

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LANGUAGE LEARNING
1.1 CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESS
You can successfully learn another language if four conditions are met:
you really want to learn it
you have a lot of interactive contact with speakers of the language
you have a method to follow
you have sufficient time available
Since language learning is hard work, your early enthusiasm may soon wear off unless you are strongly motivated.
To be able to really communicate in the language includes:
being able to say anything you want to say
speaking as much as possible like a native speaker
being understood
understanding anything which is said to you.
Ideally you should live where the language is spoken.
This in itself, however, will not guarantee success, because it is possible to live in an area and yet isolate oneself from the local inhabitants.
Not many adults successfully learn another language without a systematic approach to it — but with a set of procedures to follow, and discipline and perseverance in following them, you can learn more quickly.
Success is more quickly achieved if you are able to devote your full time and energy to language learning.
If you have other demands on your time, it will obviously take longer.
Different individuals work at different speeds — you are more likely to achieve most if you can work at a speed which challenges you but which is not beyond your capacity to attain.
Your success can be hindered by adverse influences and attitudes: if you have had a negative experience of language learning at school, or elsewhere
1.2 HINDRANCES TO SUCCESS
if you are too much inclined to book work and analysis as opposed to communicating with people
if you do not attack your language learning problems systematically
if you have feelings or attitudes of superiority in relation to your own language and culture
if you depend too much on spouse or colleagues to handle situations where speaking the language is necessary
if you have too many other responsibilities
if you are inhibited about being laughed at, making mistakes, feeling foolish, and so on.
All of us have one built-in hindrance: the unconscious habits of our first language which interfere with the new set of habits we are trying to develop.
Your success can be helped by: perseverance
1.3 HELPS TO SUCCESS
ability to accept correction
using mistakes as an opportunity for learning
positive attitudes to the people, their culture and language
good language helpers
being aware of the sound and structure system of your own language
a systematic approach to problem areas
setting and achieving realistic goals
regular evaluation of progress
Language learning situations differ widely.
You may find yourself in an established language school with a well-designed language course and well-qualified teachers.
Or, in an established school where they may not be using the most effective language teaching methods.
In both cases you will need to supplement your classroom activities with some of those suggested in this handbook, or others.
1.4 LANGUAGE LEARNING SITUATION
You may find yourself with no language school as such, but with textbooks of varying degrees of usefulness available.
The textbooks may explain the grammar but not help you to talk, and you will need to develop your own programme for this.
You may find yourself in a situation where there is no language school, no textbook, and even no written form of the language.
In this case you may want to analyse the language as well as learn to speak it.
If so, the two activities should go hand-in-hand.
As you analyse, use the methods described here to learn what you have analysed.
The basic orientation of this handbook is towards the situation where: there are speaks of the language who are literate, and bilingual to some degree; and
there is no existing or effective language learning course.
You will need one or more native speakers of the language to help you in your learning.
Ideally such a helper should be one: who is recognized by others of his/her own people as a good speaker of the language
1.5 CHOOSING A LANGUAGE HELPER
who can communicate to some degree in your own language or some other language which you know
who is able to read and writer in his/her own language
who is willing to correct you and go on correcting you
who enunciates clearly (but not unnaturally)
Usually one who is a professional teacher is not ideal — he/she may have very set ideas on how to teach, which may not meet your needs, and he/she may teach you as if you were a child.
What you are looking for is someone who will speak their language for you, listen and help you practise, and correct you.
In some cultures it would be necessary for an individual to work with a language helper of the same sex.
However, there may be differences in men's and women's speech (vocabulary, topics, style), so that ideally you should use language helpers of both sexes when possible.
In most circumstances you will want to pay a language helper for his/her work, on a scale that is comparable with the local situation.
Until you know that a certain person is going to be a good language helper, it is best to engage him/her for a day or a week at a time.
You should try to fit your working hours to normal local practice.
You need a language helper primarily as a source of information and as a source of correction.
The information you get from him/her will be spoken language.
However, if he/she knows how to read and write in his/her own language, by all means use this ability to save you time.
Encourage him/her to correct you, even though he/she may not always be able to explain to you what you are doing wrong.
Reassure your language helper every now and then that you appreciate correction.
1.6 WORKING WITH A LANGUAGE HELPER
Remember that he/she is a human being who gets tired and bored with unending repetitions.
It is therefore invaluable to have a tape or cassette recorder, ideally a small one, which can be operated off power or on batteries.
Do what you can to put your language helper at ease and avoid embarrassing him/her, e.g. by pointing out if he/she is late.
In other cultures efficiency is often not a virtue.
Personal relationships are more important than technique an productivity.
The language helper is the expert on his/her language do not rebuke him/her for saying something different from the day before — there must be a reason (if you were right in your observation).
Also, the question "Why?" is better not asked.
Often there is no logical answer to a language mystery, and if there is, the language helper may not know it.
Do not make sessions too long — many find a break after 45 minutes or an hour necessary.
To avoid boredom one activity should not go on for too long, so always have a variety of activities ready.
Each session must be planed ahead so that no time is wasted in the session trying to find and decide what to do.
Don't get side-tracked too far, but on the other hand, follow any interesting lead, note down comments on usage of a word, and know when to stop an investigation that is not fruitful or makes you confused.
Think about it and try in a different way another time.
One reason for confusion is that you may have tackled something too difficult, like skipping a step.
Move from simple to complex, just adding one more thing each time.
If stuck, go back and start again.
Decide from the very beginning that your aim is to use the target language as much as possible in the sessions.
This includes giving instructions to the language helper and when communicating with any fellow students.
Learn the phrases you need frequently early.
Remember to pay ongoing attention to the intonation, and regard it as of equal importance to get right as the actual words.
It is very easy to concentrate on the intonation only at the beginning, and then get slack and start imposing your mother tongue intonation on the new language.
When practising an utterance have the language helper say it last, so that it is the correct version you hear last.
Whenever drilling or practising, try and do so without reading from your book or papers.
Aim at mimicking the language helper at the same speed as he speaks.
If that is difficult, mimic suprasegmentals first, and then see if the utterance can be divided into several parts so you can mimic the last part first, and then add to it bit by bit.
The language helper usually knows where it is possible to break the utterance.
The following advice is for those working in a group (the above is of course applicable also for groups):
Careful planning beforehand is even more important in a group situation.
Each member should take turns leading the whole session, or each session can be divided up.
Whenever relevant, the leader should include the others in the activities.
The planning time should ensure there is variation in the sessions.
Group members may well help each other by pointing out to another where and what a problem might be.
It is sometimes easier to hear another person; s mistake than one's own.
Be prepared to accept a suggestion from a fellow student.
Mimic only the language helper, not the supervisor or a fellow student.
Keep on listening whenever the language helper says an utterance even though your turn has passed.
Don't switch off!
Mimic silently, or do selective listening.
INGREDIENTS OF A LANGUAGE LEARNING PROGRAMME
As in other disciplines, theories of language learning have gone through periodic changes, often with an over-emphasis on one aspect or anxiety, which results from the pendulum swinging from one extreme to another.
 "Traditional" language learning emphasised almost exclusively the understanding of the grammar of the language.
It taught people about a language, but not how to use that knowledge in talking or communication.
What exercises were included were usually written, and were often the type requiring translation of sentences from one language to the other.
The pendulum then swung back to the other extreme where almost no grammar was taught, but all the emphasis was on talking, using conversations in which grammatical structures occurred in an uncontrolled way.
Almost all classroom activity was oral and monolingual in the second language.
The conversation material was organised around various social situations.
When it became apparent that learners were not mastering grammatical structures by this method, pattern practice was introduced, and with the advent of language learning laboratories, the student spent much of his time listening to and mechanically repeating drills.
In these, sentences having the same structure, but no thematic or other connection with each other, are grouped together — an unnatural way of using language!
The student often becomes bored with the endless repetition of drills; he is not necessarily able to transfer the patterns he has practised into creative communication outside a classroom situation; and he does not necessarily know how and when it is appropriate to use the structures he has practised.
Since he spends most of his time practising individual sentences, he may not know how to join sentences together in connected speech.
More recent approaches are attempting to bring together knowledge about the language and its structures with the use of the language in real-life situations.
Students are encouraged to understand structures and systems as well as practise them.
Patterns are not practised merely because they exist, but because they are relevant to the learner's needs.
More natural language materials are being used.
Errors in speaking a new language tend to be systematic.
A comparison of one's own language with the new language often results in defining predictable problem areas.
Language learning should be geared to these, especially for practice purposes.
Language learning activities should be those which will lead to fluency, accuracy and comprehension.
2.1 LEARNING LANGUAGE ACTIVITIES
Fluency means being able to speak promptly, without a lot of hesitation or stumbling.
Accuracy means speaking without sounding like a foreigner, both in pronunciation, grammar and in the choice of vocabulary.
Comprehension means being able to understand what you hear and therefore being able to respond appropriately to stimuli you receive.
Learning to read and write in the language may reinforce these three skills if they are already developed, but will not produce them.
Understanding the grammar rules may reinforce fluency and accuracy, but will not of itself enable you to speak correctly.
Conjugating verbs, declining nouns, memorising lists of vocabulary items, may all form part of language study, but their contribution to speaking ability is relatively minor.
The activities which lead most directly to fluency, accuracy and comprehension are: listening, mimicking, drilling, and communicating, and any daily programme you follow should contain these four ingredients.
Ideas about how to develop listening skills can be found in Stevick, E…
Teaching and Learning Languages.
These techniques are not emphasized in this handbook.
N.B. Languages and language learners are very idiosyncratic and what works for some may not work for others.
One cluster of characteristics (personality type, language context, target language, interaction with the mother tongue, etc.) may suit some but not others.
Therefore, although hard work is necessary, slavishly following a "suggested regime" month after month hoping that it will some day "click" , may be ill-advised.
Experiment with a variety of drills in natural situations until you find the combination which is the most productive for you.
The way in which the above activities are set out in this handbook is deliberately quite detailed in order to suit those who prefer to know how to do everything step by step.
Others may find this tedious, and may prefer to modify the methods or find other suggestions in some of the literature in the Bibliography.
The importance of listening in language learning is often overlooked.
One of the advantages a child has when learning his first language is that he has lots of opportunity to hear it without being called upon to speak.
One of the traps adults fall into in learning a second language is that of embarking on speaking without adequate listening.
2.1.1 LISTENING
Listening can be done in a classroom-type situation where you listen to a live language helper or to a tape recording which can be played over and over again.
Or it can be done outside the classroom—in any place where people are talking and you can listen.
It is good to seek out opportunities where you can listen without being called upon to participate, for example, radio or TV programmes, sermons, public speeches, in the village circle at night, and participating in community activities.
In the classroom, when you obtain new data from a language helper, always listen several times before mimicking.
When you practice dialogues listen to your language helper say them first.
After you have mimicked, always listen again to each utterance so that the last thing you hear is him/her and not yourself.
Listen to him/her say a text or story slowly, then listen as he/she speeds it up in successive repetitions.
Listen to the same story told in different versions or by different people.
Outside the classroom, listening can be passive or selective.
passive, listening means just allowing the language to flow over you, absorbing the feel of it.
selective listening means focusing your attention on one particular feature at a time, such as intonation patterns, rhythm, sentence stress, abbreviations, specific morphemes or constructions, specific works or phrases, ways of hesitating, ways in which an audience accompanies a speaker, expressing agreement or disapproval.
2.1.1 MIMICKING
Mimicking can also be done both in the classroom and outside of it.
When you have listened to a language helper say a sentence several times, mimic him, remembering to first mimic the intonation and rhythm by humming or whistling the tune and tapping out the rhythm.
Some do this by combining both tune and rhythm to nonsense syllables like "la la la" or "dah dee dah" .
Then add the individual consonants and vowels.
If a sentence is long or otherwise difficult, mimic one phrase at a time, beginning with the last one, then adding the penultimate one, and so on successively till you can manage the whole utterance.
The reason for choosing the last phrase first is that there is less likelihood of the intonation being distorted.
It is also the most recent in your hearing and therefore the easiest to remember.
You will be amazed to find that a sentence which at first sounded terribly long and difficult, now seems much shorter, once you have conquered and mastered it bit by bit.
Be careful not to break the sentence in unnatural places, but let the language helper suggest where to make the breaks.
Example: I have to go home at twelve o'clock today.
First hum and tap the tune and rhythm: Then start mimicking the segments phrase by phrase: today.
Add one phrase at a time: When listening to a text or story in the classroom, or to a public speech of some kind, you can mimic by "tracking" , which means that you mimic silently or under your breath a few syllables behind the speaker.
Drilling is the repeated performance of exercises designed to master specific problems.
It can be compared to the scales which a singer or player of a musical instrument must sing or play over and over again until certain movements become automatic habits.
In language learning, drilling helps in mastering pronunciation, grammar structures and vocabulary.
2.1.3 DRILLING
In making drills for practice, you first of all have to decide what the problem is and then design a drill to overcome it.
Some problems arise because the new language contains sounds or constructions which are completely new to you.
Other problems arise because the sounds and phonological patterns of the new language partially overlap with those you already know, and your old habits interfere with the new ones.
Yet other problems arise from familiar sound, structures or words being used in unfamiliar combinations, or for unfamiliar purposes.
Having pinpointed a problem, then you make drills to help you master it.
Different kinds of drills and what they are used for are described in detail in chapters 5–8.
2.1.4 COMMUNICATING
In language learning as in many other skills, what you do not use, you lose.
going out of the classroom and using what you know is an extremely important part of language learning.
Go out and mix with people — in their homes, at social functions, on public transport, in community activities.
If you have fellow students, use the language with them also, recognizing it may not always come out correctly, but it can take away some of the reluctance you may feel in using the language, and adds to the opportunities of using it.
You can even "talk to yourself" by silently forming sentences about anything you are doing or see around you, i.e."Today is Thursday.
I am going to visit my neighbour.
She lives in an old house.
The sky is blue and the sun is shining.
It rained yesterday, but today the road is dry.
I see my neighbour's dog.
My neighbour is working in the garden.
Good!
I want to learn new words!"
From the very first day, use what you know, and do it repeatedly with different people.
It may seem repetitious to you, but not to them if you do it once to each person.
You will not always be understood, or always understand people's response to you, but plunge in anyway.
If early on you learn phrases like "I am learning your language" , "I have only been here a short time" , "I didn't understand what you said" , and "Please repeat it more slowly" , you will at least be able to make a sensible response to anything said to you.
To help you memorize useful phrases it is helpful to prepare dialogues that you can first practice with your language helper and with the tape recorder before you go out and try the phrases with other people.
Chapter 4 will deal with the use of dialogues.
There is nothing more encouraging and stimulating than successful communication.
About one third of your daily language learning time should be spent in this activity.
It may take courage, it may take discipline — but it is well worth the effort.
Here are some suggestions for visiting native speakers: do it regularly
visit everybody, not just your special friends
keep a file on each household: location, members of the household, their names and relationships, age and occupation.
Record the dates of your visits, noting any highlights, or maybe something you promised to do for them.
Refresh your memory before each new visit.
treat everyone as a temporary language helper.
If you can't think of conversation, go over your phrases with them.
In the early stages it is very difficult to fill up time.
You can't go straight from the arriving greetings to the departing ones!
Here are some suggestions that you can follow: try to go where something is being done that you can either watch or participate in.
You may also get some new vocabulary.
prepare conversation before you go.
Think about who you are going to visit, ask about the other members of the family, about their health, what they are doing.
ask all the basic questions as soon as learnt, i.e. "What is this?" (always having something new to show), "What is she doing?" ,
 "Where is she going?" ,
 "What is your name?" 
learn how to introduce yourself, so you can do it each time you meet a new person at somebody's house.
always have pictures with you: photos of your family that you can show to each new acquaintance to practise saying "This is my mother" , etc., and also other photographs to give you a variety of practice.
Using something tangible like photographs keeps the memory load down to a minimum and eases the stress of always having to think of something to say.
numerals are a good time-filler.
Don't try to go beyond five initially.
Even up to five gives you good practice on singulars and plurals (and perhaps concord).
Count everything within reach or sight — peanuts, pebbles, sticks, beans, hens, children, women, etc.
— as soon as you are drilling basic questions, use them to keep a given conversation item going as long as possible.
NOT "What is this?" 
 "A basket." 
 "What is this?" 
 "A mat." 
BUT "What is that?" 
 "A basket." 
 "What is it made of?" 
 "Straw." 
 "Whose basket is it?" 
 "Sanpoa" s."
 "Where is Sanpoa?" 
 "In the house." 
 "What is she doing?" etc., etc., Once you have exhausted the possibilities of the basket, turn to the mat, maybe changing some of the questions if you can, e.g. "Who made it?" , etc.
once the people are sufficiently used to you to converse naturally with each other in your presence (third visit or later), then use some time tracking what they say, silently or quietly.
Don't forget that callers who "keep interrupting" you when you are at your house are just visiting, only the situation is reversed.
Apply the same techniques as if you were visiting them, and make each "interruption" work for you.
You will also find it valuable to allot a certain amount of time each day to evaluate your progress in order to see how you are doing, to study any problems you have encountered, to decide what you need to do next, and to plan how to go about it.
2.2 EVALUATING PROGRESS
In their "Language Acquisition Made Practical" , Brewster and Brewster (see Bibliography) offer a very useful daily programme to follow, together with suggestions for evaluating your progress, and lots of ideas for topics for continuing language study.
This book will be an excellent help in situations where bilingual language helpers are available, and where the language is already written and analysed.
In "A Language Learner's Field Guide" Healey offers helpful suggestions to those working in monolingual situations, and in languages where language learning must go hand in hand with language analysis.
For a programme in which you can devote six hours a day to language learning, Brewster and Brewster suggest the following amounts of time on each phrase: In your daily programme you may experience two reactions — boredom or frustration.
Boredom can stem from two sources.
It may be that you are not giving yourself enough challenge in the learning goals you set yourself, and that you are attaining them without any stretching of your ability.
If that is the case you need to take bigger bites or steps.
Or it may be that you are not introducing enough variety in your activities, either always doing things in the same few ways, or else doing the same activity for too long a time at one stretch.
2.3 HOW TO HANDLE BOREDOM AND FRUSTRATION
Frustration, on the other hand, comes when you are taking bites or making jumps that are too big for you.
You may be going on to new material before thoroughly mastering previous material.
This becomes discouraging because you are accumulating more and more partially learned material, and the more you go on, the worse it becomes.
Or you may be making transitions from one point to another that do not follow in logical sequence, not building on what you already know.
The transitions may involve too many changes at one time, and you need to build in some more intermediate steps.
So it is a good practice to pay attention to your feelings as you learn, to try to pinpoint the cause of any negative feelings, and to take steps to remedy the situation.
DATA MANAGEMENT
3.1.0.
INTRODUCTION
One of the problems with learning a language, especially if you are also analysing it, is that you collect far more data than you can absorb at once.
So it is very important to know how to manage it, that is, how to keep it under your control instead of it getting on top of you.
Don't be afraid to limit the time spent with your language helper to one hour a day at first.
The amount of data you can collect in one hour will provide you with several hours of work at your desk.
If you cannot find a language helper who only wants to work for one hour a day, try hiring someone to do gardening or housework for you on a more fulltime basis and then use that person also as a language helper until you reach the stage where you can cope with a fulltime language helper.
3.1.1.
There are two kinds of data: a) Elicited — this is what your language helper gives you in reply to questions during a regular session.
b) Spontaneous — that is, new words heard when you visit neighbours or they visit you; an insight into grammar gained while you are on a fishing trip with friends, and so on .
Much knowledge of the culture too is gained by direct observation.
3.1.2.
Both kinds of data may be organised in two ways: a) On a computer
b) On paper
If you take the SIL Field Methods Course you will be taught to file and process your language materials on a computer, which can save you from many tedious tasks and which often produces more accurate results.
However, you will still need to make some use of notebooks and know how to organise papers such as computer printouts.
If you do not have a computer or you are daunted by them (or your computer breaks down within a week of your arrival in a remote village) you will obviously have more papers to keep track of.
But whether you use a computer or not there are three principles to remember at all times: a) Keep your filing up to date.
Every day, if possible, allot time at your desk to sorting and filing everything you have collected since the previous day by way of either elicited or spontaneous data.
This applies to both language and cultural information.
b) File for easy retrieval.
The main purpose of fling data is so that you or others interested can make use of it afterwards.
So you want it arranged in some form that makes it easy to retrieve (find) the specific item you are looking for at any given moment.
It is even possible that you may have to leave your project before it is complete because of illness or assignment to other responsibilities or for some other reason.
Your files should be  in such a condition that anyone taking over the project in your place can make immediate use of them.
c) Make copies.
Sad stories are told of people who spent years working on a language and who lost all those years in one night when their house burnt down.
Thieves, war and other disasters may befall you.
It is therefore a good ideas to make copies from fairly early on of all language and anthropological materials, and to keep them in other places, such as a technical studies department or headquarters office.
Copy all your computer disks and update them whenever you visit your headquarters.
Photocopy or make carbon copies of all transcribed texts.
Important tapes, likewise, should be copied.
Both while you are learning a language and afterwards if you undertake a literacy or translation programme in it, a dictionary is n invaluable tool.
Aim, then, from the beginning to collect vocabulary at a pace you can handle, and to file it carefully.
3.2.0.
ORGANISING VOCABULARY
For collecting vocabulary have a small notebook which you can carry with you wherever you go and jot down any new words or phrases on the spot.
Every day in your language session check these words and phrases with your helper.
At this point you should elicit related forms; for example, the plurals of nouns in Arabic are not predictable, so it is useful to elicit the plural of every new noun learnt and to add it to the dictionary entry for that word.
In a certain language your analysis might show you that there are, say, three basic stems for each verb; once you have determined that, elicit all three stems of every new verb you collect.
If you own a computer it is worthwhile entering all your vocabulary on to a disk from early on in your programme.
Using the SIL EDITOR programme (ED) you type in each word according to Standard Format (SF) dictionary codes.
one entry looks like this on the screen: In this particular entry \w is the word; \c the tone, which in this case is low-low-low; \p the part of speech, in this case a noun; \d the definition (meaning); \s a subentry.
Notice that there are three occurrences of \d, two for the main entry and one for the subentry.
3.2.1.
A COMPUTER DICTIONARY
For full information on the SF codes refer to: DTS Manual, section on Standard Format 10.2.
When the above entry is printed out according to the SIL MANUSCRIPT (MS) programme it appears like this: Many people will find it preferable to type the words of their dictionary in alphabetical order so that the computer prints them out in alphabetical order without further programming.
However, those with more computer expertise can type them in any order, if they wish, and use the SORT component of the TA programme (see below) to alphabetise them before printing out.
Another programme — TEXT ANALYSIS (TA)— can reverse your dictionary for you, but unless you are fairly expert in the use of computers we would advise leaving the reversal until someone who is expert can set up TA for you.
Don't waste time trying to learn its complexities yourself.
The result of a reversal programme looks like this for the Jur Modo entry above: cotton alato lll Since there were three separate definitions for alato in the Modo-English section of the dictionary, similar entries appear in the English-Modo under "thread" and "kapok" .
when you start learning a language you are constantly collecting new words, so even if you have a computer and intend to use it for producing a dictionary you may still wish to have your vocabulary in a more accessible form than on a computer disk, at least for the first few months.
a card file is a very convenient method of organising vocabulary.
3.2.2.
A DICTIONARY CARD FILE
You need a packet of file slips/cards and a box to keep them in, also some head cards to mark divisions.
Each lexical item is given its own card and is filed alphabetically.
For the Jur Modo computer entry above the card entry looked like this: The grave accents on alato mark low tone, which was shown in the computer entry by lll after the word.
In some areas of the world, e.g. West Africa, it is helpful to file words not only alphabetically but also according to major word classes, because nouns and verbs have different phonological structures.
Then if, for example, you want a list of verbs for a drill or for analysis purposes, you simply pull out the verb section of your file.
it is also helpful to note down on the card idiomatic phrases using the lexical item in question, or illustrative sentences to show its range of meaning.
If you are starting work on a language for which no phonological analysis has previously been done, it is obvious that you will be transcribing words with phonetic script.
To start with you will try to note every phonetic variation but gradually your transcription will become "broader" , that is, you will realise or find out by systematic analysis that, for example , all the voiceless alveolar stops on the language are aspirated and therefore there is no need to keep writing [th]every time,[t]is enough.
Or you discover that there is no phonemic distinction between dental and alveolar sounds and therefore it is not necessary to put [_]under symbols to mark dental.
In other words, your transcription tends to become more phonemic without being systematically so.
However, at some point you will have to switch to a completely phonemic or completely orthographic way of writing.
the switch necessitates some concentrated work on your files.
3.2.3.
WHAT TRANSCRIPTION DO I USE?
Once you have worked out the phonemic system of the language, if you are using a card file, work systematically through it, changing all phonetic transcriptions into phonemic ones.
You can do the same thing on a computer file, deleting each phonetic entry and replacing it with the phonemic transcription or an orthographic one.
Alternatively, you could use the CONSISTENT CHANGES (CC) programme to phonemicise your data.
CC is designed to systematically convert one symbol or set of symbols into another.
You will then need to go through all your entries to edit out your wrong spellings and inconsistencies since it is unlikely that you will have transcribed everything perfectly the first time.
As with TA, unless you are fond of playing with computer programmes ask someone more expert to set up CC for you.
Another question that arises is whether, if the official orthography is different from a purely phonemic transcription, you write your data phonemically or orthographically.
You have to decide whether the main purpose of the data in question is for linguistic analysis, in which case you probably want a phonemic transcription; whereas if the min purpose is for use by the local community it is clearly an orthographic transcription that is required.
It is obviously useful to be able to look up words that you can't remember in a dictionary, but in addition you will find that the more you work on your dictionary, whether it is on a computer or on cards, the more you memorise your vocabulary.
One advantage of a card file is that it is very easy to pick up handful of cards and flip through them in odd five minutes in order to memorise some new words.
3.2.4.
HOW DOES A DICTIONARY HELP MY LANGUAGE LEARNING?
As you analyse and learn to speak a language, probably the easiest way of keeping track of all your various pieces of paper  is to use a loose-leaf folder.
In one folder you can have a section for notes made when preparing for language sessions, another section for drills, another for check lists and so on.
The alternative is to have a number of separate manilla folders with loose sheets in.
Don't throw anything away until you are absolutely sure you won't need it again.
On the other hand, don't let your working folder become cluttered up with papers you are not using.
Store them in some other folder.
3.3.0 PHONOLOGY AND GRAMMAR
3.3.1 LOOSE-LEAF FOLDERS
There is a computer programme called FINDPHONE (FF) which can help you in your phonological analysis.
For example, it can find and list all the occurrences of a particular symbol or sequence of symbols in the data you have fed to it; it can make frequency counts of phonemes and print out a list of particular CV patterns.
You can apply it to language learning by getting it to produce selected and sorted check lists or lists of words containing a particular sound/symbol you wish to drill.
3.3.2.
FINDPHONE (FF)
If you are having problems with tone, stress or length you will be interested in the new SIL speech box and the CECIL and FORMANT programmes.
The speech box plugs into your tape recorder on one side and your computer on the other.
You let your tape recorder play a phrase and CECIL causes the waveform of the phrase to appear on the computer screen.
Elsewhere on the screen appears a contour of the amplitude of that phrase (amplitude being closely related to stress patterns), and also a pitch contour, that is, one showing the intonation (and tones) of the phrase.
3.3.3.
CECIL
CECIL therefore provides an objective way of determining the pitched of words and phrases, which could clearly be a great help, both for analysis and for language learning, but the information it provides is only raw data and must still be analysed.
This computer programme comes with FINDPHONE and can be applied to the same data to select different types of data for different grammatical purposes, e.g. all words can be extracted and put in a separate file to add to your lexicon.
3.3.4.
EXTRACT (EX)
A tape-recorded text is a folk-tale or account of a true happening or a sermon or any other freely told piece of speech recorded by you.
Texts can be put to many uses: a) Extracts from texts can be made the basis of language learning dialogues and drills.
3.4.0.
TEXTS
b) They provide plenty of material for phonological and grammatical analysis at all levels.
c) They provide much new vocabulary in natural contexts.
d) They provide an immense amount of information on the culture.
e) From texts stories can be created for primers and other reading materials in a literacy programme.
Texts are specially valuable for supplying a lot of information which you may not acquire from any other source, either from elicited data or from conversations while out visiting.
How should you collect them and how organise them?
By the time you have had two or three months in a language area you should start to collect texts, a few at a time, unless the local people are very suspicious of tape recorders or there is some other inhibiting cultural factor.
In fact, you will probably need to overcome a certain reluctance to be recorded, whatever your location.
Be prepared to demonstrate by telling a story yourself and playing it back, or it may be diplomatic to start by recording what the local people want, such as dance music or hymns or the local chief exhorting his people.
3.4.1.
COLLECTING TEXTS
If having one's voice recorded is considered an honour, invite the important members of the community to speak first.
Explain your reasons for wanting to record stories and speeches, namely, that you are anxious to learn their language as well as possible.
The reason is obvious to you but may not be so to them at all.
Aim to collect over a period of time a variety of texts covering different types of oral literature, the formal and the informal, fiction and truth, narrative and exhortation, and so on.
Make sure that each tape is clearly labelled for every text on it, and give each text a number.
Write down the date on which it was recorded and the name of the speaker and location.
Keep your tapes somewhere that is as free of dust and moisture as possible.
When a tape is full, make a duplicate of it for storage elsewhere.
3.4.2.
ORGANISING TEXTS
Even before you understand the words of a text you could play it sometimes for the sake of the intonation, as mentioned in ch. 2.1.1. of this book under the heading of LISTENING.
Busy mothers ma be particularly glad of an opportunity to listen at home of they find themselves tied to the house.
The next stage as soon as you find time is to sit down with your language helper and play the text back a phrase at a time in order to transcribe it.
At first the language helper repeats each phrase for you as it is played back and you write it down, but your aim should be that when you have worked out a phonemic script for the language you teach the language helper to transcribe texts for you.
Use a large notebook or a pad of lined paper and teach him to leave two or three lines blank between the lines of text for a word-for-word gloss.
If he has enough education he may be able to do the gloss as well.
When the text has been transcribed you work through it in order to discover and learn any new words or useful idioms.
After that you need to type it either on to a computer or a typewriter and provide a free translation to go with it.
Be sure to make  several copies of each text, partly because, as explained before, you don't want to lose valuable material, and partly because texts re often of great interest to other linguists or anthropologists.
Here again, aim to teach a local person, either your language helper or someone else, to do the typing for you.
When you have collected and transcribed a large body of texts this may take two or three years — you can have a concordance made from them using the TEXT ANALYSIS (TA) programme.
A concordance alphabetises all words in their context and is extremely useful for certain types of grammatical analysis.
Another computer programme that has been designed for work on texts is INTERLINEAR TEXT (IT).
However, both TA and IT are relatively complicated to master and you re recommended to let someone else set them up or run them for you unless you are really eager to advance your computer expertise.
The typing and glossing of texts is something which does not have to be done in the village.
So if you are pressed for time it is better during your first year in a language area to give more time to direct contact with people than to spend hours at your desk typing.
Do, however, try to get a certain number transcribed.
Then plan a week or two away from the village in order to catch up with some of those desk jobs that are hanging over your head.
Some of your analysis and dictionary work could probably be done outside the language area too.
3.4.3.
CATCHING UP ON A BACKLOG
One caution on trying to write a free translation of texts: a free translation requires a deeper knowledge of the language than an interlinear gloss, because not only do you have to understand the meaning of each word but also of the idioms and the discourse structure.
Free translations are best made when a language helper is with you to clarify obscure points.
If you are involved in language analysis or in literacy or translation work, you are unlikely to be working entirely alone.
You will have one or more language helpers or co-translators.
Your spouse or partner or other colleagues may be involved with the same language.
There will be local literacy instructors or supervisors, and so on.
These people must be considered as you organise your data.
3.5.0.
WORKING AS ONE OF A TEAM
For example, it is very important for a wife who is also a busy mother to learn to speak the local language, but she may have no time for sitting at a desk and making her own drills or doing her own analysis.
Therefore, if you are a husband, please do all in your power to put your data in a form which your wife can use.
Provide her with drills, preferably on tape, to which she can listen while feeding the baby or cutting up vegetables.
See that you write or print out from your computer a clear explanation of each part of your analysis as you do it.
A computer is a wonderfully useful tool but it will be only a nuisance to your wife if all the language data is locked up on disks and she has nothing to look at in a spare five minutes.
Good relations between partners depend on their sharing equally the work and making their findings freely available to each other.
Work out together before you start how you would like to divide the responsibilities.
Some people are very independent; others prefer to do more together.
Then at frequent intervals, daily if possible, meet to discuss what each of you has discovered and to review whether you are satisfied with the way you are doing things.
You could exchange drills, language learning dialogues, check lists and so on.
Be considerate over your handwriting, your computer expertise or lack of it, or anything else which might become an irritation to your fellow workers.
The same goes for your relations with language helpers and other local people who are part of your team.
It is also of great importance that you have material available for inspection by anyone else who might be interested in what you are doing.
This includes local people whose language you are working on, local officials, other linguists, members of missionary societies or development agencies active in the area, and so on.
Don't imagine that because you live in an insignificant little village away "in the bush" you won't see anyone but the villagers.
Be prepared to entertain and show your work to politicians, university students, church dignitaries and policemen as well as to your director and consultant.
They won't need to see all of your data, but choose certain items to print out or type out in a way that can be understood by the non-linguist.
Dictionaries are of popular interest, also folk-tales with a translation and other oral literature.
Have some spare copies of your phonology or grammar write-ups to give to anyone interested.
These are four of the linguist's enemies.
Most of us have to combat one or more of them.
Either we work in humid, tropical conditions where damp and heat combined make everything go mouldy, or in dry conditions where dust abounds and gets into everything.
Termites, rats and other creatures love chewing paper.
A friend of mine once returned to her house after a few month's absence and found that though the font of her desk looked exactly the same as before she left, termites had eaten out the back of it and destroyed the contents of several drawers.
Cockroaches crawl inside machinery such as tape recorders and computers and gum up the works.
Your windows are open and a gust of wind carries off loos papers left on your desk.
3.6.0.
TERMITES, WIND, MOULD AND DUST
Of course, dustproof bags, cases for machines, and strong plastic covers for papers and boxes of computer disks can be a great help, but above all, keep a constant check on all your materials and if you are away from your house for a long time, lock them all up in a metal trunk or barrel and ask a local friend to check your house for termites from time to time .
In any case, it is advisable to carry your most important material with your wherever you go.
DIALOGUES
It has already been said that your daily programme of language learning should include the ingredients of listening, mimicking, practice (drilling) and participating.
if you are in an unstructured learning situation where no well-planned course exists, a part of your daily programme will also have to be the preparation of language learning lesson materials i.e. dialogues or other kinds of text.
The material in the dialogues will help you memorize useful phrases that you need when you want to go visiting or generally whenever you want to communicate with people.
They will also provide a basis for making drills.
There are four phases to using dialogues most effectively: listening, mimicking, production, review.
(see N.B. on p.6)
4.1.
FOUR PHASES OF USING DIALOGUES
In the listening phase you don't say anything, you just listen and allow the sounds and patterns of the language to flow into you.
This will give you an auditory memory of what the language is supposed to sound like, while you at the same time keep your mind on the meaning of the sentences.
4.1.1.
LISTENING
In the mimicking phase the language helper will say the sentence and you say it after him as near to his pronunciation and intonation as you can get.
You need to make a conscious effort especially to get the tune right — at the beginning you will probably feel that you sound strange and maybe affected, but that is only because the intonation patterns are new to you.
4.1.2.
MIMICKING
Always put life and vigour into your mimicking — it keeps both you and your language helper from getting bored.
In mimicking a dialogue it is important that you hear the language helper say the utterance again after you have mimicked, so that the last version you hear is the correct one.
The production phase includes saying from memory with a cue/prompt and saying from memory without a cue/prompt.
4.1.3.
PRODUCTION
Review includes dramatizing (acting/taking parts), and modifications by changing of style, replacement of vocabulary items, expansion of phrases and deletion of non-obligatory items.
4.1.4.
REVIEW
A sample dialogue might be as follows:
4.2.
HOW TO PRACTISE
listen to the whole dialogue three times
1.
LISTEN
mimic the rhythm and intonation of each utterance
2.
MIMIC
mimic each sentence in turn, having the language helper say it both before and after you each time, so that you always hear the LH saying it correctly last (especially if it is new material).
if any utterance is long and complicated, mimic the last phrase first, then the last two phrases, then the last three, and so on, until you can manage the whole utterance
track the LH as he/she says the whole dialogue.
3.
PRODUCE
listen to the first word or phrase of each utterance, and say the whole utterance from memory (i.e. producing with a cue/prompt).
Have the language helper say it again after you.
have the language helper take the part of Bill, and you take the part of John (i.e. producing without a cue/prompt).
reverse the roles so that you start with Bill's part and the language helper says John's part.
If the dialogue isn't  reversible , you can choose if you want to practise the other part or not.
say the whole dialogue simultaneously with the tape recorder
record yourself saying the whole dialogue, then listen to yourself.
make sure you are comfortable playing the parts of both Bill and John (already done under production phase).
4.
REVIEW
have the language helper say the dialogue more quickly.
Observe changes he makes, especially phonological ones.
write out the dialogue changing vocabulary items, i.e: Good morning Hello to the Post Office to the library across the square round the corner to school home Good-bye Cheerio expand the utterances, i.e.: Where are you going this morning?
I'm going to the Post Office to buy some stamps.
It's across the main square in the town centre.
I'm going to school to study.
delete non-obligatory items.
You can take a dialogue where all the sentences are complete and make all the deletions you can, still making it natural.
this can be done in writing, by reading, and by role-playing with another person.
E.g.: "Morning." 
 "Morning"  "Where you going?" 
 "To the Post Office." 
 "Where is it?" 
 "Across the square." 
 "I" m going to school."
 "Bye." 
 "Bye." 
When recording dialogues, drills etc., it is always good to introduce the recording by stating what it is, date, etc.
Then, for each stage it is helpful to say "for listening" , "for mimicking" , etc.
It helps you to find your place.
4.3.
HOW TO RECORD A DIALOGUE
It is useful to record dialogues, so that you can practice on your own when your language helper is not available.
You may also need to refresh your memory before you go to visit somebody.
If you wish to record a dialogue for use as above, it can be done as follows: record the whole dialogue for listening at normal speed, without any pauses between the various utterances (if there are pauses you will be tempted to mimic)
FOR LISTENING
if the sentences are too long to manage, first record the sentences phrase by phrase, i.e.: record the dialogue sentence by sentence with a pause long enough for you to mimic, then having LH repeat the sentence, i.e.: record the first phrase or word of each sentence with a pause long enough for you to produce the whole sentence (i.e. with cue/prompt).
Have the language helper say the whole sentence: record alternate utterances (S.1, S.3, S.5, etc.,) with pauses for appropriate responses (i.e. without cue/ prompt).
Repeat with other set (S.2, S.4, S.6, etc).
When you start with S.2 you need to leave space at the beginning for you to say S.1.
MIMICKING
FOR PRODUCTION
greeting and leave-takings (if appropriate in the culture)
4.4 SUGGESTIONS FOR DIALOGUE TOPICS
polite phrases
introduction of oneself/asking about the other person
language learning expressions, e.g. "How do you sat…in your language?" ,
 "Please repeat" , "What does it mean?" ,
 "Please record" , etc.
the family
eating
house-work, e.g. cooking, washing, cleaning, baking
shopping/marketing/trading
the weather
visiting (the use of pictures and objects).
Questions about pictures could be: What's this?
What's that?
Who is that?
Who are they?
What is he/she doing?, etc.
Questions about objects could be: What is it?
Who made it?
How did he make it?
What is it for?
How do you use it?
Ask about shape, colour, size.
at the farm/in the garden
travelling: locations, directions, times, tickets
getting something made/repaired
taking a message/talking on the phone
hiring and paying an employee
getting a taxi, bus, etc.
at the restaurant/cafe/teashop
a visit to the doctor/hospital/dentist
visiting a sick person at home or in hospital
at the Post Office
renting a house
a visit to the tailor/dressmaker
work situation: house-building, making pottery, spinning, weaving, hunting, fishing, farming, teaching, etc.
See further Larson and Smalley: Becoming Bilingual, chs. 14, 15, 21, and Brewster & Brewster: LAMP, ch.2.
MASTERY OF PRONUNCIATION I
SUPRASEGMENTAL FEATURES
It is very important in the earlier stages of language learning to pay a lot of attention to all facets of pronunciation.
You may otherwise develop bad habits which you will either never become aware of or which you will not be able to change.
In the first weeks, sometimes months, of language study, you will need to use a large part of your time to practise pronunciation.
It is important that you practise all the features in the new language which are different from your own.
In this first of two chapters about mastering the pronunciation we will deal with the suprasegmental features (affecting more than one sound or segment (or intonation, tone, rhythm, stress and syllable patterns.
Since you cannot pronounce any utterance without using some kind of tune and rhythm, you will undoubtedly use your own familiar patterns unless you consciously focus on these features in the new language from the beginning of your language study.
There are basically two things to master in learning the intonation of a new language: the basic intonation patterns of the language and any other feature (like stress) associated with them
5.1.
INTONATION PATTERNS
the appropriate situations in which to use these patterns (tunes), and the appropriate reactions when you hear them.
5.1.1 Record some connected texts of different kinds (e.g. narrative dialogue, exhortation, reproof).
Play the text one sentence (or one pause group) at a time, and hum or whistle its tune.
Notice at what point(s) the pitch changes direction (falls or rises), and the intervals of the pitch changes (how far the pitch falls or rises).
Notice the prominent (tonic) syllables in the stretch of speech.
Try to mimic these features.
SUGGESTIONS FOR LEARNING THE INTONATION OF A LANGUAGE
Notice what happens to the general level of pitch after a pause, e.g. does a downward trend continue until the end of the utterance (a)?, or, is there a return to a high pitch after each pause (b)?
Listen to the whole text over and over again.
If you listen to a text enough times you will come to a point where you more or less know it by heart, and the correct tunes will be sort of "ingrained" in your ind to such an extent that you will yourself react if you would say the text with the wrong intonation.
5.1.2.
Prepare lists of utterances which may all be said to the same tune, e.g. following example from Portuguese of Brazil: listen to each list in turn listen to pairs, one word from each list, across insert one utterance from list 2 near the end of list 1, and vice versa, and listen to check that you hear the difference between them standing out clearly
HOW TO PRACTISE (See N.B. on p. 6)
LISTEN
mimic down each list (no repeat from language helper necessary)
MIMIC
mimic each item across
read the lists down and across yourself without hearing the language helper say it first.
As you don't have him repeat every utterance again after you, you need to make sure he knows you want him to correct you if you don't say it right!
PRODUCE
If you record the drill, then, in the production stage you could treat the drill as a transform drill, so that the LH would say list 1, you produce list 2, and vice versa.
The production stage of a drill could also be recorded by first leaving a space for you to say the item, and then have the LH say it for comparison.
RECORD
Any list of utterances can of course be drilled separately.
5.1.3.
Prepare pairs of stimulus and response utterances in which the stimulus uses one tune and the response requires another tune.
e.g.: repeat the procedures as for previous drill
have the language helper give each stimulus in turn, and you give the appropriate response
reverse roles, so that you say the stimulus, and the language helper the response.
Make sure the language helper knows you always want him to correct you if you don't get the sentences right.
if you are studying in a group, you can repeat the same process with your fellow students.
5.1.4.
Prepare stimulus — response utterances in which the stimuli use different tunes which require various different tunes in response: 5.1.5.
Track (i.e. hum the tune silently out aloud to yourself a bit behind the speaker) while listening to radio, TV, public speeches, and to conversations going on around you.
Tonal languages also have intonation patterns which may override the basic tone of the words.
TONAL LANGUAGES
When selecting utterances to practise these intonation patterns it may be more difficult to find complete utterances with the same overall tune, because the intonation pattern may only be carried by a segment of the utterance.
If this is so, try to use short utterances for initial practice, e.g. constant subject + varying verb (+ constant object).
Example from Hanga (Ghana), to practise stative — interrogative intonation patterns: If this is not possible initially, because of limited data, you will need to focus your attention, when practising, on the segment of the utterance which carries the intonation pattern.
Some tonal languages also have a downdrift (downstep) feature.
This means that in a sequence of HLH basic tones within an utterance, the pitch of a H tone, following after a L tone, will be lower than that of the preceding H tone, e.g.  If you are not aware of this, you may think the language has more tone levels than it actually has.
Every language has its characteristic stress and rhythm patterns which need to be learned (rhythm will be dealt with in the next section).
It is possible to pronounce the individual consonants and vowels of a language correctly and yet be almost unintelligible because the stress or rhythm is wrong.
5.2.
STRESS PATTERNS
Stress has to do with the relative prominence of one or more syllables in a word, phrase or sentence, in comparison to other surrounding syllables.
The prominent syllable is called a stressed syllable.
The prominence, or emphasis, is caused by the stressed syllable being pronounced louder, longer, and/or often on a higher pitch than surrounding syllables.
These and other factors combine in various ways to create stress in a language.
In words stress can be used to mark a lexical difference (i.e. a difference in meaning) between otherwise identical words.
For example, in Brazilian Portuguese "sabia" means "he knew" and "sabia" means a particular species of "bird" .
5.2.1.
DIFFERENT USAGES OF STRESS
Stress can also be used to mark a grammatical difference.
In English, for example, "insult" is a noun and "insult" is a verb.
In Spanish, "termino" means "I terminate" , and "termino" means "he terminated" .
In addition "termino" means "term" , which adds a lexical difference.
Languages which use stress to mark lexical or grammatical differences are said to have free stress, i.e. it is not possible to predict where it will come, so there are no rules to follow.
As it is especially important in these languages to stress the right syllable the language learner must devote time to practise stress sufficiently.
In other languages there are regular rules as to which syllable of a word is stressed.
These languages are said to have bound or fixed stress; if you know the rules you know where to put the stress.
Languages in this category include French, with stress on the last syllable of a word (or phrase); Polish, with stress on the penultimate (next to the last) syllable; and Finnish, with stress on the first syllable.
The rules are not always as simple s that, e.g. Classical Arabic has the stress on the first long syllable of the word, or on the first syllable if there are no long syllables in the word.
Even if the language has rules to follow it is important to practise stress, because it may come in a position you are not used to.
In this book a stressed syllable is marked by a vertical dash in front of the stressed syllable.
There are other ways of marking it, but it would always be explained at the beginning of a textbook or dictionary which system is used.
In some examples where the stress mark could be confused with the simple quotation mark we have underlined the stressed syllable.
5.2.2.
HOW STRESS IS MARKED
There can be degrees of stress.
If both primary and secondary stress need to be marked it can be done like this: demonstration.
5.2.3.
DEGREES OF STRESS
The importance of stress in language learning is often overlooked.
You can be quite fluent in a language, and yet, something you say is not understood, and you cannot understand why.
The stress may have been in the wrong place.
In the book "Intonation, Accent and Rhythm" , A. Butler says in reporting an experiment that, "listeners tended to interpret what they heard to conform with the stress pattern, often in conflict with the segmental information." 
For example, when words which should have stress on the first syllable were said with stress on the second syllable, they were misinterpreted.
Thus "atmosphere" was heard as "must fear" , "yesterday" as "or study" , and "character" as "director." 
Similarly when "written" was pronounced "written" , it was heard as "retain" .
5.2.4.
THE IMPORTANCE OF STRESS IN LANGUAGE LEARNING
Getting the stress wrong may not necessarily mean you will be understood, but it will meant that you will sound foreign.
For example, if somebody says "university" , "controversial" and "determination" it is probably a Finnish speaker, whilst "Washington" , "Oslo" and "Stockholm" would be the pronunciation of Frenchman.
The moral is that stress should not be neglected.
It has to be written in an initial transcription of a language until you have decided with that it is phonemic (i.e. can make a difference in meaning), in which case you will have to continue writing it, or that there are rules to follow, so you can predict where it comes.
In either case, for language learning purposes, you need to mark the stress in order to know how to pronounce a word.
Will you have to do that forever?
Brewster and Brewster say, "After the words become old friends you will no longer need to indicate the stresses" (LAMP p.255).
1.
Make lists of words which have the same stress pattern, keeping the lists as consistent as possible with regards to CV pattern and segmental length.
Do this fir 2-syllable, 3-syllable and 4-syllable words, and practise as below.
Example from Brazilian Portuguese: N.B. The Portuguese words are here written in the orthography, which does not always make it clear where the stress is.
5.2.5.
HOW TO PRACTISE STRESS (See N.B. on p.6)
listen as the lists are read down and across
HOW TO DRILL
then, as they are read down again with a pause after each word, practice tapping the stress patterns, maybe also saying nonsense syllables, such as "dah" for stressed and "dee" for unstressed syllables (i.e. dah dee dee, dee dah dee, dee dee dah).
mimic the language helper down the lists and across.
Mimicking across can be done in two stages: first mimicking each word, then mimicking all three words across.
read the lists down and across yourself and have the language helper correct you if you don't pronounce correctly.
2.
There may be words where you keep getting the stress pattern wrong.
In Swedish, for example, the word for "photograph" if "fotogra'fi" , with stress on the last syllable.
It is therefore very difficult for a Swedish speaker to remember to put the stress on the English word on the first syllable (by the time you remember it is too late!)
You would need to take each such problem word and put it in a set of sentences and drill on it, e.g: This is my 'photograph.
This is a 'photograph of me.
The 'photograph of the wedding is on the shelf.
He took a 'photograph of the Tower.
She enjoys having her 'photograph taken.
3.
Some languages have long words of many syllables which are difficult to pronounce at first.
If you encounter such words, practise them systematically by a) tapping the rhythm, b) mimicking the last few syllables and then gradually building up to the beginning of the word, c) putting the long word in different position on a series of sentences and practising them, like in following example: Word stress is often modified when the word occurs in a sentence.
Depending on the rules of the language the stress on a word may disappear completely, as in "The Student body is very active" , where "body" has lost the stress it would have in "My body is aching all over" .
Or, it may change position in the word, as in "I am fourteen" and "I have fourteen classmates" .
It is therefore a good idea not only to take note of and practise stress patterns in words in isolation, but also study to see what happens with the stress when the same words are put in various sentences.
The rhythm of a language is hard to describe or define, but we react to it subconsciously.
Imagine yourself being in a crowd where English is being spoken, but suddenly you sense that somebody is talking in another language.
It isn't the actual words you react to, but the different rhythm.
Similarly, using the wrong rhythm while speaking a second language immediately singles you out as a foreigner.
5.3.
RHYTHM PATTERNS
Several factors contribute to the rhythm of a language: the basic rhythm pattern, stress, syllable structure, frequency of consonant clusters, short and long segments, intonation patterns.
The most important of these is which basic rhythm pattern the language has: whether it has stress timing or syllable timing.
The difference is often not even mentioned in textbooks, with the result that the learner may be ignorant about it and keeps sounding foreign.
5.3.1.
STRESS TIMING is the basic rhythm pattern in English.
It means that the stressed syllables in an utterance tend to come at regular intervals with a varying number of less stressed syllables in between.
If the number of unstressed syllables between the stressed ones are few, then the unstressed ones tend to be prolonged (see the sentence "The weather was awful" below).
If, on the other hand, there are many unstressed syllables between the stressed ones, then the unstressed ones are squeezed together, so that the time between the stresses is approximately the same as it was in the first example (see the sentence "The weather we had last summer was awful" ).
In a stress timed language there is often vowel reduction in the unstressed syllables, i.e. the vowels there tend to be less distinctly pronounced than in a stressed position.
For example, the first vowel in the following English words is of a different quality when it is stressed than when it is unstressed: convert, progress, transfer.
If the language you are learning has stress timing and your own doesn't, make lists of utterances having the same number of stresses but different number of syllables.
Practise saying them in the same time span, as far as possible, e.g.: 5.3.2.
SYLLABLE TIMING is the opposite to stress timing.
In syllable timing each syllable is given about the same amount of time and therefore seems to be more distinctly pronounced than in a stress timed language.
In this case it is syllables (rather than stressed syllables) that tend to occur at regular intervals, thus giving the language a staccato rhythm.
The unstressed syllables, although unstressed, do not get squeezed together as in a stress timed language, but are still distinctly pronounce.
French, Spanish and Swedish are examples of syllable-timed languages.
In order to get the feel of the difference of stress timing and syllable timing you could use the above sentences, and first say them again with stress timing.
Then change and say them with syllable timing.
Before you start saying the words you will probably need to tap a quite fast regular beat, and then say the sentences with each syllable given one beat, saying one syllable at each beat.
Another exercise to practise the difference of stress and syllable timing, would be to take any paragraph of text, mark the main stresses and read it aloud with stress timing.
Then read the same paragraph aloud in syllable timing.
During both readings tap the rhythm, and also have somebody to listen to you and tell you if you switch to the wrong rhythm.
In your language learning always pay attention to the rhythm and try to mimic the language helper as accurately as you can.
If the language has long and short vowels and consonants, this will affect the rhythm of the language.
In order to practise, make lists of words with contrasting length patterns.
5.3.3.
LENGTH
Example from Xavante of Brazil: Practise each pattern, or list, in turn (i.e. drill down), and then drill the contrastive patterns across.
Tone languages use tone to distinguish words from each other.
In some of them it is the tone of every syllable which is contrastive and therefore important.
In others, it is the tone of the word which is contrastive.
In no-tonal languages the pitch of the syllable may be determined by the quality of the vowel, or by the stress or lack of it.
Even though these languages are not tonal, the following procedures are still needed to determine this fact and also to master the pronunciation.
5.4 TONE PATTERNS
In dealing with pitch phenomena, it is essential to make comparisons in a controlled environment.
It is usually relative pitches that are important in languages.
Some people have low voices, others have high voices.
A language helper may well change key between utterances.
To sort out the various pitches and decide if the language is tonal or not, you therefore need a frame with pitches that stay the same relative to each other.
You can then compare your data items with that frame, noting if the substitution item has the same or different pitch as the word in the frame you are comparing with.
Sometimes, of course, one can decide immediately if the syllable that is to be checked for pitch has the same, a higher, or a lower pitch than the part of the frame it is being compared with.
There are two main kinds of tone languages: register tone languages in which the tones are basically level, and contour tone languages in which the various tones usually glide.
If both the frame and substitution items have gliding tones that is of course an added difficulty, but as long as you work with a frame that stays the same, you at least have something constant with which to compare the substitution items.
You will at least be able to group together those substitution items which have the same tone patterns, and that will give you material to practise.
More than one frame may be necessary.
To start with, look, for example, for a frame where you can have the substitution items (the words you want to check the pitch of) in the middle and where there preferably is a high tone immediately preceding or following the substitution items.
If it is impossible to find a frame with a high tone in such a position it is recommended that the first part of the frame consists of 3–4 syllables, i.e. isn't too short, so as to give enough reference points.
Arrange the substitution items into groups with the same number of syllables, and as far as possible the same CV pattern, and the same length and stress pattern.
The following is an example from Kusaal, Ghana.
Please note that this layout and procedure is not the same as an "ordinary" checklist, where all the items are compared with no. 1.
Such a procedure could be used even for these words.
If so, two separate lists would be needed, nos. 1–10 (monosyllabic words), and nos. 11–18 (disyllabic words).
Listen to each item in turn in the same frame, noting the pitches.
You may need to run through it several times before you have a clear idea of the pitch.
It often helps to hum the tune to yourself as you try to make your decisions.
STEP 1
Regroup your substitution items into groups each with the same tone patters, and try each group again in the same frame to see if the items do in fact have the same tone pattern (see right-hand column).
STEP 2
Do any further regrouping that is necessary.
Repeat the process with other frames.
Frames with different pitches need to be used in order to determine how many pitch levels there actually are.
the words in the Kusaal example would, for example, have to be checked in a frame with a low tone (Kusaal doesn't have a mid tone) immediately preceding the substitution item, to check if the words that have been marked as being lower than the high tone in the first frame do indeed have the same pitch, or if there are two levels lower than the high.
Also, various frames need to be used in order to find out if anything changes in the words when they are checked against frames with other words or pitch.
Once you have lists where you are confident that you are hearing the tone correctly, these can then be used as drills following the same procedure as before, i.e. listening and mimicking down and across the lists: It is by no means always possible to find a high frame preceding the place of substitution.
There are other possibilities however.
Look for other convenient, unchanging frames, low or mid, preferably where the substitution items fit in the middle, as tones often change at the end of an utterance.
If you are unable to find a frame where the substitution items are inserted utterance medially, you need to be sure to check all substitution items with a following frame as well as a preceding one, as the utterance final tone of the substitution item may differ from its basic tone.
For example, in Hanga (Ghana), words with basic LL tone become LH utterance finally in the stative.
The substitution items need to be of the same class, so they can be used with the same frame.
Substitution items can be whole words, or part of words where affixes form part of the frame as in following example from Xavante (Brazil): In this example, is the frame, meaning "this is" , and  meaning "my" , and being a possessive affix to the substitution item.
Some languages have very simple syllable patterns like V and CV, while others may have complex patterns like CCVC, CCVCC, CCCVCC, etc.
While the consonant sounds may be familiar to you, these may occur in unfamiliar positions or unfamiliar combinations, and you will need to practise in order to master them.
5.5 SYLLABLE PATTERNS
In Portuguese, for example, the consonant clusters /st, sp, sk/ occur, but only with a syllable division between them /-s.p-, -s.t-, -sk-/.
A Brazilian therefore finds it difficult to pronounce "sp" , "st" , and "sk" at the beginning of a word (his tendency would be to put a vowel in front of the "s" ) or at the end of a word in English, and he would therefore need to drill on these clusters in the, to him, unfamiliar positions and combinations.
After practising these positions the Brazilian learning English would need to practise more complex combinations like the following.
Otherwise it is very likely he would always hesitate or stumble when he would have to use these words in the course of a conversation.
There are times when it is difficult to decide whether a syllable or word has one or two lengthened segments, if it is the vowel or the consonant that is lengthened, or both.
It is sometimes easier to hear that two words have the same pattern.
To practice those patterns will not only help accuracy in speaking, but speed analysis also.
MASTERY OF PRONUNCIATION II
INDIVIDUAL SOUNDS
As mentioned in the previous chapter the main emphasis during the early stages of language learning is on the pronunciation.
Of necessity the pronunciation of the individual sounds, the various vowels and consonants, will have to be mastered as soon as possible, otherwise it will be impossible to speak intelligibly.
All languages have vowels and consonants and these combine together to form syllables.
Syllables, in turn, are grouped together in rhythm patterns which are formed by combinations of such features as duration (length), pitch, ad stress.
At a yet higher level, there are stretches of sound over which intonation tunes operate.
Some of those suprasegmental features were dealt with in the previous chapter.
As you work on the pronunciation of the vowels and consonants in the new language you will of course need to concentrate on those that are unfamiliar and difficult.
However, those that are similar to the ones in your own language need also to be practised.
If the difference is only minimal it is so easy to "forget" to pronounce a sound in the way it should be pronounced in the new language.
Other features like glottal stops, devoicing, slowing down and speeding up before or after pause, etc., may also cause pronunciation difficulties and require practice.
A comparison of the phonological system of your own language with that of the language you are learning will reveal the kinds of problems you are likely to encounter.
Unawareness of the phonetic habits of your own language may mean that you carry over those habits into the new language.
To start with you need to know what the phonemes of the new language and their variants are.
You can then immediately make drills to help you pronounce them.
If you do not have such information available, you will have to start by making out phonetic workcharts and from them check lists.
A phonetic workchart is a table of all the phonetic sounds that you have recorded in the language.
You make one by going through all your data to find all the different phonetic sounds you have written, and arranging them on phonetically ordered charts, one for consonants and one for vowels, including modifications (for details see Introduction to Phonemic Analysis).
6.1 PHONETIC WORKCHARTS
The first such charts should be done early — at the end of the first day even, and then added to and/or modified day by day as more data is obtained.
Your first charts will not be final or perfect, but these early charts are very useful steps towards an accurate pronunciation (and also, of course, necessary if you are doing a phonemic analysis).
Don't wait until you have a whole bookful of data or a whole month has gone by before you start to make your first workchart.
By then you will have got used to some bad pronunciation habits.
You might also be consistently failing to hear other sounds that you would have been able to hear (and  produce too) had you approached the problem methodically by means of the workchart.
Your first efforts at hearing, transcribing and producing the sounds of a new language are bound to be subjective an biased according to the languages you have previously had experience with.
You may be suffering from "phonetic nervousness" and hearing or recording distinctions which aren't really there, or, on the other hand, you may be missing important distinctions.
A methodical attack with the help of the workchart will help you overcome such difficulties.
When your workcharts are made out, mark, on the charts, the mutually suspect sets of sounds, i.e. the phonetically similar sounds you need to check to see if they are in contrast or in variation.
This is one of the uses of a check list, as seen below.
Check lists are used for several purposes: an initial transcription of a language is usually not consistent.
The same sound may well be written with different symbols, even in the same language session or in the same word on different occasions.
A check list will enable you to listen to those words over and over again in a controlled environment, and you will be able to make up your mind as to what symbol(s) you want to use for it/them from then on.
6.2 CHECK LISTS
a.
TO HELP YOU TRANSCRIBE CONSISTENTLY
if you need to do a phonemic analysis you must decide which sounds are in contrast (belonging to different phonemes), and which are variants (belonging to the same phoneme).
Check lists will help you hear the contrastive distinctions, and they will also provide you with minimal pairs and other good examples of the contrasts you establish.
b.
TO HELP YOU FIND CONTRASTS AND VARIANTS
in language learning the check lists will provide you with the language data you need to start making pronunciation drills.
c.
TO GIVE YOU MATERIAL TO USE IN DRILLS
Before you make out the lists of words to check with your language helper, some preparatory work needs to be done.
What is suggested here may seem tedious and unnecessary, but it saves time and frustration in the long run, and makes the checking itself more effective and fruitful.
6.2.1.
HOW TO MAKE CHECK LISTS
Prepare a sheet for each of the sounds you have recorded, or for each suspect set of sounds if you don't have much data to work with.
Then go through the data and enter all the words on the appropriate sheets, making separate lists depending on the position of the sound in the word.
On these sheets it is helpful also to have the reference and the English translation.
Add to these lists each day as you get more data.
When you have lined up your data in this way a glance will tell you for which sounds you have enough words to make check lists.
Even so you may still want to get some more vocabulary before making out the check lists.
In the initial stages consonants are best checked between vowels or word initially; vowels are best checked in a stressed syllable (open and closed syllables in separate lists).
Avoid checking sounds word finally, to start with, as these are often devoiced.
When you have decided which sound or set of sounds you want to check make as consistent lists as possible — this will greatly help your hearing.
The lists should: have a heading
have all the items numbered (ref. not necessary here if you have it on the preparatory lists)
ideally consist of words of the same class, preferably nouns, as they are easiest to put into frames.
This is sometimes necessary to do both in eliciting and checking, and is also the final stage in practising a drill.
Therefore, whole phrases, such as greetings, should be avoided in a check list.
You will not need to use them if you have done your homework and gathered enough other vocabulary for checking purposes.
be separated according to the position of the sound in the word, and according to stress and CV pattern (i.e. each list should start with a new no.1.
be arranged so that the environment of the sound within the lists is as much the same as possible, i.e. same stress pattern, same CV pattern, words with short and long segments kept separate (especially with regard to the sound that is being checked).
It is better to have comparatively shorter consistent lists than a huge one with all the above mixed, even if you are checking a sound word initially!
What is said above about making consistent lists is even more important in a tonal language where the sound(s) to check should ideally be in words having the same tone pattern.
If your language helper can read, it is helpful to give him a copy of the words you want to check, with the numbers and the English translation.
This is easily done by using a carbon when you write out the list, removing the language helper's copy before you fill in the words in your transcription.
Then the LH can write in the words in his/her own script.
It is also helpful to have the LH simply read down the list of words before you start the actual checking.
You may have included words that don't fit, and you may want to remove them immediately from the list, so as to avoid confusion when you check.
Some people find it helpful to make a recording of the lists to listen to later.
Some make the recording one day, listen to it and come back and do the checking the next day.
As you gain experience some of the checking can well be done by listening to the recording, thus saving time working with the LH.
Here is a sample check list from the Kusaal language of Ghana: to the right of the lists you would have two columns, marked "s" for "same" and "d" for "different" .
The one thing you are interested in right now is if the sound i question is the same in all the words or different in some of them.
6.2.2.
HOW TO DO THE CHECKING
have the LH say item no. 1 and 2, then item 1 ad 3, item 1 and 4, etc.
You may want to instruct him to say each pair twice all the way through, without you having to ask for a repeat each time.
After listening to each pair of words decide whether the sound in question is the same or different in the second word as in the first word, and put a tick in the appropriate column, first having ticked off word no. 1.
in the "same" column, as being your word to compare the others with.
Instruct the LH to make a pause after each pair to allow you time to decide where to put the tick.
Be aware of the fact that the last word may sound different, especially if it is a tone language (list intonation), and may need to be listened to in another position in the list.
when you have been through the list ask the LH to read all the words that you have in the "same" column, one after another, to see if they really are the same.
As it is helpful to hear them without a break you may ask the LH to mark which words you want him to say, or you can mark them for him.
If one word stands out as not being the same as the others, put a question mark after it for now.
then go on to the ones you marked as "different" and listen to them read one after the other.
Depending on the variety of sounds you had included in your check list, they may or they may not all be the same.
Let us assume that you found some to be same and some to be different.
If you are checking a mutually suspect set of sounds, you are likely to have several "different" sounds in the "different" column.
If you do, make a third column and ask the LH to say the first and second words in the "different" column, then the first and third, etc., as you tick off in the third column the ones that are now different from the new no. 1.
Do this until you have all uniform lists, that is, until each list contains words which all contain the same sound in the same place.
plan to check the words where you have a question mark against words in other suitable lists, either lists still to be checked, or in already established lists.
make a note to check any "odd ones" in other lists later match up the separate lists one against the other to make sure that each list contains a different sound.
After completing a check list you need to write down a conclusion.
Ask yourself: What did the check list tell me?
Were all the sounds the same?
If so, which sound do you think it is now, and in which way should you always write this sound from now on?
6.2.3.
CONCLUSION
If you ended up with several lists of different sounds you would also try and decide what sounds they are phonetically and what symbols to use.
You may want to go back to your original data and indicate what you want a certain sound to be ow that you have checked it, and from now on you would use correct and consistent symbolisation.
You would also need to study the lists to see if there is anything conditioning the sounds, i.e. if they are in complementary distribution and belonging to the same phoneme, or if they contrast in some way, thus constituting different phonemes.
tick off the list s being checked and put the date
if you record your check lists keep them on separate tapes and correctly labelled, so that you can easily find what you want.
Whatever the conclusion or result of your check list — write it down — and make sure you make a note about anything you need to check up on later.
The result of the previous given check list was, for example, as follows: Put the words which have the same sound into established lists.
Develop a system whereby you make sure every sound in every new word is being checked against these and added to the appropriate established list.
Of course, as you become more fluent in the language you will be able to distinguish between the different sounds more and more automatically, and need to do less checking.
However, remember that in working with check lists it isn't crucial, to start with, if you can't arrive at an exact technical phonetic description straight off — as long as you can distinguish between same and different you can still make progress.
For each sound, think of the disposition of the organs of articulation required to make it, i.e. tongue and lip position, presence or absence of aspiration, retroflexion, fronting or backing, etc.
Then think of all the sounds that could be "suspect" with this sound, i.e. all the sounds that could vary from this sound with just a slight change of some of these features.
How would you distinguish the original sound (i.e. the one you've written down in your transcription) from any of the sounds that are suspect with it?
Can you make these sounds in isolation and also in the context in the word in the language under study?
Practise the several different most likely possibilities till they are fairly smooth.
Check with your language helper next session, for you may have missed some phonetic detail which could be important.
No two languages have exactly the same set of phonemes, the same combinations of phonemes, or the same variants of phonemes.
It is helpful to compare a chart of the phonemes of your own language with a similar chart of the language you are learning.
This enables you to pinpoint likely problems.
6.3 CONTRASTIVE PHONEME CHARTS
The first chart is of the consonant phonemes for one dialect of English.
Notice that of the plosives and fricatives there is one voiceless set and one voiced set.
The chart of Tamil phonemes presents a very different sound system.
Notice the lack of contrast between voiced and voiceless sounds and the predominant contrast between long and short consonants.
This latter will be difficult for the English speaker to hear, as there is no such contrast in English.
The set of retroflex consonants in Tamil will also require special drilling for the English speaker, and the dental consonants will be difficult for him to hear as being different from his own alveolar consonants.
To compare the phoneme charts of the mother tongue and the target, language gives a general idea of where the main pronunciation problems may arise.
As the phonemic contrasts in one's own language are "built in" , it can be expected that it takes longer to detach oneself from these contrasts than it takes to master the actual pronunciation.
In order to see what other pronunciation problems there may be, one also needs to study and compare the various individual phonemes of the two languages and see what variants they have.
Doing this with the English and Tamil examples we will find that: Note that  in Tamil is a variant of the /t/ phoneme, but a separate phoneme in English.
Differences like these mean, for example, that the Tamil speaker will have difficulty hearing the contrasts between /t/. /0/ and  in English as these contrasts do not occur in Tamil.
he is liable to "hear" /0/ and  as  as this is the nearest sound in his consonant system.
Thus he will have difficulty in distinguishing "tin" and "thin" , and "tear" and "there" .
A study of the Tamil phoneme /l/ would reveal that it never occurs at the beginning of a word.
The Tamil speaker would therefore find it difficult to pronounce words as "lake" and "lamp" .
He would want to put a vowel in front of the "l" and say "ilake" and "ilamp" .
Problems in pronouncing the sounds of a new language generally fall into the following categories: a. unfamiliar sounds b. familiar sounds in unfamiliar positions c. familiar sounds in unfamiliar combinations d. sounds which are similar to your own but not identical e. pairs of familiar sounds which contrast in the new language but not in your own f. familiar phonemes but with a different set of variants, or familiar variants in unfamiliar environments g. different transition and juncture features between sounds h. different morphophonemic changes when two sounds come together at morpheme or word boundaries.
Further problems may arise that are orthographical in origin: a. a familiar letter is used to represent a different sound, e.g. the letter "r" in English "rat" and Portuguese "rato" b. a letter is used but the sound is not pronounced, e.g. Spanish "h" as in "hoja — leaf c. a combination of letters is used to represent a single sound, e.g. final im in written Portuguese is pronounced  d. a single letter is used to represent two sounds, e.g. in Portuguese the letter" x "is used for [z]in" exame ", and for [s]in" caixa"As your sounds get checked, decisions about phonemes made, and you've compared the phoneme charts, you are ready to start putting some of the words from your check list into pronunciation drills.
In particular you need to practise new sounds, new contrasts, and the phoneme variants.
The rest of this chapter will deal with various kinds of pronunciation drills.
6.4 PROBLEMS IN PRONOUNCING INDIVIDUAL SOUNDS
These are used to master: new sounds
6.5 NON-DIFFERENTIAL PRONUNCIATION DRILLS (see N.B. on p.6)
difficult sounds
sounds similar to the sounds in the mother tongue
The new sounds in the target language, and of course especially the difficult ones, cause the most obvious pronunciation problems in language learning.
Even if some sounds are similar to some in your own language they still need to be practised, as they may differ just a bit, and that sometimes makes it even harder to get them sound right automatically.
Prepare lists of words for each position in which the sound you want to practise occurs.
Your check list should have given you some words, but maybe not in different positions, so you may need to ask your language helper for some more words.
If you can, use words of the same class — it will make it easier to put the words in a frame as part of the drill.
The example below is from Tamil, where [z]is a frequently used sound, but unfamiliar to English speakers.
It occurs word medially between two short vowels, between a long and short vowel, or word finally after a long vowel.
To keep the environments as much the same as possible is a good general principle — it highlights the feature that is to be practised.
It is not always possible to keep to that principle, or to the above one about using words of the same classes.
Which principle you choose to sacrifice depends on the answer to the question: "What words should I use to make this drill as effective as possible?" 
listen to your language helper as he reads down the whole of list A
HOW TO DRILL:
LISTEN
mimic after the language helper each item in list A
MIMIC
read each item without hearing it first, and have the language helper say the word correctly after you have said it only if you didn't say it right
PRODUCE
listen to all three columns in turn
REPEAT THESE STEPS FOR LISTS B AND C IN TURN
listen to sets (i.e. in this case three words) across the columns.
mimic each item across the columns
mimic all three items across the columns (to practice the sound across the columns gives added facility in automatically producing the sound correctly)
produce (read) the items across the columns, first one by one if necessary, and have the language helper repeat after you only if you didn't say them right
a final step in a drill like this would be to put as many of the words as possible in a usable frame, such as "I see a…" or "Give me a…" 
To make this last step possible is one reason for using words of the same class.
When the language helper says the words in a frame he will say them more naturally.
Some language learners also find it easier to hear e.g. a word initial sound at a predictable point in a frame.
However, be aware that the stress pattern may change when the word occurs in the middle of an utterance and that there may be some phonetic conditioning across word boundaries.
An example of the latter would be if a voiced sound that you want to practise becomes voiceless adjacent to a voiceless sound forming part of the frame.
keep an index of your recordings
HOW TO RECORD:
keep pronunciation drills on separate tapes from other material
label the tapes
introduce each drill
when you record for listening instruct the language helper not to leave any space between the words (if he does, it is tempting to mimic)
when you record for mimicking do leave enough space for you to mimic
These drills are used to master difficult distinctions in the new language, and therefore two sounds are involved.
6.6 DIFFERENTIAL PRONUNCIATION DRILLS — CONTRASTIVE PHONEMES
The distinction could be between two sounds which are not in themselves difficult to distinguish, but the contrast may be difficult to hear because it is new.
New English, for example, uses two different k's in the words "key" and "car" , although most English speakers are unaware of the difference.
The sound in "key" is said further forward than that in "car" , but the difference is not contrastive, i.e. the words could never mean anything else if you should happen to use the "wrong k" .
If another language uses this difference contrastively, you would need to practise those two sounds with the words they go with.
The distinction you need to practise could also be between two sounds where both or one of them causes real difficulty in pronunciation as well as being contrastive.
The difficult-to-pronounce-sounds are probably best first learned by thoroughly drilling them in all positions in non-differential drills (substitution drills) as in 6.5.
An example will be given from English.
Suppose a Tamil speaker wants to master the distinction between the English phonemes /t/ (th) and /0/, an expected difficulty that we pointed out earlier.
Apart from his difficulty in hearing the contrast the Tamil speaker will also have difficulty producing both th and [0].
The English th is alveolar, and the nearest sound in Tamil is dental, and the fricative [0]does not occur at all in Tamil.
These two sounds may therefore first need to be practised separately in non-differential drills.
Make a list of words for each of the two sounds in the same position in the word, as much as possible keeping the environment the same and the lists consistent.
Minimal pairs and nearly minimal pairs should be placed side by side across the lists.
In some languages you may be able to utilize material from grammar books for these lists.
In others, you will have to make the lists from your own check lists, and may need to ask your language helper for more words with the sound in a certain position.
DIFFERENTIAL DRILL PRACTISING ENGLISH //t/ (th) and /0/
listen down list A and then down list B
HOW TO DRILL:
LISTEN
listen across the columns
insert one word from list B near the end of list A, and vice versa(sometimes called a "sore thumb drill" ), e.g.: Listen down list A, and then down list B. The sound in the word from the other list should stand out as being different from the rest of the list.
You should be able to pick out the one that is different.
have the language helper say any two words from the original lists, and decide whether they have the same sound in them or not
if the lists have minimal pairs you can have the LH say one word at a time and you will have to decide which list it is from
mimic each word down list A, and then down list B. Instruct the LH to repeat the word again after you only if you didn't pronounce it correctly
MIMIC
mimic each pair of words across the lists, i.e. have the LH say both words one following the other, and you mimic both.
(If the sounds cause you real difficulty you may need to mimic each word across, before you mimic them in pairs.)
mimic the LH as he gives words from both lists in random order
you simply read the lists down and across yourself, without first hearing the words, and the LH should only stop you and say it right if you didn't
PRODUCE
you say any word and see if the LH reacts to it as being the word you meant to say.
You will then also need to drill the same contrast in all other positions in which it occurs.
For the /t/ — /0/ contrast it could be as follows: firstly try and find a frame you can use with at least some of the words from the lists, and listen, mimic, produce.
This will give you additional practice of the sounds, but now in a context, e.g.: secondly, put the sounds you are practising in the frame, and substitute elsewhere, so that you don't concentrate any more on the difficult contrast.
You will now hopefully get it right automatically.
E.g.: A specific phoneme may have several different variants depending on the phonetic environment in which it occurs.
Unless you practise these variants systematically it is very easy to transfer to the new language the variants of the phonemes in your own language.
As you get more fluent in the language the conditioning rules will start to make sense and will help you know how to pronounce a new word without having to practise it, and before too long it will all be automatic.
To start with, though, drilling will be needed.
PRACTISE IN FRAMES
6.7 DIFFERENTIAL DRILLS TO MASTER VARIANTS OF A PHONEME
For example, the Tamil phoneme /t/ has three variants; To master these variants of Tamil /t/ you would prepare a list of words for each phonetic environment affecting the /t/ (note that the Tamil words are written phonemically and not phonetically, as the environment shows what the pronunciation should be): Collect words as similar as possible to highlight the conditioning factor.
Note that these sounds do not contrast with each other in the same environment because they are variants of the same phoneme.
Drill in the same way as outlined for a non-differential pronunciation drill.
Even when practising variants it is good to finish by practising the words in a frame — it helps in getting automatic control.
MASTERY OF GRAMMATICAL STRUCTURES
All languages have grammatical structure but the details of the structure and the devices used to signal structure vary from language to language.
Learning difficulties arise at the points where the structure of your own language differs from that of the new language, the target language.
There is said to be mismatch between the mother tongue and the target language at these points.
You need to recognize what the mismatches are between your own language and the new one.
You have then located the trouble spots in your language learning and must tackle these systematically with appropriate drills.
Grammatical structures need to be "overlearned" — so that they become automatic habits.
Like other parts of a language, however, knowing how to form grammatical structures does not automatically result in your knowing which one is appropriate to use where.
This means you must practise not only individual sentences but also the use of these sentences in larger contexts.
The next section of this chapter will deal with typical kinds of mismatch between languages.
The last section will discuss the different kinds of drills which can be constructed to overcome problems of mismatch and to gain fluency and automatic control of the grammatical structure.
In English the normal word order for a transitive clause is Subject-Verb-Object (SVO), i.e. "The dog bit the child" .
Other languages may use a different basic word order, for example Nambiquara (Brazil), where the order is always SOV, i.e. "The dog the child bit" , and Dusun (Philippines), where the typical order is VSO, i.e. "Bit the dog the child" .
Some languages have a freer word order and use other devices to signal the difference between S, V and O.
7.1 MISMATCH IN STRUCTURE
7.1.1.
WORD ORDER
Languages differ as to the use they make of affixation.
Compared to many languages English has few affixes.
Navajo, for example, can have up to 11 prefixes on a single verb.
In Tamil a statement becomes a question by the simple addition of a question suffix (there is no difference in intonation).
In many languages tense is signalled by affixes, e.g. Dusun, whereas in others tense is signalled by a separate word.
7.1.2.
AFFIXATION
In some languages, like those of the Bantu group, nouns belong to one of several classes and they and their modifiers are all marked by the set of prefixes appropriate to that class.
In some languages one item in a phrase governs other items without being affected itself (government), while in others two or more words must be inflected systematically in the same way (concord).
These two kinds of agreement can be found in European languages where: different person in the subject require different verb endings
adjectives agree with nouns in gender and number
prepositions govern the suffixes of the following nouns.
These are words of closed, classes which have grammatical functions in the phrase, clause or sentence.
Some examples of these in English are: Learning problems occur when function words are used in the target language but not in your own language.
For example, in English one says "I like cheese" , but in Portuguese one says "I like of cheese" …
7.1.3.
FUNCTION WORDS
Another problem is where a function word in the target language has the same meaning as in your own language, but does not occur in all the same contexts as it does in your own language.
The word "sino" in Spanish means "but" , but it is used only to show a contrast with a preceding negative statement.
Some languages use intonation to signal a grammatical contrast, for example, Portuguese uses intonation to signal the difference between a statement and a polar question, in contrast to the example of Tamil in 7.1.2.
Note, however, that when a language uses a question word in an utterance, the intonation is not necessarily the same as that of a polar question.
7.1.4.
INTONATION
In "Learning a Foreign Language" (p. 148) Nida gives examples of languages where a difference in tone signals a grammatical contrast, e.g. a difference in tense, as in Ngbaka (Zaire): In English, stress is used to signal the difference between a verb and a noun, e.g. 'import (noun)— im'port (verb).
In Dusun (Philippines) this would be impossible, as a verb is always signalled by affixation (Dusun does use change of stress for other grammatical features).
The last three points are examples of how suprasegmental features can be used to signal grammatical differences.
How to master the pronunciation of suprasegmental features is dealt with in ch. 5.
7.1.5 TONE
7.1.6.
STRESS
Both your own language and the target language may have the same kinds of systems but within these systems different distinctions are made.
For example, both English and Tamil have pronouns, but in Tamil there is much greater differentiation in the system, particularly in the third person singular: The respectful form is used in speaking of someone older than you or above you in status.
The reflexive is used in constructions like "he said he (himself) would go" .
7.1.7.
DIFFERENT DISTINCTIONS WITHIN THE SAME KIND OF STRUCTURE
Another example of this kind of mismatch is the tense system of Nambiquara (Brazil): A simple example of a totally different system is the numeral classifier system of languages such as Chinese and Malay.
In these languages all nouns are classified (they are in many other languages too), often according to shape and size.
When the nouns are used with numerals the appropriate classifier word must be included in the phrase.
The following is an example from Malay: N.B. The classifiers are all nouns: orang means "people" ; ekor means "tail" ; batang means "big stick" and biji means "seed" .
7.1.8 TOTALLY DIFFERENT SYSTEMS
A more complicated example of a totally different system is found in Dusun (Philippines), and illustrates a typical feature of most languages in that country.
In the Dusun language every clause has to have a grammatically marked topic (i.e. the person or thing about which something is said), which is determined by the larger context (at discourse level).
In the three sentences below, the SUBJECT is the TOPIC (T) in sentence 1: "I cut the meat for mother" .
the BENEFACTOR is the TOPIC in sentence 2: "It was for mother I cut the meat" .
the OBJECT is the TOPIC in sentence 3: "The meat is what I cut for mother" .
Accordingly, the sentence "I am cutting the meat for mother" can be said in these three different ways: This leads to three different types of clauses according to whether it is the Subject, Object or Benefactor that is the topic.
In the above example the devices used to signal the clause type are: 1) the affixation on the verb root (root underlined above) 2) the set of pronouns 3) the noun marker.
As nothing similar to this system exists in any European language this could be a particularly difficult thing to learn.
The first step in making structure drills (grammar drills) is always to identify the learning problem.
Is it a problem of word order, government, function word, or what?
The second step is to construct appropriate drills to overcome the problem.
You need to be sure that the structure you plan to practice is a genuine structure in the language.
If you base the drill on a structure you have elicited from your language helper, you need to check that it really is a natural structure in the language.
The safest way to ensure this is to take your basic structures from stories or texts told by your language helper or other speakers of the language.
7.2 STRUCTURE DRILLS (GRAMMAR DRILLS)(See N.B. on p. 6)
As in all drilling, the aim is to achieve automatic control of the feature concerned and to react with the correct form in response to the appropriate stimulus.
A stimulus could be the waving of a hand, which requires a verbal greeting in response, or it could be something spoken which requires a particular response.
In structure drills as well as in pronunciation drills there is one important principle: drill one thing at a time.
When there is mismatch between different devices, seek to master one device at a time, e.g. drill word order first, and then inflections of the verb.
You will otherwise feel frustrated if you try to tackle different things at the same time.
As a general advice, keep drills moving, do not let them drag.
Rather spend a short time on several drills and come back to them another day, than a long.
long time on one drill.
The language helper needs to be kept from being bored, too.
The kinds of structure drills used for mastering the grammar of a language are: substitution (frame) drills (these are non-differential)
differential (transform) drills
system drills
stimulus-response drills
linking drills
Drills for the mastery of grammatical structure need to be graded, i.e. start with simple drills, then go on to more complex ones.
The type of drills and the order in which you construct them will depend on the structure of the new language and also on your own language background which to a certain extent determines in what area you will find difficulties.
Always keep in mind what it is you need and want to practise, then decide how you can most effectively do that.
There are usually several ways of doing things, and as we are all individually different, we will find different ways and procedures helpful.
Therefore, what we are suggesting is not to be considered as the only way of "doing it right" .
A substitution drill consists of a pattern sentence, also called a frame, which is a meaningful phrase or clause that stays the same, and a list of substitution items.
They are used very widely in language learning.
They are used in learning vocabulary as well as for mastering grammatical structure.
They can be used very effectively for gaining automatic control when problems are caused by mismatch of word order or of a function word.
The two following drills illustrate this, the first one being an example from Dusun (Philippines): A general principle is that substitution should be made at the trouble spot or as near the trouble spot as possible.
I this case the problem is to remember to put the verb first in the sentence, so this is why substitution is made in the verb slot.
7.2.1.
SUBSTITUTION DRILLS (Frame drills)
listen as the language helper (LH) says: Pattern Sentences (PS) Substitution Item 1 (SI.1), Sentence 1 (S.1) Substitution Item 2 (SI.2), Sentence 2 (S.2), etc.
HOW TO DRILL
1.
LISTEN
There should be no long pauses — as you are only listening at this stage
mimic in the same order as 1.
Do not have the LH repeat the utterance after you unless you need to be corrected o something.
As it is the structure you are concentrating on, you get it again in the next utterance.
2.
MIMIC
3.
PRODUCE (no need for the Lh to repeat, unless you didn't say it right)
you produce (or read) the Pattern Sentence, the LH says SI.1, you produce S.1; LH says SI.2, you S.2, etc.
produce the appropriate sentences as LH gives the substitution items in random order
If you record the drill it is recommended that in the production state you have the LH say the whole phrase after you.
Otherwise you have no way of knowing if you said it right.
When this mismatch has been mastered, a drill can be constructed with substitution items in the object slot.
Then the Verb-Subject sequence (just drilled) will form the frame that stays the same.
As it is no longer in focus the drill serves to reinforce what has already been drilled and ensures automaticity of control.
Usually a function word or affix cannot be substituted, so substitution must be made at the slot with which the function word is more closely related, in this example the object or the verb.
Not all verbs require a function word in Portuguese, but some do.
The verb for "to need" , as in this drill, as well as some other verbs, always require the function word "de" ; there are other verbs which require other function words like "com" and "a" .
Differential drills which we will deal with in the next section are a development from substitution drills (which are non-differential).
Substitution drills are also the first step in making system drills, but these will be dealt with in 7.2.3.
Substitution drills would also be used a first step in mastering the totally different topic system in Dusun which we discussed in 7.1.8.
Separate drills would have to be prepared to master each of the three clause types.
As the verb is the first trouble spot encountered in the sentence, the substitution is made there.
Such a drill could be something like this: The verbs that are being substituted would also have the affixes -mom (sentence type 1), p- and -an (sentence type 2, and p- and -on (sentence type 3).
Drills could also be made with substitutions made at other slots, until all possibilities have been drilled or the problem overcome.
A simple differential drill consists of two substitution drills which first have been practised and mastered separately.
The structure of the two should be clearly related.
For a differential drill they are placed side by side and drilled across to highlight the difference between them.
7.2.2.
DIFFERENTIAL DRILLS (Transform drills)
Suggestions for differential drills are: The positive statement drill on the left-hand side has been discussed earlier in this chapter.
The negative statement drill on the right-had side is clearly related structurally to the positive statement.
Before it could be used in a differential drill, however, it must have been thoroughly mastered as a separate substitution drill and trouble spots such as the two positions of the negative must be fully controlled.
listen to each pair of sentences
HOW TO DRILL
LISTEN
reverse the order of the columns and listen to each pair of sentences (helps flexibility and keeps you from getting into a rut)
MIMIC (NO LH repeat)
mimic each sentence in pairs, i.e. going across
mimic each sentence pair but reverse the order
PRODUCE (NO LH repeat unless you don't produce it correctly)
have the LH say each sentence from col. 1 in turn and you produce the corresponding transform from col. 2.
reverse the order so that the LH starts with col. 2
have the LH say any sentence from either column and you produce the corresponding transform
Problems of concord and government cannot be mastered only by simple substitution drills because they involve changes at more than one point in the sentence.
In other words, changing one part of the utterance forces a change in another part.
Examples of this would be the Bantu concord system, where, if you change the noun to a noun of another class, all the affixes in the noun phrase must also be changed.
7.2.3.
SYSTEM DRILLS
In many European languages if you change a pronoun, the endings of the verb must also change (a. below), or if you change a noun to a noun of a different gender, you will have to change the article and suffix in the noun phrase (b. below).
An example from German would be: Because two (or more) changes are involved, something more than a simple substitution drill is required for mastering these features.
You would need to set up a system drill.
Traditionally, the European type of pronoun and verb system has been learned by means of a paradigm drill, e.g. Spanish: yo hablo, tu hablas, el habla — "I speak, you speak, he speaks" , etc.
This type of drill, however, probably teaches little more than familiarity with the verb root.
It doesn't make you know automatically how to say "she speaks" and to come out with it instantly.
In your mind you may have to start from the beginning of the paradigm and go down until you arrive at the form you need at the moment.
By that time the person you were speaking to may have left!
In order to gain automatic control of the trouble spot, namely the association between the pronoun and the verb ending, a system drill consisting of several substitution drills needs to be set up, in which the pronoun is kept constant (and hence the verb ending), and substitution is made at the verb stem position.
This is illustrated in the following drill using Spanish: This type of drill would have to be set up for each person, number, tense and verb class, and be thoroughly drilled in order to gain automatic control of the association of pronoun and verb ending.
After these simple substitution drills are mastered separately they can be placed alongside each other(as above) and drilled across as a system drill.
Below is an example from French, where separate drills of each tense (already individually mastered) would be placed side by side preferably in a meaningful frame and drilled across.
This would help to master the tense system, and then, gradually, as learning progresses, other pronouns can be added to the drill.
It is very easy when doing structure drills to be merely repeating like a parrot without one's mind being engaged in the exercise.
You need constantly to think actively of the meaning of what you are drilling.
Pictures, drawings, objects, and actions are sometimes a help to that end.
The concord system in Bantu languages requires that there must be agreement between the object and number depending on which noun class the object belongs to.
Separate drills need to be set up for each noun class to learn its associated affixes.
The following drill shows how this was set up for (simplified) Basari (Togo): Once these simple drills are mastered then the noun phrase in the object slot could be expanded by the addition of one modifier at a time and drilled until all modifiers which may be affixed for concord with the noun have been drilled.
In some Bantu languages the adjectives, possessives, relative clauses and even the verb are all affixed according to the class of the noun.
When practising a complete and complex system drill it is of course not possible to place all the separate drills side by side and drill them all in one go.
One possibility is to choose two or three at a time, as above, and then go on to a few others.
One can also use flash cards and have, e.g., one card for each person, and one card for each verb form, according to person and tense, using a few different verbs.
These cards could then be placed side by side in the fashion you want to practise.
A final step in mastering a system of e.g. agreement is to use a stimulus-response drill.
The stimulus requires a choice to be made within the system that is being drilled.
Thus, if the French verb tense system were being drilled, the stimulus could be a time word such as "yesterday" or "tomorrow" , and it would require a correct choice of verb tense.
The sentences must have been previously drilled and mastered.
7.2.4.
STIMULUS-RESPONSE DRILLS
The language helper gives the stimulus and you reply with the correct response.
The person is kept constant, because the problem being drilled is tense.
Similar stimulus-response drills could be constructed where the pronouns were being drilled.
In these drills the stimulus would be a pronoun that would vary, while the tense would be kept constant.
You would respond choosing the appropriate verb form, e.g.: With the problem of concord, as in Basari (see p. 62), once all the different noun classes and their appropriate affixed had been drilled, a stimulus-response drill could be set up to ensure fluency and automatic control.
Here the stimulus is a noun from a variety of classes and you have to choose the affix that goes with the numeral.
In cases like the French verb system it is possible to build up a drill containing all the tenses of the verb and all the pronouns within the framework of one drill.
One could then make a multiple stimulus-response drill where two stimuli are given each time, and you have to choose the appropriate verb form.
This involves a double choice as the verb from has to agree with the stimuli both in tense and person.
To master the French verb system a series of such drills would have to be constructed for a wide variety of common verbs and their tenses.
Every language has characteristic ways of linking words, phrases, clauses, sentences and paragraphs in connected discourse; of referring back to something previously mentioned; and of deleting redundant information.
So beyond drilling simple sentences, it is necessary to drill larger stretches of speech.
7.2.5.
LINKING DRILLS
Complex sentence structures are mastered by building up from simple sentence structures, which have been drilled already in substitution and differential drills.
The example below uses an independent and dependent clause.
A very simple independent clause structure is used first: "She swept the room" .
 "She cleaned the floor" , etc.
This is a S V O structure which has been mastered already by the use of substitution drills.
7.2.5.1 COMPLEX SENTENCE DRILLING
These independent structures are then transformed to dependent ones: "After she had swept the room" , etc., and made part of a complex sentence.
The dependent clause functions as a substitution item in a frame, the frame being the rest of the sentence.
N.B. This may seem a very simple construction in English, but may represent a trouble spot where a different device is used in the target language to mark the sequence of events.
In Dusun, for example, two different sequence particles are used in the verb phrases — one in the first clause an a different one in the second clause.
In the above drill the frame might be expanded, e.g. "…she cooked the rice, and gave the children their dinner." 
 "…she cooked the rice, gave the children their dinner, and then took her siesta." 
A further step would be to make a series of independent clauses into a series of complex sentences, e.g.: She swept the room.
She scrubbed the floor.
She polished the furniture.
She cleaned the windows.
After she had swept the room, she scrubbed the floor.
After she had scrubbed the floor, she polished the furniture.
After she had polished the furniture, she cleaned the windows.
Before she cleaned the windows, she polished the furniture.
Before she polished the furniture, she scrubbed the floor.
Before she scrubbed the floor, she swept the room.
Another kind of linking drill is where the language helper writes a series of separate sentences which the learner has to combine appropriately into a paragraph.
This of course requires quite a sophisticated language helper.
It is good for developing fluency and for practising naturalness in connected speech.
The paragraph can be first written, then corrected, and then read aloud.
Make sure the topic is something common that you may be able to use apart from the exercise.
It could be something like this: Another exercise of this kind is to study a picture and to write statements of what is in the picture and then link them together in a paragraph.
If you have a picture of a view, following statements might made: Statements: There is a church.
There is a river.
There is a path.
There are trees.
There are flower beds.
The church is reflected in the water The trees are ""  "" The flowers are under the trees The trees are both sides of the river The path is along the right bank of the river The church is on the right side of the river The church is in the distance Paragraph: The picture is of a river with trees on both sides, and with flowerbeds under the trees.
A path on the right bank leads to a church in the distance.
The trees and the church are reflected in the water.
When you memorize whole texts or dialogues, you are unconsciously practising linking features of paragraphs and discourse.
The use of dialogues has already been discussed in chapter 4.
It is good to practise discourse structure consciously as well.
To do this you can read texts, making systematic changes of person, tense, and vocabulary items.
Each time you go through the text you practice the discourse structure, as the structure, or "grid" , stays the same while you are making the other changes.
You will unconsciously assimilate the structure.
This will help you speak as well as write more idiomatically.
7.2.5.2 PARAGRAPH DRILLS
7.2.5.3.
TEXT DRILLS
You can also take a conversation where all the sentences are complete and go through and make all the deletions which make it natural.
This can be done in writing, by reading, and by role-playing with another person.
An example of this can be found at the end of chapter 4.2.
When listening to sermons, speeches, lectures, etc. you can make a point of listening especially to the use of connectives, e.g. "firstly" , "lastly" , "alternatively" , "however" .
MASTERY OF VOCABULARY
The number of sound patterns and grammatical patterns in a language is limited but the vocabulary is unlimited and seems a vast area to tackle.
In learning vocabulary you will need to know how to choose vocabulary items to learn, how to go about learning them, and what particular problems to be on the look out for.
In the early stages, you will want to learn vocabulary that is used frequently, and which has wide usefulness, for example, verbs in English like do, make, give, and generic terms (common to a whole group or class) like people, animal, tool, food.
But be sure later to learn specific items and don't overuse the generic terms.
A very useful way of enlarging your vocabulary is to prepare a dictionary in the language.
8.1.
WHAT TO LEARN
Aim at learning vocabulary that has to do with basic living needs, such as shopping, getting directions and using public transport, arithmetic for handling money, greetings and leave-takings, introductions, polite phrases, expressions of appreciation, how to use the telephone.
A detailed word list for beginning field work with the aim of doing segmental phonology is included at the end of this chapter.
After concentrating on vocabulary for your basic living needs, you can then proceed to words which will help you become more involved with the local community, those related to simple cultural themes, and then those related to deeper cultural values.
There are excellent detailed suggestions for such vocabulary topics in Brewster and Brewster, Language Acquisition Made Practical, ch. 2.
When learning the names of objects, have the objects or pictures of them before you, so that you associate the word you are learning with the object rather than through translation.
A question-answer drill is useful for learning these vocabulary items: When learning verbs, ask your language helper to act them, or act them yourself, so that you associate the verb you are learning directly with the action it signifies.
Physical response drills are useful for learning to recognise verbs in command forms.
The language helper can give a command, and obey it himself; he can give a command and you obey it; you can give the command and obey it yourself; you can give the command and he obeys it.
Brewster and Brewster give many good ideas for such drills (ch. 3).
8.2.
HOW TO LEARN VOCABULARY
8.2.1.
BY DIRECT ASSOCIATION
Another way of learning vocabulary by direct association is to participate in local activities, and find out the names of objects, actions, processes, etc., "on the job" .
You can then make drills about these activities, e.g. house-building in Kusaal, Ghana: If you have a series of drawings or photographs of these stages of house-building, you can use these in your drill.
8.2.2.1 Learn words in self-defining sentences, e.g.: 8.2.2.2.
Learn words exploiting relationships which exist, e.g.: You will find other suggestions of this kind in an article by John Beekman, "Eliciting Vocabulary, Meaning and Collocations" in Healey's Language Learner's Field Guide, an in ch. 5 of Dakin's "The Language Laboratory and Language Learning" .
8.2.2.
BY ASSOCIATION WITH OTHER WORDS IN THE LANGUAGE
Determining the meanings of words is by no means as simple as one may think.
Everything about the meaning of a word is not said simply by giving a synonym for it.
Nor can it be said simply that "this" in language A means "that" in language B. If the meaning of words is to be determined accurately, the following basic principles of semantics ( "the science of meaning" ) must be understood and applied: 1.
There are no exact synonyms within any language.
2.
There are no exact parallels between languages.
3.
Ambiguities occur in all languages.
4.
Changes of meaning occur in all languages.
5.
Words have areas of meaning rather than precise points of meaning.
6.
Different languages subdivide experience differently.
7.
Words reflect the culture of the people.
8.3 PROBLEMS OF MISMATCH IN VOCABULARY
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SEMANTICS:
Some words are used in essentially one kind of context only.
That is, they have a fairly definite, precise meaning.
An example of such a word in English is "announce" : John announced his news.
success.
failure.
engagement.
What John is doing in each situation is very much the same: he is making a pronouncement about something.
Other words may be used legitimately in several kinds of contexts, e.g. "to run" in English: Within each of the above groups, the word "run" has approximately the same meaning.
There is, however, a bigger variation of meaning as we go from one group to another.
This is demonstrated when other words are substituted in these different contexts.
What can be substituted meaningfully in one of the above groups may not be substituted in the others.
For example, "walked" might be substituted in 1., but it would make nonsense in the other three contexts.
Comparison of the members of one group with the members of the other groups makes it clear that, though identical in form, "ran" is in fact semantically different in each of these contexts.
To study the word "dress" in English would lead to similar conclusions.
The usual or primary use of this word is to put clothes on yourself (or somebody else), but it has other uses too, such as to dress poultry, to dress timber, to dress a window.
These, however, are less common uses of the word "dress" , and the senses of "dress" in these cases are "non-primary" .
Because words have ares of meaning rather than points of meaning you must be alert for mismatch in meaning when you translate from your own language to another.
In the example given earlier of the different uses of "run" in English, you must not expect that the word in the new language which is used to translate the word "run" as it is used in group 1.
above, could also be used to translate the meaning of run as it is used in any or all of groups 2–4.
The problem of mismatch of vocabulary may be illustrated by use of a diagram showing a chain of mismatches, beginning with the English verb "run" , and ending with "die" , and similar verbs in Tamil: "Oodu" in Tamil can be translated in English in some contexts as "run" , and in others as "happen" .
Conversely, "happen" in English can be translated in Tamil in some contexts as "oodu" and in others as "nada" .
The areas of meaning of the Tamil words overlap with the areas of meaning of the English words, but they do not completely coincide.
There is a very natural tendency for languages to make finer distinctions in phenomena which are important to their own culture than other languages to whose culture these phenomena are less important.
For example, Nambiquara (Brazil) has several words for "honey" , according to where it is found, because this is a very important food item in their culture.
Similarly, many Eastern languages have a number of names for "rice" depending on the state of growth of the plant and the manner in which it is cooked.
Again, this is because rice is important to the speakers of those languages, as it is their staple food.
8.4.
TYPES OF MISMATCH OF VOCABULARY
English has a multitude of names for different types of tools, because of our high mechanisation, e.g. "spanner" , "ring-spanner" , "box-spanner" , "C-spanner" , etc.
Portuguese uses the one word "chave" to cover all these tools, and in fact uses "chave" for "key" as well.
The rest of this section will illustrate various types of mismatch of vocabulary.
The first two would be examples of mismatches that could have cultural causes similar to the ones explained above.
8.4.1.
One word in your own language is translated by two or more words in the new language.
For example, in English we can talk about both humans and animals "eating" , but in German "essen" (to eat) is an activity restricted to humans, and "fressen" (to eat) is what animals do.
 "Fressen" is only used of humans when the speaker wishes to be rude or sarcastic.
The way to master such mismatches is to construct simple context drills, i.e. drills which use each of the problem words in the culturally correct context.
Here, for example, is a context drill to master the difference between "essen" and "fressen" : Non-English speakers learning the English word "run" would construct drills similar to the examples given for the different uses of "run" .
8.4.2.
Two words in your own language are translated by one word in the new language.
This is the reverse of the previous problem.
This kind of mismatch is not so obvious as the other, but it should not be forgotten, as it can cause difficulty in understanding.
For example, the Malay word ikat which means "to go" as in "go by bus" , or "go by boat" , also means "follow" as in "follow a path" or "follow a person" .
You would need to know which meaning was intended in order to understand what was being said.
German speakers have difficulty in distinguishing between "bring" and "take" in English as these are translated by one German word "bringen" , but the English speaker has difficulty trying to decide which of the two English words is meant in any statement containing the German word "bringen" .
In order to learn to master this sort of mismatch, simple context drills must be prepared such as the following one, in order to become accustomed to the way the word is used in German: N.B. (to me) indicates that it is implied in the English sentence, but not usually stated; if stated, it would be followed by the preposition "in" , as in "Bring the books to me in the library" .
You should be on the look-out for any grammatical or contextual clues which are being used to signal different senses of the meaning, and which are automatically understood by the native speaker.
In the German example above, "zu" + article, "zur" , signals the "take" meaning, whereas "in" + article signals the "bring" meaning of the German word "bringen" .
8.4.3.
Two words which collocate (may occur together) in your own language may not collocate in the target language.
For example, in English "maiden" collocates with "voyage" , and "virgin" with "jungle" , but not vice versa .
8.4.4.
A word which has a positive or neutral connotation (overtone) in your own language may have a negative connotation or a double meaning in the new language.
For example, "cancer" , "death" , "fanatic" , "mother-in-law" , often have a negative connotation in English, and are therefore often avoided.
In other languages those words may not have any negative overtones.
In some languages certain parts of the body or bodily functions are not mentioned in certain social situations.
Problems of collocation and connotation are usually only discovered by unwittingly using the words in inappropriate contexts.
It is helpful if somebody points out such mistakes to you.
The following is essentially a list of categorized items to ask for, so that you can get quickly into segmental phonology.
The best thing to do is to develop anything that looks promising.
Don't spend too much time on what isn't.
Beware of the trap of spending time on long explanations in English on what something is. it may not exist in the other culture.
If it is obvious that a word is a loan word, keep it, but make a note that it is a loan.
Avoid an area where all the words seem to be loan words.
Compound words may be quite useful for various parts of grammatical analysis but are not of much use in phonology.
8.5 WORD LIST FOR BEGINNING FIELD WORK
An alternative to asking for item after item is to ask, "What animals (birds, fish, etc.) do you have in your country?" , or, "What different kinds of clothing do you wear?" 
If you only get vocabulary where you give the item in English there is a risk that you will miss common words where there is no equivalent in English.
PEDAGOGICAL GRAMMARS
9.1.
DEFINITION OF A PEDAGOGICAL GRAMMAR
 "A pedagogical grammar is a presentation of a language which is designed to teach the reader how to speak that language" (Forster 1980).
Its target is an adult.
Therefore, the subject matter of the lessons should be appropriate to the interests and intelligence of an adult.
Moreover, the learner is a foreigner, not a native speaker of the language, and so has no previous control of the language.
The purpose of a pedagogical grammar is to teach the student to speak the language.
This differentiates it both from a descriptive grammar and from a primer.
Although a descriptive grammar gives detailed coverage of the facts about a language, it is not written in a form which can be used directly to acquire speaking control of the language.
A pedagogical grammar, on the other hand, is a handbook based on a descriptive analysis, which includes sets of language learning drills, neatly set out and systematically arranged according to the structure of the language and the needs of the student.
It is not just a book of instructions or explanations to be read, but a practical handbook to be drilled and practised, in order to acquire speaking mastery of the language.
A primer is used to teach a non-reading native speaker of a language to read his own language.
A pedagogical grammar, on the other hand, is used to teach an adult (who already reads his own language) to speak a foreign language.
As the problems involved in learning to read one's own language and learning to speak a foreign language are quite different, the resulting text books also (i.e. the primer and the pedagogical grammar) are widely different.
This discussion of pedagogical grammars will help you in any of the following four typical situations in which you may find yourself: a.
You may need to evaluate an existing pedagogical grammar.
You may be confronted with some grammar book from which you are required to learn the language, and you must be able to tell whether it is a good one or not.
If it is good one, you can go straight ahead and use it.
If it is defective, you need to know where it is defective and how you can modify the language material contained in it, so that you can learn the language well in spite of the book!
Alternatively, you may be confronted with several pedagogical grammars in the same language.
In that case, you will need to know which to choose.
Should you use one to the exclusion of the others?
Or should you take the best parts out of each?
In order to meet this type of situation you need to know how to evaluate a pedagogical grammar.
9.2.
THE PURPOSE OF THIS CHAPTER ON PEDAGOGICAL GRAMMARS
b.
You may need to do a complete revision of an existing pedagogical grammar, so that it may be of greater use for the language learning programmes of your colleagues.
You must know how to go about a revision of this kind.
c.
You may need to prepare all your own language learning material.
In a language which has no written from, or one for which no pedagogical grammar has been prepared, you will have to learn the language from scratch, eliciting all your own language material, planning your own language learning programme and writing your own drills.
This material must be checked thoroughly with a language assistant before it is used.
In the process of developing these drills, you will have produced the central core of a pedagogical grammar.
d.
You may need to write a pedagogical grammar.
Some dy after you have mastered the language, a request may come from a government official, an anthropologist or a missionary, for help in learning the language.
They may not call it a "pedagogical grammar" , but it is what they will mean.
Some of the principles of planning and writing a pedagogical grammar will now be considered.
Such a grammar needs to be appropriate to the audience that is to use it, its content needs to be appropriate to the culture of the people whose language is to be learnt, and it needs to progress smoothly from one topic to another.
(Note that, in evaluating an existing pedagogical grammar, you should not only look at its contents, but also consider its orientation and progression.)
9.3.
PLANNING A PEDAGOGICAL GRAMMAR
The first question you must decide is where the pedagogical grammar is to be used.
Will it be employed in a classroom situation in which a competent teacher supplies linguistic explanations and moves the student from one topic to the next?
In such a case, the pedagogical grammar may consist of little more than exercises and model conversations, without translations of the phrases taught, etc.
Alternatively, will it be used primarily by an individual, teaching himself/herself the language as he/she works with a language assistant?
In that case, explanation of the points covered will need to be included, together with translations of the language material taught, at least in an Appendix.
9.3.1.
The Audience.
Secondly, what are the mother tongues of those who will be using the grammar to learn the language? if the mother tongue is related to the target language, many features which the languages have in common will not need to be drilled.
And even if their mother tongues are unrelated, the problems faced by the native English speaker will not necessarily by the same as those faced by the native French speaker, for instance.
The pedagogical grammar must not only be designed for a specific audience; it must also teach materials that are culturally appropriate.
the conversation selected should be  useable in real cultural situations and should reflect topics of everyday conversation.
Every item taught in each lesson should be useable in the living cultural situation outside the classroom.
The vocabulary used should be such that words and constructions learned in the lessons can be used immediately in situations which occur frequently in the culture.
9.3.2.
Cultural Orientation.
The best way to ensure that a pedagogical grammar will both meet the audience's needs and be culturally orientated is to plan every lesson carefully.
Draw a line down the centre of a page.
On one side list the structures that must be drilled.
On the other side list the most common cultural situations, with appropriate vocabulary and common idioms.
Then coordinate the two lists by using the material on the right side of the page for the opposite.
Wherever possible, work culturally relevant conversations into the drills.
Just as it requires careful planning to ensure the correct orientation of a pedagogical grammar, so the progression of the lessons too must be carefully planned.
In teaching the phonology of the language, for instance, the suprasegmental features should be drilled early (for example intonation and stress).
This will safeguard against the student acquiring bad habits in these features of pronunciation.
The same applies to difficult sounds and pairs of sounds which will be found confusing in learning the language.
9.3.3.
Progression
In teaching the grammar, the most essential grammatical structures, in their minimal forms, should be drilled first.
Simple statements, questions and commands should be introduced early because of the student's immediate need of communication with the people among whom he/she is living.
Long, expanded drills should not be given until the student has mastered the shorter, minimal structures, because the expanded drills are based on the minimal ones.
Until the student has mastered (and indeed overlearned) the minimal structures he will find the expanded forms both confusing and discouraging.
A limited vocabulary of immediately useful terms should be used in all drills and conversations.
The student should not be confused with long lists of new vocabulary to master before the drills can become meaningful to him/her.
Common cultural situations should be built in both to the drills and to the conversation material, from an early stage in the book.
A good pedagogical grammar should contain the following: a preface or introduction (sec. 9.4.1.)
9.4.
THE CONTENT OF PEDAGOGICAL GRAMMAR
a table of contents and/or index (sec. 9.4.2.)
a series of graded lessons each one consisting of pronunciation and structure (grammar) drills and a short conversation.
There should also be any necessary explanatory notes on the phonology, grammar, vocabulary and culture (sec. 9.4.3.)
systematic revisions of previously learned material (sec. 9.4.4.)
self-checking tests for assessing the student's progress.
(sec. 9.4.5.)
paradigmatic displays where useful (sec. 9.4.6.)
dictionary of vocabulary used (sec. 9.4.7.)
These topics are now discussed in turn.
The first thing to note about the preface is that it needs to be read.
Therefore, it must be attractive and readable.
As there is often a strong tendency in our own culture never to read a preface, it may be good to call it something else, to give it a title such as "How best to make use of this grammar" , or "Vital know-how before you start" .
9.4.1.
THE PREFACE
The preface should contain the following items: a.
A statement of the aim of the pedagogical grammar.
It must be stated clearly for whom the grammar is written, and where it is to be used.
b.
A summary of language learning principles.
You must state these, because you cannot assume that the users of this grammar are well acquainted with such principles.
Therefore you should explain the importance of right attitudes in language learning; the need for listening, mimicry and speaking (at normal talking speed, not in an artificially slow mode of speaking); the importance of overlearning, and the need for both automaticity and accuracy in language learning.
In connection with this, state the purpose both of the pronunciation and the structure drills.
c.
General instructions on language study.
It has to be emphasized that the pedagogical grammar should be used only with a language assistant who is a native speaker of the language.
You must explain the use of tapes and give clear instructions on the correct methods of drilling, both in classroom groups and in individual sessions.
Students should be advised to keep a "Difficulties Diary" in which they note those items, both phonological and grammatical, which causes them particular difficulty.
Each item noted in this diary should be given special emphasis in succeeding sessions with the language assistant until the difficulty is mastered.
If possible, supplementary material should be prepared, checked with the language assistants, and tape-recorded, to enable the student to overcome these difficulties.
In situations where the student is working with a literate language assistant, he/she should ask him or her to keep a note-book in which to record mistakes the student makes, both inside and outside the classroom.
Every difficulty noted should receive special attention until it is mastered.
d.
Suggested study guides.
The preface should include two types if study guides.
Firstly, a chart showing an overall plan of study for, say the next nine months.
This chart should indicate how much material the student should aim to cover in each week of language study.
(Note that the rate of progress if the average students should be the guiding line in these suggestion.)
Secondly, there should be a daily study guide, indicating how the student might divide up his daily study time.
There should be suggestions on how much time to spend with the language assistant; how much times to spend drilling with the aid of a tape-recorded; how much time to spend on any necessary "book-work" ; how much time to spend on practising in the community.
The student should be advised to break up his study time into fairly short sections so as not to spend too long on any one particular area of study.
e.
A brief outline of the phonological structure of the language.
The outline should include phonemic contrastive charts of the consonants and vowels.
There should be notes on pronunciation, preferably with phonetic descriptions of the sounds.
Important suprasegmental features of the phonology, such as rhythm, intonation and stress, should also be described in the preface, as well as in the lessons where they will be drilled.
To be of maximum value to the user, an index should be included, to indicate the reader where each grammatical structure and phonological feature is discussed (e.g. the passive; stress patterns) An introductory table of contents is also useful, to indicate the general topics which are covered in each lesson.
9.4.2.
THE TABLE OF CONTENTS AND/OR INDEX.
The lessons will normally consist of three to five sections: a short conversational exchange; a section on phonological features with drills (particularly in the initial stages); a section on grammar; any cultural points relevant to the topic or situation being considered; and vocabulary items which can be employed in the drills and exercises accompanying the lesson.
9.4.3.
THE LESSONS
a.
The sort conversational exchange.
Model conversations are intended in the first instance, for mimicry-memorization, to help the student to use freely the common expressions in the language.
The conversations should be designed so that the student can use them outside the classroom, and use them is such a way that he/she can control the direction go the conversation.
This is most easily done by having the students ask appropriate questions and become familiar with the answers that are most likely to be given.
The topics and situations envisaged in the conversations should be those that the student can expect to meet in real life.
If possible, even the conversations taught in Lesson 1 should be useable in a real life situation, as soon as the student has complete Lesson 1.
The conversation should be short.
One or two exchanges will be sufficient initially.
Subsequent lessons can further develop the same conversation, or can tackle different topics.
b.
Phonological features.
Unless the language displays great phonological complexity, the phonological features which occur in the model conversation will be discussed in turn and drilled.
The section on phonology should include: A description of the sound to be drilled.
This should preferable be a phonetic description, but if the students have no phonetic training a face diagram accompanied by a tape-recording should be provided.
Descriptions based on comparison of a sound in the new language with a sound in the student's own language should be used only as a last resort, since dialect differences in languages made such descriptions confusing and often valueless.
Moreover, the sounds in the new language will rarely be identical to the sounds in the student's language.
Pronunciation drills.
Be careful to treat adequately all levels of the phonological hierarchy.
There should be drills on all contrasts, including those marked by intonation, stress, length, and tone, wherever these apply, as well as drills on segmental phonemes.
For tone languages, tone frames should be drilled from the outset of the course.
In a language with contrastive intonation patterns, the most common ones should be drilled early on the series of lessons.
Pronunciation practice is necessary on all sounds, even on sounds which are similar to those of the student's own language.
Notice that all the difficulties discussed in Chapter 5 (i.e. difficulties due to phonemic contrast and distribution, phonetic difficulties, and orthographic difficulties) must be drilled.
c.
Grammatical Features.
In early lessons, it is not usually desirable to discuss every grammatical feature that is encountered in the model conversation.
Rather, two or three immediately productive features only should be discussed and drilled.
The student will be able to use many other features found in set expressions, for example, without having to understand immediately how they work.
In constructing structure drills for a pedagogical grammar, the following principles should be kept in mind: The drills must deal adequately with the differences between the structures of the language, and the structures of the student's own language.
Substitution drills should concentrate particularly on structural differences between the languages.
These drills should be tabulated in such a way that the substitution item is clearly displayed.
When the drill is set out in this way, it provides a visual picture of the structure of the new language and so reinforces learning.
Differential drills should deal adequately with related structures within the new language.
By showing clearly such relationships between the structures, the memory load for the student is lightened and the total configuration of the language pattern becomes clearer.
Every contrast must eventually be drilled.
Thus, if there is a two-dimensional paradigm in the language, it must be drilled both down and across the paradigm.
For model conversations which are based on questions and answers, it is relatively easy to design them so that each conversation, introduces a different question word and preposition or case ending, together with a new tense, aspect, mood or word class.
d.
Cultural Points Cultural points relevant to the topic or situation illustrated in the model conversation should be discussed so that, when the student employs the conversation in the real world, his/her behaviour is appropriate and pitfalls are avoided.
e.
Vocabulary The model conversations will tend to introduce new vocabulary items.
Further vocabulary items which can also be employed in the drills may also be included.
Vocabulary items should be introduced at a fairly constant rate (e.g. 15 words a lesson).
In every pedagogical grammar, there should be a plan for systematic revision of previously taught material.
If such revision is not included in the grammar, the student will tend to forget what he/she had learned.
Even if the student attempts to revise, he/she will tend no to do much more than mere repetition.
Moreover, as the student my not be a linguist, he should not have to plan his own revision.
It is better, therefore, that the revision be built into the pedagogical grammar, by including some revision in each lesson and also by special revision lessons.
The previously learned structures may be revised by using different substitution items and/or by expanding the structures which have been learned.
9.4.4.
REVISION
As a rule of thumb, drill every point taught at least three times: in the lesson in which it is introduced; in the next lesson; in a later lesson.
Use a check list to ensure this is done.
Vary your drills, especially in the special revision lessons: use pictures as a stimulus.
ask questions about a short passage of simple text, or about the student's situation.
reinforce vocabulary recognition with "odd man out" exercises, e.g. "three, two, tree, ten" .
try "filling in the blank" and "choosing the right form" exercises, e.g. in which the student has to choose the right plural endings for different noun classes.
don't be afraid of some exercises in translation, to and from the target language.
These tests should be taken at regular intervals, according to the general plan of study indicated in the Preface.
The language supervisor (ideally the author of the pedagogical grammar) should later scrutinize these tests, to pick up any particular difficulties that the student may be having.
Supplementary materials should then be supplied to enable the student to overcome these difficulties.
If a student is showing evidence of having major difficulties, he/she should be advised not to progress further with new material until these difficulties have been mastered.
The student should be encouraged never to try to progress too quickly, and so fail to assimilate what he/she is studying.
Slow, steady progress is the most efficient method of language learning.
9.4.5.
CHECKING THE STUDENT'S PROGRESS
If the language is one for which paradigmatic displays of verbs, noun classes, pronouns, or the like would be useful, these can be included in the appropriate lesson and/or an appendix.
9.4.6.
PARADIGMS
Include a Lexicon listing all the vocabulary items introduced in the volume, indicating the lesson in which each was first used.
9.4.7.
LEXICON