

Germany and Greece
Theories of Tragedy
Friedrich Nietzsche's book, The Birth of Tragedy, appeared in 1872.
It is a book that can be related closely to the age in which it was written, and especially the personal circumstances of its author, then a young classical scholar.
It can be related, again, to the mature philosophy of its authors later years.
It must, obviously, be considered in relation to the actual matters it is concerned with, of which Greek tragedy is the most specifiable.
And in respect of this main concern, it is also to be related to a particular tradition within German thought, which provides us with our starting point: a tradition of theoretical enquiry into the nature of tragedy — Greek tragedy, above all.
This tradition goes back at least to Herder and Lessing in the eighteenth century; and it continues beyond Nietzsche to Johannes Volkelt and Bertolt Brecht in our own time.
Common to all the contributors, up to and including Nietzsche, is their profound interest in the literature of ancient Greece.
They all take issue, in a variety of different ways, with the classic theory of tragedy propounded in Aristotle's Poetics; They all, in the wake of Herder, make some attempt to relate the achievements of the Greek tragedians to the religious or social facts of Greek life; and they all consider the dramas of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides to form one of the summits of world literature.
About the other summit there is less agreement: it is not always Shakespeare.
But while the reasons for "the tyranny of Greece over Germany" are many, the belief in the paramount value of these Greek plays as in some sense forming one of humanity's fundamental documents is always present.
Why the interest in theory?
It is true that preoccupation with theoretical accounts of phenomena of all kinds is characteristic of German culture at least since the days of Leibnitz at the beginning of the eighteenth century, but in this instance there is a more specific reason.
The need for a German theatre, as part of a wider literary and philosophical programme for Germany, arises at the point where Herder sets out to emphasize the Englishness of  Shakespeare and the French character of the court of Louis XIV and its drama, and where he begins to point to the absence of a comparable phenomenon in the "Germany" — that is, the conglomeration of German principalities and duchies — of his own day.
To the articulation of this need are added proposals for a specific programme and conscious, often self-conscious, attempts to create the repertoire of a national theatre.
The theory of Greek drama is intended to provide the guidelines for such a theatre, for there is an idea prevalent in Germany that a special affinity links German thought of the period with classical Greek thought.
Above all, there is a feeling that the metaphysical and religious thinking revealed in the Greek dramas is specially relevant to German thought about the relation of man to the cosmos and the forces that rule it.
Lessing — for us the first of these theoreticians — is quite frank about the strictly functional purpose of his concern with Aristotle.
It is to gain authority from the Poetics for his "bourgeois tragedy" (bürgerliches Trauerspiel) by arguing that with the reduction in the social standing of the characters of his plays must come a corresponding reduction in the intensity of the emotions displayed by them and the reversals of fortune that they experience.
His aim might unkindly be described as the creating of rococo tragedy with Aristotle's support.
For Schiller, Greek tragedy poses a problem which he approaches from the point of view of Kantian ethics.
If, in the age of the Enlightenment, a transcendent religious authority no longer provides an objective sanction for men's deeds and a punishment of their misdeeds, and if a common belief in such an authority is no longer there to provide the theatre with a cultural-religious function and to give unity to its public, then that authority must be replaced by the voice of individual conscience.
The "political" dramas of the Greeks are seen as, and become the authority for, dramas of psychological conflict; and this innovation, which is not always fully conscious, is hardly modified in Schiller's attempts in his last plays to reestablish supra-individual objectivity by the use of the ancient chorus.
Next comes Schelling, the most uncompromisingly metaphysical of our theoreticians, and the one least concerned with the theatrical side of the programme.
He offers an interpretation of Greek drama, in come ways anticipating Hegel's, which brings to the fore the question of tragic guilt.
The aim is to acknowledge the guilty nature of the hero according to one set of criteria, those of ordinary morality, but to stress at the same time that his guilty act is a source of pride and value of an altogether different, non-moral, antinomian kind.
As far as the Greek stage is concerned, Schelling's emphasis on the hero is bound to entail a diminution of interest in the chorus, that problematic but inescapable feature of ancient drama.
While in Schiller the  attempt to reestablish (and perhaps reinterpret) the function of the chorus never gets very far, in Schelling this concern is abandoned altogether in favour of a wholly individualistic view of the hero, whose very Solitude is the source of his strength and tragic predicament alike.
Hegel's life-long love of Sophocles and his profound historical preoccupations issue in a novel view of the relationship between chorus and hero.
It may be described as the dialectical relationship between the broad objectivity of the socio-political circumstances of an age, embodied in the chorus, and the assertive subjectivity of the individual.
Here, as in Schelling, Something like the notion of pride in suffering is validated on the side of the hero, but, as against that, the validity of the point of view of the socio-political complex is asserted with equal force and disastrous — necessarily tragic — consequences.
Finally, for Schopenhauer Greek tragedy has a significance that must be comprehended in terms of his particular brand of pessimism: it provides a powerful demonstration of the vanity of all desires of the "will" , its foolish stubbornness, and the unworthiness of all its goals.
In so doing, tragedy teaches us to contemplate with equanimity, indeed with serene detachment, that which we cannot change and should therefore speedily abandon.
It must be said, though, that in Schopenhauerian eyes the Greeks are in fact less compelling instructors than Shakespeare; and that tragedy as a whole is not much more than one of several "quietives of the will" which it is the function of art in general to provide.
Were we to adhere strictly to the interpretation of our tradition as "theoretical" , there would, for our purposes, be no need to go beyond Schopenhauer.
But with Nietzsche in mind, we can hardly conclude this section without mention of Richard Wagner: a figure of central importance to Nietzsche, albeit one of only peripheral relevance to the tradition in itself.
With Wagner the theatrical part of the programme reappears in a pure form.
The product is a new German drama — music-drama — which, with its reintegration of long separated arts, its mythic basis and its aspiration towards a socially organic function, evokes, at least in intention, several of Greek tragedy's most distinctive characteristics.
But not-withstanding a strong attachment to Schopenhauerian doctrine, Wagner does not evince any serious theoretical interest in tragedy as such; and therefore he cannot, one might add, effectively reassert the special claims of tragedy, especially Greek tragedy, which Schopenhauer himself had tended to discount.
For the decisive reassertion of these claims, we must wait for Nietzsche, Wagner's young friend and admirer who, like Wagner himself, had the deepest respect for Schopenhauer's ideas, but, unlike the composer, also possessed the capacity to reappraise those ideas and challenge them.
GERMAN HELLENISM
The German preoccupation with the theory of tragedy is bound up with a more general German admiration for Greece, to which we have alluded already.
The question that needs some consideration now is: why Greece?
What did the German writers of the century preceding Nietzsche's book hope to find in Greek antiquity?
The short answer is: a superior alternative to the contemporary world and the situation of Germany in it.
They might, as we have suggested, feel confident of some ability between their own world of ideas and the Greeks', and so think themselves particularly well equipped to explore this alternative.
This apart, their characteristic posture was not one of confidence about the world they lived in.
They were apt to see contemporary man in a radically alienated situation: estranged from his divine origins, from nature, from his fellow-men.
In the culture of ancient Greece, as they saw it, man was the "whole man" , with precisely that integrity of experience and that experience of psychic integrity which they missed in the world around them.
Such enthusiasm, for all its passing likeness to the Renaissance esteem of the "universal man" , is something new in Europe, something axiomatically Romantic, the exile's enthusiasm.
It is (in Nietzsche's words)"thoroughgoing romanticism and yearning for home [Heimiveh]…: it is the desire for the best that ever was.
One is no longer at home anywhere, so in the end one longs to be back where one can somehow be at home because it is the only place where one would wish to be at home: and that is the world of Greece!"
The value and dignity of German Hellenism, therefore, lay in "reclaiming the soil of antiquity" and strengthening Germany's "bond with the Greeks" , the "highest type of the species" man "so far achieved" .
To Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717–18), son of a Saxon cobbler, who rose to be a friend of cardinals and custodian of their books and antiquities, belongs the honour of having been the first and, in some ways, the most influential of these "thorough-going Romantics" .
To appreciate his achievement, we must bear in mind that in his time Europe in general and Germany in particular had remarkably little awareness of Greece or Greek culture as distinctive entities, and insufficient enthusiasm for things Greek (as opposed to things Greco-Roman) to feel such unawareness as a deficiency.
The Renaissance had provided western Europe with a handsome collection of hitherto lost Greek texts, literary, philosophical and historical, to be studied by scholars, admired by the cultivated (generally in translation), and imitated, in part, by contemporary writers; but insofar as the Renaissance was actually a "rebirth" of anything past, it was predominantly a rebirth of Rome and the spirit of Rome, not of Greece; and the remains of Greek antiquity were  treated, and well into the eighteenth century continued to be treated, largely as if they belonged to some kind of extension of the now assimilated world of Rome.
Germany, moreover, had been comparatively little touched by the Renaissance and so by even the limited Renaissance cognizance of Greece.
Yet in the person of Winckelmann it was Germany that now initiated a quite new passion for the Greek world and an equally new sense of its distinctiveness.
In ancient Greece, Winckelmann saw the embodiment of an ideal: an ideal of visual beauty and, more particularly, of a whole mode of life dominated by visual beauty.
His ideas derived partly from his youthful reading of Greek literature, hut largely from his studies of Greek statuary — or, in most cases, later copies of Greek statuary — in Germany and Rome.
From the contemplation of these copies he distilled "the spirit of Greek art" , which became, for him and his successors, not only the characteristic of all Greek art (poetic as well as visual), but also the criterion of aesthetic value judgements in general.
The perfection this "spirit" reveals is a perfection of static harmony.
It is displayed (Winckelmann affirms) in the Laocoon group, that famous sculpture of the Trojan priest and his sons in the grip of the sea god's serpents: and this example, certainly surprising, is used over and over again by subsequent theorists.
His description of the group culminates in the famous formulation of the "perfect law of art" of which it is said to be the embodiment:
The universal, dominant characteristic of Greek masterpieces, finally, is noble simplicity and serene greatness [edle Einfalt und stille Grösse]in the pose as well as in the expression.
The depths of the sea are always calm, however wild and stormy the surface; and in the same way the expression in Greek figures reveals greatness and composure of soul in the throes of whatever passions.
This spirit is depicted in Laocoon's face, and not in the face alone, in spite of the most violent sufferings.
The pain which is manifest in all the muscles and sinews of the body…does not express itself with any violence either in the face or in the position as a whole.
This Laocoon, unlike the hero in Virgil's poem, is raising no dreadful cry…
The pain of the body and the greatness of the soul are equally balanced throughout the composition of the figure and seem to cancel each other out.
Laocoon suffers; but he suffers like Sophocles' Philoctetes; his misery pierces us to the soul; but we should like to be able to bear anguish in the manner of this great man.
Are there any manifestations of Greek art which are not informed with this spirit?
Once Laocoon, an effigy of the utmost suffering, physical and mental, has been accommodated within the scheme, almost anything, seemingly, can be.
There is, Winckelmann concedes, "Aeschylus' tragic muse" with its dark hyperboles and lurid dramatic effects; Greek drama, he admits, does contain "the high-flown and the astonishing" , "the hasty and the  evanescent" .
But whenever something does not fit his "spirit of Greek art" , he has a notion — and for eighteenth-century aesthetics it is a disturbingly new notion — of development to fall back on.
And so he ascribes all the dark aspects of Presocratic drama to the imperfection of a young and immature culture.
Yet the heartland is safe: "Greek literature of the best period, the writings of the Socratic school" , are once again validated by that solemn phrase, "noble simplicity and serene greatness" .
The fact that this particular "best period" had seemed to some of its leading figures a fallen world is not allowed to affect the conclusion.
Winckelmann's influence was enormous.
When Goethe, in a scene of Faust I written in Rome, evokes the travail of modern man and shows it being assuaged by the contemplation of the "silver figures of the ancient world" (der Vorwelt silberne Gestalten) these shapes are the ideal models of Greek man which Winckelmann had set up in his historico-aesthetic studies; and when, in his "classical" drama Iphigenia in Tauris, Goethe's fervent heroine is eventually victorious and the play resolves itself into a serene and harmonious close, it is the spirit of Winckelmann that triumphs.
In the sphere of aesthetics, Lessing, Herder, and, a generation later, Friedrich Schlegel not only base their diverse theories on material or formulations put into currency by Winckelmann, but might be said to owe to him, as Schlegel put it, "the very idea of a history of art" , conceived as the development of a series of individual works towards a perfect beauty.
And even Nietzsche — whose vision of Greece was formulated, as we shall see, in conscious opposition to Winckelmann's — generously acknowledged his great feat of imaginative scholarship as the foundation of a true German national culture.
Generously, but also nostalgically: the national culture thus founded reaches an immediate peak in the Weimar classicism of Goethe and Schiller at the end of the eighteenth century, but the innocence and cultural purpose of that epoch are strengths no longer to the fore among the Germans of Nietzsche's own day — the modern barbarians and "cultural philistines" (Kulturphilister) of the Wilhelminian Reich.
The Greek ideal as founded by Winckelmann implied something more than a purely scholarly pursuit.
It implied a quest for perfection: a quest that could inspire an astonishing quantity of new translations of Greek authors, original literature on Greek models, and theoretical writing informed by the Greek achievements; and a quest that could be interpreted by subsequent generations in a variety of ways.
If the Greeks had, for instance, thought through the deepest problems of life and if Germans aspired to emulate their profundity, the Greeks had also possessed a rich and much admired language which was likewise not beyond emulation.
There was (as indeed there still  is) a strange belief that the German language showed a particular affinity with Greek and was, among other things, uniquely placed to achieve effects associated with the ancient system of quantitative metre.
This theory, already prefigured by Klopstock, was worked out at inordinate length by the poet, scholar and translator Johann Heinrich Voss (1751–1816) and, erroneous though it was, it served to fuel the growing fire of Hellenism by Stimulating the imitation of Greek metres in German poetry.
There were those, again, in Germany as elsewhere, for whom the terms "Hellas" and "liberty" were axiomatically linked: a link symptomatized and strengthened by the warm interest taken by many German writers in the Greek struggle for independence, whose fruition followed in the wake of the French Revolution.
One of these writers, the poet Hölderlin, claims our particular attention here for the new attitude towards Germany that his commitment to the Greek ideal entails — and also for his intuitive awareness of a greater complexity underlying "the spirit of Greece" than Winckelmann or his immediate successors had been able to recognize.
Hölderlin was born in 1770, two years after Winckelmann's death.
Like many German poets of his age, he came from a clerical family and was intended for the church.
The passion of his life, however, was Greece.
For Hölderlin, the assimilation of classical Greece is conceived of as a blueprint for the German nation.
Criticisms of Germany had hitherto been largely implicit in the philhellenic perspective.
It is Hölderlin who first articulates them fully in his letters, in his epistolary novel Hyperion and, above all, in his poetry; and his central target is the imbalance of German culture — as compared with the supposed perfection of Greece.
It is, in particulars the unnerving intellectuality of the life around him that Hölderlin attacks, the overvaluation of philosophizing and the promise of action that never comes, the substitution of books and words for deeds, the excessive introspection and lack of worldly competence (the criticism has a special poignancy in that these are character traits he is intimately familiar with, which at times become part of his self-criticism) When he speaks of Greece, it is not always clear whether he has in mind the fifth century or the timeless present in which Hyperion lives, but it is always Greece that provides the contrast.
For Greece is the golden mean between this northern introversion and the passionate spirit of exotic lands:
The north drives…its pupils back into themselves too soon; and while the spirit of the fiery Egyptian hurries out into the world, too intent on the journeys in the north the spirit prepares to retire into itself before it is ready to travel.
In the north you must be wise even before you have a mature emotion…; you must develop your self-assurance before you have become a man, you must be intelligent before  you are a child; personal harmony and beauty are not allowed to thrive and mature…
Hölderlin's vision of Greece is, like Winckelmann's, idyllic, but not in precisely the same way.
Like Winckelmann he still speaks of "harmony" and "beauty" , but the ultimate source for his interpretation of these ideal values is not Greek sculpture, but Greek literature of the classical period, especially Plato and Pindar.
The Greece that these writers evoke for him is a whole culture, a mode of life in which there is no division between material and spiritual, gods and men:
And the people [of Hellas]came out of their doors and felt the spiritual stir in the air lightly move the soft hair across the forehead and cool the ray of [divine]light, and gladly they loosened their robes to take it to their breast: they breathed more sweetly, touched more fondly the light, clear, caressing sea in which they lived and moved."
 "Felt the spiritual stir" : the breath of the Spirit itself is tangible, is felt.
The opposites are reconciled in an overriding harmony.
Hölderlin, then, has significantly modified Winckelmann's notion of a homogeneous "Greek spirit" : the harmony is the product of opposing forces.
It can also be said that, unlike Winckelmann, Hölderlin has some intuitive appreciation of the Greek spirit's darker depths to which Nietzsche will later attach the name "flionysiac" — although Hölderlin gives them no such definition, and only in the last draft of his unfinished dramatic poem, The Death of Empedocles, do these depths receive a comparably urgent emphasis.
His own urgent concern is the material-spiritual harmony which he sees as something lost and never again recovered: here, certainly, he agrees with Winckelmann.
In his own interpretation, it is the advent of Christianity and its repudiation of the material that destroyed the harmony — at which point Hölderlin's Christian allegiance engenders, in his greatest poetry, an antithesis, if not an actual conflict between his Greek ideal and the purely spiritual aspiration appropriate to his own Protestant background.
This dilemma may well have been one of the factors that precipitated his eventual madness, which began in 1802: that possibility adequately suggests the existential seriousness of the Greek ideal for the German writers under its spell.
After the first decade of the nineteenth century the German concern with Greece can be seen to undergo a change in character.
Schiller died in 1805.
By 1810 Hölderlin's active life was over.
And Goethe — although he retained his admiration for the Greeks, and not least for the three tragedians, right up to his death in 1832 — mostly looked in other directions for his inspiration after the unfinished drama Pandora of 1810.
Sixty odd years separate this work  from The Birth of Tragedy and compared with a similar span of years since Winckelmann's revolutionary study of Greet art, the later period, viewed as a period of German Hellenism, is anti-climatic.
This is not through any lack of distinction on the part of the writers of the time or those of their works that show the Greek influence; nor is there any lack of such works.
On the contrary, the poetry of Von Platen, Mörike and Heine attests the continuing influence of ancient Greece at a high level of poetic achievement.
And in other spheres too, such as philosophy, a figure like Schopenhauer (to choose a single example particularly relevant to our general concern) can be taken to represent the respect for Greek literature general among the intellectual élite of the time: in his case, Plato, above all, was not merely an interest but an important influence — if not quite to the extent he claimed himself — on his own work.
But these are individual writers or thinkers responding to, and making use of, ancient Greece for their own individual purposes; whereas in the earlier period there was the constant hope, at least, of something more, something evoked by such of our phrases as "quest for perfection" , "superior alternative to the present" , "blueprint for the German nation" .
The Greek achievement represented an ideal: special, superior, but still largely remote and  mysterious ; Germany's own new culture was to evolve by coming to terms with it; and a collective effort was to be the means of realizing that aim.
In the age of Winkelmann and Weimar, therefore, the sense of purpose depends on there being a common cause to guide the nation's culture; and it is this that wanes.
CLASSICAL SCHOLARSHIP
One aspect of the change of character within German Hellenism — and, to an extent, one of the complex casual factors in the change — needs special consideration: the development of German classical scholarship.
The quest for Greece initiated by Winckelmann was not (we have said) a purely scholarly pursuit.
Nevertheless, it did have important consequences within the scholarly study of antiquity itself.
If his notion of Greek serenity and harmony induced writers to look to Greece for their standard of perfection, it also coloured the interpretation of Greece current among professional students of the Greek world.
If his studies in ancient sculpture succeeded in making the notion of "art history" a public procession, they also gave a particular impetus to the study of ancient artifacts in their own right and to the historical study of antiquity as a whole.
In short, Winckelmann epitomizes an intimate relationship between classical scholarship on the one hand and living culture and thought on the other.And in this he was renewing  a tradition which had once existed (albeit primarily outside Germany): the Renaissance tradition, which had weakened during the intervening centuries, and which was to lapse again almost beyond recall within the hundred years after his death.
The Renaissance was essentially a rebirth of Rome.
Its driving force was the aspiration to make classical Latinity — not merely literature, but culture overall — an integral part of contemporary life.
That aspiration was realizable, in Italy above all, and to a substantial degree was realized; and in its realization scholarship and contemporary cultural activity were inseparable.
We might think back, for example, to the fourteenth century, and its dominant figure, Petrarch.
Here was a creative writer of great historical importance in vernacular Italian, as also in neo-Latin; one who played a crucial role in the promulgating of manuscripts of lost classical texts which embodied the ancient culture and could propagate that culture anew in his own time; whose creative writing variously reflected the new access to ancient literature; and whose overall achievement helped to ensure that classical scholarship, in its work of reclaiming the ancient world, became not merely a prestigious activity, but a central and formative activity in contemporary culture as a whole.
But if Winckelmann's activities evoke this Petrarchan world, they do so only momentarily.
The differences between the Italian Renaissance and the German Hellenizing movement initiated by Winckelmann are far greater than the similarities.
One relevant difference is that whereas the Renaissance aspiration to assimilate Rome was realizable, no analogous aspiration was possible for Germany vis-a-vis Greece.
Germany could not assimilate Greece — perhaps because Greece was simply too great, certainly because Greece was too alien.
For all the suppositions of "affinity" , Germany — and western Europe in general— had no direct linguistic or cultural continuity with the ancient Greek world.
If only for this reason, it was inevitable, as the nineteenth century wore on, that the sense of purpose once associated with German Hellenism must be lost.
But whatever else was lost, the impetus that Winckelmann had given to Greek scholarship in Germany survived; and if we wish to understand its subsequent history and the remarkable growth of German classical scholarship as a whole, we should not forget his formative contribution, even though much of the impending development can hardly be traced directly back to him.
This development can be briefly outlined.
In the mid-eighteenth century, Germany was not — and never had been — a notable centre of classical studies, and least of all a centre of Greek studies.
German scholarship had done little to add to, and nothing to disrupt, the traditional European pattern of "philology" , as the study of classical antiquity was widely called  (and for a long time continued to be called).
 "Antiquity" for philological purposes was conceived primarily as the two ancient languages and the literature written in them; and its "study" was, generally speaking, the province of learned individuals concerned, above all, with the restoration and exegesis of the ancient texts.
Thanks, initially, to Winckelmann, Greece and thereby the whole ancient world took on a new fascination which resulted in a new kind of scholar with a new kind of scholarly aim: the reconstruction of antiquity in all its real detail.
And such was the momentum of the new German scholarship that by the beginning of the nineteenth century Germany had become the European centre for classical studies, traditional as well as new, and an unprecedented growth in the scale of scholarly work of a host of different kinds well under way.
To reconstruct antiquity in all its real detail was the aim; and in this connection "real" is the appropriate word to use.
The movement that began with Greek sculpture rapidly added other new areas of study to the familiar territories of language and literature, issuing in a serious concern not simply with "the classics" , but with ancient civilization in all its aspects: aspects that might well centre on the "facts" of ancient life, its physical relics, its customs and institutions: all of which to be summed up in the German word Realien.
This is one major innovation developed in Germany.
A second, of even greater significance, was closely associated with it.
To its increased range, scholarship added new "scientific" method.
Techniques that went back to the age of Aristotle and the scholars of Alexandria were married to contemporary nations, among then the idea, conceived in the time of Leibnitz, of a historiography based on the study of original documents; and the marriage bore fruit.
The ancient world, its texts and its history, were submitted to critical analysis with an unprecedented thoroughness, sense of system and concern for evidence that was, in intention at least, dispassionate and (in spirit of Kant's moral and aesthetic philosophy) disinterested.
Learning was superseded by research; and if the work was pursued with the enthusiasm of a Winckelmann, that enthusiasm was not allowed to affect the outcome of the pursuit itself.
A further innovation was prefigured, as we have noted, by Winkelmann himself: the historical approach.
Where the works of antiquity had once been treated as timeless products of a homogeneous whole, ancient civilization was now conceived historically and its divers elements related to their precise period.
To take a simple instance: in the heyday of the Enlightenment, Homeric poetry would have been treated primarily like its Virgilian equivalent — as a work of a certain kind (epic), embodying given characteristics of its genre or of poetry as a whole.
Homer was, of course, the best  part of a millennium earlier than Virgil and his chief model; and Homer, like Virgil, might naturally allude to contemporaneous, or earlier, events or individuals; but "history" hardly impinged beyond this.
In contrast, it would now be a consideration of primary and pervasive significance that the two epics were produced in quite different epochs and were, perhaps correspondingly, composed in quite different ways.
This was bound to entail a new evaluation, which (we may note) might not necessarily be to Homer's advantage, for all the undoubted "harmony" and "beauty" of the early epic.
Like Winckelmann and Hölderlin, many later Hellenists felt those favourite qualities to be best represented in the literature of the mature classical period from Sophocles to Plato (roughly 450 to 350), which was almost exempt from criticism.
The later Greek literature of the Hellenistic period, the literature of Rome and the literature of earlier Greece, even Homer, were not so favoured.
Our Homeric example was not chosen at random.
The man who posed the "Homeric question" in this, its modern, form was Friedrich August Wolf (1759–1824), a scholar of representative significance in the development of classical studies in Germany.
Wolf produced his Prolegomena to Homer in 1795, while professor at the University of Halle.
Partly because of this book his lectures became famous; and in them his aim, as the standard English history of classical scholarship puts it, was"not to communicate knowledge, but to stimulate and suggest…
The spirit of critical inquiry…breathed through all his lectures…symbolized by the fact that the sole ornament of his lecture-room was a bust of Lessing".
But Wolf's concern for "stimulus" and "suggestion" was, ultimately, a means to an end that might be defined very much in terms of "knowledge" and not at all in terms of cultural purpose such as one would associate with a figure like Lessing.
For Wolf was"the first to present a systematic description of the vast fabric that he called by the name of Altertumswissenschaft, to arrange and review its component parts and to point to a perfect knowledge of the many-sided life of the ancient Greeks and Romans as the final goal of the modern study of the ancient world.
He raised that study to the rank of a single comprehensive and independent science, and thus deserved to be reverently regarded by posterity as the eponymous hero of all the long line of later scholars".
Altertumswissenschaft, the "scientific" study of antiquity (Wolf's use of this expression has, in retrospect at least, a symbolic significance) becomes "a single comprehensive and independent science" — with its autonomy implicit in its scientific stance.
This new autonomy, fostered by German scholarship, was its most decisive innovation of all; and the fact that most areas of knowledge were just then involved in methodological developments of one kind or another does not  lessen its importance.
In the context of German Hellenism as a whole, what it meant was an ever-widening gulf between classics as a study and the creative art and life of the time.
Previously, "the classics" (or some of them) were a possession of the educated classes in general and for those classes they constituted a natural part of experience, forming a continuum with modern literatures and ideas.
 "Classics" henceforth is an isolatable, delimitable entity and classical philology a discontinuous academic subject.
In 1777 Wolf himself, then a prospective student at Göttingen, had to fight to be allowed to enrol for philology: there was no such "subject" then.
A generation later, such battles are a thing of the past.
Classical philology is a subject and institutionalized as such.
Research is conducted by specialists in organised fashion, often in university programmes, on a systematic basis; knowledge accumulates; philological periodicals and societies multiply to absorb and facilitate the accumulation.
And as knowledge expands, the next tendency is towards specialization within "the subject" itself.
Language, literature, thought, art, politics and society become separate territories and are occupied by separate specialists, until it becomes increasingly hard to find any scholars with pretensions to competence over the whole field: K. O. Müller from Göttingen, active in the 1820's and thirties, is one notable exception, but there were few to approach his breadth then or subsequently.
On its own terms, meanwhile, the new philology went from strength to strength.
Its most important triumph, perhaps, was not in fact on new ground at all; indeed, it was on the most traditional of all grounds: textual criticism.
In the first half of the nineteenth century, the age-old struggle to reconstitute an ancient text from imperfect manuscript copies was, for the first time, given a proper basis: methodical study of the manuscripts' interrelationships.
Scholars of impressive energy and fine acumen established the new "science" and formulated its principles.
Wolf's treatise on Homer laid the foundations at the end of the eighteenth century and a celebrated edition of Lucretius by Karl Lachmann represents the completion of the edifice in 1850.
Ever since the ancient Alexandrians, textual criticism had been a highly valued activity; it now acquired a new lustre.
Young scholars gravitated towards it, to concern themselves, generally, with the practicalities, and especially the problems, of single texts.
The solution of such limited problems might be seen as a triumph of "method" as much as a source of new knowledge.
But in any case the cost of the progress of "the subject" was, as usual, more specialization.
It would be idle to deny that great progress was made; but equally idle to deny that a price was paid for it.
The fragmentation of classical studies from "life outside" and the further fragmentation within classical studies itself ironically symbolize the much  wider disintegration which had been deplored by the Romantic philhellenes and which had evoked their yearning for Greece in the first place.
And, ironically again, the increasing specialization of Greek scholarship made it increasingly more problematic for German writers to draw on Greek literature and its topoi as wholeheartedly as they once had.
Specialization thus emerges as a contributory factor to the loss of momentum suffered by German Hellenism as a cultural force after Weimar.
The Hellenic ideal — or ideals — that German intellectuals and writers hoped to live by could hardly command full allegiance without some support from the professionals in the field and perhaps some modification from their new ideas.
But to the new professional researcher a Hellenic ideal was something that belonged to the modern world outside; and while he might privately approve, his professional concern was with a self-contained world of antiquity.
Furthermore, the new notions about antiquity that he was professionally concerned to propagate would very likely be conceived without reference to that modern world and expressed in such dauntingly esoteric form, with such a massive presupposition of specialist information, as to repel the amateur, however willing.
Any interplay between scholarship and life, under such circumstances, was bound to be exceptional and random.
Wolf himself poignantly enough, did not evince this inward-looking spirit.
On the contrary, he exemplified perfectly the interplay which was shortly to disappear: his own scholarly work was of immediate interest to — and readily assimilated by — the finest minds of the day.
Not that all of those minds were equally receptive to his theories on the ancient epic.
The poets Klopstock, Wieland and Schiller were among those who listened but dissented, as was the versatile Voss, himself a good example of the interplay: his oeuvre included verse in classical metres (Luise, 1795) which influenced Goethe's Hermann and Dorothea, scholarly work on Latin as well as Greek, and a celebrated translation of the Odyssey (1781).
Even so, they listened, and their disapproval of Wolf was in any case balanced by the enthusiasm of von Humboldt, the brothers Schlegel and, for a time, Goethe too, who "drank to his health" in 1796 in celebration of the study of Homer, corresponded with him, and attended his lectures.
But the fact remains that Wolf and the tendency Wolf represented made an inward-looking discipline possible and, ultimately, respectable.
By the eighteen fifties and sixties, a generation after his death, the classical philologist's separatism is something normal and generally unquestioned, and interplay between classical studies and life as a whole is an ideal as little in prospect as the "wholeness" of life itself.
Biographical Background I: Nietzsche and his early interests
LIFE AND CLASSICAL CAREER
The main external events in Nietzsche's life that concern us here are easily summarized.
Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche was born in 1844 into a pious Protestant family at Rocken in Saxony.
His father, the local parson, died in 1849, leaving, in all, three children, one of whom died shortly afterwards.
The survivors were Nietzsche himself and a younger sister.
This sister, Elisabeth, was to count for a good deal in Nietzsche's later life, favourably and otherwise: she eventually became the custodian of all his surviving works during the long period of incapacity that preceded his death and continued in that influential role, which she executed in a highly questionable way, for thirty-five years afterwards.
In 1850, with his mother, sister and — to add to the regiment of women — two aunts and a grandmother, Nietzsche moved to nearby Naumburg.
He soon showed academic promise and in 1858, at the age of fourteen, went to the famous boarding school of Pforta, not to far from Naumburg, where he excelled in most subjects, the chief exceptions being art and mathematics.
The standing of this school, established in 1543 and before that a Cistercian Abby, was considerable.
Its distinguished pupils over the years had included such famous names in German cultural life as Klopstock, Fichte, Ranke, and Friedrich Schlegel; and not the least of its products was a series of remarkable classical scholars, beginning with Ernesti in the early eighteenth century and proceeding through Bottiger, Thiersch, Doederlein, Dissen, Meineke, Otto Jahn, Nauck, Breitenbach, Bonitz and Wachsmuth to the illustrious Wilamowitz, four years Nietzsche's junior.
Classics was also to be Nietzsche's chosen profession and his rise in it was rapid.
From Pforta in 1864 he went to the University of Bonn to read classical  philology and theology, but he stayed only for a single year.
A bitter personal feud had developed there between the two eminent classics professors, Otto Jahn (like Nietzsche from Pforta) and Friedrich Ritschl; and in 1865 Ritschl left, followed by some of his students, to take up a post at the University of Leipzig.
Nietzsche was among those who went with Ritschl; and under Ritschl at Leipzig his career blossomed.
He now dropped theology to concentrate entirely on classics.
He rapidly achieved prominence among his contemporaries and in the winter of 1865 was one of the founders of a University Classical Society, the Philologischer Verein.
At a meeting of the Society in January 1866 he read a paper on the formation of the Theognidea, a collection of poems traditionally ascribed to the sixth-century Greek poet Theognis.
Ritschl was impressed and urged him to turn the paper into an article for publication.
There followed regular contact between student and professor and more published work by Nietzsche on Greek subjects: besides reviews, there were articles on the lyric poet Simonides, the historian of philosophy Diogenes Laertius and the anonymous quasi-biographical piece known as the Contest of Homer and Hesiod.
His unpublished contributions to the Leipzig Classical Society included scholarly studies in other Greek fields, such as the Aristotelian corpus, while at Leipzig he also worked extensively on the philosopher Democritus.
Taken together, these studies comprise a substantial body of work notable for its diversity, its competence and its orthodoxy.
They show us Nietzsche collating manuscripts, emending texts or (in more discursive, literary-historical vein) investigating date, authorship, provenance or genesis of ancient writings.
In short, these studies exhibit all the familiar features of nineteenth-century "scientific" scholarship.
They also evince an obvious preference for Greek, as against Latin, as an object of study — a preference that can be traced back to Nietzsche's schooldays, which produced a noteworthy essay on Sophocles' Oedipus Rex (1864).
In 1867, the young scholar's career was temporarily interrupted by a period of military service which resulted in a serious chest injury.
There followed a period of convalescence in Naumburg, and in the autumn of 1868 Nietzsche returned to Leipzig to continue his independent studies.
Ritschl, by now increasingly confident of his protege's abilities, recommended him for a vacant chair of classics at the University of Basle in Switzerland.
In January 1869, on the strength of his published work and Ritschl's glowing reference, he was offered the chair despite his youth and lack of the usually mandatory doctorate and "habilitation" ; he took up the post in April 1869.
This was the only regular employment he was ever to have.
It lasted until 1879, when ill health compelled his premature retirement.
Thereafter, apart from a small  private income, he subsisted on a university pension for a further ten years, during which time he produced the bulk of his philosophical works, at that time largely unknown, until in January 1889 all creative work ended abruptly with his mental breakdown; he died in 1900.
At the time of Nietzsche's move to Basle, none of his major works were yet conceived, but it is the winter of this year, 1860–70, to which we can trace the genesis of The Birth of Tragedy, his first.
In May 1869 he gave his inaugural lecture on Homer, but his classical interests were now turning towards Greek tragedy.
After a break during the Franco-Prussian war, in which he was actively involved, though not as a combatant, his thoughts on tragedy took final shape in 1871.
The book appeared in early 1872, beset with controversy from which — with good reason, one may think — it has never been free.
SCHOPENHAUER
The genesis of BT in the first years at Basle is, we shall see, problematic.
To understand it, we need first to look at the development of Nietzsche's inner life: the particular temperament and range of interests without which the controversial book would never have been written at all.
A few quotations from his correspondence to friends during the years before its appearance will serve to introduce the main interests and traits in question: "Three things are my relaxations, but infrequent ones: my Schopenhauer, Schumann's music, and solitary walks" (from 1866);"It is only too natural that…concentrating on a particular field of knowledge all day long should somewhat blunt one's untrammelled receptivity and attack the philosophic sense at its root.
But I flatter myself that I can meet this danger more calmly and securely than most philologists; my philosophical seriousness is already too deeply rooted, the true and essential problems of life and thought have been too clearly shown to me by the great mystagogue Schopenhauer… "(1869);" I love the Greeks more and more…[but]…the philologist's existence…seems to me more and more anomalous "(1870);" For me, everything that is best and most beautiful is associated with the names Schopenhauer and Wagner, and I am proud and happy to share this feeling with my closest friends "(1870 again); and from the close of the same year," Let us drag on in this university existence for a few more years; let us take it as a sorrowful lesson…I realize what Schopenhauer's doctrine of university wisdom is all about…
We shall create a new Greek academy…
You will know of Wagner's Bayreuth plan.
I have been quietly considering if we too should not likewise break with philology…as practised till now".
Three preoccupations stand out clearly: music (especially, though not  at first, Wagner), philosophy (the ubiquitous Schopenhauer), and the Greeks — the Greeks not merely as a professional concern, but as a personal ideal in conflict with professional norms: here, as will become apparent, Nietzsche is a whole-hearted successor of the earlier generations of Romantic Hellenists.
In addition, we can point to certain temperamental facts: most obviously, the youthfully ardent seriousness; then the self-consciousness of the gifted and isolated individual — a consciousness of his own giftedness, one might add, which shades into a growing concern with the problems surrounding genius as such, and which helps to intensify an already strong impulse to express himself articulately in writing; and, finally, a compulsion to relate his music, his philosophy- his Greece to each other .
This last characteristic is of central importance: this, above all else, is what associates him with the earlier philhellenes and their quest for wholeness, and sets him against his own scholarly profession.
The creative work to which his life will be devoted is the expression of a sensibility which makes it increasingly distasteful, and eventually impossible, to keep any one area of experience permanently apart from any other.
Even that commonplace academic distinction between "intellectual" and "emotional" becomes ever more unreal.
Years later he will note: "I have at all times written with my whole body and my whole life.
I do not know what "purely intellectual" problems are."
B T is, in fact, the first of his works for which these words are true.
The other relevant facts about the gifted and isolated individual can be left, for the moment, to emerge from a more detailed discussion of his major preoccupations.
To take the philosophical one first, it was actually Nietzsche's isolation at a critical period of his life that helped to create the need which Schopenhauer was to satisfy.
But certainly his interest in "the true and essential problems of life and thought" had begun long before.
His first apprehension of such large issues as "problems" seems to have been during his schooldays at Pforta.
After a pious and seemingly untroubled Christian upbringing, he was duly confirmed in 1861 at the age of sixteen, but within a year was already casting a cold eye on the case for a "literalistic attitude" towards Christian doctrine and asserting that"the existence of God, immortality, the authority of the Bible, inspiration and other things will always remain problems.
By 1864 his interest in Christianity and his deference to family expectations were still strong enough to lead him to the choice of theology as one of his two subjects at Bonn; but there is no doubt that belief was a thing of the past.
The next summer he wrote from Bonn to his sister: "If you want to gain peace of mind and happiness, have faith; if you want to be a disciple of truth, search." 
With hindsight, we can see this loss of faith as one of the formative facts  of his life: much of his subsequent thinking is precisely a ‘search’ for something to fill the void or, more characteristically, for a way of honestly confronting the void.
Whether at the time Nietzsche himself felt the loss as so momentous is not clear.
At all events, he was unsettled by it and, partly for this reason, was not happy at Bonn.
He achieved little in his work and dissipated much of his time in an uncongenial student fraternity.
On his arrival at Leipzig in the autumn of 1865, with a largely wasted year behind him and no fixed bearings for the future, he was in low spirits.
Cut off from close friends and sympathetic counsellors, and without any creed to turn to for support, he was in an ideal condition to respond to a new spiritual guide: his discovery of Schopenhauer when browsing one day in Leipzig bookshop seemed like an event preordained.
In an autobiographical account written a couple of years later, he described himself in having been "absolutely alone, of the most painful experiences and disappointments" ; and of his first response to "Schpenhauer's masterpiece" he wrote that "in this book, in which every line cried out renunciation, denial and resignation, I saw a mirror in which I espied the whole world, life and my mind depicted in frightful grandeur" .
But the appeal that Schopenhauer had for Nietzsche was far from being merely dependent on temporary circumstances, and it survived the return to everyday optimism that his life at Leipzig gradually produced.
There was certainly a specifically doctrinal attraction, which, for a time, was almost overwhelming.
In the ensuing months, his letters, glowing with a convert's fervour, faithfully reflect the tenets of Schopenhauerian philosophy: the illusoriness of empirical reality, with all its individual phenomena; and the recognition, behind our illusory world of an ultimate reality that brings no joy, no good, no providence, no ordained meaning, no rational basis to life or to death.
Only a blind will-to-exist fills the universe, and the only salvation from it lies in the surrender of the individual will through self-denial.
The appeal of such a doctrine for the young Nietzsche was bound to be intensified by Schopenhauer's conception of aesthetic, especially musical, experience as a main escape route from the domination of the will.
For Nietzsche's "aesthetic, especially musical, experience" was already of special importance to him.
Nietzsche, then, became a Schopenhauerian in a state of mind engendered by isolation, although he was soon "proud and happy" to share his new creed with friends.
 "Creed" was, indeed to some extent how the convert himself saw it at the time: witness the acknowledgement in letters of 1866 and 1867, that such philosophical tenets are not philosophically demonstrable, but are acceptable as art or for their edifying power or simply as faith.
Implicit  in this admission, however, is the possibility of a more critical stance, and this was not long forthcoming.
Uncritical adherence was clearly out of the question by 1868, as appears from various sober notes on the logical problems that he saw in Schopenhauer's system.
The bare notion of the will remained important for him and, along with it, the presupposition of irrational nature and the special value of art, but much of the doctrine was no longer operative in this thinking.
Nevertheless, his allegiance did not suddenly evaporate and by 1869, on the eve of his departure for Basle, he was still happy to be the central member of a small circle of devotees.
The most important of these was Erwin Rohde, a fellow-classicist and contemporary of his at Leipzig.
In the late 1860's, Rohde, a sensitive and highly intelligent person, was Nietzsche's closest friend and so kindred a spirit that ambitious, albeit abortive, joint plans were regularly mooted: a collaborative book on Greek literature in 1868 or a year studying together in Paris (scheduled for 1869 and frustrated by Nietzsche's appointment at Basle).
But Schopenhauer could not have had his potent influence on the young scholar without an additional aesthetic quality which, in Nietzschean eyes, made him virtually a one-man cultural ideal.
From remarkably early in his life, Nietzsche had a strong awareness, visionary rather than analytical, of the problematic nature of modern culture, although initially his perspective could hardly be called original.
It was derived in the first place from Goethe and Goethe's Hellenist contemporaries; and it was modified only by the conviction that the ailments which artists and thinkers of that period had identified in the Germany of their day were now more virulent than ever, while an additional threat was posed by the new diseases of mediocrity and the cult of "progress" (often associated with politicking and liberalism), from which the age of Goethe had been relatively free.
Amidst all the complexities of modern culture in which Nietzsche could only see "desolation and exhaustion" , Schopenhauer was "a Durer knight" , a spiritual guide "pursuing his terrible path" alone.
To Nietzsche he was a thinker who not only valued the right things, notably art, but also embodied them himself: a philosopher with an artist's power of words.
He was an upholder of the supreme value of individual genius and its special insights as against everything ordinary and "philistine" ; an honest thinker, whose philosophical composure was strenuously acquired, so unlike the easy optimism of his age; a man equipped to inspire a nation, "the philosopher of a reawakened classicism, a Germanic Hellenism, the philosopher of a regenerated Germany" .
is Above all, he was seen by the young Nietzsche as the proponent of a total philosophy, a vision of life that called for a personal, not merely an intellectual, commitment — a vision that stimulated, and even promised to satisfy, the yearning to be a  personal whole attuned to the ultimate values, or non-values, of life.
So intently did Nietzsche interpret Schopenhauer's "personal" relevance at this time, that he could locate the vital centre of the philosopher's system in its therapeutic power to help with the practical crises of living.
In a letter of 1867 to a friend on the death of the latter's brother he writes: "You have experienced at first hand…why our Schopenhauer exalts suffering and sorrow as a glorious fate, as the deuteros pious [second way]to the negation of the will…,
This is a time for you to test for yourself what truth there is in Schopenhauer's doctrine…
If [it]…does not have the power to raise you up…to that mood where one sees the earthly veils pull away from oneself — then I too want to have nothing more to do with this philosophy."
GREECE
Schopenhauer's status as total philosopher and cultural ideal lasted longer, in the event, than the doctrinal appeal of his metaphysics.
To understand why it should have attracted Nietzsche so strongly at this time, we must turn to the background of his academic specialization, and his great love for Greece.
Nietzsche's school, Pforta, had its impressive classical tradition, but his own decision to specialize in classics did not come early or easily.
In 1859 the self-conscious schoolboy had written that the most important rule of school life should be"to educate oneself equally in all sciences, arts, faculties and ensure that body and mind go hand in hand.
One should guard against specializing in one's studies "; and in himself he noted" an extraordinary craving for knowledge and universal culture "— something like an instinct for" wholeness"was clearly, if naively, operative.
Soon, however, restlessness and some undefined ambition began to be apparent.
"I started to feel a revulsion against this desultory wandering over all the departments of knowledge; I wished to force some limitation on myself so as to probe individual subjects more deeply and thoroughly.
I was able to realize this desire agreeably by means of a small scholarly society which I formed with two friends."
This group, with the grandiose name of Germania, was founded in 1860 and survived until 1863.
Its concerns were intellectual and cultural.
The three members contributed regular essays, or else original compositions, and criticized one another 's work at group meetings.
Nietzsche's varied contributions included poems, essays oil historiography and discussions of the medieval Nibelungen saga, but mostly consisted of musical compositions, an indication of his predominant artistic interest at the time.
By comparison with music, the visual arts barely touched him (a fact presumably connected with the poor eyesight he had from birth), but he possessed a strong feeling for  poetry, especially Romantic poetry.
Among other signs of this is a lecture on Byron for the Germania and, during the same period, a remarkable "letter to a friend" in praise of Hölderlin, who was at this time little read Concomitantly, he felt great enthusiasm for Shakespeare, long since appropriated by the German Romantics as an honorary ancestor.
These artistic predilections went hand in hand with a marked interest in aesthetic theory His notebooks of 1862-for instance, contain comments under the heading "On the Essence of Music" , which are probably notes for a two-part Germania essay on "The Demonic in Music" , and, again, a set of Emersonian reflection on Nature, beauty and art.
It was during the Germania period that Nietzsche's inclination toward ancient Greece seems to have taken its first definite shape, although his distaste for specialization remained.
The two attitudes can be found side by side it the letter on Hölderlin, which was written in 1861.
 "Nowhere has the longing for Greece been revealed in purer tones" , proclaimed Nietzsche, and a feu lines earlier, in equally heartfelt terms, he spoke of Hölderlin's "bitter truths to his countrymen on the subject of their cultural inadequacies: " In Hyperion he hurls sharp and cutting words at German "barbarism"  "and, above all;" he hated in Germans the mere specialist, the philistine".
It is evident that even at seventeen Nietzsche took life and his own views on it with great seriousness; also, that implicit in those views was an uneasy relationship, here in its first stage, between the inevitable "mere specialism" of the professional classical scholar and a growing "longing for Greece" .
As late as 1863 he could still assure his mother that he might turn his attention to almost any subject, but it must have been around this time that a first decision in favour of classics was taken, even though it was not until 1865 at Leipzig that his academic specialization became complete.
Bearing in mind the strength of his views on "mere specialists" , we may surely see more than coincidence in the swiftness with which this final commitment was followed by the conversion to Schopenhauer.
He opts for a single fragment of European culture and, by way of compensation, he must at once reaffirm that ideal of personal and cultural wholeness which on various grounds he now sees immediately symbolized in Schopenhauer — and not least because Schopenhauer, for all his scorn of the contemporary world, unquestionably belongs to it.
The older philosopher offers the young Nietzsche a lifeline between his scholarly avocation and the world outside.
But Nietzsche's motive in opting for classical philology, when he finally did so, was not simple.
It was not just the love for the Greeks that he acknowledged later, although certainly that was already present: an auto biographical essay of 1864, for instance, expresses in warm tones his feeling  for Greek poetry, including Sophocles and Aeschylus, and for Plato.
It was also a desire for therapy, a wish to subordinate himself to the specific kind of "scientific" discipline that, over the previous half-century, classical philology had everywhere become.
Looking back on the decision a few years later, he interpreted it in these terms: "What I wanted was some counterweight to my changeable and restless inclinations, a science that could be pursued with cool impartiality, with cold logic, with regular work, without its results touching me at all deeply." 
A peremptory demand for "wholeness" , a specialist "science" requiring "cool impartiality" , and strong personal feelings for the object of that science — this was a combination which could hardly be stable for long.
In the event, what happened was a strengthening of those personal feelings ( "I love the Greeks more and more" ).
This was accompanied by a desire to relate the feelings and their object to the wider issues of life and by a growing resentment of philology as currently practised.
The very qualities that had recently prompted him to opt in its favour were now distasteful: its methodical impersonality and the inherent compartmental separateness from "life" that its impersonal, scientific character presupposed — and with it the all too familiar compartmentalization within the subject itself.
In later years Nietzsche came to have a more favourable attitude to these aspects of classical studies, but for the time being his dissatisfaction was almost unqualified.
Thus, from a letter of 1867: "most philologists lack that elevating total view of antiquity, because they stand too close to the picture and investigate a patch of paint, instead of gazing at the big, bold brushstrokes of the whole painting and — what's more — enjoying them…" ; and"…our whole mode of working is quite horrible.
The hundred books on the table in front of me are so many tongs that pinch out the nerve of independent thought…one cannot go one's own way independently enough "; and, from 1868, a sardonic dismissal of" the philologists of our time "for" their joy at capturing worms and their indifference to the true problems, the urgent problems of life".
The earlier letter reveals, incidentally, how closely his complaint against contemporary philology was related to distaste for contemporary intellectual life in general.
His correspondent had lately left the academic world for military service; and with his own bookish situation, so detrimental to "independent thought" , Nietzsche contrasted and, in part, commended his friend's active life: "…not that I applaud your present profession as such, bud only insofar as it is the negation of your previous life…
With such contrasts, soul and body stay healthy and do not produce those inevitable diseases that result from the preponderance of scholarly activity and from the excessive predominance of physical activity as well…
The Greeks were no scholars, but they were also not mindless athletes.
If  it is so necessary for us to opt one way or the other, is it perhaps that here too Christianity has caused a split in human nature of which the people of harmony knew nothing?"
The formulation of the criticism recalls Hölderlin's Hyperion, but its intensity arises from Nietzsche's own experience.
And yet, for all his reservations, Nietzsche continued to devote time and energy to orthodox classical scholarship; and he was still prepared for an academic career, albeit with the special aims appropriate to one so sceptical of the established order.
He wrote to Rohde in 1868, encouraging his friend to follow suit: "we must do it simply because we cannot do anything else…[but]…for our part let us see to it that young philologists are brought up with the necessary scepticism, free from pedantry and the over-valuation of their profession, and behave as genuine promoters of humanistic studies.
Soyons de notre siècle, as the French say — a stance that no one forgets more easily than the trained philologist."
Accordingly, when the call to Basle came in 1869, he accepted.
Indeed, despite his disillusion with the present reality and underneath the modest ambition he communicated to Rohde, he cherished an almost missionary hope that if and when he was himself in a position to exert influence, the future of his subject might look altogether different.
What he envisaged was an access of "philosophical" seriousness: the positive alternative to a discredited status quo was "Schopenhauerian" .
 "To permeate my discipline with this new blood, to transmit to my listeners that Schopenhauerian seriousness…, this is my wish." 
But Nietzsche's use of such terminology tends to mask the actual nature of the alternatives in question.
A diagrammatic note of early 1869 is closer to the ground: on the one side, academic philology (Universitätsphilologie) with its goal of the "scientific" study of history and language; on the other, classical education (klassische Bildung) with its acknowledgement of the ancient world as a standard or model for life.
Restated in this way, the two aspirations are clearly familiar: the latter is Winckelmann's, the former is Wolf's.
MUSIC: THE CONVERSION TO WAGNER
Nietzsche's great interest in music began early in life.
 "Through a peculiar accident, I began to take a passionate interest in music in my ninth year and even started composing immediately." 
His devotion to music seems in fact to have been even stronger than his feeling for words: "there are times when everything…that cannot be grasped in terms of musical relations actually fills me with disgust and horror" .
In his Germania days before university he may have entertained thoughts of a musical career, and, as we have noted, his contributions to that forum were usually musical.
In music, unlike  literature, he was largely self-taught, but during his schooldays he developed a facility both for improvisation on the piano and for attractive small-scale compositions.
In view of Nietzsche's subsequent adulation of Wagner, it is important to recognize that in these early years his predilections lay elsewhere.
Musical opinions among the educated circles of the time tended towards a polarization.
On the one side, lovers of the traditional harmonic idiom and formal structuring in which German music had excelled since Handel and Bach favoured such modern representatives of that tradition as Schumann and, a little later, Brahms.
On the other side were the proponents of a new "music of the future" (Zukunftsmusik), represented by Berlioz, Liszt, and above all, Wagner, whose restless chromatic explorations, culminating at this period in Tristan und Isolde (finished in 1859) and the tetralogy Der Ring des Nibelungen (1854–74), most radically undermined traditional diatonic stability.
Wagner's compositions, furthermore, involved a dramatic "programme" on which the full significance of the music was to depend.
This represented a challenge to the conventional presupposition of self-contained musical structures, hitherto heeded even by "dramatic" grand opera.
For in that traditional genre, which Wagner set himself to transcend, dramatic action was customarily relegated to the dialogue or recitative, whereas throughout the arias the musical element was hardly less dominant than in any "absolute" music.
The operas of Gluck and Donizetti, Mozart and Meyerbeer, however unlike in other ways, were at one in this: music and drama usually alternated, and the Wagnerian ideal of music as a means to a dramatic end was only occasionally in view.
In university circles there was for a long time little sympathy for the innovators, and in his younger days Nietzsche's own tastes inclined the same way.
He knew something of the new music, but neither the movement as a whole nor Wagner's particular achievement within it meant anything special to him.
During the early and middle sixties he was firmly attached to such composers as Bach, Haydn and, especially, Schumann.
For a time he showed a certain curiosity about Liszt and something of the same kind about Wagner.
He evidently found the new idiom interestingly problematic, but not attractive enough to compel his full attention.
In the autobiographical Ecce Komo, written in 1888, Nietzsche asserted flamboyantly: "From the moment when there was a piano score of Tristan — my compliments, Herr von Bulow — I was a Wagnerian." 
This claim has been shown to be a considerable misstatement.
It was through the Germania that Nietzsche encountered the piano score of Tristan in 1861, and though this and other Wagnerian topics figured prominently in Germania  discussions, they had little place in Nietzsche's own contributions.
It is true that he seems to have been sufficiently interested to use Wagner as the extreme example of "the demonic in music" for his Germania paper on that theme; and also that, following his exposure to the music of Tristan, some of his own compositions of 1861 have a marked Wagnerian flavour (in eccentric combination with formally archaic polyphony)— but this flirtation was short-lived and not repeated until his conversion to Wagner seven years later.
We may well find it significant that there is no evidence during this period of any attempt on his part to acquaint himself with Wagner's own voluminous theoretical prose.
During the mid-sixties, Nietzsche's traditionalism seems even to have stiffened: certainly his attitude towards anything Wagnerian became explicitly antipathetic.
During his year at Bonn (1864–5), he came under the influence of the distinguished music critic Eduard Hanslick who was, where Wagner's experiments were concerned, largely a traditionalist and a sceptic.
From Nietzsche's private notes of the period, it appears that his conservative inclinations were reinforced by Hanslick's insistence on traditional formal principles of composition and the orthodox ideal of autonomous musical structures; and it is no surprise to find distinct hostility in Nietzsche's recorded comments on the new piano score of Die Walküre in 1866.
In the meantime, of course, he had become a Schopenhauerian, the relevant effect of which can only have been to confirm the validity of his preoccupation with music and his suspicion of the new musical idiom.
For while Schopenhauer gave music a gratifyingly important role within his scheme of things, the music on which he based his theories was primarily the formally respectable tradition that he saw represented in Haydn and Mozart; and the importance he gave to music turned to a large extent on its supposed capacity to foster the right — dispassionate and otherworldly — response.
And while conservative, "Hanslickian" , music might, at least in part, elicit such a response, the new music was likely to lead in the opposite direction.
If a dispassionate response was obligatory, then Wagnerian music, in particular, with its irresistibly sensuous-emotional appeal, was bound to seem wholly illegitimate.
In addition, the role of the words in Wagner's music drama would be open to damaging criticism on Schopenhauerian grounds, although this further problem only impinged fully on Nietzsche at a later date, when his interest in Wagner was of a different order altogether.
Nietzsche's musical attitudes remained more or less constant until the summer of 1868, when the conversion to Wagner began.
Unlike his earlier conversion to Schopenhauer, this one involved no sudden, overwhelming revelation, but rather a gradual heightening of interest and enthusiasm  over several months.
The catalyst of the change was the much publicized premiere of Die Meistersinger in Munich in June.
Nietzsche was not present, but whereas the premiere of Tristan in 1865 had not prompted any discernible reaction in him, on this occasion he took a much livelier interest and during the following months familiarized himself with the work through the score.
In view of the terms in which he was later to express his enthusiasm for Wagner, it is interesting to note what it was that first seriously attracted him: nor the morbid metaphysical-flavoured world of romance, the hypnotic emotional intensity and musical "modernity" of Tristan, representing at the time, the high point of Wagner's most distinctive line of development; nor indeed the available parts of the similarly "modern" , but emotionally more robust, Ring; rather, the musically "reactionary" Meistersinger that deferred to traditional expectations of harmony, tonality and musical organization and depicted through the medium of "healthy" comic opera the successful struggle of artistic genius against stifling Hanslickian convention.
Signs of Nietzsche's growing enthusiasm are visible in his correspondence during the summer.
An enigmatic reference to Meistersinger in a letter to Rohde in August is followed two months later by an avowed relish for the emotive Wagnerian ethos to which Meistersinger presents, comparatively, such a contrast.
His comments here, interestingly enough, were occasioned by a reading of some essays on musical topics by Otto Jahn, Ritschl's former colleague and opponent at Bonn.
"Recently I also read…
Jahn's essays on music, including the ones on Wagner.
You have to have some enthusiasm to do such a person justice, whereas Jahn has an instinctive antipathy to him and listens with his ears half stopped up.
Still, I grant him many points, particularly his maintaining that Wagner is representative of a modern dilettantism that sucks up and swallows everything of any artistic interest; but precisely from this standpoint, one cannot be astonished enough at…a disposition that allies indestructible energy with many-sided artistic gifts…
Moreover, Wagner has a sphere of feeling totally hidden from O. Jahn, one of those "wholesome provincials" , to whom the Tannhäuser saga and the Lohengrin atmosphere are a closed world.
In Wagner, as in Schopenhauer, I like the ethical air, the Faustian odour, cross, death, grave etc."
These remarks show Nietzsche's attitude a stage further on, but still in a state of transition.
Wagner's appeal is becoming stronger and more general and the association of his name with Schopenhauer's indicates a new degree of commendation.
At the same time, Nietzsche's stance, though extremely favourable, is still critical, and his enthusiasm is qualified by a certain self-conscious humour: witness the blandly ironic use of "wholesome" (ein Gesunder) and the self-deflating "etc." , which in the German original is  preceded by an extravagantly formulated double rhyme: die ethische Luft, der faustische Duft, Kreuz, Tod und Gruft etc.
Furthermore, at the time of writing it was still the "healthy" Meistersinger that in fact came first in his esteem.
It is therefore slightly ironic that it should have been this same Meistersinger which now finally stirred his feelings to the point where any "healthy" critical stance became impossible.
In late October he wrote again to Rohde: "This evening I was at the Euterpe Society, which has started its winter concerts, and refreshed myself with the Prelude to Tristan und Isolde as well as the Overture to Die Meistersinger.
I cannot get myself to react with critical coolness towards this music; every tissue, every nerve vibrates in me and it is a long time since I had such an enduring feeling of rapture as when listening to the latter overture."
Meistersinger, then, still came before Tristan, but such distinctions were fast losing their significance.
Wagnerian music in general had now taken its hold and was irresistibly leading Nietzsche to admit a response diametrically opposed to the objectivity that had commended itself to him before.
It is possible that for all its lofty consequences, Nietzsche's willingness to expose himself to Meistersinger in the first place arose out of nothing loftier than social contacts: the coincidence that a sister of Wagner's living in Leipzig was friendly with Professor Ritschl and his wife, with whom Nietzsche was on excellent terms at the time.
At all events, it was through this channel that in early November he engineered a meeting with Wagner.
From a famous letter to Rohde we know of the powerful effect that the meeting had on him.
He felt himself to be in the presence of a creative genius and experienced"enjoyments of such peculiar piquancy that today I am not quite my old self…
".
The composer's liveliness and wit impressed him and, not least, his enthusiasm (unsuspected by Nietzsche) for Schopenhauer: "You will understand how much I enjoyed hearing him speak of Schopenhauer with indescribable warmth, what he owed to him, how he is the only philosopher who has understood the essence of music." 
Wagner, for his part, was equally taken with his gifted young admirer and, as Nietzsche explained to Rohde, "when we were getting ready to leave, he shook my hand warmly and with great friendliness invited me to visit him, in order to make music and talk philosophy." 
Contact with the man Wagner now kindled an interest in Wagner the theorist and within a few weeks Nietzsche was writing again to Rohde to impress on his friend his high opinion of Wagner's Opera and Drama, a treatise written nearly twenty years before, but apparently now providing Nietzsche's first direct acquaintance with any of Wagner's theoretical works.
In January 1869 he travelled to Dresden to attend the local premiere of Meistersinger, whose special place in his affections was  unchanged, and on 17 May, now at Basle, he was finally able to accept Wagner's invitation and visit him at Tribschen, his house near Lucerne in Switzerland.
Why the conversion to Wagner in 1868–9?
It was not simply the attraction of Wagner's music; Nietzsche, after all, had known some Wagnerian music, including the quintessentially Wagnerian Tristan, for years without feeling any overwhelming pull.
We can better appreciate the conversion by thinking back to the philosopher Schopenhauer, with whose name Nietzsche was now so assiduously coupling Wagner's as twin deities, dei maximi.
By 1868 Schopenhauer remained a central fact of life for Nietzsche, but hardly, in himself, a source of fresh inspiration; if anything, Nietzsche's more critical attitude towards this first deux maximus had left something of a vacuum.
Once he had been won over by Meistersinger, with its triumphant portrayal of genius.
Wagner began to assume in his mind a heroic, aesthetic, Schopenhauerian status, so that it was natural for him to couple the two even before he had any reason to suppose that Wagner was at all interested in the philosopher.
Wagner's profession of sympathy for Schopenhauer at the November meeting could only have come as the happiest of coincidences, while, in general, this first experience of the composer's powerful personality confirmed and added to his new status: Wagner was at one with Schopenhauer and he was (to Nietzsche's way of thinking) an artist such as Schopenhauer himself would have wished him.
"Wagner, as I now know him from his music, his poetry, his aesthetic, not least from that fortunate meeting with him, is the flesh-and-blood illustration of what Schopenhauer calls a genius.
It was, naturally, a substantial part of Wagner's appeal that he was "flesh and blood" , a living genius, unlike Schopenhauer (who had died in 1860).
It also seems likely that Wagner, thirty-one years Nietzsche's senior and born in the same year as Nietzsche's long dead father, was in some sense a father-figure and additionally attractive on this account.
The passion of Nietzsche's attachment — and, still more, of his later assertion of independence — becomes more explicable in this light; and "passion" , Nietzsche wrote years afterwards, "is the only word for it" .
In some ways, too, the relationship smacks of a Platonic love-affair — in the fullest sense of that word, with the young man learning wisdom at the feet of the older.
But something is still needed to explain Nietzsche's willingness to commit himself so totally at this particular time; and the November meeting, usually taken to be the cause, cannot by itself have been sufficient.
The answer, we suggest, is that Wagner now represented precisely what Schopenhauer had been before: a lifeline to save himself from drowning in his professional specialization, as he went further and further out into it.
The propriety of  coupling the two names, therefore, could hardly be more complete.
It was no accident that Nietzsche's move to Leipzig, implying the decision to specialize in classics, was followed by an overnight conversion to Schopenhauer; and no accident, again, that his final acceptance of a classical career should have been so closely associated in time with his commitment, after so many years of desultory acquaintance, to Wagner.
Nietzsche's first news of the offer of a chair at Basle came in January 1869 and we have on record, as it happens, his immediate reaction.
A letter to Rohde contains, half-way through, the sign "N.B." and, at the end, the following: "At the point marked N.B., a message came calling me into town as soon as I reached the foot of the page; now returned, I am trembling all over and cannot free myself of it even by pouring out my heart to you.
Absit diabolus!
Adsit amicissumus Erwinus!
[The devil leave me!
Friend Erwin be with me!],
It was with Rohde that Nietzsche had intended to spend the forthcoming year in Paris on what might have amounted to a non-classical refresher course.
In November 1868 he had written to Rohde: "I intend to get through all the business of habilitation by Easter [sc.
1869]and finish my doctorate at the same time."
Then would come the journey to Paris, after which (as he noted in another connection in the same letter) "it will be all right in this academic career" .
 "Absit diabolus" : the strength of Nietzsche's feelings needs no commentary.
In the light of the order of events involved in the earlier conversion to Schopenhauer, we can surely point to this moment as decisive.
If Nietzsche was to come to terms with a specialized academic career, his need of a compensatory allegiance was extreme.
Since June 1868 his enthusiasm for Wagner and his works had been steadily growing.
The allegiance he needed was now to hand.
From this moment, but only from this moment, he was "a Wagnerian" without any qualification.
Biographical background II: the genesis of The Birth of Tragedy 
BASLE, TRIBSCHEN, AND THE FIRST PLANS FOR A BOOK
Up to this point in our narrative, it has been possible, with some difficulty, to keep the three main strands of Nietzsche's life apart.
With the beginning of his Basle period, it is virtually impossible to separate these or any aspects of his life or work, including the complicated genesis of BT .
Everything converges — and Nietzsche himself does everything possible to ensure that it should.
The convergence, in fact, reflects his first full-scale, and characteristically self-conscious, attempt to oppose fragmentation in favour of a whole response to experience.
As he puts it, with a certain dispassionate irony, in a letter of early 1870: "I observe how my philosophical, moral and scholarly endeavours strive towards a single goal and that I may perhaps become the first philologist ever to achieve wholeness." 
And how should he achieve it?
Throughout this early period, "Schopenhauer" is the device behind which Nietzsche is mustering his increasingly independent thinking.
And so he can still express his aspiration towards that "wholeness" in terms of a unifying Schopenhauerianism.
In September 1869 he writes: "I really do stand now at a centre from which Schopenhauerian threads reach out into all parts of the world" ; and it was in April, on th eve of his departure for Basle, that he had expressed the ambition to infuse his own philological discipline with"that Schopenhauerian seriousness…;
I should like to be something more than a drill-master for competent philologists — the generation of present-day teachers, the care of the growing younger generation, this is what I have in mind."
Despite these protestations, however, it can hardly be denied that Nietzsche's main enthusiasm, and the main stimulus to his enthusiasms in general, was no longer Schopenhauer, but the composer whose devotee he was and whose intimate friend he shortly became.
 "Intimate" is not, perhaps, the right word.
There is a case for saying that Nietzsche's relationships, though often intense, hardly ever permitted the degree of self-revelation, at least on his side, that true intimacy presupposes.
His friendship with Rohde might be an exception here; his relationship with Wagner was probably not.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that this relationship flourished.
The visit to Wagner's Swiss home, Tribschen, in mid-May was the first of over twenty such visits made between 1869 and 1872, the year in which first BT appeared and then, a few months later, Wagner, with his wife Cosima, moved to illegitimate daughter of Franz Liszt and wife of Wagner's friend Hans von Bulow, eloped with Wagner in 1866 and married him in 1870.
A woman of character and finesse and blessed with a total devotion to her new husband, she played a large part in setting the artistic tone at Tribschen, which Nietzsche was to remember with admiration all his life.
The first years at Basle were, for Nietzsche, the Tribschen years.
His rapport with the Wagner household comes across vividly from letters to Rohde in the late summer of 1869: "Just recently I've paid four visits there in quick succession and a letter takes wing in the same direction almost every week" ;"On the visit before last, during the night, a baby boy called Siegfried was born.
On my last visit there, Wagner had just finished his composition Siegfried and was full of the most exuberant sense of his artistic strength."
The proximity of Tribschen to Basle obviously made contact easier, but it was undoubtedly Nietzsche's new professional eminence that made it particularly welcome to Wagner and led to a rapid development of the relationship between the two.
It is clear that Wagner became genuinely fond of Nietzsche, but for all the young professor's admiration of him as a person, Wagner — it is a notorious fact — was a supremely egocentric man; it is easily inferred that he glimpsed in Nietzsche a means of gaining respectability in hitherto hostile academic circles, and that it was this glimpse, as much as anything, that encouraged his fond feelings to grow.
At the same time the young scholar's concern with large aesthetic-cultural questions and his deep interest in Schopenhauer were felt as a stimulus by Wagner himself.
Nietzsche was therefore made increasingly welcome.
He became a party to household secrets and to Wagner's cherished artistic plans.
He was shown unpublished essays and given his own room to work in.
Not surprisingly, his enthusiasm knew no bounds.
In August 1869 he wrote to his mother: "I have never felt happier than during the last few days.
The warm, hearty and increasing closeness with Wagner and Frau von Bulow, the complete agreement between us on all the questions that chiefly interest us, Wagner absolutely in the prince of genius…
"
In Wagner he could see an "absolutely immaculate greatness" and a "depth of seriousness" such that as Tribschen he felt "In the presence of one of the century's elect" .
 "Dear friend" , he wrote  to Rohde in September,"what I learn there, and see, and hear, and understand, is indescribable.
Schopenhauer, Goethe, Aeschylus and Pindar still live, I assure you".
In 1888, a decade after total estrangement had come between them, Nietzsche was still able to look back to his days with Wagner at Tribschen as "days of trust, optimism, sublime accidents, profound moments" .
Nietzsche's Wagnerian experience affected him profoundly and pervasively.
If Schopenhauer had given him the notion of a personal vision of life, Wagner gave him first-hand knowledge of a creative talent and the ambition to emulate its cultural achievements.
At the same time, the experience was formative in a more immediately practical way.
In the first place, Wagner and the ideal of his music drama directly influenced the direction of Nietzsche's classical thinking.
Not that he was suddenly drawn into entirely new areas of interest: it was more a matter of being drawn back, with a new urgency, into old ones.
The fact was that Wagnerian music drama claimed a relationship with Greek tragedy and that the new status of music drama in Nietzsche's thoughts sufficed to activate and inform an interest he had taken in the Greek tragedians years before: witness his Pforta dissertation on the Oedipus Rex (which, prophetically enough, actually alluded at one point to the analogy between Wagner and the Greeks).
But hitherto that interest had been merely one among many; his temperament had precluded any drastic specialization, and he worked on an almost random variety of Greek topics, with a discernible bias only towards philosophy.
Now his professional interests began to assume a pointed interrelation.
He chose, for example, to lecture to his students largely on Greek subjects which were associable, however indirectly, with the new enthusiasm.
Between the summer of 1869 and the winter of 1871 his lectures included courses on metrics, a field fundamental to the consideration of Greek music; on two tragedies, Aeschylus' Libation Bearers and Sophocles' Oedipus Rex; and on lyric poetry, which in Greece was originally and characteristically sung poetry and which included the dithyramb, that special kind of sung poetry originally employed in the orgiastic worship of the fertility god, Dionysus, and conventionally regarded as ancestral to Greek tragedy.
And his notes for the course on lyric (prepared in the spring of 1869) show him devoting ten times more space to the dithyramb, of which next to nothing had survived from antiquity, than to the epinician, the kind immortalized by Pindar and the only kind that had survived in any bulk."
It is clearly a new preoccupation with tragedy that explains the disproportion — tragedy and its origins: in the historically minded nineteenth century, no one with intellectual pretensions could think of an entity without also looking to its origins, however remote or obscure.
Outside the Hellenic sphere, too, Wagner's influence materialized in the form of a revival of earlier preoccupations: a renewal of Nietzsche's old interest in large problems of aesthetics and art as a whole.
But for Nietzsche "art as a whole" and "the Hellenic sphere" were simply not separable, any more than they had been for Winckelmann.
Any thought he had about Greek art was a thought about art per se: a Greek instance was not, for pragmatic purposes, an instance but the instance.
But if Nietzsche stood with the earlier philhellenes in this way, he was explicitly against them in another.
For thanks once more to his Wagnerian experienced he was beginning to formulate a new interpretation of art, art as a whole, and, in accordance with the given pragmatic logic, a new interpretation of the "Hellenic sphere" as well: a view of Greece and Greek art in direct opposition to the traditional view of which Winckelmann was a prime source.
Nietzsche himself was, as usual, self-consciously aware of what was going on.
In October 1869 he wrote to Rohde: a whole lot of aesthetic problems and answers have been bubbling inside me for the last few years…of course, Wagner is in a very pregnant sense beneficial, especially as, an example incomprehensible on the basis of traditional aesthetics…; and a few months later he was proclaiming to another correspondent a"marvellously new and changed…
Greek world".
The "traditional aesthetics" which Wagner was, in Nietzsche's eyes, helping to bring into question had its roots in the aesthetics of Winckelmann and, among others, of Lessing, whose classic discussion of poetry and the plastic arts, Laocoon (1766), Nietzsche had studied privately in 1865.
Whatever Lessing's disagreements with Winckelmann, he had shared Winckelmann's estimate of beauty as the goal and supreme achievement of Greek art.
It was this principle that seemed now to be inadequate.
If beauty was sovereign for Greece, it was sovereign everywhere.
But Wagner's art, so irresistible and so much to the fore in Nietzsche's thinking, seemed to presuppose some value other than— or in addition to — beauty: and was this not also true of Greek art, on the basis of which the theory of beauty had been largely formed?
Having declared the new music to be — incomprehensible on the basis of traditional aesthetics', Nietzsche at once went on to sum up the task he saw before him: "the thing above all is to get beyond Lessing's Laocoon" .
In saying this, it is likely that he had in mind not merely Lessing's criterion of beauty, but his fundamental contrast between poetry and the visual arts.
Nietzsche was soon to substitute a new opposition whose polar extremes were occupied by visual art and music.
But that was still to come.
For the time being, his dissent from "traditional aesthetics" was very much a matter of finding his way among various alternative sets of ideas.
From as far back as late 1868 items in his notebooks show this happening.
One  sequence of entries, for instance, seemingly associates the words "aesthetic" and "tragedy" ; another connects Greek drama with "optimism and pessimism" , a new polarity destined to exercise his mind for years to come; and another, after a list of topics that includes "development of tragedy" and "Lessing, Winckelmann" , offers a brief theoretical discussion of "development" that refers to "music" , "opera" , and another notion of significance for the future, "instinct" .
The associations among these items, however, serve to remind us once more of Nietzsche's relation with earlier German theorists, Winckelmann among them.
 "Aesthetics" in these exploratory notes is not confined to art, not even to "art as a whole" .
It runs into history, psychology and moral philosophy, into life itself.
We can see in this Nietzsche's aspirations towards a total philosophy of life.
We can also note that the relating of the artistic to the existential is characteristic of a long line of German writers.
The word "aesthetic" itself acquired its modern academic denotation in eighteenth-century German philosophy — in the writings of Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten and his disciple Immanuel Kant; but the most significant of German "aesthetic" enquiries have invariably moved beyond "aesthetic" in the narrow sense, and often into a question for the "whole man" .
Schiller's On the Aesthetic Education of Man (1795) represents one of Nietzsche's most celebrated precedents.
The new direction of Nietzsche's interests was first made public in early 1870 in two lectures with the suggestive titles, "Greek Music Drama" and "Socrates and Tragedy" .
In these lectures we can identify the beginnings of BT.
Not only do they represent the first substantial draft of much of the material that was to be more fully worked out there.
They also open up a breach with scholarly orthodoxy which BT was to make final.
Nietzsche's inaugural lecture, it is true, had alarmed Ritschl by suggesting that "all philological activity should be embraced and defined by a philosophical outlook" , but that (in a lecture on Homer) was merely a statement of intent.
Now, however, Nietzsche was making his first serious attempt to put into practice the "wholeness" he aspired to.
He was treating "the classics" as one coherent entity and, without apology, bringing that new entity and his extra-classical orientations together.
Personal involvement was implicit in the tone and the procedures involved: the matters under consideration were treated as if they did matter; epochs and makers of epochs were sharply characterized and subjected to urgent evaluation.
The first lecture was given in mid-January.
In it Nietzsche attempted to illuminate Greek tragedy with a modern parallel, grand opera.
Greek tragedy, he impressed on his audience, had been a total art form, a Gesamtkunst (Wagner's slogan, although Wagner's name was not mentioned), to suit an  age of whole men:a poetic drama that made use of architecture (the theatre), painting (scenery and costume), song, dance and music; a drama created amid "perfection and harmony" by "artistic man" , who, at least in the earlier part of the fifth century, the time of Aeschylus, was poet, composer, conductor, producer and actor in one; a drama performed at the communal festival of Dionysus before an audience which brought to the theatre something of the instinctive, rapturous spirit from which, in the Dionysiac celebrations, tragedy had originated in the first place.
For tragedy and true art in general must (this was implicit) be essentially the product of instinct.
Despite the absence of Wagner's name, it must have been sufficiently evident that the real parallel offered was not with opera as much, but with Wagner alone; an insistence on traditional opera's inherent inferiority and a brief allusion at the end of the lecture to its new rival "music drama" were enough.
Nietzsche, however, made no attempt to demonstrate the aptness of his particular parallel, and the plausibility of the detailed propositions was not thereby enhanced.
The second lecture, closely connected with the first and, like the first, closing with a portentous allusion to contemporary music drama, was given at the beginning of February, and dealt with the mysterious "death" of tragedy at the end of the fifth century.
Its chief heterodoxy, ironically enough, was the large theory of Greek cultural development invoked to explain the mystery; ironically, because the view of Greek culture actually advanced was based — with explicit acknowledgement — on ideas familiar to all classical scholars and accepted by them without demur, but accepted only as a purely historical phenomenon.
Their source was Aristophanes, comic poet, critic of his times, and younger contemporary of Sophocles and Euripides, the two tragedians whose almost simultaneous deaths inspired his comedy.
The Frogs (405).
From this play, taken in conjunction with earlier comedies, an interpretation of Athenian culture can be extracted which is, in essence, coherent and credible — even though there is considerable room for argument about how seriously the comic author might have liked the interpretation to be taken.
At all events, the great age of Athens, on this reading, was the age of the Persian wars in the early years of the fifth century, a time of supreme political endeavour and a time when the grandest of all tragic dramatists, Aeschylus, was there to provide the spiritual leadership of the city.
By comparison, the Athens of Aristophanes; own day, at the end of the century, was a city fallen from greatness, and not only because of the protracted destruction brought about by the Peloponnesian war.
That war had, rather, intensified the real causes of decline: social and cultural changes that were already operative and that were, almost uniformly, changes for  the worse.
Prominent among these developments was the rise of a new intellectual attitude towards the traditional, stable bases of Greek life, above all, its instinctive religious basis.
The new intellectualism, represented in different spheres by the "modern" tragedian Euripides and the philosopher Socrates, was both disturbing and destructive.
As regards tragedy, spiritually the city's focal point, Euripides was not and could not be a spiritual guide as Aeschylus had once been, although the need was, no doubt, greater than in Aeschylus' time.
Most melancholy fact of all, however, there was no going back.
Euripides (and with him the more "traditional" Sophocles) was dead, and degenerate as he might have been, the scale of his artistic gifts was not in doubt; but there was no successor of equivalent stature to mend matters: like Athens herself, tragedy was in decline.
Building on this Aristophanic foundation, in the second of his lectures Nietzsche sharpened the relationship between Euripides, Socrates, and tragedy's demise.
Euripides, the intellectual Euripides, was the "poet of Socratic rationalism" and tragedy did not simply die after him: it was "Socratism" in its Euripidean embodiment that killed it, although this destructive tendency preceded Socrates himself and affected even Sophocles.
As in the earlier lecture, therefore, the most positive valuation was given to Aeschylus, while the harshest words of all were reserved for Socrates' pupil Plato, who translated into paradoxically artistic form his master's rationalistic distrust of instinct and instinctive art.
But it was not only its a-rational basis that damned tragedy in Socratistic eyes.
It was also its insight into the a-rational nature of life itself.
Inherent in Socratism was the optimistic insistence that life must make rational sense, whereas true tragedy was pessimistic and found in life only "terror" and "absurdity." 
These propositions are large and open to a variety of possible objections.
They are also inextricably bound up with evaluations which were at the time extremely unfashionable: not so much the depreciation of Euripides, who, although the most admired of the tragic poets in later antiquity, hardly approached that popularity again until the twentieth century (and who, in any case, had been subjected to a famous critique in the lectures of A. W. Schlegel as long ago as 1808); rather, the elevation of "primitive" Aeschylus above even Sophocles, and the disrespect shown towards Socrates and the "divine" Plato.
Apart from anything else, the dethronement of Sophocles — and Plato — in favour of Aeschylus represented a challenge to the ideals on which German Hellenism had been founded and to which academic circles in general still generally adhered.
As against the classical, the serenely beautiful, Nietzsche was opting for the archaic.
One novelty Nietzsche did spare his audience, a new antithesis that was  not yet fully worked out, but was, no doubt, the object of much private thought at this time: the Apolline (das Apollinische) and the Dionysiac (das Dionysische).
This celebrated polarity was not actually invented by Nietzsche, but derives its fame from his very particular and original use of it in BT.
The distinction concerns, in the first instance, the two Greek gods Apollo, lawgiver and god of light, and Dionysus, a god of life and yet a sinister, "dark" , force.
As Nietzsche uses them, however, the names denote not merely this pair of very different Greek deities, but two large, supra-historical, and diametrically opposite aspects of art and existence in general.
It was these two terms that he was to use in BT to symbolize his alternative to the single Winckelmann-Lessing principal of "beauty" .
But in his two lectures he contented himself with a couple of scattered references to "Apolline clarity" and tragedy's — actually Shakespearean tragedy's — "Dionysiac" quality.
The audience was given no hint that he was envisaging the terms as an antithesis, let alone that he was feeling his way towards significant categories of thought, although from various notes from the winter of 1869–70 it is clear that he was now doing just that.
Nevertheless, the world of classical scholarship was left in no doubt about one thing.
On top of his other heterodoxies, Nietzsche's criticism of "Socratism" implied, as he was only too well aware, a question mark against pure intellectual inquiry as much, against Wissenschaft.
And with their given tone and range, the two lectures proclaimed that Altertumswissenschaft, the pure intellectual and compartmental study of antiquity, was not the least of his particular targets.
Here, then, were the first tangible fruits of his aspirations towards "wholeness" .
That last, familiar, word was used by Nietzsche himself precisely in this context and at this time: "I observe how my philosophical, moral and scholarly endeavours strive towards a single goal and that I may perhaps become the first philologist ever to achieve wholeness." 
So much we have already quoted.
The continuation of the passage is to the point: "How marvellously new and changed history looks to me, especially the Greek world!
I would like to send you my most recent lectures, the second of which ( "Socrates and Tragedy" ) has been understood here as a chain of paradoxes and his aroused hatred and anger in some quarters.
Offence must come.
I have, by and large, already stopped taking any notice."
Nietzsche, then, was as aware of the dangers on his path as of its necessity.
In a memorable letter to Rohde, written at the same time, he envisaged his eventual goal: "I gave a lecture here on" Socrates and Tragedy"which excited terror and incomprehension.
On the other hand, it has strengthened the ties with my Tribschen friends even more…
Richard Wagner has also most touchingly  indicated the aim he sees mapped out for me.
This is all very frightening.
You know what Ritschl has said about me.
But I refuse to be tempted: I really have no literary ambition at all; I don't need to conform to a prevailing stereotype in the search for distinguished and illustrious positions.
But when the time comes, I shall express myself with as much seriousness and freedom of mind as possible.
Scholarship [Wissenschaft], art and philosophy are now growing together inside me so much that in any case I'll be giving birth to centaurs one day.
What Ritschl had said one can gather from his testimonials that had helped to bring Nietzsche to Basle: his pupil was "a phenomenon" who would simply be able to do anything he chose to do.
Wagner's comments, made on reading the two lectures, were more specific.
Full of admiration and impressed above all by the signs of Nietzsche's originality of mind and literary power, he saw in him a new kind of worker for the cultural cause with which he identified his own ambitions: "Now you must show what philology is for, and help me bring about the grand" renaissance"…
"
And Wagner spelled out the means: "I should like to advise you not to touch on such incredible views in short essays written…for popular effect, but…to concentrate on a larger and more comprehensive work on this subject." 
Years afterwards, in fact decades afterwards, when Nietzsche himself was no longer available for comment, his sister repeatedly asserted that as a young professor he had always intended to produce a "large" book on Greece, not one dealing with, or centred on, a single topic, but a book that would deal comprehensively with various aspects of Greek civilization.
Although widely accepted.
the claim is hard to substantiate, not so much because of Nietzsche's professed lack of "literary ambition" (a somewhat disingenuous profession in any case), but for want of any decisive evidence in, for instance, the copious private notes surviving from his first years at Basle.
In his notebooks of 1867 we find an extraordinary profusion of plans for a book: one or two are lists of wide-ranging topics arranged to form a more or less coherent whole; most are variations on the theme of tragedy.
In itself, a plan, even a coherent plan, can easily imply a vague aspiration rather than a definite commitment; and it seems that, though not averse to the occasional vague aspiration, Nietzsche was in fact committed to nothing — except to the book on tragedy that eventually materialized.
What we do know is that in the autumn of 1869 Nietzsche was contemplating a large book, but one of a different kind.
On 16 October he wrote for advice to his mentor, Ritschl.
He felt he ought now to be thinking of writing a book — but on what?
A major work on a coherent subject seemed out of the question.
with much of his time fragmented by preparation for  lectures and classes.
What he could do, if Ritschl thought it a plan worth pursuing was put together a book of miscellaneous bits and pieces-part literary history, part "new ideas and views" (neue Ansichten und Aussichten) of an as yet unspecified nature, part textual criticism.
And he added his hope that in about two years he would have a more straightforward kind of book ready, developing his published studies on Diogenes Laertius, and possibly also an edition of Aeschylus' Libation Bearers (on which he had been lecturing earlier in the year) Without any direct reference to this last suggestions Ritschl, in his reply a few weeks later, implicitly endorsed it.
To the idea of a miscellany he gave a firm no.
There was no hurry and for a first book something unified was essential: a couple of years' delay was of no importance.
Nietzsche took the advice.
He gave the miscellany no further thought.
The subjects of Nietzsche's two public lectures were already chosen by the time of his letter to Ritschl, as we can see from a letter to a friend in late September.
But the letter to Ritschl (if we take it at face value, as we presumably should) shows that Nietzsche had as yet no thought of basing a book on these subjects, although something pertinent to "Greek music drama" or "Socrates and tragedy" would, no doubt have been among the various matters envisaged for the miscellany in the "literary history or the" new ideas and views".
When first envisaged, then, the lectures were not seen as the core of a forthcoming book, even though(with their Wagnerian connection) they bore on his current preoccupation — and even though he was currently casting around for a subject for a book.
But we can surely reconstruct the pattern of events whereby the lectures did become the basis of the book that in fact materialized.
Once Ritschl had scotched the idea of a miscellany, only something "unified" would do.
The material of the two lectures, though not originally envisaged in this connection, provided the starting point — but only in the light of Wagner's flattering advice to "concentrate on a larger and more comprehensive work on this subject" .
Wagner's suggestion that such a book would help to usher in a new "renaissance" must have made his advice irresistible.
Wagner's role in the genesis of B T has not hitherto been accurately defined.
It was twofold: first, the material of the book had a Wagnerian stimulus behind it and a discernible "Wagnerian connection" ; and secondly, the decision to write a whole book on the basis of that material was prompted by Wagner's personal advocacy.
Having emerged from this complex background, the book evinced an eccentric fidelity to Ritschl's advice, when it duly appeared after the suggested "couple of years" .
compared with the rejected miscellany, it was even less what that orthodox scholar could approve, but it was certainly "unified" — in more senses than one.
THE PROBLEM OF THE GENESIS
It will already be apparent from our narrative that the genesis of BT is far from straightforward.
It is as well at this point to confirm that it is so and to add that there are further complications, bibliographical and biographical.
In the first place, our picture of the genesis to a large extent depends on the interpretation and dating of Nietzsche's literary remains (the Nachlass), and specifically on the mass of plans, fragments and isolated notes which survive in notebooks from his first years in Basle.
This material has recently (1978) been published in its entirety for the first time, but many problems remain unsolved — or insoluble.
The corpus relevant to BT numbers hundreds of separate items and fills about four hundred printed pages; it is contained in fourteen different notebooks, written over a period of two years (autumn 1869 to autumn 1871).
The notebooks are datable, but each one may cover a month, a few months, or a year or more, and many of them were used concurrently.
This means that the individual items in each notebook can rarely be dated with any precision and that notes in one notebook may, and often do, presuppose plans in another; even within single notebooks it is not always possible to determine whether items in a sequence belong together.
Nor is it always clear whether a given list of topics constitutes an actual plan for a book or not, or whether a given note pertains to our book at all.
Furthermore, the dating of a notebook need not be the same as dating its contents.
On the one hand, an item may be a later insertion, and therefore postdate its apparent context; on the other, it may be a more or less faithful copy of earlier, perhaps discarded, material, and may thus predate its apparent context.
The second complication is biographical.
There is a traditional picture of the genesis of BT whose main lines depend, substantially, not on any direct evidence, but on the later recollections of Nietzsche's sister, which were first set out in one volume of a biography of her brother published in 1897.
But her evidence by itself is of very little value.
It has for some years been established beyond doubt that Elisabeth used her long period as custodian of her brother's works and papers (during which time she wrote and rewrote his biography, as well as overseeing the editing of his works) to misrepresent important aspects of his life and thought and, in extreme cases, to falsify letters and unpublished writings.
Her motives were various and not always dishonourable, but chief among them was the desire to glorify her brother's reputation: to represent him, in fact, as supremely original genius, complete intellect (she made an exception of his mathematical capabilities, but, by way of compensation, emphasized his standing as a classical scholar), perfect human being and, eventually, tragic hero.
And although there is no question  of any actual tampering with the unpublished material that pertains to BT, Elisabeth is no more reliable as a biographer for our period than for any other.
In the first place, there is the time factor: her first biography was begun over twenty years after the publication of BT and even honest sisters' memories would be fallible at such a distance.
Secondly, it is not even probable that she would have known much about the progress of the book at the time, except in the most general terms: she was not often in her brother's company and his letters to her during these years do not suggest that details of such matters formed any part of their common ground.
Thirdly, it does not inspire confidence in her work to find it not simply going beyond the independent evidence we have, but often going against it.
And finally, her particular motive for deception is surely not far to seek: the crucial consideration is that Nietzsche's relationship with Wagner, with which the genesis of the book is bound up, was for her a sensitive issue in which her brother's reputation was particularly at stake.
This is, indeed, confirmed by differences between her various accounts of the biographical aspects of the genesis ( "how did the" Wagnerian connection "come about?" ), generally in line with a characteristic of hers, that in sensitive areas of her brother's biography her memory for convenient detail improved as she got older.
An apt description of Elizabeth's cast of mind in the very years when her first biography was planned and written was given by Rudolf Steiner in 1900.
He had been invited to give her "private lessons in her brother's philosophy" which (as she had rightly decided) would help her to propagate the Nietzschean cause.
His caustic comments included the following: "Frau Forster-Nietzsche…lacks any sense of objectivity…
She believes at every moment what she says.
She convinces herself today that something was red yesterday that most assuredly was blue."
Yet although her capacity for distortion is well known and although her account of the genesis has been questioned (Erich Podach has called it "untenable" , nicht haltbar) its substance is still widely accepted — by her brother's latter-day detractors no less than his admirers.
Representatively Martin Vogel's recent large-scale — and extremely hostile — study of Nietzsche and the Apollo-Dionysus polarity relies heavily, at certain points — on her testimony.
The genesis of BT must be reconstructed from contemporary documents Nietzsche's plans and fragments, especially if datable, and correspondence After examining this evidence, we have come to conclusions that differ in certain respects from received opinion.
Received opinion, based unduly on the word of sister Elisabeth, has it that Nietzsche began with the idea of a large book on Greek culture which, under Wagner's influence and again its author's real inclinations, was gradually whittled down to a book on Greek  tragedy — and Wagner.
Our conclusion, overall, is rather that a large book on Greece was not a serious possibility for long, if at all ; that the actual book written was, in an important sense, Wagnerian from the start; but that, notwithstanding the extent of Wagner's influence, there is no good reason to suppose that Nietzsche ever went against his own inclinations for Wagner's sake, whether by adding material, changing it or suppressing it.
On this last point, it is worth emphasizing, in advance of the evidence, that Nietzsche did certainly reject a quantity of material before the final draft, but that few of the "suppressed" passages are at all long and none are strikingly impressive.
In later years, we shall find Nietzsche looking back at this first book, and especially its Wagnerian dimension, with very mixed feelings.
It is particularly significant that none of his many critical comments on the book from that period suggest any mixed feelings at the time when the book was actually being planned and written.
But it is presumably these later criticisms, made long after his emancipation from Wagner, that inspired Elisabeth to explain away the Wagnerian connection as merely secondary; while her claims about her brother's real intention to produce a "large" book about Greece (and nothing but Greece) would seem to be prompted by a desire to enhance his scholarly image; for no other kind of book (she decided) would have satisfied his "scholar's conscience." 
NEW PLANS, WAR, PHILOSOPHICAL CREDENTIALS
By the spring of 1870 the new project had its first name.
In April Nietzsche announced to Rohde: "The theme and title of the coming book [Zukunft-buch, perhaps with allusion to Wagner's Zukunftsmusik]is" Socrates and Instinct "." 
From our knowledge of Nietzsche's earlier thinking on that subject, we would naturally take such a title to imply a central concern with tragedy and its demise, but it is certainly significant that the word "tragedy" is not itself part of the title.
Nietzsche, it seems, was at a transitional stage.
He had not yet finally committed himself to subordinating all his other interests to tragedy, but was still toying with ideas of a wider scope.
The book, as we gather from a plan in his notebooks of the same period, was to deal with four large areas: ethics; aesthetics; religion and mythology; and politics, law and education.
Of the forty-odd subheadings in the plan only two point explicitly towards drama, "Socratism in tragedy" (under "aesthetics" ) and "The tragedians and the state" (under "politics…" ), although in the retrospective light of BT a considerable number of the others can be seen as bearing specifically on the tragic ethos: for instance, "music and poetry" , "Aristotle's aesthetic" , "ecstatic art in Greece" , "Dionysus and  Apollo" .
Nevertheless, the plan is too wide for a tragedy-centred book even on Nietzsche's terms, and, as such, it is certainly a piece of evidence in favour of his sister's postulate of a full-scale book about Greece.
The width of the Greek material can be gathered from the presence of such diverse names as Plato, Homer, Alcibiades, Herodotus and the Stoics.
On the other hand, even in this plan the book was not to be simply "about Greece" .
For one thing, there were some headings of a still wider generality: for instance, "Art in the service of the will" , where the orientation towards Schopenhauer points, if not away from Greece, at least past Greece; and in a separate note the whole plan was subtitled, without reference to Greece, "A contribution to the philosophy of history" .
There were also one or two indications of expressly non-classical matters, including allusions to the "Jewish-Christian world" .
But in any case, bare titles give us no indication of the strength of their author's commitment to them.
If we suppose that Nietzsche did feel committed to the plan's extra-tragic Greek aspects (ethics, politics and the rest), we must make that supposition without much in the way of supporting evidence.
The notebooks show that Nietzsche was prepared to rethink the precise shape of the book well into 1871, but almost all of the numerous plans there — including some which appear to be earlier than "Socrates and Instinct" — point to a book centrally concerned with tragedy and recognizably related to BT.
So too do most of his other notes and jottings and — more important — most of the substantial pieces of work that he wrote during this period.
The chief exception is a group of extended fragments generally known under the title "The Greek State" and ascribed to early 1871, which correspond roughly to some of the "political" sections of the "Socrates and Instinct" plan.
Here at last, it may be, Nietzsche shows a serious interest.
But these fragments stand alone.
It is surely a powerful confirmation of his underlying concern with tragedy throughout the whole of 1871 that in this period we find, again and again, lengthy drafts and preliminary studies for one part or other of BT, but no other sizeable fragments ascribable to a "large" book "about Greece" and falling outside the actual book's eventual range.
There are some pieces — the most notable is usually known as "On music and words" — which were apparently meant for the book and later rejected, but which fall within the scope of BT, and so have no bearing on the question.
The same goes for Nietzsche's very limited work on such topics as his "Homer's Contest" , apparently begun in 1871 and quite unrelated to the material of BT, but arising out of his earlier philological studies.
In the light of our discussion, it comes as no surprise to find another, abbreviated plan for "Socrates and Instinct" with a question mark against the heading "politics" which, of all the main headings, would seem the furthest  removed from Greek drama.
But whatever the real significance of the plan's extra-dramatic aspects, they hardly square with any talk of a "scholar's conscience" .
Here, as elsewhere, heterodoxy was built into the whole conception, as Nietzsche intimated in the letter to Rohde: "I'm afraid it won't look philological; but who can go against his own nature?" 
During the spring and summer of 1870, Nietzsche rethought his ideas on tragedy.
The results are preserved in some notes for a course of undergraduate lectures on Sophocles' Oedipus Rex and an essay called "The Dionysiac Philosophy" , in both of which Greek tragedy is the primary object of attention.
Here, then, are two more of the group of "preliminary studies" from which BT was to emerge; and indeed a letter to Wagner later that year refers to "The Dionysiac Philosophy" , in precisely such terms, as a Vorstudium, Whatever remains of the course on Oedipus Rex itself is as yet unpublished.
All that we have available is the notes for the first part of the introduction, written, presumably, in the spring, and consisting of a highly condensed discussion of Greek tragedy and its development.
The material is more extensive than that of the two earlier lectures, but the general orientation much the same.
In particular, Nietzsche lays stress on tragedy's origin, its musical element and its chorus, and devotes a separate section to the topic of "classical tragedy and opera" , which, among other details, briefly names Wagner as a successful instance of the redevelopment of classical tragic norms.
There is also, unheralded and essentially unexplained, a first public appearance of Nietzsche's new antithesis.
Early on, contrasting Greek lyric and epic poetry, he notes: "Lyric, from which Greek tragedy developed, was Dionysiac, not Apolline.
This distinction of style holds good for the whole of Greek art…"
From now on, Nietzsche's antithesis was to figure prominently in all the studies leading up to BT.
The next of them, "The Dionysiac Philosophy" , was largely devoted to it.
This essay was a theoretical account of Apollo and Dionysus in their various guises: as deities within Greek religion; as expressions of opposing attitudes to, or philosophies of life; and as artistic forces in Greece and elsewhere.
Under the last heading, music and lyric poetry were characterized as Dionysiac, sculpture and epic as Apolline, and tragedy as a rare fusion of the two.
(Lessing, we recall, had made his contrast between poetry and plastic art: Nietzsche had now, in his own words, "got beyond Lessing's Laocoon" .)
In calling "The Dionysiac Philosophy" a preliminary study, Nietzsche did not say preliminary to what, but in the light of the essay's range, the end product as envisaged could hardly be anything very different from B T as it in fact emerged.
In his preface to the book, written at the close of 1871, he signified, albeit in flamboyantly veiled language, that this  essay was indeed the effective starting point.
We may say, then, that by the summer of 1870 he was committed to a book centred on, and organized with reference to, Greek tragedy — although its exact scope still remained to be determined.
In August 1870 Nietzsche's work was brought to a temporary halt by the Franco-Prussian war, which had begun in July.
On moving to Switzerland, he had forfeited his German citizenship and was therefore ineligible for active service, but an exception was made for him, and as a German patriot he was allowed to volunteer in the capacity of medical orderly.
His service was itself cut short by illness.
He contracted severe dysentery and diphtheria and after a partial recovery returned to Basle in October.
The recovery was to remain partial: his permanent ill-health dates from this time.
The experience of war and its suffering affected Nietzsche deeply.
In August, near Worth, he sent his mother "a memoir of the horribly devastated battlefield, scattered all over with countless mournful remains and reeking with dead bodies" and in December he wrote to a friend: "if one is to avoid losing all courage, one must not think of these frightful things any more" It is apparent how far removed this mood was from any chauvinistic or militaristic fervour — nor would we particularly expect any such fervour (despite long established misconceptions about Nietzsche's attitudes) from one whose ideas of German nationhood were moulded so largely by the cultural preoccupations of a Hölderlin or a Schopenhauer.
In fact, the war gave him a new sombreness of attitude to match his stark experience of the "essential problems of life" ; and inevitably this sombreness communicated itself to his continued thinking about the problems of tragedy.
 "Before the walls of Metz, in cold September nights, while on duty as medical orderly, I thought through these problems." 
His feelings reached their bitter climax a few months later, when the war was over and the defeated French were in the throes of the Commune rising.
The Tuileries were destroyed by fire and it was rumoured that the Louvre had been burned down as well.
Nietzsche wrote: "When I heard of the fires in Paris, I felt annihilated for some days and was overwhelmed by fears and doubts; the whole academic (wissenschaftlich), philosophical, artistic world seemed an absurdity, if a single day could wipe out the most glorious works of art, even whole periods of art; I clung with earnest conviction to the metaphysical value of art, which cannot exist for the sake of poor human beings, but has higher missions to fulfil." 
His feelings thus transcended any straightforward patriotism.
With his high cultural ideals he had, in any case, strong and growing suspicions about the worth of a Germany united under Prussian domination and dedicated to  narrow military and materialistic goals.
Set against these were what he took to be the essential strengths and cultural possibilities of the German spirit, which in recent generations — and most clearly in the age of Goethe — had been partially realized and whose full realization was an ever-present dream.
His letters of 1871 are scattered with remarks pointing up the contrast: on the one side "our German mission" and "old Germanic health" , on the other "that fatal anti-cultural Prussia" and "our whole threadbare culture" .
His hopes for Germany and its culture were, of course, vested most particularly in Wagner, whose Bayreuth ideal of a spiritual centre for German culture was something he could support unreservedly.
It was, therefore, extremely relevant to him that Wagner had a less complicated view of the age they lived in and found it possible to regard the rise of the new Reich as the outward expression of, precisely, Germanic health and strength.
And under the Master's spell, Nietzsche too was able to ease himself out of his suspicions into something more like Wagner's optimism.
To Wagner, therefore, he could write in a different tone: "I prefer not to say a word about the German victories: these are the letters of fire on the wall, intelligible to all peoples." 
Perhaps the war might, after all, have some deep artistic meaning or goal.
In Wagner himself, at all events, he continued to see only the image that Wagner wished to project: an "idealistic cast of mind" , an "incredible seriousness and German depth" in his view of life and art, an epitome of "our German mission" in every way.
Years before, Nietzsche had written: "the past is dearer to me than the present; but I believe in a better future" .
With Wagner in mind he could say it now.
The sobering experience of war, which now determined Nietzsche's general outlook, affected his thoughts about the tragic spirit that were to be embodied in the coming book.
It also precipitated changes of plan regarding the book's scope.
When first setting out for Basle, he had expressed the conviction that his grasp of life's "true and essential problems" was already strong enough to meet the threat to his "philosophic sense" posed by academic specialization.
The scholar's separation of the Greek experience from the modern world had always seemed a frivolity; now it was intolerable.
His "philosophic sense" required to be given a freer play and a more adequate expression.
Accordingly, in the autumn of 1870, under the new title "Tragedy and the Freethinkers" , he drew up the first main plan whose scope, in both space and time, went substantially beyond Greece.
While still centred on Greek tragedy and associated topics, the plan began and ended with a wide range of other subjects from Buddhism to modern culture and education, from Schiller and Goethe and their drama to the generalities of "art" , "religion" and "science" ; the Greek items went from "Dionysus and Apollo" to "Plato against art" , via the central "music and drama" The plan contained no Greek items unrelated to tragedy, or the birth and death of tragedy, which makes it the earliest of Nietzsche's plans to define the scope of the Greek material as eventually realized in BT.
Many of the other subjects, Buddhism and the rest, were also there to stay — although BT was to deal with them in extremely summary or allusive form.
Nietzsche's capacity to stick to a plan, however, was no greater than before, and at or towards the end of the year he produced a spate of alternatives.
Some were simply modified versions of "Tragedy and the Freethinkers" .
Some involved quite new titles: "Tragic Man" , "Greek Serenity" , "Tragedy and Greek Serenity" , "Greek Serenity" was itself the title for a series of plans — here too Nietzsche kept chopping and changing — and despite the presence of "Greece" and the absence of "tragedy" in the title, the book was still, unmistakably, a "comparative" tragedy book in all its versions.
In the most detailed of these, the plan had six main sections, beginning with "tragic thought" and ending with "science and art" and "metaphysics of art" , The unqualified generality of these two headings confirms Nietzsche's insistence on looking beyond Greece, even if specifically non-Greek items, like those on Buddhism and Goethe in the previous plan, were no longer explicit.
A greater concentration on Greece, however, was envisaged in the remaining parts, whose headings were "the tragic masks" (meaning, among other things, tragic characters), "the death of tragedy" , and "the means used by the Hellenic will to achieve its goal, the genius" .
That last heading is of special interest.
Concealed beneath the opaque wording about the "Hellenic will" was another attempt — as it proved, Nietzsche's last attempt — to discuss some of the socio-political aspects of the Greek world as part of his first book.
The heading was subdivided into eight separate sections on such subjects as slavery, women, Plato's ideal state and the mysteries, and Nietzsche was sufficiently interested in it to produce a draft version for the bulk of the sequence.
The result was the fragments, four in number, to which the name "The Greek State" has traditionally been given: that name was actually attached to one of the eight sections themselves.
In these four passages Nietzsche's sister saw a prime piece of evidence for her brother's "real" intention to write a big book about Greece rather than a short one about tragedy.
That idea can be dismissed out of hand.
The eight sections deal only with a small fraction of what a "big book about Greece" must have entailed, and the portions written (covering most of those sections) would add only about one fifth to the eventual modest length of B T. Furthermore, Nietzsche very soon decided that these particular sections of the book did not belong with the rest.
One of the "Greek  Serenity" plans attempts to subsume them under "tragedy itself" ; a memorandum elsewhere suggests rewriting them; another of the plans seems to omit them altogether.
And if we look at the actual fragments, it is all too clear that Nietzsche was right.
A few sequences were eventually used in BT in modified or abbreviated form.
The rest is fundamentally alien both to BT as we have it and to any of its earlier versions, even the version implicit in the extended "Greek Serenity" plan to which it relates.
As far as B T itself is concerned, the discrepancies are not simply those of subject: the fragments are strangely different from the book in attitude, in idiom and, not least, in quality.
All in all, it is in no way surprising that Nietzsche should have put them to one side soon after writing them at the turn of the year.
From the terms in which he subsequently refers to the longest of the fragments, we can confirm that "The Greek State" represents a short-lived attempt to widen the scope of a book whose central concern with tragedy was already determined.
Whatever their other fluctuations, Nietzsche's latest plans had one thing in common: their lists of topics, however long or diverse, contained no explicit reference to Wagner.
And although it is true that Wagner could, if required, have figured under various of their headings, it seems that the decision to lay any emphasis on the relevance of Wagner's work to his own ideas represented a further and final development.
This step came soon enough.
Something approaching a personal crisis had been building up since Nietzsche's return from the unforgettable distress of war.
If the contemporary world as a whole seemed to be more flawed than ever, academic life, in particular, was irredeemably so.
We have already quoted part of the letter to Rohde, written in December, which gives the best testimony to Nietzsche's state of mind: "Let us drag on in this university existence for a few more years…
A completely radical institution for truth is not possible here…
Afterwards we can become real teachers…by becoming not only wiser, but also better human beings…
So one day…we shall create a new Greek academy…
You will know of Wagner's Bayreuth plan.
I have been quietly considering if we too should not break with philology as practised till now and its educational perspective.
I am preparing a big adhortatio for everyone who has not yet been utterly suffocated and swallowed up by the present age."
Only three days earlier, however, he had written to another correspondent in less drastic tones: "give me a few more years and you should sense a new influence on classical studies" .
The note of personal ambition here is reminiscent of that zeal which the young professor-elect had felt, among other feelings, on setting out for Basle.
His aspiration then had been to inject a "Schopenhauerian seriousness" into his subject, and the ideal had never been  abandoned.
But alongside it he felt a deep disillusion with the actuality that confronted him, and a growing restlessness.
With the new year, his restless feelings were given, for the time being, a specific object to focus on: an opportunity of a new kind presented itself and he espoused it eagerly.
The chair of philosophy at Basle became vacant and in January 1871 he applied for it.
In a remarkable letter of application, he set out his reasons in detail.
He began with his poor health.
This, he had eventually decided, was caused by the diversity of his present academic work, which was especially taxing in that one of his university duties was a daily round of language-teaching at the local high school, the Pädagogium.
These commitments were constantly distracting him from what he called "my real, philosophical task, to which, if necessary, I must sacrifice my career" .
Elliptically relating this "philosophical task" to academic philosophy (including the history of philosophy), he declared himself to be better qualified for a philosophical chair than a purely philological one.
His dominant inclination (he wrote) had always been towards philosophy, "and even in my philological studies I have been most attracted by those topics which seemed important for the history of philosophy or for ethical and aesthetic problems" .
His "solid training in classical philology" was surely an asset: it was important to "stimulate among the students an interest in the careful interpretation of Aristotle and Plato" .
He had indeed already announced two forthcoming lecture courses on ancient philosophy (on the Presocratics and on Plato) and could also point to work he had published in this field (on Diogenes Laertius).
Of modern philosophers he had studied Kant and Schopenhauer "with particular interest" .
For his own successor he suggested Rohde, "the ablest of all the younger philologists I have known" , and with a disarming naivety he added: "I cannot express how profoundly my life here in Basle would be alleviated by the presence of my best friend." 
As far as the stress on his philosophical bent is concerned, we can certainly grant (and not only with hindsight) that Nietzsche was substantially correct.
Diogenes Laertius was not the only ancient philosopher he had worked on in his later Leipzig days: he had also grappled with the Aristotelian corpus and, especially, with the Presocratic, Democritus.
And as regards modern philosophy, in 1868, before the summons to Basle, he had actually considered writing his doctoral dissertation on Kant, although he subsequently rejected the subject as unsuitable.
The electors to the philosophy chair might also recall, as symptomatic of his inclinations, that striking formula from his inaugural lecture: "all philological activity should be embraced and defined by a philosophical outlook" .
And, again, they might call to mind a passage from Ritschl's eulogistic reference that had made Nietzsche's earlier  appointment possible: "His studies so far have been weighted towards the history of Greek literature…with special emphasis, it seems to me, on the history of Greek philosophy.
But I have not the least doubt that, if confronted by a practical demand, with his great gifts he will work in other fields with complete success."
On the other hand, it should be borne in mind that for all his adolescent encyclopaedic zeal and his years of cultural enthusiasms, his familiarity with European culture was largely restricted to two areas: classical antiquity and the modern period, especially the previous hundred years.
This was as true in philosophy as elsewhere.
Schopenhauer and, to a lesser extent, Kant he might claim to know, but his knowledge of any pre-Kantian, post-classical, philosophy — nearly two millennia of European thought — was at this time quite superficial.
Nietzsche's letter to the authorities at Basle included one cryptic sentence which we have still to mention: "I shall be able, soon enough, to show publicly my competence for an appointment in philosophy." 
The meaning emerges from another letter to Rohde, written some weeks later, at the end of March.
The crucial appointment had not, to his knowledge, been decided yet and was still in the forefront of his thoughts.
The passage in question, revealing on various counts, deserves to be quoted at length: "I have no idea how the business is coming on…
I must establish my philosophical credentials a bit; to that end I have finished, except for a few touches, a short work, "The Origin and End of Tragedy" (Ursprung und Ziel der Tragödie)…
I live in reckless estrangement from philology — a worse alienation is unimaginable…
So gradually I am claiming my philosophical estate and already believe in myself; it wouldn't even surprise me if I turned into a poet.
I have no compass to tell me what I am destined for; and yet, when I look back, everything seems to fit as well together as if I'd been following a benevolent daimon all along…
What a feeling to see your own world, a pretty ball, growing round and full before your eyes!
Now I see a part of some new metaphysics growing, now a new aesthetic…
Everything I learn now finds its proper place in some corner of whatever's already there.
And I feel the growth of this world of mine most of all when I consider, not coolly but calmly, all the so-called "world-history" of the last ten months."
The book, then, was once again in progress, under a new title, "and evidently progressing in a spirit that might be called" philosophical ", and specifically" metaphysical "or" aesthetic ", and perhaps even" poetic"; but not philological.
It was nearing completion, and its completion embodied the hope of that now familiar wholeness so precious to its author: everything seemed to fit together, all experience could at last be integrated.
One important corollary of this new integration Nietzsche had not  mentioned in his letter to Rohde.
The book was at last to deal specifically with Wagner.
The new "philosophical" perspective meant that Nietzsche could feel free to give all his enthusiasms, classical and non-classical, their due public expression.
Subtitled "an aesthetic essay" , the work was to begin with a preface to Wagner and, after discussion of the birth and death of Dionysiac art in Greece, to end (apparently) with its rebirth in Wagner's music.
The aim of the book was set out in the preface (which, unlike many items in these plans, was actually written)."
The object, Nietzsche explained, was to find appropriate terms for his insight into the "weighty problem" of tragedy's origin and goal.
Greek tragedy belied the prevalent notion of a Hellas grounded in serene optimism: its lesson was that a beautiful surface may conceal terrible depths.
To appreciate this was to see the problem as ultimately a problem of living, and as uniquely relevant to a recently unified and politically ascendant Germany.
For Germany now had the chance to bring her new strength of purpose to bear against her real enemy — at which point Nietzsche introduced a reinterpretation of politics in cultural and philosophical terms which was to become characteristic of his mature thinking: the "real enemy" was modern superficiality, and Germany's chance was to destroy it by relearning "tragic cognition" from the Greeks.
In this way she might foster a new creative generation and a "German rebirth of the Hellenic world" .
WAGNER AND THE CONCLUDING PHASE
In established classical-scholarly terms, Nietzsche's heterodoxy was now complete, in exact proportion to his commitment to Wagner.
Without question the period between autumn 1870 and the close of 1871 was the high point of Wagner's direct influence on him, as can almost be demonstrated without reference to BT at all.
There was, for instance, a project for a "music drama" that Nietzsche began in the autumn of 1870, and there was a new and strong Wagnerian flavour in his musical compositions of 1871: the explicit emphasis on Wagner in the developing book is in no way an isolated phenomenon.
At the same time it needs to be stressed that despite his close relations with Wagner the man and his reverence for Wagner the artist, Nietzsche's first-hand acquaintance with his idol's artistic achievements was in one important respect limited: experience of Wagnerian music drama in its proper theatrical setting was largely denied him.
He had access to scores and opportunities of hearing orchestral excerpts in concert, but at the time of the publication of BT the only Wagnerian work he had seen performed remained Meistersinger.
"…
I have finished, except for a few touches, a short work, "The Origin  and End of Tragedy" …
"
Those words, just quoted, were written at the end of March, not from Basle, but from Lugano, and it was in Lugano that the new plans for the book had been translated into this continuous draft.
Nietzsche's health had not improved, and in February he had left Basle for two months of convalescence.
He returned to Basle in April to find the hopes he had left there come to nothing: he was not to have a philosophy chair (nor Rohde his own chair), and so he was obliged to remain, at least nominally, a philologist.
Precisely what effect the disappointment had on Nietzsche himself and the book in progress is not clear.
For himself, he may well have decided that his cavils against classical philology applied equally to academe in general, so that , wounded pride apart, he was hardly worse off than before.
As for the book, there was at least no drastic change of plan, but rather a continuation of work already done: "the short work" was surely not all that "finished" by the end of March.
At the end of April, however, it was near enough to completion for Nietzsche, at last, to send the first part of the manuscript to a publisher, Engelmann, in Leipzig.
In his covering letter he mentioned yet another title and gave the Wagnerian aspect an unexpected prominence: "I have written a pamphlet…which is to have the title" Music and Tragedy", and I am sending you the beginning of it in manuscript.
As you will see, I am attempting to explain Greek tragedy in a completely novel way, in that for the time being I disregard all philological approaches to the question and keep only the aesthetic problem in view.
The real task, however, is to throw light on Richard Wagner, the extraordinary enigma of our age, in his relation to Greek tragedy.
I think I can claim that the whole last part is bound to make an impact on our musical public; at least, if I compare it with what has been said recently on the same problem by Hanslick and others…
I cannot help believing that the most discerning public must be interested in this work.
In order to make myself comprehensible to them, I have taken particular pains with the style and clarity of the exposition…"
In speaking of Wagner as an "enigma" , Nietzsche was not resorting to empty  rhetoric .
 "Hanslick and others" had indeed found it difficult to place Wagner's achievements, and furthermore Wagner's own explicit interpretation of his ideal had in recent years been shifting in an enigmatic way that impelled his articulate young admirer to offer his own clarification: here was one of those "aesthetic problems" which had been occupying his mind for some time.
The task was not simply to come to terms with Wagner's music drama, but to reconcile his theory of it with his actual practice.
Intermittently throughout his long career, Wagner attempted to formulate his aspirations in prose.
The first phase of his theorizing was represented by a group of essays, including the celebrated Opera and Drama, that were written  as far back as 1849–51, before much of his most distinctive music was yet composed.
It was in these essays that he pronounced Attic tragedy, and especially the tragedy of Aeschylus, to be the complete form of art, the original Gesamtkunstwerk whose spirit must be recreated in a German context.
Unhampered by his lack of scholarly acquaintance with Aeschylus, or indeed any Greek author, he saw himself (it was evident) as the German Aeschylus who could reinterpret in tragic poetry and music the ancient gods, heroes and heroic legends that comprised the national mythology.
(We can see how the new Aeschylean note that Nietzsche had been sounding since his lectures of 1870 was, like much else, in harmony with Wagner's aspiration.)
But Aeschylus, however close to the Wagnerian ideal, was no more than a spiritual ancestor.
The immediate source of inspiration was much more modern — it was Beethoven.
Ignoring his considerable debt to Meyerbeer and the Parisian grand opera without which his early works, especially Rienzi (1838–40), would have been inconceivable, Wagner claimed descent from Beethoven and, in particular, the Choral Symphony.
For it was there that Beethoven had enhanced the German grandeur of his music with the words of Schiller's Ode to Joy and thus took the first step towards reintegrating poetry and music as equal partners in a new and sublime unity.
This, for Wagner, was the goal, and a goal which he, as supreme poet-composer, was destined to reach: a perfect harmony between word and music, with music as emotional expression of the verbal line and verse as regulating element in the composite whole.
Such was Wagner's first position and it satisfied him, if not his critics, for a decade.
What eventually brought him to reconsider his theory was not the critics' doubts.
If for instance, Hanslick found it impossible to take his libretti seriously as poetry, so much the worse for Hanslick.
The impetus came partly from a growing interest in Schopenhauer's theory of music, and partly from an uncomfortable sense that his own artistic practice was diverging further and further from the theoretical postulates of which it was supposed to be the realization.
On both counts it was, above all, the status of the word that was brought into question — and thereby the Gesamtkunst ideal as whole.
In Das Rheingold, finished in 1854, and, up to a point, in Die Walküre, begun in the same year, Wagner came as near as he was ever to come to giving his theories practical effect.
The work that really belied the ideal was Tristan und Isolde.
Finished eight years after Opera and Drama in 1859 (though not performed until 1865), Tristan was the most impressive of his works up to that time, and yet one in which the music, irrespective of its dramatic significance, dominated the word utterly.
Impassioned sequences in which the "poetry" consisted of nothing more than strings of synonyms were merely the extreme example of a tendency that was apparent throughout the work.
Wagner's relationship with Schopenhauer was a curious one.
Paradoxically, it dates from the very period in which Tristan was conceived; in fact the Tristan drama itself was planned and its words written under Schopenhauerian influence — but influence of an ethical, rather than an aesthetic, kind.
 "Apart from making slow progress with my music" , Wagner wrote to his future father-in-law, Franz Liszt, in 1854,"my sole concern recently is a man who has come like a gift from heaven…into my solitude.
This is Arthur Schopenhauer, the greatest philosopher since Kant…
The German academics very prudently ignored him for forty years; but lately, to the disgrace of Germany, he has been discovered by an English critic.
All the Hegels etc. are charlatans beside him.
His central idea, the ultimate negation of the will to live,…(offers) the only salvation possible "— and turning to his own artistic activities, present and prospective, he added," I have in my head Tristan und Isolde…; with the "black flag" that flutters at the end of it I shall shroud myself to die."
Wagner, that is, contrived to regard his hymn to love and love's fulfilment in death as an enactment of Schopenhauerian renunciation, and even sent the elderly philosopher a copy of the libretto, which was finished in 1857.
On the aesthetic side, the dominance of the musical element in Tristan did, as it happens, bring Wagner's art somewhat into line with Schopenhauer's theories, although, as we have already pointed out, the sensuous-emotional appeal of Wagnerian music, at its most extreme in Tristan, directly flouted the philosopher's denial of all worldly values.
But in any case, Schopenhauer's terms of reference were such that the poet-composer could never properly comply with them, for the simple reason that they reduced the role of the word in a musical context to nothing more than a necessary evil.
For Schopenhauer, valuable as all the arts were, music was the art which uniquely penetrated the depths of metaphysical reality and expressed the essence of that reality, the will, directly: "the composer reveals the innermost nature of the world and expresses the deepest wisdom in a language which his rational faculty does not understand" , Words, on the other hand, like the instruments of reason that they are, could only intrude from the secondary world of physical phenomena, with which true music was not concerned.
Folk-song was a special case: here words were said to aspire to the condition of music.
But in general, and especially at the highest creative level, words were redundant.
It is not entirely surprising that Wagner's gift of the Tristan poem elicited no response.
It seems clear that Wagner perceived the lack of congruence between his own theory and Schopenhauer's as uncomfortably as the gulf between his own theory and practice.
Being the child of a system-ridden age, he must have a theory.
Being vain, however, and temperamentally unable to reject outright any of his earlier pronouncements, he could not admit, to the world  or to himself the contradictions in which Schopenhauer involved him.
Instead, he groped towards some formula into which he might recast his earlier aesthetic while obscuring the reasons for doing so: a task made easier by his tortuous prose style.
The first fruit of this endeavour was Music of the Future (Zukunftsmusik).
In this treatise, written a year after the completion of Tristan and, as it happened, in the month of Schopenhauer's death (September 1860), he continued to represent music drama as a harmonious union of music and poetry, but the equal status of the two had gone.
The function of music now was to express pure feeling on an ideal, unverbalizable, metaphysical level (Schopenhauer's influence is plain); the task of the poetic word was to reinterpret that "feeling" in terms of "thought" and so help mediate the metaphysical world to an earth-bound, concept-bound audience.
In the next decade Wagner complicated his position by returning, in Meistersinger, to the tradition of grand opera with which his career had begun, and, incongruously enough, by adding further Schopenhauerian elements to his theory.
On State and Religion (1864), a political treatise with forays into aesthetics, showed a new preoccupation with creative illusion and dream images, Wahn and Wahngebilde, clearly visible also in Meistersinger (the victorious Prize Song itself arises from a dream) and, at least in part, derived from Schopenhauer's Parerga and Paralipomena (1864–5).
These notions recur in Wagner's essay Beethoven, a thickly and explicitly Schopenhauerian mixture of ideas, written in late 1870, and a companion piece, The Destiny of Opera, written in early 1871.
By this time, however, Wagner and Nietzsche had explored areas of mutual interest in many conversations and had begun to exercise a reciprocal influence on each other 's thinking.
The two essays, accordingly, reveal Wagner's influence on Nietzsche and equally his own debt to him — one unmistakable sign of this being a casual allusion in The Destiny of Opera to the Apolline-Dionysiac polarity as to a pre-existing conceptual entity.
Compared with its earlier forms, Wagner's theory had gained in complexity, but not, perhaps, in perspicuity, from its new influences.
Poetry, it appeared from Beethoven, was now a very junior partner to music ( "the union of music and poetry must always end in…a subordination of the latter" ) and served chiefly to stimulate the composer's creative process.
The two elements that mattered were the music and the drama (meaning the stage action, which Wagner, unlike Schopenhauer, now saw as a thing independent of words).
The relation between these two major elements was far from clear.
Wagner differentiated them by associating drama with visionary illusion and music with dreams, but also made an attempt at establishing parity between them by pronouncing drama "the visible counterpart of music" and by stressing the equal greatness of Beethoven's music and Shakespearean drama.
If the reader was nevertheless left with the feeling that music counted for most, it was partly because the bulk of the long treatise was in fact about music and nothing else.
The Destiny of Opera discussed the special role of the performers in the ideal work and offered some further thoughts concerning the three elements, but without modifying their relative status.
The supremacy of music was not challenged.
One might be forgiven the thought that Wagner's theoretical position had at this point compounded too many incongruities to make criticism necessary.
The theory, in all its latest elusiveness, might suit Tristan, more or less, but continued to stand in a highly problematic relation to Wagner's musical oeuvre as a whole — an oeuvre surely too varied for any useful all-embracing formula.
Meanwhile, the Schopenhauerian aspects of his theory contradicted his own earlier doctrines without in fact bringing them properly into line with Schopenhauer's aesthetic itself.
Few of Wagner's admirers can have been satisfied.
Nietzsche, in particular, was not — but, unlike most of Wagner's admirers, he was willing to take the master's prose voice sufficiently seriously to contemplate positive action on its behalf.
Since his first meeting with Wagner in 1868 he had known of the latter's conviction that Schopenhauer was "the only philosopher who had understood the essence of music" .
On Nietzsche's return from the war in late 1870, Wagner sent him a copy of Beethoven.
Nietzsche's letter of acknowledgement evinced unqualified loyalty, but did so without one word of unqualified praise for Wagner's latest effort.
He stressed first how important it had been to him to get to know Wagner's philosophy of music and that his own "Dionysiac Philosophy" reflected that debt.
With awe he noted the remoteness of Wagner's new range of thought, where everything was surprising and astonishing.
 "But" , he added, "I am afraid that to the aestheticians of these days you will seem like a sleepwalker, whom it is inadvisable, not to say dangerous, and, above all, impossible to follow." 
There was a "deep harmony" between Wagner's thinking and Schopenhauer's, but even experts in Schopenhauerian philosophy would mostly be incapable of grasping the connection either intellectually or emotionally.
 "I would think that to follow your thought in this instance is only possible for one to whom the message of Tristan, in particular, has been revealed." 
From the tone of these comments it is easy to see that, for Nietzsche, Wagner's work was still a problem in urgent need of a solution."
It was, in fact, "the enigma" on which, he now assured the publisher Engelmann, his book might shed new light.
It is not so easy to gauge what his emphasis on the book's Wagnerian aspect really implied.
We might infer simply that  Nietzsche supposed this aspect was the most likely to interest the general public.
Did he intend to give the impression that it was the central aspect?
Such a characterization would certainly not fit B T as we have it, nor any of the various plans leading up to it.
It is apparent, however, that at the "Music and Tragedy" stage of his thinking, Nietzsche did envisage a larger role for specifically Wagnerian matter than eventually materialized."
It will have been in this connection that he wrote the discarded pieces "On music and words" , which largely rework part "of" The Dionysiac Philosophy "of the previous year, but whose copious references to Schopenhauer, opera and Beethoven's Choral Symphony relate directly to one side of the Wagner problem, though without any explicit stress on that fact." 
The Schopenhauerian character of these fragments is striking and serves, incidentally, to align them with BT.
In the work on tragedy done before Wagner's Beethoven Schopenhauer's influence is less evident.
We may infer that Nietzsche, although now somewhat distanced from the detail of Schopenhauer's doctrines, had shortened the distance under the stimulus of Wagner's interest in the philosophy of music.
When it comes to the appraisal of new writing, publishers are generally more cautious than authors, and Engelmann, apparently unmoved by Nietzsche's self-confidence, deferred a decision.
In June, with understandable disappointment, Nietzsche withdrew the manuscript"and conceived the idea of dismembering the new whole and having the pieces published separately as pamphlets or articles.
The only fruit of this plan, however, was the private publication in that month of the book's central portion under the title "Socrates and Greek Tragedy" ; "and it is clear that Nietzsche continued to regard the book as one continuous work." 
In October he took the manuscript to Wagner's publisher, E. W. Fritzsch.
The book had now at last acquired its final title, The Birth of Tragedy, or in full, with qualifying subtitle, The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music (Die Geburt der Tragödie aus dem Geiste der Musik) and on 16 November, under this title, it was accepted."
The manuscript, however, was not entirely ready for publication,"and during the next few weeks Nietzsche submitted it to a final revision.
The book's central part, represented by "Socrates and Greek Tragedy" , had already been well worked and, apart from some reordering, was left virtually as it was; the rest required more attention, but on 12 December he was able to send off the final portions of the manuscript, including a new, short, preface to Wagner."
This introductory piece was little more than an extremely abbreviated version of the February preface.
The relation of BT itself to its earlier versions was more complicated.
The book comprised twenty-five sections of varying lengths.
 "Socrates and Greek-Tragedy" was the immediate source of the central part (8-is), but was more a final than a preliminary  version.
Looking further back, we can see the book as very largely a composite of earlier extended drafts.
The beginning (1–10) is substantially based on the essay of summer 1870, "The Dionysiac Philosophy" , although one sequence (5–6 is more closely related to the lectures on Sophocles' Oedipus Rex (also from 1870) and the rejected fragments "On music and words" .
The next portion (11–14) can be traced directly to the lecture "Socrates and Tragedy" (February 1870), but the rest of the book (15–25) is a less tidy amalgam.
Apart from a few parts which seem to lack any antecedents, it derives variously, but less closely, from the compositions just mentioned, from the lecture on "Greek Music Drama" January 1870), from the fragments on "The Greek State" and, in a few places, from the earlier preface to Wagner.
Less than a month separates the publisher's acceptance of the book and Nietzsche's completion of the revision; and during part of this time he was busy preparing lectures on Plato and, unexpectedly enough, on Latin epigraphy."
However, Nietzsche's first editors (1895), then his sister (1897), and subsequently the world at large have asserted that the scale of this last revision was substantial and, specifically-that of the book's eventual twenty-five sections, he added at this time the final six (20–25), which are partly (though not, as is often said, largely) concerned with Wagner."
The point is of some importance: it would seem to follow that the end of the book was a hasty afterthought.
It is necessary, therefore, to point out that there does not seem to be any decisive evidence in favour of the assertion.
We would do better to accept that we cannot say precisely how much of the book dates from this last stage, although there were, no doubt, changes of various kinds, including deletions.
It is worth stressing once more that most consequential points or passages in BT are prefigured, sometimes loosely, sometimes almost verbatim, in one or other of the preliminary versions of 1870 and the extended fragments of 1871.
This means that most of BT is a rewriting and as such embodies considered judgements not "hasty afterthoughts" .
And for the bulk of the last six sections, the general pattern of correspondence (in this case, loose correspondence) to earlier versions is unchanged.
The chief exceptions seem to be the final two sections (24–5), which in large part reformulate points already made, and a page-long discussion (21) of the relation between the drama and the music in Tristan, which, apart from passing references, is actually the only discussion of any Wagnerian work in BT.
It is not hard to imagine Nietzsche adding passages of this modest length in the final weeks, especially if he had continued to work on the"whole last part of the book during the summer; any late additions would then have been based on that work.
Be that as it may, our main conclusion must be that the traditional claim about the last ( "Wagnerian" ) part is unsubstantiated; and such other evidence as we have does not give it much plausibility.
In discussing the "Wagnerian" aspect of the book, we should in any case remember that during the later part of 1871 Nietzsche actually reduced the extend of Wagner's presence in it, rather than increased it.
If some uncertainty surrounds the last stage of the book's genesis, we can at least say something about its author's state of mind on the eve of publication.
He went through a quick succession of very different feelings.
Now finally assured of a publisher and a book, he could forget his earlier disappointments and even indulge, briefly, in a degree of euphoria: he envisaged a spectacular success and had "the greatest confidence" that the book would have huge sales.
Within a few days, however, anxiety had set in and he was confiding in Rohde his fear that a book that crossed so many conventional demarcation lines might deter all his prospective specialist readers: "the philologists won't read it because of the music and the philology…" ; and regarding the classical readership in particular, Rohde would know "how offended the philologists are bound to be at anything not published by Teubner and without the paraphernalia of critical notes" .
After four more weeks, with the last amendments now seen to and the last portions of the manuscript finally delivered, his mood was more settled.
While still hoping for general public success, he anticipated some hostility, especially to the "Wagnerian" end of the book, but about the book's merits and its personal necessity he felt no doubts at all.
Among other things there is no sign of any late qualms about his reliance on the Apollo-Dionysus formula: as he had remarked to Rohde a few months earlier, "I really believe I can get a great deal out of the polarity." 
Shortly before Christmas and in the middle of correcting the proofs, he wrote to Rohde again: "The whole last part, which you do not know, will certainly astonish you; I have been very daring, and I can cry out to myself in an altogether enormous sense, animam salvavi [I have saved my soul]; for which reason I think of the book with great satisfaction and am not worried for it turns out to cause the greatest possible offence and in some quarters a" cry of outrage"greets its publication.
Moreover, I feel wonderfully assured in my musical perceptions and convinced of their rightness — thanks to what I experienced this week at Mannheim with Wagner."
This last remark referred to a Wager Society concert that had included, among other works, the preludes to Lohengrin and Meistersinger and the prelude and Liebestod of Tristan.
Nietzsche was more enthusiastic about Wagner's music than ever: "What are all other artistic memories and  experiences compared with this latest one!
I felt like a man whose presentiments have at last come true."
Appropriately enough, then, the last few days before the book's appearance were touched with the same rapture that had helped to prompt its creation.
 "Scholarship, art and philosophy" , Nietzsche had presciently written nearly two years earlier, "are now growing inside me so much that I'll be giving birth to centaurs one day." 
The centaur "in question, child of Nietzsche's yearning for wholeness, meeting-point of his diverse interests, and his" salvation"from philistine compartmentalism, made its due appearance in January 1872.
Rapturous as the circumstances of its conception may have been, the genesis as a whole could only, in retrospect, seem an extraordinarily painful business, as he intimated to Rohde shortly after the book was out: "No one has any idea how such a book comes into being: the trouble and torment it is to keep oneself as clear as this of other ideas pressing in from all sides; the courage needed to conceive of it and the honesty needed to carry it through; and above all, perhaps, my tremendous task vis-à-vis Wagner, which has certainly been the cause of many heavy clouds in my heart" the task of being independent even here, of taking up an, as it were, alienated stance."
Nevertheless, as he went on to say,"my friends at Tribschen assure me that, to their amazement, I have succeeded in this even where the problem is at its most extreme, with Tristan…
It is precisely on this point that I feel proud and happy and am convinced that my book will survive."
The argument of The Birth of Tragedy
The argument of BT is large, complicated, allusive and often elusive as well.
In this chapter we provide a detailed summary as a practical aid, to help the reader to see precisely what Nietzsche is saying.
The summary follows its original uniformly, section by section, except in the following ways:(i) Nietzsche frequently alludes, without explaining the allusions, to more or less well-known features of Greek tragedy or the Greek world; he gives virtually no dates for artists, thinkers, or events, ancient or modern; and he sometimes makes points that rest, clearly enough, on unstated presuppositions, but points that cannot readily be summarized without reconstructing each presupposition and making it fully explicit.
In all these cases we have supplied explanatory or factual material within square brackets:(We have also supplied headings and subheadings (Nietzsche provides none), likewise within square brackets.
(ii) Nietzsche sometimes alludes to a topic without explanation in one section, but adds the necessary explanatory matter in another (or in more than one other).
In such cases, we have transposed the explanatory matter out of its proper section to the main discussion that presupposes it, but have enclosed it inside pointed brackets: We have then indicated in the margin ad loc. from which section or sections such matter actually derives, using the symbol, so that(e.g.)(maths) means"this matter comes from.
(iii) Where necessary, we have provided footnotes, containing explanatory editorial comments.
However, editorial additions of all kinds are kept to a minimum.
In particular, it is not our business in this chapter to pass judgements on Nietzsche's suppositions, arguments or conclusions.
(iv) In many sections, Nietzsche's points are not presented in what one might take to be their natural order.
Within sections, therefore, we have reordered his material, without warning, in the interests of the argument.
(v) All unattributed quotations are from BT, but in this chapter and thereafter all quotations from the book follow the standard (1874) text."
Preface to Richard Wagner The aesthetic problem considered in this book is central to the hopes for Germany today.
Those who find it objectionable  that an aesthetic problem should be taken so seriously may be assured that art represents the highest task and the true metaphysical activity of this life: witness the illustrious pioneer on my path, to whom I dedicate this essay.
[1 THE BIRTH AND DEATH OF GREEK TRAGEDY]
[1–4 The Apolline and the Dionysiac]
All true art is either Apolline or Dionysiac or both.
The Apolline and the Dionysiac are to be thought of as antithetical artistic tendencies or impulses; and the nature of any art at any time varies according to which of the two is operative.
The names of the two impulses are derived from the Greek art deities, Apollo and Dionysus.
(Like all the Greek gods, these two have many differing spheres of activity and areas of special interest, but taken together they present a particular contrast.
Apollo is in various ways a god of higher civilization: he is, for instance, the god of medicine.
Dionysus, on the other hand, is a god of nature and natural fertility, associated with wine and "uncivilized" , orgiastic worship.
Some of his mythical exploits are equally remote from civilized life:)(among the events recounted are his dismemberment by primitive powers, the Titans, and subsequent rebirth).
The Apolline and the Dionysiac are the only genuine art impulses.
They often operate singly, the classic instances being sculpture, which is pure Apolline art, and music, which, <at least in its highest form>, is pure Dionysiac (<for Apolline music and music of a third, "inartistic" kind do exist as well>).
But there are also instances of the synthesis of the two tendencies; and the classic instance here is Greek tragedy.
Higher art is not the only sphere in which the Apolline and the Dionysiac are to be found.
They find expression also, on an elemental level, in dreams (Apolline) and intoxication (Dionysiac).
Dreams are, by their nature, imagistic.
They give us an immediate apprehension of form, albeit with a residual sense that the forms apprehended are illusory.
For the dreamer this illusion represents a deep and pleasurable necessity — which accounts for the well-known state of mind in which a dreamer can say, "It is a dream: I want to go on dreaming it." 
The dream seems to have one kind of reality and yet is felt, at the same time, to have another, deeper reality underlying it.
In this it is analogous to reality itself; that is, the ordinary individuated reality in which we, as individuals, live.
For that reality too may be reinterpreted philosophically as an illusion, a world of appearances, what Schopenhauer calls "the veil of maya" , interposed between ourselves and the ultimate reality — by which is meant the ground of being, the primordial oneness or unity of all individual things.
Apollo is the bright sun-god, the symbol of all brightness, all appearance, all plastic energies that express themselves in individual shapes.
The Apolline is the sphere of individuation, restraint, form, beauty, illusion.
Apollo is also the soothsaying god, <the god of the Delphic oracle>; but though Apolline images seem to offer higher truth, they are and remain mere appearance.
In a state of intoxication, an individual loses himself.
This is the basis of the Dionysiac experience: the collapse of individuation.
In its fuller forms this is an ecstatic experience with mystical implications, and an experience of supreme intensity: rapturous, but also terrifying.
Dionysiac emotions may be aroused directly, especially among unsophisticated peoples, by intoxicants and also by the approach of spring, with its promise of the rebirth of natural life and fertility.
In particular, they tend to find collective expression, as with the medieval dances of St John and St Vitus; the wild and orgiastic festivities of ancient near-Eastern religion, with their song and dance and sexual licence; and, in Greece, the choruses that sang and danced in the worship of the fertility god, Dionysus.
In his Dionysiac state a man feels that all barriers between himself and others are broken in favour of a rediscovered universal harmony.
Between himself and nature, too, all things are as one.
There is, in fact, no place for any distinctions, for anything that sets one thing off against any other thing: limits, forms, conventions, individuals.
In the first phase of [historic]Greek culture,[the "Homeric" period (VIII B.C. and earlier),]the Apolline impulse was entirely dominant.
There was no [overt]Dionysiac worship among the Greeks at this time; and though they must have known of the near-Eastern festivals, the savage excesses of those cults were totally alien to them, at least on a conscious level, and were rejected uncompromisingly.
The pure Apolline tendency of this phase, clearly present in the Homeric epics, found its purest expression in Doric art [(sculpture and architecture) of a rather later period], but [meanwhile]irresistible Dionysiac impulses began to appear spontaneously in Greece itself.
The result was a compromise.
The Dionysiac cult was established throughout Greece and a symbolic reconciliation with Dionysus was effected in Apollo's chief cult at Delphi; at the same time, Dionysus' cult in its Greek shape lost the wildness of its Asiatic equivalents, although its other features — above all, its song — were retained.
By this means, Dionysiac music was introduced into Greece [(VII B.C.?)]and rapidly became a potent force.
<Its characteristic instrument was the flute and> the cult-song to the new deity was the dithyramb.
Apolline music, played on the lyre and characterized by regular rhythm and overall restraint, was  already familiar in Greece.
Dionysiac music — music proper — introduced the emotional power of tone, melody and harmony.
Dionysiac religion was a religion of initiates, <a mystery religion>, and at the centre of its worship was the mystical evocation of nature's awesome unity, the primal unity concealed by our dismemberment into individuals, and the worshippers' yearning for a recovery of that unity.
In the dithyramb, the potent Dionysiac music and the accompanying movements of the dance symbolized the agony and the joy of this aspiration.
Although the Apolline tendency was dominant in early Greece, this state of affairs was not, in fact, original, as a closer examination reveals.
Apollo, unlike Dionysus, is one of the Olympian deities, familiar to us from Homer, and these deities are, in general, Apolline in the given sense.
Olympian religion, lacking in moral elevation and other-worldly spirituality, is an exuberant and indiscriminate deification of good and evil, suggestive of an extreme enjoyment of life.
But actually the Greeks in their most creative period knew only too well that the basis of existence is horrific.
Beneath its Olympian surface, Greek culture evinces an unmistakable and unique sensitivity to the painful truth about life: the Dionysiac truth <that the underlying reality of existence is unchanging contradiction, pain and excess, represented to our immediate experience as the "curse of individuation" — our subjection, as impotent individuals, to the change and suffering that befall us from birth to inevitable death>.
As evidence of the Greeks' Dionysiac perception, we can point to the dark side of their mythology: Titanic wars and heroes; the agonies of Prometheus, Oedipus, Orestes; and the definitive wisdom of Silenus, the satyr companion of Dionysus: the best thing is not to be born — the next best is to die soon.
These Dionysiac elements within Greek mythology must be regarded as its earliest stratum,[pre-Hellenic in origin (second millennium B.C.);]while the Olympian mythological apparatus, along with the world of art that depicts it, is a later development.
This fact is reflected in Greek myth, which commemorates the victory of the Olympians over the Titans.
The Titanic terror, then, precedes the Olympian joy.
The terror, in fact, necessitates the joy.
In other words, the Olympian world that overtakes the Titans was created by the Apolline instinct for beautiful illusion, in order to make life bearable.
The Olympian gods satisfy a profound need.
They vindicate life and make it desirable by living it themselves more gloriously.
It is they who make possible the "naive" Homeric identification with living and pain at  the idea of death.
Contrary to Romantic misconceptions, such naivete is not "natural" , but achieved.
It represents the sublimation of suffering into beauty, the formation of a beautiful illusion to conceal the painful truth.
Homeric naivete is the complete victory of the Apolline.
Naive art, then, is a secondary phenomenon.
It must also, like dreams, be regarded as a psychological necessity: its visionary illusion is needed to redeem the horror and suffering of existence.
It may even be regarded as a metaphysical necessity, in that the primal unity, "eternally suffering and contradictory" , likewise needs the visionary illusion for its own redemption.
And if the value of Apolline art is that it redeems existence, the value of the suffering inherent in existence is that it impels the creation of this art.
In early Greece, where the Apolline tendency was dominant, the redemptive vision almost entirely overlaid the horrific truth it was created to redeem.
Above all, it imposed norms of order and limitation to conceal the Dionysiac revelation of contradiction and excess as ultimate realities.
Moderation became a central ideal in human affairs, requiring observance of.
the limits of the individual.
Hence the celebrated commandments of Delphic Apollo, "know thyself" and "nothing in excess" .
And hence, inevitably, the hostility towards any manifestations of excessive self-assertion, whether those of the pre-Hellenic, pre-Apolline, world of Titans, or comparable tendencies among the "barbarian" peoples outside Greece.
But despite the Apolline code, the Dionysiac impulse could not be permanently repressed.
With the introduction of Dionysiac worship, either the Apolline gave way entirely; or the repression was intensified, as in the Dorian world (witness the defensive rigidity of Dorian Sparta as well as Doric art); or, thirdly, a compromise was reached.
The observations made so far may be summed up in terms of four historical phases throughout which Hellenic creativity was dominated by the two impulses.
Phase one: the (pre-Hellenic) Dionysiac world with its dark mythology and the austere wisdom of Silenus (second  millennium B.C.).
Phase two: the Apolline world of Homeric naïveté (X-VIII B.C.).
Phase three: the influx of Dionysus-worship (VII B.C.).
Phase four: the Dorian reassertion of the Apolline [VII-VI B.C., although during this period].
<Apolline culture was undermined by a growing trivialization of its religion and mythology>.
Attic tragedy [(fl. late VI and V B.C.)]represents a further, climactic, stage in which the two conflicting tendencies were united.
[5–6 Lyric poetry]
Greek tragedy originated in lyric poetry.
Greek lyric was established as a literary genre by Archilochus (VII B.C.), whom the Greeks accordingly regarded as a creative originator on a par with Homer (c.
VIII B.C.), the creative genius of Greek epic.
To appreciate the significance of the lyrical origin of tragedy, we must first elucidate lyric poetry as such.
Lyric poetry has been misleadingly categorized as "subjective" art.
All true art, however, must entail objectivity and the "silencing of the individual will" .
Lyric poetry is not subjective in the ordinary sense; and in its freedom from subjectivity it should be thought of in the same terms as music.
Greek lyric poetry was (literally) musical: it was sung to music and inseparable from its music.
The lyric poet (in general) is a composer first and foremost and, as such, a Dionysiac artist who surrenders his egoistic subjectivity to identify himself with the true metaphysical reality and reflect it in music.
He now comes under Apolline influence and is therefore able to symbolize the music, in turn, in the form of specific ideas and language.
This sequence of events is already prefigured in a claim made by Schiller that he used to conceive his own poetry in and through a "musical mood" .
In other words, music precedes the idea.
Epic poetry, like sculpture, is an Apolline art, and all such art involves a quite different creative process.
Like a dreamer, the Apolline artist is absorbed in contemplation of something outside himself and does not identify with it.
The ideas of the lyric poet, on the other hand, are projections of himself (whence the lyric "I" ), but a self indistinguishable from the ground of being, with which the poet is now one.
This explanation of lyric makes use of Schopenhauerian categories, although Schopenhauer himself was unable to deal satisfactorily with the problem of "subjectivity" .
The whole subjective-objective distinction is irrelevant here.
Schopenhauer's position was that lyric combines contemplation and the individual will.
But, on the contrary, the lyric poet, as artist, is released from his individual will and becomes a medium through which the ground of being makes its appearance.
We are not, after all, the ultimate creators of the realm of art: we are ourselves part of it.
We are works of art, belonging to a world that is itself an aesthetic phenomenon; and this is our highest claim to dignity, "for only as an aesthetic phenomenon can existence and the world be eternally justified" .
Of course, our conscious  rationalizations of our own significance and the significance of our art are bound to be quite illusory.
Only the Dionysiac artist in the act of creation has any direct knowledge of the truth, thanks to his identity with the ultimate reality and the ultimate creator.
Archilochus' specific contribution was to introduce folk-song into literature.
Folk-song is the direct ancestor of lyric poetry, and the simplest artistic form that unites the Apolline and the Dionysiac.
As with lyric proper, the music (the Dionysiac element) is primary and the words (the Apolline element) are secondary reflections of the music.
The music, therefore, may be variously objectified in the verbalization.
This explains the strophic form of folk-song, whereby one melody generates a succession of different lyrics.
One may also adduce the fact that a Beethoven symphony often impels its audience to interpret the music pictorially, but in no one single way.
The distinction between the two main streams of Greek verse represented by Homer and Archilochus can now be restated in a way that, incidentally, takes account of the essential differences of phraseology between Homeric poetry and the lyric tradition that begins with Archilochus and (ends) with Pindar (V B.C.).
In Homeric epic, language symbolizes the world of phenomena; in the new poetry, it symbolizes the world of music.
In Schopenhauerian terms, this means that music becomes will, or rather that music, which cannot be will, makes its appearance as will.
In sum, lyric poetry is dependent on the spirit of music, while music itself is independent of language.
For music, unlike language, symbolizes ultimate reality, beyond and prior to all phenomena.
[7–10 The origin and essence of tragedy]
Greek tragedy is generally assumed to have had an original connection with Dionysus.
It was performed at the festival of Dionysus in Athens and is said by Aristotle in his Poetics (c. 330 B.C.) to have originated in the Dionysiac dithyramb.
Beyond this, however, its origin has hitherto been an insoluble problem: the explicit evidence of the ancients is notoriously inadequate and various different theories have been constructed from it.
The main task is to establish the nature of the tragic chorus, since it is clear from the ancient tradition that tragedy originated in the chorus and once consisted of nothing but the chorus.
For this reason, among others, we must reject A. W. Schlegel's interpretation of the chorus as the "ideal spectator" there being originally no spectacle for it to be spectator of.
We should also reject (Hegel's) idea that it represents the populace as against the aristocratic heroes  of the drama proper: in origin and essence, tragedy is purely metaphysical and not sociopolitical.
There is more value in Schiller's insights that the chorus is essentially anti-naturalistic and serves to uphold tragedy's ideal ground and poetic freedom.
The chorus of primitive tragedy did indeed have such a basis.
Originally it was the satyr chorus of the Dionysiac dithyramb.
That is, it originally comprised the band of Dionysus-worshippers who, in their ecstatic state, saw themselves as the god's goatlike attendants, fictitious nature spirits in a fictitious natural state.
But the "fiction" had its own reality and credibility on a religious level.
Greek tragedy, like all true tragedy, leaves its audience with the feeling that despite all superficial changes, "life is at bottom indestructibly joyful and powerful" .
This feeling was originally conveyed in manifest form by a chorus of primeval beings, close to nature, who permanently retain their natural shape, irrespective of any changes in civilization.
In their presence, the audience could feel its civilized surface annulled and replaced by a consoling sense of unity with nature.
And the reason why the Greeks should have needed such consolation is that in their Dionysiac ecstasies they had looked into the painful essence of life.
Like Hamlet, they had come face to face with its essential horror and absurdity.
Such knowledge by itself leads to a Buddhistic negation of the will.
It induces nausea and thereby inaction, since nothing can be done to affect the essential condition: action requires illusion.
The salvation and solace for this state of mind is art, which converts thoughts of loathing into ideas it is possible to live with: horror is tamed and made sublime, while what had been disgusting absurdity becomes comic.
(Like tragedy, its "sublime" sister art, the "Old" (Aristophanic) Comedy of classical Athens is generally regarded as having originated in the worship of Dionysus.
Aristotle derives it from "phallic songs" , which were a common constituent of Greek fertility ritual and would have been sung to or for a particular fertility god: this would usually, though not perhaps invariably, have been Dionysus.)
The Greeks, "uniquely susceptible to the tenderest and deepest suffering" , were saved from total Dionysiac nausea by the artistic mediation of the Dionysiac satyr-chorus.
The Greek satyr represented nature in a pre-cultural state, but without any "idyllic" sentimentality or artificiality and (for all his goat-like appearance) without being a mere animal either.
As sympathetic companion of the suffering god, the satyr embodied man's highest and most intense emotions.
He was a source of wisdom and a symbol of nature's sexual omnipotence.
The satyr-chorus of the dithyramb represented what poetry always aspires to represent, the real truth of nature.
The contrast between this truth and  the false "reality" of civilization is equivalent to the contrast between the eternal ground of being and the world of appearance.
In their ecstatic state, the Dionysiac worshippers saw themselves as satyrs.
These visions constitute the starting point of tragic drama and must not be confused with the Apolline visions of the epic poets (or equally those of the visual artist).
In his mind's eye the epic narrator visualizes the personages and events that he is to describe, and sees them as something independent of and outside himself.
In contrast, the Dionysiac chorus, like unconscious actors, enter into and lose themselves in the characters that their collective ecstasy impels them to conjure up.
We must also contrast the dithyramb with the other kinds of choral song developed by the Greeks, all essentially Apolline, in which there is no "entering into" and the singers remain "themselves" , retaining their names and keeping a sense of their ordinary civic status.
In the dithyramb, but only in the dithyramb, the chorus are oblivious of everyday existence: in their ecstatic state they identify entirely with their proto-dramatic part.
A second visionary experience was required to create the world of the archetypal stage, the skene, and with it make true drama possible.
In his ecstasy, the worshipper saw himself as a satyr and "as a satyr, in turn, he saw his god" .
That is, the Dionysiac vision of himself as satyr was complemented by an Apolline vision of events outside himself, i.e. the sufferings of Dionysus; and these visionary events constitute the origin of the skene with its dramatic action and speech.
Tragedy remained pre-dramatic, however, so long as Dionysus himself, the hero of the vision, was purely visionary.
Drama began when a masked actor was introduced to represent the god (in the sixth century, from which time) the Dionysiac experience of visionary transformation into satyrs was represented artistically.
This meant that the Dionysiac participants were divided into two separate groups, worshippers (making up a new and smaller chorus) and spectators.
The chorus now had the task of moving the spectators to see, not an actor, but the visionary figure that the actor stood for.
A special relationship between the two groups remained, and the physical conditions of the Greek theatre (as it subsequently evolved) continued to ensure that the two groups were never in actual opposition to each other.
(The theatre, always open-air, consisted in the first place of a circular dancing-floor (orchestra), where the chorus danced and sang, and the skene, behind the orchestra, was later added for the actors.
The audience sat in tiers round the front half of the orchestra, which thus served to separate them from the skene.)
The spectators could therefore still feel themselves as one with the chorus performing immediately below them and ignore the "reality" of the real world all around.
We can now explain tragedy's familiar alternation of choral lyrics and dramatic dialogue as the Dionysiac chorus with its repeated objectifications in Apolline form.
We can also now account, genetically, for two qualities that characterize the chorus of classical tragedy: passivity and wisdom.
In their Apolline vision, the dithyrambic chorus see Dionysus as their lord and master: they are his servants.
But in their Dionysiac experience, they become participants in the god's suffering and thereby in his understanding: as such they can "proclaim the truth from the heart of the world" .
In so far as the action of tragedy is originally a vision, seen only by the chorus, the chorus may, in a special sense, be regarded as its "ideal spectator" .
In classical tragedy as we know it,[the tragedy of Aeschylus (525–456) and Sophocles (496–406)], the drama, as represented in the dialogue, gives a uniformly Apolline impression of form, precision, lucidity and beauty, much like Homeric epic.
But the heroes who convey this impression are merely embodying the Apolline response to life's horror: the attempt to make that horror acceptable.
This is the real meaning of the famous "Greek serenity" , so often misrepresented as some kind of untroubled cheerfulness.
Consider the serenity achieved in Sophocles' two Oedipus plays.
In these, Sophocles presents the hero as the noble man who is doomed to error and misery despite his wisdom and all his efforts (Oedipus Rex), but who, through his great suffering, eventually wins the magical power of benediction beyond his death (Oedipus at Colonus).
The structure of the first play has an intricate, and quite exquisite, logical basis, a peculiarity that contrives to lend the work a "note of superior optimism" .
In Oedipus at Colonus the optimism is raised to a religious plane.
It is implied here that however destructive they may be, the actions of a noble man cannot involve sin and that the apparent passivity to which the hero is eventually reduced is actually his highest activity.
This whole conception is undeniably optimistic; and yet the myth underlying it is gruesome.
Oedipus, who solved the riddle of the Sphinx, murdered his father and married his mother.
This is to say that the man who solves the riddle of nature must also violate the most sacred natural law, and even that wisdom as such is a crime against nature.
The serenity, then, belongs to the poet, not to the myth: it lies precisely in the poet's attempt to palliate the dark truths that the myth represents.
The myth in itself is deeply pessimistic.
The glorification of action in Aeschylus' Prometheus Bound is the antithesis of Sophocles' endorsement of saintly passivity, but it rests on the same pessimistic basis.
The Aeschylean Titan, who, to his own cost, gives man fire and thereby civilization, has an artist's confidence in the sufficiency of his  own capacities and an artist's readiness to suffer for it.
In him we see man himself, risen to Titanic stature, creating civilization by his own efforts.
But the mythical basis for these gratifying notions is, once again, deeply disturbing.
The control of fire is the mark of the civilization man aspires to, but constitutes a kind of sacrilege, a "robbery of divine nature" , that must be paid for with immense suffering: human aspiration must inevitably bring man into conflict with the divine realm.
The Prometheus myth is not specifically Greek.
It is in fact of native Aryan origin and, with the dignity it confers on the crime against nature, it presents a marked contrast to the equivalent Semitic myth, the myth of the Fall.
In the Aryan conception, human evil (guilt and suffering) is traced to active sacrilege, which is masculine (der Frevel) and committed by a man.
In the Semitic myth, evil originates in feminine weakness (die Sünde).
The central insight of the Prometheus myth evinces an Aryan instinct for the tragic interpretation of life, whereby human evil is justified pessimistically.
Man's aspiration to transcend his limits entails sacrilege and suffering, being at bottom an attempt to reimpose the original unity of life.
The cost of that heroic effort is the (annihilation of the individual hero): "he suffers the primordial contradiction in his own person" .
This is Dionysiac wisdom, and in this respect Prometheus is certainly a Dionysiac figure.
The Aeschylean Prometheus, however, expresses at the same time an Apolline demand for justice characteristic of his author.
The clash between human and divine presents us with two spheres, each with right on its side, pointing forward to a reconciliation in line with the Aeschylean view of Fate enthroned above gods and men as eternal justice.
The poet's conception is, once again, more optimistic than the myth.
We know from ancient tradition that in its earliest form Greek tragedy always dealt with the mythical sufferings of Dionysus.
We may therefore imagine performances centring, as the Dionysiac mysteries did, on his dismemberment by the Titans and his hoped-for rebirth, which would be presaged in the worshippers' songs of triumph.
The meaning of this myth is clear.
The god experiences the agony of individuation in himself, symbolizing the shattering of the original unity and its transformation into a multiplicity of elements and their individual forms.
It is understood that individuation is the ultimate source of all suffering, and the end of individuation, implicit in the vision of the god's rebirth, is intensely desirable; <for only by (a second shattering), the destruction of the individual, can the original unity be restored.
We have here all the elements of the "mystery doctrine of tragedy" : the ultimate unity of all things, individuation as the source of evil, and art as an augury of eventual reintegration.
[It was in the second half of the sixth century that the primitive tragedy practised by the Dionysiac worshippers developed into true drama, and, in the same period,]the cult was accepted as a public cult in Athens.
Dionysiac wisdom was now promulgated openly,(sometimes through its own mythology, although more often) it was mediated through the Olympian mythology associated with Homeric epic.
For the post-Homeric Dionysiac movement that culminated in tragedy supplanted Olympianism to the extent of taking over epic mythology to express its own insights.
In this sense, all the diverse myths of classical tragedy are equally Dionysiac, and the same applies to the tragic heroes: for a long time, Dionysus had been the only character represented in the early drama, its only hero, and, until Euripides, all the different suffering heroes of tragedy were still "mere masks of this original hero" .
This accounts for the fact that the Aeschylean and Sophoclean heroes are never represented as individuals, but have an "ideal" character.
(By the beginning of the fifth century) the Olympian religion and its mythology were in a state of crisis.
In particular, the mythology was coming to be regarded as history — the first step towards trivialization and eventual nullity.
But for the time being the whole field of myth was reinterpreted in terms of Dionysiac pessimism and thereby revitalized, gaining a new weight and significance.
The catalyst that made this possible was Dionysiac music.
[11–14 The death of tragedy: Euripides and Socratic optimism]
As a serious force, Greek tragedy came to a sudden end with the death(s) of (Sophocles and) Euripides (480–406) at the end of the fifth century.
Euripides was its last great figure, and it was his innovating genius that destroyed it —(myth, music and all).
Once tragedy was dead, its only heir was the "New Comedy" (of the late fourth and third centuries) and it is, again, Euripides to whom the innovations represented by this degenerate form must be traced back.
Euripides' importance for New Comic poets like Menander (342–293) and Philemon (368–267) lay, above all, in his introduction of mundane naturalism, through which it became possible, for the first time, to stage the mediocrity of ordinary life: "Euripides brought the spectator on stage." 
His heroes had none of the traditional grandeur appropriate to demigods and he reduced the customary high language of the genre accordingly.
His positive contribution in this sphere was to give his characters the ability to "speak" In a special sense — to debate and to philosophize.
This is the origin of New Comedy's characteristic cleverness, its "perpetual triumphs of cunning" , its glorification of the good-natured, cunning slave.
And this good nature has  its own enormous importance.
It is representative of a new outlook on life.
There is no more of the profound serenity that had characterized the Greek spirit in its greatest period, and, above all, in the sixth century, which had produced the (religious) movement of the mysteries, tragedy, and (the "religious" philosophers,) Pythagoras and Heraclitus.
Instead we have the cheerfulness of a slave without responsibilities or aspirations, and a satisfaction with the easy enjoyment of the passing moment.
Such superficiality became a legitimate target for the early Christian thinkers, under whose influence Greek antiquity as a whole has been misrepresented as superficial ever since.
If Euripides brought the spectator onto the stage, it was not because he enjoyed popular favour in his lifetime.
Unlike Aeschylus and Sophocles, he was not consistently popular, and his innovations did not arise from any desire to pander to the public.
They were prompted by his critical spirit.
Like Lessing in modern times, he had an extraordinary critical talent, which constantly stimulated his productive artistic impulse.
To such a man the traditional basis of tragedy must be essentially alien.
For Euripides, understanding generated all enjoyment and creation, but at the heart of tragedy he saw something inexplicable and altogether "incommensurable" with the workings of reason.
Accordingly, he formulated a new conception of drama to suit his own inclinations.
What Euripides wanted was to make tragedy reasonable.
He therefore aspired to remove its "original and all-powerful Dionysiac element" ; and his aspiration was fulfilled.
It is true that his late play, the Bacchae (produced in 405 B.C., a year after his death), dealing expressly with Dionysus and the early opposition to his worship in Greece, is to be interpreted as a belated recognition that such opposition is in fact inadvisable: Pentheus, who opposes the god, is destroyed, and the poet impresses on us that Dionysus is too powerful to be ignored.
But thanks to Euripides' earlier efforts, the Dionysiac element in tragedy had been negated already.
This elimination of the Dionysiac might, at best, have resulted in some kind of dramatized Apolline epic (like Goethe's projected Nausikaa, perhaps); but in fact Euripides did not achieve even this:(having abandoned Dionysus, he was in turn abandoned by Apollo}.
Like the latter-day rhapsode of Plato's Ion , he intruded his own personality into his work and, instead of the requisite epic detachment, showed an intense involvement with his heroes and heroines.
(This is the source of) the two new, suspect (and barely compatible) ingredients that he added in order to give his drama any life at all: hot emotional outbursts and cold thoughts and paradoxes — poor substitutes for{ 9 Dionysiac ecstasy and Apolline (lucidity and precision).
The extreme  naturalism with which his characters' thoughts and emotions were portrayed was the final inartistic touch.
The fact was that, driven by an impulse that was not artistic at all, but critical, Euripides could only produce work that was thoroughly inartistic itself.
But quite apart from these subsidiary deficiencies, it is clear that Euripides' rejection of the Dionysiac was bound to make the true tragic effect unattainable.
And yet the Euripidean spirit cannot be regarded as the ultimate cause of tragedy's downfall.
It is itself a manifestation of something deeper: a new rationalism, epitomized by Euripides' great contemporary, the philosopher Socrates (469–399).
In Euripidean drama, we see the results of "aesthetic Socratism" , the outlook that makes intelligibility a prerequisite of beauty — a counterpart to Socrates' notion that only the man of knowledge can be virtuous.
With this criterion Euripides adjusted all the elements of the drama: language, characters, structure and choral music.
His treatment of the prologue is representative.
Euripidean drama commonly has an expository prologue whose function is to outline the forthcoming action of the play.
This action is not itself the centre of interest, however.
The effective centre of interest is intense emotion, embodied above all in the new "rhetorical-lyrical scenes" that featured the "passion and dialectic of the protagonist" .
To ensure that the spectators would be totally absorbed in these scenes, there must be no missing links or unexplained aspects of the story to act as distractions.
On such characteristically conscious grounds, he employed the prologue.
(According to a well-known anecdote quoted by a writer of late antiquity) Sophocles said that Aeschylus did what was right, although he did it unconsciously.
Euripides would probably have said that what Aeschylus did was wrong because he did it unconsciously.
For Euripides, as for Socrates, too, conscious intelligence was everything.
Euripides and Socrates were persistently associated by ancient writers.
Socrates had a contempt for tragedy; yet we hear anecdotes about him helping Euripides with his plays and only watching tragedy at the theatre if there was a new play by Euripides on.
Especially important is the way that (their younger contemporary), Aristophanes (d. 385 B.C.), brackets the two as instigators of a suspect  enlightenment ; and likewise the decision of the Delphic oracle that the wisest of men was Socrates, followed by Euripides, with Sophocles third — a decision clearly based on the new estimate of conscious intelligence.
Socrates' own comment was that all men were equally ignorant, but he alone was aware of the fact; and even those expert in their own fields (poets among them) had no conscious understanding of their  calling but worked "only by instinct" .
The implied contempt for instinct, together with his excessive logical faculty, explains why Socrates should have depreciated all known art and ethics and aspired with "divine naivete" to put them right.
At the same time, some special factor is necessary to explain his extraordinary self-confidence and strength of purposes evinced even in the face of death — the death that he himself engineered and then suffered with such calm that the image of "the dying Socrates" became a new ideal.
The special factor is Socrates' daimonion.
In moments of crisis, Socrates was guided by the utterances of a divine voice, which invariably warned against any further pursuit of knowledge.
In his case, that is to say, instinctive wisdom manifested itself only on exceptional occasions and as a purely inhibiting agency.
And even though he insisted on the divinity of his inner voice, the essential perversity remains: in him, instinct, which should be a creative-affirmative force, becomes the critic, and consciousness, which should be critical-dissuasive becomes the creator.
To Socrates, the only acceptable kind of literature was the fable — a straight-forward medium for conveying necessary truths.
At the opposite extreme, tragedy seemed unreasonable and dangerous: it was full of incongruities and had no concern with "truth" at all.
Following Socrates, the young Plato (429–347) who had aspired to be a tragedian himself, repudiated tragedy and art in generals even burning his own plays.
Nevertheless, he was led by a strong artistic instinct and the personal impact of Socrates himself to create a new art-form related to those he now despised.
Plato's main (if misguided) objection to traditional art was that it represented only the limited reality of the empirical world.
His new art attempted to represent instead the underlying idea and so transcend the pseudo-reality — which is in fact precisely what traditional art, in its own way, had always done.
The new form was the Platonic dialogue, in which the traditional modes of poetry survived, albeit in an eccentric reconstitution.
It was a cross between prose and poetry- a mixture of narrative, lyric and drama.
By this means, Plato provided the model of a new art-form, the novel, which might be regarded as "an infinitely enhanced Aesopian fable" , with poetry in strict subordination to rationality: as in Euripides, the Apolline was reduced to "logical schematism" The new art-form also had a hero, Socrates: a "dialectical hero" , reminiscent of the argumentative Euripidean protagonist.
The Socratic dialectical tendency, found alike in Euripides and Plato, inherently untragic, because it is inherently optimistic: it presupposes the essential problems of existence can be solved by the activities of the ration mind.
 "Virtue is knowledge, all sins arise from ignorance, the virtuous man  is the happy man" : in these Socratic maxims we see the formulae of a rationalistic optimism that was — and is — incompatible with tragedy.
It is in accordance with such optimism that Euripides should have turned the suffering hero of earlier tragedy into a dialectician and the transcendental justice of Aeschylus into the "poetic justice" dispensed by the deus ex machina who appears at the end of so many of his plays.
The central target of the new rationalism, however, was the chorus, which now came to be seen as an anomalous relic of the past.
That process is, in fact, already apparent in Sophocles, who no longer gives the chorus the major role; instead, he limits its sphere to that of one of the characters, which face Aristotle) destroys its meaning.
After this the chorus degenerates further in Euripides and all but disappears a century later, in New Comedy.
(There it merely provides musical interludes between acts, a pattern foreshadowed in some odes of Euripides.)
But without the chorus and its music the Dionysiac impulse — and thus the very essence of tragedy — cannot survive.
In the light of this discussion, we can see that even before Socrates there was a spirit hostile to the Dionysiac.
Socrates was simply its most magnificent expression.
We can also see that Socrates himself cannot be regarded merely as an agent of destruction, despite the immediate responsibility of the Socratic impulse for the dissolution of tragedy.
The new art-form developed by Plato would not have existed without Socrates, who, in any case, seems to have felt some misgivings about the sufficiency of rationality himself.
It appears that he had a recurring dream in which he was told, "Socrates, be an artist" , a command which he ignored at first, supposing that nothing could be a higher "art" than his own philosophizing, but eventually complied with by writing some poetry while waiting for death in prison.
Is it that Socratism and art are not incompatible after all?
Might art be Socratism's necessary correlative?
And might they even be combined in one person?— is an "artistic Socrates" a possibility?
The Socratic spirit in the modern world
Having granted that Socrates is far from being a purely destructive force, we must now go further and acknowledge the full extent of his positive cultural significance.
Greek culture has provided the creative exemplars of all subsequent cultures, including our own, and Socrates is one of its principal figures.
He represents theoretical man, a type of existence previously unheard of, but one which our culture has elevated above all others.
Like the artist, theoretical man takes an "infinite delight in all that exists" and is thereby protected against  pessimism.
The two types differ primarily in respect of their attitude towards truth and the uncovering of truth.
Whenever truth is uncovered, the artist's pleasure lies in contemplating whatever is still unexplained, whereas theoretical man finds pleasure in something already explained and, above all, in the attempt to explain still further.
In fact, ultimately (as "the most honest theoretical man" , Lessing, perceived) he cares more for the search after truth than for truth itself.
And this attitude is explained by the "sublime metaphysical illusion" peculiar to theoretical man, his "unshakable faith" that by rational thought he can penetrate the depths of existence and even correct existence itself.
Socrates lived by reason and died by reason.
He symbolizes man liberated by reason from the fear of death, the optimist for whom all truth is rationally accessible and knowledge of the truth a panacea.
Over the centuries, this Socratic spirit has extended its influence, and in our culture that influence has reached its peak with a universal demand for knowledge and the triumphs of Wissenschaft — philosophy, science and learning — by which our culture endeavours to make existence comprehensible and therefore justified.
As the progenitor of this movement of ideas, Socrates must be regarded as the turning point in the whole history of civilization.
Without his influence, the vast energy expended on Wissenschaft over the centuries might have been used for purposes of individual or national aggrandizement.
The result would have been world wars and migrations and eventually a weakening of life-instincts in favour of a self-destructive ethic of murder and suicide like that of the Fijians.
But for all the triumphs of the Socratic spirit, its true significance is that it repeatedly prompts a regeneration of art — art in the metaphysical sense which is its widest and deepest sense.
For Wissenschaft has its limits, and the "unshakable faith" in its power ensures that its most gifted followers press on until they reach those limits and discover for themselves its ultimate powerlessness to solve the problem of existence.
At this point optimism makes way for a new kind of awareness, tragic awareness, which can only be borne through art in the shape of myth.
Thus myth is the necessary consequence of science, even its purpose; and the demand for knowledge which on a lower level is hostile to art ultimately becomes a need for art.
Such is the critical situation at the present day, but the outcome is still unclear: a new triumph of art (albeit under the name of religion or Wissenschaft itself? a new barbarism? new kinds of genius — even perhaps the "artistic Socrates" ?
II RESTATEMENT: HOPES FOR THE REBIRTH OF TRAGEDY IN GERMANY
[16–20 Music and the crisis in modern culture]
The aim of the discussion so far has been to show that tragedy arises from the spirit of music and is bound to perish without it.
What follows is an amplification of matters already discussed with an emphasis on contemporary culture and the conflict at its summit between the resurgent tragic impulse and the rationalistic spirit of Wissenschaft.
The origin of my inquiry was Schopenhauer's insight about music,(recently) approved by Wagner in his essay, Beethoven.
It was this that prompted me to scrutinize Greek tragedy and thereby gain the new view of the Hellenic spirit that I have been putting forward.
To recapitulate: what Schopenhauer demonstrated is that music differs in character and origin from the other arts because they represent phenomena, while music represents metaphysical reality directly.
This truth is to be reinterpreted in the light of my principle that art does not derive from a single impulse (i.e. the Apolline impulse towards beauty), but from two: the Dionysiac as well as the Apolline.
From these starting points we can come to understand the dual effect of Dionysiac music on our Apolline capability.
Music stimulates us to realize the Dionysiac metaphysical world in Apolline symbolism, which then, under the influence of music, acquires its highest significance.
Hence the capacity of music to engender myth, especially the tragic myth that symbolizes Dionysiac wisdom.
The tragic spirit, with its joy in the annihilation of the individual, cannot be explained simply in terms of the traditional principle of beauty.
The beauty associated with tragedy represents Dionysiac wisdom translated into Apolline images.
Tragedy affirms, not the illusory beauty of this world, but the eternity of the metaphysical world, even through the negation of the hero.
<It reconciles us to the destructibility of the individual by an evocation of indestructible (albeit, for the individual, terrifying) unity.
> It is only Apolline art that seeks to replace suffering by beauty.
The "eternity" promised here is the eternity of the phenomenon.
In Apolline art beauty replaces truth.
My theory of tragic myth provides the first acceptable explanation of the chorus of Greek tragedy.
It has to be admitted, though, that the real meaning of tragic myth was never consciously articulated by the Greek tragedians who used it.
Their plots and theatrical effects reveal a deeper wisdom than they themselves could verbalize.
(It is the same with Shakespeare, whose Hamlet, for instance, "talks more superficially than he acts" .)
But it must be remembered that the choral music of Greek tragedy, now lost, might have conveyed the requisite metaphysical depth.
The mythopoeic power of music has already been shown to be a decisive force in Greek literary history.
The first such objectification of music in myth was in Greek lyric poetry (from VII B.C.); the last, climactic, one was In Attic tragedy (VI-V B.C.); after tragedy,(in fact, from IV B.C.), thanks to the new rationalism, the faculty for creating myth disappeared from Greek art, although a mythic expression of the Dionysiac world-view lived on in is a debased form in the mystery religions underground,(later to re-emerge in the shape of "a secret cult which gradually covered the earth" ).
Mythopoeia began to decline (in the middle of the fifth century).
We see this in the music of the New Dithyramb (from c. 470–460), a degenerate form of the dithyramb proper and rightly opposed by Aristophanes.
Where Dionysiac music expresses truth on a universal and metaphysical scale and engenders myth as the instance of that truth, the aim of the New Dithyrambic composers was to imitate particular phenomena (natural or human) in the manner of a tone-painting.
The result was to make the music an even poorer thing than the phenomenon itself, and to nullify the music's mythopoeic power.
It is not surprising that this movement had the sympathy of Euripides, who made considerable use of its tricks and mannerisms.
(During this same period,) an analogous tendency was operative in the sphere of tragic character-portrayal.
(In Aeschylean tragedy) the characters had been eternal types representing the universal laws implicit in myth.
Sophocles still portrayed complete characters, but used the myths to suggest individual peculiarities.
In Euripides the characters are purely individuals, with their prominent traits delineated to suit a proto-scientific "truth to nature" .
The process culminates in New Comedy's recurrent stock characters, each one based on a single stereotyped peculiarity — cunning slaves and so on.
From now on, music could be no more than tone-painting or else a stimulant for jaded nerves, where the words hardly mattered (as was already the case in Euripidean lyrics).
The clearest instance of all involves the dénouements of the new drama.
Genuine (mythic) tragedy characteristically ended on a note of metaphysical comfort, the purest instance being Sophocles' Oedipus at Colonus.
The new drama pioneered by Euripides and perfected as New Comedy (rejected the implications of tragic myth and) was obliged, faute de mieux, to look for "an earthly resolution of the tragic dissonance" .
After due suffering, the hero was rewarded with a marriage or some token of divine favour.
The deus ex machina took the place of metaphysical comfort.
These are all signs of the new "Greek serenity" which excluded the Dionysiac and dominated the Greek world from Socrates onwards.
Apart from its survival in underground religion, the tragic outlook was overwhelmed by a "senile love of life" , unproductive and sharply distinct from the Apolline naivete of the early period, which was an achievement, a triumph over suffering.
The optimism of theoretical man, with its aspiration to "confine the individual within a limited circle of soluble problems" , was the noblest form of the new outlook.
For all its worldly achievements, however, such optimism cannot prevent the re-emergence of the tragic outlook for ever.
At its higher levels, what we call culture is made up of three formative elements: Socratic love of knowledge;[the Apolline impulse towards]the beauty of art; and [Dionysiac]metaphysical [faith]in the essential indestructibility of life.
All three are [in different degrees]illusions, which make the weight of life bearable —to those of sufficient stature to feel its weight in the first place.
Depending on which one of the three is dominant, we have a predominantly Socratic or artistic or tragic culture — or, in historical terms, Alexandrian or Hellenic or Buddhistic.
Up to the present day, modern culture has been almost totally Alexandrian.
Distrustful of action, it is preoccupied with the expansion of knowledge, and theoretical man is its ideal.
It education is geared to producing such men.
Its religion has degenerated into scholarship.
Even its poetry has developed from scholarly imitations.
The quest for knowledge and the assumption of the limitless power of rationality have shaped our civilization; above all, they have imbued it with its optimistic view of life.
But modern culture is now proving to be vulnerable on two counts, one social, one intellectual.
In the first place, its survival requires the existence of a slave class, whereas its optimistic outlook obliges it to deny the necessity of such a class.
Without some fundamental change of outlook, this internal contradiction must eventually be fatal: slaves who have learned to regard their existence as an injustice will look for a terrible vengeance.
In the second place, the claim of rational thought to limitless applicability has been disproved.
Such great thinkers as Kant and Schopenhauer have used the apparatus of Wissenschaft to demonstrate the limits of Wissenschaft.
The optimistic belief that the essence of reality can be explored by scientific laws  has been exposed as a failure to see that the mere phenomenon is not the sole reality.
With this insight, a tragic culture is inaugurated.
In such a culture, knowledge is superseded by wisdom, which looks for a total view of life, seeking to come to terms with its essential suffering and aspiring [in Goethe's words]to "live resolutely in wholeness and fullness" .
To educate the new and heroic seriousness of the coming generation, a new art will be needed, the art of metaphysical consolation: tragedy.
Meanwhile, Socratic culture, shaken from two directions, has lost its self-confidence: witness its present obsession with novelty, coupled with a fear of any change of direction that would contradict its own premises.
The crisis is indicated by the state of modern art, which is eclectic and derivative, scholarly but unsatisfying, without joy or strength.
In place of a Socratic self-assurance, modern man has a Faustian yearning.
Modern culture can be regarded as the culture of the opera: in this superficial art its essence is revealed most clearly.
The primary need that opera was invented to satisfy was a non-artistic need.
That explains how such externalized music — recitative, stilo rappresentativo and all — could have arisen in an age (XVI A.D.) which had produced the "ineffably sublime and sacred music of Palestrina" .
The new music was characterized by alternations of emotionally charged speech (half-sung) and passionate lyrical interjections (wholly sung).
The "speech" emphasized the sense of the words, whereas the lyrical parts invited a musical response.
Such an unprecedented mixture had no inspiration from Apolline or Dionysiac principles.
And yet it was intended as a re-creation of the music of ancient Greece; that is, as an evocation of a primitive and pure world.
Operatic music is essentially idyllic.
It sets up an ideal world of nature, which is nevertheless represented as attainable reality (to use a formula of Schiller's) In other words, it is constructed on the false premise that man is archetypally good and naturally artistic (witness the absurd convention of the eternally virtuous hero forever bursting effortlessly into song).
As such, it represents a trivialization of nature and an optimistic glorification of man to suit an Alexandrian-theoretical culture.
Opera is, indeed, the invention of theoretical man, the critical layman, not the artist.
It stems from experiments in Renaissance Florence based on the demand of unmusical amateurs that, above all else, the words must be understood.
Lacking any sense of the Dionysiac depths of music, they assumed that the words took precedence and, as with the New Attic Dithyramb their music aspired to nothing higher than tone-painting, in imitation of the world of phenomena.
Under the influence of opera and the culture it represents, most modern  music has been reduced to the level of entertainment and deprived of its Dionysiac seriousness — except in Germany.
For in the recent course of German music from Bach to Beethoven and Beethoven to Wagner, we see the reawakening of the Dionysiac spirit, albeit misinterpreted in terms of "beauty" by such as Otto Jahn, and, in general , uncomprehended by its contemporaries.
This movement is aligned with the recent advance of German philosophy.
Thanks to the Kantian Schopenhauerian critique of Socratism, an infinitely more profound view of ethics and art has been developed, which amounts to a conceptualized form of Dionysiac wisdom.
In these developments of music and philosophy, we can foresee a new form of existence.
The rebirth of the Dionysiac spirit in art presages the rebirth of culture as a whole, in the shape of a new tragic age.
This is shown by the Hellenic prototype, thanks to which we can see that we are now recreating the Hellenic epochs, hut in reverse order, passing from the Alexandrian to the tragic.
At the same time, in these new developments the German spirit is rediscovering its own true self.
Germany must now reject the alien influence of Romance culture, to which she has been subservient, and develop her full creative potential; and for this purpose, Hellenism, as an educational and cultural force in our society, is more necessary than ever.
Since the time of Winckelmann, Goethe and Schiller, the German attempt to recreate the achievement of ancient Greek culture has grown increasingly feebler because of a failure to penetrate into the essence of the Greek spirit.
The result is that belief in Hellenism as a cultural force has been almost abandoned.
The Hellenic ideal is either patronized, or else upheld with vacuous rhetoric about "Greek harmony" , "Greek beauty" , "Greek serenity" ; while professional scholars, opting for a comfortable scepticism, have been content to pervert their subject by limiting its aim to textual and linguistic studies or the "historical" assimilation of antiquity.
The critical state of Hellenic studies in Germany is a particular, central, instance of our general educational and cultural crisis.
The educative power of our academic institutions has never been lower: it is journalism that gives the lead.
The intelligentsia and true art have never been further apart.
Our entire Socratic-Alexandrian civilization is exhausted and desolate.
Even Goethe and Schiller failed to renew it.
Even Schopenhauer could do no more than persist in a hopeless search for truth.
Unless we place our hope in the rebirth of true Hellenism through tragic music, there is no hope anywhere.
[21–24 The tragic effect and tragic myth]
Only from the Greeks can we understand what a rebirth of tragedy must mean to the inner life of a nation.
The Persian wars (490–479, in the time of Aeschylus)}were fought by men who were inspired by tragedy and in turn revived by it.
In its pure form, the Dionysiac impulse leads to apathy and hostility to any political action, and eventually to a total, Buddhistic withdrawal from the public world in pursuit of mystical self-negation.
The antithesis of this is the extreme secularization of the Roman Empire, in which the institutional and political instincts (these being essentially Apolline impulses that define the place of the individual) were credited with absolute validity.
 "Placed between India and Rome" , the Greeks in their greatest period achieved a third mode of existence thanks to an extraordinary combination of political and Dionysiac instincts; and the remedial power that prevented either instinct from overwhelming the other, the power that stimulated, purified and relieved the people at this time, was tragedy.
To comprehend all that was involved here, one must experience the full force of tragedy at first hand; and here Act III of Tristan can be pointed to as a prime specimen of tragic art.
Tragedy's specific effect depends on the interaction of its two components, the Apolline drama and the Dionysiac music.
There is a fashionable but crude notion that music and drama are related like body and soul.
In fact the relationship between the two is intricate.
The chief function of the Apolline elements is to shield the spectator against the full impact of the music; and it is actually the presence of this shield that permits the highest potential of music to be realized.
By itself such music would be shattering with its evocation of primordial universality, but the Apolline particularity of the tragic myth makes the evocation bearable by giving us sublime individuals to feel for and to satisfy our sense of beauty.
Instead of the negation of all individuality, we are offered a parable of a single individual who, in his heroic struggle, "takes the whole Dionysiac world on his back and thus relieves us of that burden" .
In its turn, the music activates the Apolline component to the highest degree.
The drama acquires a supreme vividness unattainable by words and action alone: words and ideas are made to convey their suggestions sensuously, and the movements and characters of the drama are illumined from within.
But this triumph of the Apolline is qualified by the predominance of the Dionysiac in the total effect.
Through the music the tragic myth acquires an intense metaphysical significance, whereby}it gives the spectator intimations of a supreme joy and a higher existence to be attained through the annihilation of the individual.
In the last analysis, therefore, the Dionysiac, as the more powerful element, forces the Apolline to communicate its own wisdom.
Thus the intricate relation between the two elements in tragedy is resolved by a synthesis: "Dionysus speaks the language of Apollo and Apollo, finally, the language of Dionysus: and so the highest goal of tragedy and all art is attained" .
Of all the peculiar effects of musical tragedy, the most remarkable is the coexistence of opposite impressions.
Whereas visual art and epic poetry invite a purely contemplative response and an uninterrupted delight in the phenomena as portrayed, the spectator of tragedy{ experiences a satisfying sense of illumination, even of omniscience, <together with an impulse to find a more intense satisfaction in something deeper.
> In one sense he accepts the world of the stage, in another he denies it.
The tragic hero appears before him with an epic clarity and beauty, and yet he rejoices at the hero's annihilation.
<He feels compelled to see, and yet at the same time he yearns for something beyond sight.
>
Tragedy can only be fully explained in such <metaphysical> terms.
It is not to be thought of as a mere "imitation of nature" .
With its creation and destruction of individuals, it offers us a presentiment of the primordial unity that lies behind the world of phenomena.
But our aestheticians have no inkling of this.
Their notion of the essence of tragedy is "the struggle of the hero with fate" (like Schelling) or "the triumph of the moral world-order" (like Schiller) or "the discharge of the emotions" (like Lessing and other neo-Aristotelians) One can only suppose that they are incapable of the proper response to tragedy: that is, an aesthetic response to a work of art.
Previous theories of the tragic effect are misplaced.
It is quite wrong to posit a pathological process, as Aristotle does with his theory of katharsis, whereby the audience is purged of pity and fear by the solemn events of the play.
And it is equally inadequate to suggest that the audience should only respond morally, elevated by the supposed triumph of good over evil — even though for many people now this is undoubtedly the effect of tragedy.
The Greeks, as Goethe divined, were attuned to experience intense feeling in the spirit of an aesthetic game.
But until now the members of our theatre-going public have not been so attuned: a public brought up with entirely false expectations, a public of "critics" evincing a half-moral, half-scholarly, predisposition.
The reaction of the more serious dramatists of our era to this public was to appeal to irrelevant moral-religious feelings or to use contemporary material to arouse equally irrelevant socio-political emotions like patriotism.
But these well-meant attempts were bound to fail from the  sheer perversity of the enterprise.
The attempt to use the theatre for purposes of moral education, still practised in Schiller's time, was soon discredited.
With critics and journalists in positions of influence in the worlds of culture and education and in society as a whole, art has degenerated into a mere topic of inconsequential chit-chat, and criticism, correspondingly, into the cement of a worthless social milieu.
But even in such an unfavourable atmosphere, a work like Wagner's Lohengrin (first produced in 1850) might succeed in momentarily startling the more sensitive members of the public into a true response.
In the absence of any informed critical guidance, it is true, they would be unable to go any further: the experience would remain isolated and leave nothing behind it.
Nevertheless, in such experiences "the aesthetic audience" has been reborn along with tragedy itself.
Only a spectator with a truly aesthetic capacity can respond properly to myth.
For him, myth is a concentrated image of the world, which is serious and effective notwithstanding the way it breaches causality by introducing miracles.
The Socratic-critical spectator finds miracles on stage arbitrary or childish; and, in fact, most of us in the modern world are incapable of feeling any myth as a credible reality unless it is mediated through the abstractions of scholarship: our own mythology has been all but destroyed.
But without myth every culture loses its creative power and its unity.
Only myth provides direction for man's imaginative powers; it is myth that matures the child's mind and helps the adult to interpret his mature experience, and myth that sanctifies the state.
In our age, Socratism, despising myth, has reduced everything to abstraction: education, morality, law, the state, culture.
Our insatiable demand for knowledge and frantic interest in other cultures, past and present, stem from the loss of myth and the consequent absence of any stable consecrated basis for our own culture.
A people may or may not identify itself with the dominant culture.
In France, such an identification was a source of strength when the culture was itself strong, but now it is a source of weakness.
Fortunately, the German spirit that found expression in the Reformation, and with it gave rise to the first German music, has never yet fully lost itself in the dominant Alexandrianism.
It is still uncorrupted and the hope is that it can now generate the rebirth of German myth.
The destruction of Greek tragedy went hand in hand with a nullification of Greek myth and a degeneration of the Greek national character.
These correlations must be insisted on.
Hitherto, the Greeks had instinctively interpreted their experience through their myths and so given it "the stamp of the eternal" .
The worth of any people depends on its capacity to do this.
Only in this way can it express its unconscious conviction of "the relativity of time and the true, metaphysical meaning of life" .
Conversely, when a nation begins to see itself historically and destroys its mythology, the result is secularization and spiritual malaise.
Greek art and especially Greek tragedy delayed the destruction of myth.
Once myth was destroyed, the metaphysical drive survived at best in attenuated form in the Socratic search for knowledge; and at worst in a religious syncretism that led only to complete triviality or exotic superstition.
The Renaissance was a rebirth of the Alexandrian-Roman spirit, and it has taken us on the same path.
We now exhibit the same symptoms of the same disease, the loss of myth.
To ensure the regeneration of her spirit, Germany must recover her own mythic roots and, if necessary, reject alien mythic elements implanted in her culture.
It may be that our first target should be Romance elements and, if so, our victory in the recent war may be taken as a good augury.
But the inner spiritual effort is what really matters.
We must restore German myth and make ourselves worthy of our great predecessors — Luther, as well as our artists and poets; but we can only do so under the direction of the Dionysiac impulse.
The co-existence of opposite feelings experienced by a spectator during a performance of tragedy is shared by the tragic artist himself Despite the pleasure he finds in appearances, he negates it for the higher satisfaction of their destruction.
And it is in terms of just such a co-existence of opposites that tragic myth arises.
The content of tragic myth is, in the first instance, a pleasurable epic glorification of the hero.
The hero's destruction, on the other hand, is ugly and discordant.
The positive inclination [of the Greeks]towards this discordance can only mean [that they found]a higher pleasure in it — especially as [the period in question was]the period of [their]youth and vigour.
It cannot be explained on the grounds that ordinary life is just as tragic (art is not merely imitation of life) or by reference to moral feelings or pity and fear.
Mythic discordance is analogous to musical dissonance: in fact, the two derive from the same source and arouse the same joy.
The tragic myth's ugly content stimulates a higher, aesthetic pleasure.
The explanation of this can only be in metaphysical terms, namely that "only as an aesthetic phenomenon are existence and the world seen to be justified" .
The function of tragic myth is to show that all things, even such ugly discordance, are part of an "artistic game" played at the heart of things.
The Dionysiac capacity of a nation is revealed equally by its music and its tragic myth.
The development of the new German music drama, therefore, fully attests our latent Dionysiac capacity.
For here we have the most profound music and tragic myth to supersede the "entertainment" represented by opera.
We may now hope that, with the rebirth of our own mythology from music, the abstractions and the shallow optimism that have degraded the German genius for so long will make way for a new strength and joyful seriousness.
The Dionysiac and the Apolline: Conclusion
The Dionysiac is the basic ground of the world and the foundation of all existence.
In the final analysis, it must be thought of as the eternal and original artistic power that calls into being the entire world of phenomena.
The Apolline is secondary, the source of those illusions with which the Dionysiac world must, for our sakes, be transfigured.
As far as human awareness is concerned, the two impulses manifest themselves in a strict relation: only so much Dionysiac experience is permitted to the individual consciousness as can be controlled by the Apolline and translated into its life-sustaining terms.
The present emergence of the Dionysiac thus implies the co-presence of the Apolline and, in turn, an efflorescence of Apolline art in the years ahead.
The scale and perfection of the Apolline manifestations among the Greeks, conversely, attest the powerful hold that the Dionysiac must have had among them.
Let us bear in mind how much they must have suffered to achieve such beauty.
Above all, let us acknowledge the two principles, Dionysiac and Apolline, as the basis of tragedy, their highest achievement.
No summary can be perfect.
In one respect ours falls particularly short of perfection: it gives very little idea of Nietzsche's style.
This is an inevitable consequence, not merely of the need to anglicize Nietzsche's German phraseology, but of the special nature of that phraseology itself.
From start to finish, BT is written in a remarkable idiom, whose precise effect a summary cannot convey.
In later chapters we shall give this aspect of the book closer attention.
Here we need only point out that for most of Nietzsche's first readers — even readers familiar with his public lectures of 1870 — the style must have been quite unexpected.
For whereas in subject matter and perspective those lectures clearly prefigure the final work, stylistically they still bear some of the marks of academic decorum from which BT is entirely removed.
Compared with the lectures, the book is condensed, elliptical and impatient.
Methodical presentation of evidence and scholarly citation of references are  proscribed.
Without warning or apology, interpretation of the historical past alternates with bold evaluation of past and present, and with large theories about eternal truths of art and life.
With its ubiquitous Dionysus and Apollo and a mass of imagery besides, the language has a high coloration and a strong emotional charge.
For better or worse, Nietzsche had developed an idiom for his book that was no less distinctive than its contents and their range.