

PREFACE
the purpose of research into materials
The student about to undertake research in materials science may be motivated by curiosity about the nature of common materials: why some are soft, some hard, some strong, and some brittle, and whether these differences can be explained satisfactorily in terms of their microstructure.
Alternatively he may not wish to pursue the subject in great depth but, instead, may wish to use materials in new and imaginative ways, and therefore needs to understand their properties.
In the last twenty years or so new materials have appeared which were hailed as the results of brave new technology, revolutionizing such fields of applications as aerospace.
While there have indeed been advances in our ability to invent new materials the principles upon which the properties of materials depend have not altered.
The new materials, such as fibre composites, polymers, memory alloys and optical fibres have resulted from improved technology together with a more widespread understanding of the physical basis of the behaviour of materials.
It should be stressed that the boundaries of one scientific discipline very often overlap those of another and advances are made at these boundaries rather than at the centre.
A proper study of materials now requires a sound knowledge not only of metallurgy but also of crystal physics, ceramics, polymer physics, elasticity and continuum mechanics, as well as an understanding of practical mechanics.
The computer, relevant in materials science as in all other spheres of modern science, enables analysis of structural and microstructural problems to be made by using, for example, the Finite Element method, while computer-controlled machines simplify the problems of data gathering so that reliable information on materials properties can be obtained rapidly.
The practical user of solids as load-bearing materials requires information on, for example, displacement, load and time in order to design a useful structure — interpreting the term structure as anything from a bridge to a woven garment.
For his purposes data sheets are ideal and standard tests laid down by the national standards institutions are the methods that he uses.
The materials scientist, however, seeks more fundamental information, attempting to answer the question of the relation of structure to macroscopic  properties.
Starting from the classical theories of elasticity such questions as the prediction of elastic moduli from the inter-atomic forces and the part played by crystal structure and crystal defects have been the subject of research for a great many years.
We now understand many of the problems but there is still a great deal which is not properly understood.
This is particularly, but by no means exclusively, the case in polymeric materials where great problems still exist in the proper description in terms of the microstructure.
One of the factors limiting our understanding is that, with few exceptions, we can never have a macroscopic single crystal to study as is the case with metals or ceramics.
Polymers are multivariable systems.
We cannot, as in the idealized experiment, vary only one quantity and assess its effect.
For this reason, if for no other, the study of polymers is difficult and many techniques must be used.
In this monograph I deal mainly with the mechanical properties, showing, however, in the final chapter how some of these relate to other physical properties.
I have further confined the text to the elastic and viscoelastic properties omitting the irreversible behaviour of yield and fracture.
To have included the yield, crazing and fracture of polymers would have required another three chapters to do them justice.
They should form the subject of a separate monograph by another hand.
The book is divided into seven chapters, each reasonably self-contained, and each designed to provide the serious student with a critical review of its subject-matter as a basis for further research.
Since progress is still rapid I have chosen the title "An Introduction to Polymer Mechanics" and have indicated in each chapter where further information may be sought and where current advances are being reported.
Lastly, I have tried to show tat the mechanical properties of many polymers may be described using the concepts and terminology of composites, so indicating the usefulness of what may be called a theory of materials.
Using appropriate scaling factors, one can think of materials as structures and use the analysis appropriate, for example, to the description of the forces and displacements in a bridge or an aeroplane for describing the moduli of a semi-crystalline polymer.
One such analytical method is that of Finite Element theory, much used in engineering and eminently suitable for modelling the microstructure of polymers and composite materials.
It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the elements of thermodynamics, statistical mechanics and elasticity to the level of an honours degree in physics or chemistry but since continuum mechanics and viscoelasticity are not commonly found in such courses a detailed account of them is give in Chaps 2 and 3, Chap.
4 is devoted to the consideration of polymers as heterogenous materials, or composites since, except for amorphous polymers, most polymers which crystallize can be considered as at least two-phrase materials.
Many of the concepts developed, for example, in the field of fibre-reinforced composites are relevant to semi-crystalline polymers.
Chap.
5 includes some detail on test methods which are peculiar to polymers and which have been specially developed for them.
Chap.
6 gives an account of the classical statistical theories of rubber  elasticity and polymer solutions and concludes with an introduction to the recent tube or tunnel theories of polymers associated with the names of de Gennes and of Edwards.
Chap.
7, which is necessarily brief, shows the relationships between the mechanical and other properties of polymers.
Its brevity reflects its purpose as a link with specialized treatises on, for example, optics, X-ray crystallography and infra-red spectroscopy, each one of which is a discipline in its own right.
I have drawn on my earlier book, Arridge (1975), referred to as (MP), for parts of the present book.
It may sometimes serve as a companion to the present volume.
the polymeric state of matter
1.1 Introduction
For many purposes polymers can be thought of as entirely one-dimensional that is, as mathematical lines.
Thus in the theory of rubber elasticity the polymer chain is represented quite well by a random walk in three dimensions and from this the chain entropy and hence the free energy are deduced.
Sometimes it is convenient to give the line some thickness and so what may be called the "cooked spaghetti" model is used.
For visualization this is, in fact, quite a useful model, since the sliding and bending of the cooked spaghetti as it traverses the mass of its neighbours models quite well the behaviour of real chains, particularly in the tunnel or tube models of polymers of de Gennes, Edwards and others (Figure 1.1).
The bulk modulus of polymers is determined almost entirely by the van der Waals' forces between chains and so has values similar to those for the inert gases.
Table 1.1 shows some comparisons.
The shear properties of polymers, however, are primarily determined by the wriggling, bending and twisting of the chains.
The spaghetti model has used here for visualization.
In fact although the chemical structure of polymers, to be discussed below, does affect physical properties considerably it is not of prime importance for determination of the mechanical properties when a particular state is being considered.
For example, in the glassy state all unoriented polymers have similar bulk and shear moduli.
These will only be changed if the chemical composition is such as to ease crystallization or if the chains have been oriented by some means so that considerable anisotropy is present.
Similarly, in the rubbery state the shear modulus of all polymers depends primarily upon the density of cross-links.
This is why the simple random walk theories are so successful and whey they apply to rubbers, gels and even to thermosets.
What the chemical structure of course does determine is the temperature at which the glassy state passes into the rubbery and, if the cross-linking is insufficient to prevent it, further passes from the rubbery to the liquid-like state.
In addition the chemical translational symmetry, the symmetry along the chain, determines whether or not the polymer is crystallizable and in what form.
Thus if the polymer is atactic, that is, has no regular translational symmetry, it will form only an amorphous solid, whereas if stereo-regularity exists it can crystallize.
Chemical structure determines also, of course, the chemical properties of the polymer such as solubility, reactivity, the optical and electrical properties and, most basic of all, whether the polymer can be made at all from the small molecules which constitute the monomer.
No attempt will be made here to discuss the chemistry of polymers but certain terms used by the chemists must be defined if the simple physicist's view of the polymeric state of matter is to be understood.
Monomers are the raw material of polymers and there are several ways in which a monomer is polymerized, that is, joined end-to-end as in linear polymers or in multidimensional ways as in three-dimensional polymers or thermosets.
One monomer may be added to another or to itself in so-called addition reactions.
Examples are: polyethylene, polypropylene and polyvinylchloride — to name  three familiar polymers.
Another way to form a polymer is by a condensation reaction where the reaction of two monomers results in a composite molecule together with a product of the reaction.
A common example is the reaction of di-acid and di-amine to form nylon with water as a by-product.
(Molten nylon held under pressure in an atmosphere of steam in fact depolymerizes in a reversal of this condensation reaction.)
Other examples of polymers obtained by condensation reactions are the saturated polyesters, polyurethane, and the old-established phenol- and urea-formaldehyde (which form three-dimensional networks).
Three-dimensional networks can also be formed with polyesters if they are unsaturated and mixed with an unsaturated monomer, such as styrene, which polymerizes by addition, cross-linking to the points of unsaturation of the polyester.
These polymers are extensively used for structures made with glass-fibre reinforcement.
Another important class of three-dimensional networks forming polymers is the group of polyethers termed epoxy resins or epoxides.
Many polymerizations proceed best in the presence of catalysts and in consequence the resulting material often contains catalyst residues.
It is also important to remember that in commercial plastics the basic polymer is not the only constituent.
Apart from the catalyst residues referred to above a commercial plastic will contain many additives such as anti-oxidants, colouring agents, plasticizer molecules (small molecular weight additives which affect the mechanical properties) as well as components required by the chemist to stop the chain growing.
The details of the composition of a commercial plastic are commonly kept secret but they may nevertheless play a vital part in determining its properties.
Examples are to be found in, for example, the textile industry, where commercial acrylic fibres differ considerably from one another although they are all nominally polyacrylonitrile.
Nature herself feels free to impose secrecy as regards the composition of some of her polymers and one of the most interesting fields of polymer research today is that of bio-polymers, where the techniques of the explorer are as important for the researcher as those of the polymer chemist.
Such familiar materials as hair, leather, skin and bone are by no means fully understood.
1.2 The main chain
When a monomer polymerizes it will only yield a useful polymer if it does so in the form of a long chain.
Ring compounds of low molecular weight exist but we are here mainly concerned with the properties of long-chain polymers -ones in which there are hundreds or thousands of repeat units before the end of the chain, a branch or a cross-link occurs.
In linear polyethylene, for example, the molecular weight may be as high as 1 000 000, that is , the chain consists of some 70 000 CH2 repeat units.
Where the polymer cross-links to itself or, as in polyester resins, to another polymer, the term molecular weight between cross-links is used.
It is self-explanatory.
In branched polymers such as the older, high-pressure, polyethylene the molecular-weight between side chains is relevant.
It may be as low as 500 (3 branches per 100 carbon atoms) in high-pressure polyethylene, which in consequence has a lower density than its linear brother — high-density poly-ethylene, which has a molecular weight between branches approaching 3000.
In cross-linked thermosets like epoxy resins the molecular weight between cross-links is about 500, while in rubbers it is very much greater (of the order of 10 000).
The value of molecular weight determined for any given polymer depends upon the method used.
We cannot in fact count the number of monomer units in a chain and we must remember that, even if we could, this number would be very unlikely to be the same for all chains.
The term used for this is polydispersity and it is described by parameters derived from the statistics of the method used for molecular weight determination.
Any frequency distribution such as that schematically shown in Figure 1.2 can be described by the moments the first four of which are commonly used in statistics.
In the language of polymers the first moment the  mean is denoted by where is the number of molecules of molecular weight .
Such averages are found from techniques which effectively count the number of molecules in a given mass or volume, such as end group analysis or studies of osmotic pressure.
Other methods such as light scattering give weight averages, defined as .
This average is related to the second moment of the distribution by the equation .
The ratio is commonly used as a measure of the dispersity of the molecular weight distribution.
It must be greater than unity unless all the molecules are of equal length, as is easily seen.
For is the variance where is the standard deviation.
This is zero only if the distribution is monodisperse, that is, all molecules are of the same size, and we have which is .
For example, the two types of linear polyethylene Rigidex 50 and Rigidex 25 (in the USA, Marlex) have widely differing and .

Flory (1953) defines higher averages respectively.
These are related to the third and fourth moments of the distribution by the equation respectively.
(Statistical terms such as variance, skewness and kurtosis, though easily defined in terms of the above molecular weight averages, are not usually employed in polymer science.)
The viscosity average molecular weight is defined (Flory) as where and is the coefficient in the expression for intrinsic viscosity. 
The full amount of information contained in the molecular weight distribution is of course not to be described by one or two averages, the complete set of moments being required.
In practice and are usually sufficient except where details of the tails of the distribution are needed.
Examples of this are in studies of crystallization and the deformation behaviour of polymers.
When this is the case methods which give the entire distribution rather than some of the averages referred to above must be used.
A device in common use is the gel permeation chromatograph (GPC), although any technique which employs a measure that is dependent upon molecular weight, such as viscosity, will give information.
Recent studies on extensional flow suggest that measurement of the viscosity in such flows may contain information on the molecular weight distribution not easily obtained by other means.
Modification of the GPC to allow preparation of well defined molecular weight fractions is a refinement of value, for example in studies of crystallization.
Further details of the GPC can be found in the review by Johnson & Porter (1970).
1.3.
Main chain bond energies
There are three quantities of significance to the understanding of mechanical properties.
One is the potential energy and stiffness of the primary main chain bond, that is, its behaviour under a direct pull when the chain is fully extended.
The second is the size and shape of the potential energy well that determines bond  rotation, for without rotation the polymer chains would behave as rigid rods and rubbers, for example, would not exist.
The first property, the resistance to direct pull, determines of course the ultimate strength of the polymer in extended chain form.
Failure of the chain links is called scission and it can be caused not only by strain but also by chemical means.
The third property of a polymer which affects its mechanical behaviour is the between-chain potential energy.
This is some orders of magnitude less than the primary bond energy and, as mentioned above, is responsible for the bulk modulus and bulk cohesion of the polymer.
The interactions involved in bond-length and bond-angle deformation are usually small, and details of the deformation mechanism are ignored in favour of a simple Hookean spring model with a force constant k derived from infra-red and Raman spectra.
Typical values of the force constants are given in Table 1.2.
These figures in Table 1.2 are derived from spectroscopic studied except for the last, which is discussed later.
Many calculations have been made of what is termed the chain modulus from the force constants such as those in Table 1.2.
Results have been derived for the modulus of the polyethylene chain (which, because of the smallness of the unit cell, should be the largest chain modulus available) varying from 256 GPa to as high as 380 GPa.
Measured values at present indicate that the chain modulus of polyethylene is certainly higher than 280 GPa.
If you compare this modulus with the typical bulk modulus of a polymer — about 5 GPa — it is clear that the forces opposing extension, whether by bond stretching or bond bending, in any one chain are considerably greater than the forces which hold one chain to the next.
It is quite justifiable therefore to picture polymers as made up from stiff by flexible chains freely sliding among their neighbours and constrained only by cross-links or entanglements — unless, of course, strong lateral forces also exist, such as the hydrogen bonds in polypeptides or polyamides, which tend to hold neighbouring chains together.
1.4.
Rotation about bonds
In the calculation of moduli, whether the "chain" modulus or the bulk modulus, it has been assumed that the displacements are small enough for a Hookean spring to be the model for the interaction.
The Hookean spring model is, however, inappropriate for description of the rotation of molecular groups about bonds (Figure 1.3).
Such rotations are commonly described in terms of a potential energy function possessing a number of minima (Figure 1.4).
The deepest "energy well" in a symmetrical polymer such as polyethylene corresponds to the chain configuration in which the atoms of the side groups are as far apart from each other as possible.
This gives the planar zigzag chain configuration and this is termed the trans form.
Subsidiary minima which occur at angles of rotation from the trans form are called gauche.
This of course implies that the minimum energy configuration of an isolated chain is the  extended planar zigzag if the polymer is a symmetric one, for example polyethylene, polyvinylchloride or polytetrafluoroethylene.
The actual configuration taken up in a solvent, in the liquid or in the solid, will, however, depend upon the sum total of all the interactions whether intrachain or interchain rather than upon the nearest neighbours only.
It will also depend upon the temperature.
The equilibrium trans form may not therefore always occur and, as the temperature is raised, so the other configurations become more probable; so also does the difference between rotational energy levels become small enough in comparison with thermal energy for the rotation to be considered as free on the surface of the bond angle cone and even, in the limit, to be considered s random or Gaussian.
This change of properties of a chain from the restricted rotations imposed by energy barriers to the freedom of unrestricted rotation is reflected in the mass by the phenomenon of the glass-to-rubber transition or glass transition s it is commonly termed.
This is discussed more fully in Chap.
3.
The temperature at which this freedom of the chains to take up any configuration allowed by the bond angle cone occurs will depend upon the chemical composition of the polymer, which, in turn, determines the depth and shape of the energy wells governing the probability of any configuration through a Boltzmann factor.
Restriction of the rotation to the surface of the bond angle cone (Figure 1.3) does not in fact alter the "Gaussian" chain model appreciably since an "equivalent random link" may always be found, whatever the restrictions on bond angle.
This may be done by defining where is the number of links of length in the equivalent random chain and and are, respectively, the fully extended and the mean square length of the real chain.
The meaning of these terms will be made clearer in Chap.
6.
Detailed analysis of the local bond structure is required when defects are being considered, such as jogs, folds and kinks in the solid polymer.
These are defined in the following way (Figure 1.5).
Jogs occur when, over small number of monomer units, the linear chain is displaced laterally but continues in the same direction as before.
If the direction is reversed the defect is called a fold, while if the defect causes neither displacement nor reversal of direction but only a local disordering of the zigzag configuration it is called a kink.
There have been many studies of the energetics of such chain defects both analytically and experimentally.
Some of them are held to be responsible for relaxation phenomena at low temperatures while folds are of great importance in the crystallization of polymers.
Finally, the energy barriers to rotation about primary main chain bonds must play a part in determining the freedom of chains to slide relative to each other, both in the crystalline state and in the amorphous.
Chains are not really cylinders of uniform diameter and material, and so in longitudinal motion relative to another chain (as in a crystal) a combination of oscillation and translation must occur.
Similarly, where bending takes place, the restrictions on rotation of one chain link relative to its neighbour imply a coupling of bending  and rotation at the level of the chain link.
The above effects are likely to be important only at or below the glass transition temperature but they do not seem to have been analysed to date, nor is there yet a molecular interpretation of the frictional forces between chains arising from these and other causes.
Further reading
A good general introduction to polymers is the book by Young (1981) but the most comprehensive account is still to be found in Flory (1953).
Aspects of polymer science such as viscoelasticity and the statistical mechanics of long-chain molecules are discussed in Chaps 3 and 6 and references for further reading given there.
There are several journals devoted to polymer science.
Some, such as Advances in Polymer Science (Springer) and Progress in Polymer Science (Pergamon) consist of review articles on various aspects of the subject.
Some of these reviews will be referred to in later chapters.
stress, strain and their relationship
2.1.
Introduction: modulus
Most scientists know what is meant by the word"modulus’: it is another term for stiffness.
Steel is stiffer than aluminium and both are much stiffer than plastics.
Few would quarrel with the above statement but it is, of course, qualitative and any engineer or scientist needs a much more exact definition of stiffness.
It was first given precision by Robert Hooke, a contemporary of Newton, who proposed what is now called Hooke's law, namely that stress is proportional to strain.
We must therefore define carefully what we mean by the terms stress and strain.
Again, the familiar definitions are: stress is force per unit area; strain is change in length divided by the original length.
We shall need to extend these to more general statements in what follows, but the above definitions are in fact what are used when actual measurements are made on real materials.
A common experiment is to measure the extensional modulus of a piece of wire, for example, and so to verify Hooke's law.
A weight is hung on the end of a wire of known diameter and its change in length measured.
Putting on successively larger weights increases the extension and the"modulus' is measured from the graphical plot of load against extension, corrections being made for the cross-sectional area and for the original length.
Other simple experiments use the bending of a beam or the torsion of a cylinder, in each case verifying a quasi-linear relation between load and deflection and an attendant modulus (see Chap.
5).
Classical elasticity as developed in the nineteenth century assumed that the deformations caused on application of load were small; in fact the linear relation between stress and strain, as defined above, can only be true for infinitesimal strains.
Yet there exist common materials, within the scope of the subject of this book, where strains are very far from being small and may reach several hundred per cent.
In these cases classical theory cannot be applied and large-strain elasticity theory is used.
There is likewise a large class of materials, some natural, some synthetic, which possess different moduli in different directions.
They are  termed anisotropic materials and require the measurement of several elastic moduli for their proper specification.
They can, however, be included in the classical definitions of elastic materials by a generalization of Hooke's law.
Such materials are: wood, fibre-reinforced plastics, textile materials and the class of crystals of all substances.
In fact, when metals or ceramics are prepared in single-crystal form, even the common materials such as iron, aluminium, alumina and rock salt — to name only a few — are anisotropic and so not adequately described by a single modulus such as Young's modulus or even the two moduli required for an isotropic material.
We must therefore set out to discover the sources of our common knowledge of stiffness and to define strain, stress and their relation.
2.2.
The definition of strain: the classical approach
We need to be able to define a measure of strain which is valid for any type of deformation, not just extensional or shear distortion.
To do this we consider the change in length of a small element dS of a line in the body as it is distorted to a new shape.
We shall use suffix notation, in which a vector X in Cartesian coordinates is written where we assume i can take values 1, 2 or 3.
When a particular component of is needed we refer to it by it suffix thus Another convention we shall use is the so-called summation or Einstein convention, namely that in any expression repeated suffixes imply summation over the range 1 to 3.
For example the expression is equivalent to .
In a deformation let the point move to a new point where is the displacement vector.
A neighbouring point moves to while the element dS becomes ds (Figure 2.1).
Now since must be expressible as a function of we have using the summation convention.
We can now write and by Pythagoras's theorem, giving therefore where the dummy suffix in the second expression is changed (which is always possible) so that when the multiplication is done there are no more than two dummy suffixes in each expression.
Multiplying out, we have The first term on the right-hand side is .
To deal with the other terms we first change the dummy suffixes so that becomes .
We can now collect the terms to give and, finally, we obtain: where 
The economy introduced by the suffix notation may be illustrated by writing out in full as follows Now the direction of dS in the coordinate axes (1, 2, 3) is given by the direction cosines .
We see therefore that Equation (2.1) can be rewritten in the form The ratio is a measure of the change of length of our small element dS.
Its change of direction can also be derived simply s follows.
It is given by the direction cosines and we find 
Example 1.
A stretch along the element dS
If ds has the same direction as dS, the are equal to the .
We have .
Hence .
In this deformation all quantities dX become increased by the same factor — -1).
The new quantity so that the deformation is an expansion by the radio —(which is in general, of course , a function of Xi).
Homogeneous expansion
If — is a constant then is directly integrable, giving or, since where i is a constant.
(This is a particular case of the general linear transformation where the matrix consists of constant terms.)
The values of the quantity for an expansion by the ratio — are interesting.
We have from Equation (2.2): Note that for –1 we have neglecting higher powers of .
We shall return to this shortly when seeking a measure of infinitesimal strain.
Example 2.
Uniaxial expansion
If the expansion is in the 1-direction only, with no change in the other dimensions, we have where –1 is in general a function of all the Xi.
We shall have .
Then Hence if the reference element dS lies along the 1-axis it follows that — = –1 and Equation (2.5) gives the value of — for any other direction (only one direction cosine l 1 is required since there is axial symmetry in this case).
In the case when we shall have deformations and is given by  The components of are somewhat similar in form to those in the last example.
Thus 
Volume changes
Clearly the volume element  becomes The change in volume dv/dV is therefore equal to .
If there is no change in volume, that is, the material is incompressible, then .
If the deformation is homogeneous, so that and are independent of the then for the whole material.
A common case is that of cylindrical symmetry, where the material is stretched along, say, the 1-axis and contracts equally along the two axes perpendicular to 1.
Then for an incompressible solid (Figure 2.2).
Example 3.
Volume changes in a general deformation
In the two previous examples we have considered deformations in which .
A general deformation will not be of this type and we need to know the change in volume in such a case.
It is shown in books on the calculus [see, for example, Kreyszig (1967) or Boas (1966]that in a transformation from a set of coordinates Xj to another set , the volume element dV in the former becomes dv=JdV in the latter, where J is the Jacobian determinant.
but lines perpendicular to the direction are changed in the ratio which, for small is very nearly negligible.
The component of are Now it is clear from Figure 2.1 that the ratio is the tangent of the angle —.
Hence, if the value of — is small we may replace tan — by — itself, and we then have 
In engineering practice — is called the angle of shear.
We shall see later that in simple shear a rigid body rotation is involved as well as a displacement.
Meaning of 
From Equation (2.3), is a coefficient in the expression giving the stretch ratio — for any element dS on deforming to ds, in terms of the orientation of dS in the undeformed axes.
It is therefore related to the simpler definitions of strain, as change in length divided by original length, only when the direction under consideration is one of the coordinate axes.
Thus for dS lying along the l-direction 
From this expression for — we have Then if ds is not very different from dS, that is,— is near unity 
The values of when — is small will be written as and termed infinitesimal strains.
We are then in fact neglecting the product terms in so that The exact relation between the components of large strain and the infinitesimal terms is easily found.
We may write The first term on the right-hand side is symmetric in i and j, the second is anti-symmetric.
We write them as and respectively.
Then Now form the scalar product The right-hand side vanishes, since all terms such as are identically zero, the other terms occur in pairs and is antisymmetric.
Hence the vector du is perpendicular to dX and may be written where is the rotation vector .
Now We can now see the meaning of the in the general case.
The non-vanishing terms represent the components of a rotation vector (more properly an anti-symmetric tensor) and a general deformation consists of terms such as which cause changes of length and which cause rotations.
The as we saw, are made up of both .
Returning now to Example 4, we may note that in simple shear there is a component of that does not vanish.
It is in fact implying that the deformation is partly a shear and partly a rotation by the amount about the 3-axis (Figure 2.4), since we have the rotation vector .
We shall return to this separation of the deformation into distortion   and rotation in Section 2.4, when we outline the continuum mechanics approach to the subject.
2.3 Tensors
The quantities , which we have defined in Section 2.2, are all examples of Cartesian tensors of the second rank.
For a fuller account of tensors, particularly the more general covariant and contravariant tensors which are used in non-Euclidean geometries, the books by Schouten (1954), McConnell (1957) and Eringen (1976) may be consulted.
Here we shall only be concerned with the straightforward properties of Cartesian tensors, of which stress, strain and similar quantities are examples.
(But see also Section 2.5.)
Consider a vector X with components Xi in a set of Cartesian axes (1, 2, 3).
We may also choose another set of axes (1 ", 2" , 3") different from the first and in these axes the vector X has different components .
How are the two sets of components related?
We define the direction cosines of the (1'2'3") axes in terms of the (1,2,3) axes (or vice versa) by the set of quantities 1,2,3).
These are not tensors for example is the cosine of the angle between the 1"-axis and the 2-axis.
Properties of the direction cosines
The have the following properties:
The law of transformation from the (1,2,3) coordinate system to the (1 ", 2" , 3") is the one given above in Equation (2.9).
A vector is a tensor of rank 1, defined as a quantity that obeys this transformation.
We define a Cartesian tensor of second rank as any quantity which transforms under the change of axes governed by the direction cosines in the following way:
Example 7
The vector product a ∘ b is also a tensor of second rank but behaves like a vector (sometimes called a pseudo-vector) because it has only three non-vanishing components.
We have since dummy suffixes may be interchanged in the second term on the right.
Hence We shall encounter several other second-rank tensors in the course of our account of elasticity theory.
2.4.
The continuum mechanics approach
Continuum mechanics is a more general theory than elasticity theory.
It embraces fluid mechanics and viscous flow as well as elasticity and shows the relations between these formerly separate fields of physics.
After starting with a general description of deformation, relations between the forces involved and the deformations they cause are derived.
These include the stress-strain relations of elasticity theory, the laws of fluid mechanics, viscous and viscoelastic materials  as well as plasticity.
Since the theory is more general it is also more complicated and, in its advanced forms, more abstract.
Here we shall state the more physically understandable aspects of the theory and show how it relates to the classical theories of elasticity.
In fluid mechanics two methods have always been available for the description of motion — Lagrange's and Euler's.
To illustrate these methods consider the simple example of the flow of people into a football ground.
We may ask an observer to carry a device which records his position, velocity and acceleration as a function of time as he mingles with the crowd or we may set up two observation posts at the entrance and count the number of people per second passing across the space between the posts.
In the first method we are describing the motion of one person (a material particle): this is the Lagrange method.
In the second we are describing the spatial distribution of people, not one person: this is the Euler method.
The first may be thought of as the historical, the second the statistical method, and they were so named by Clerk Maxwell.
The kinematics of materials, considered as assemblages of particles may be described by either of the two methods and this is so whether the material is elastic, viscous or a classical fluid.
The language of continuum mechanics is increasingly being used in modern material science.
It is particularly relevant for the study of polymers.
Let us examine the Lagrange (material) and Euler (spatial) descriptions more fully.
We have already used the vector Xi to describe the position of a point in the material when referred to axes in the undeformed state and considered its transformation to a point xj on deformation.
This is the material description: we are following the particle Xi from its initial position to its deformed one.
Now consider the point xj in space.
Many particles originally at points other than Xj can deform until they reach the point xj, although, of course, the deformation required will differ from the one which carried Xi into xj.
The use of the spatial coordinates xj is therefore the Euler description.
Using the material description we will write for the position vector at time t of a point originally at Xi at time t = 0.
Using the spatial description the particle Xi, which at time t occupies the position xj, is given by .
The one equation should in principle be convertible into the other, but this is not always possible.
The difference in the descriptions may be seen when considering time-dependent quantities such as velocity and acceleration.
In the material description the velocity of the particle Xi which moves from xj to is, in the usual way.
since Xi is constant in this motion.
Similarly the acceleration is since we consider only one particle from its position xj at time t and in its subsequent motion.
In the spatial description however different particles occupy the point xj  at times t and t + t- respectively.
Now if we wish to use Newtonian mechanics we must relate velocity and acceleration to the same particle.
What must be done is to find the new position in spatial coordinates of the particle initially at xj after a time interval —t.
This position is of course and the differential dXi is given by as may be verified by writing out in full the expression in square brackets.
Now Xi does not change with time; it is the initial position of the particle.
Hence the total differential dXi = 0 and we have the set of equations from which the vj may be found in terms of the spatial coordinates provided that we know the explicit form of .
Suppose Then in material coordinates.
To find the spatial expression of v we can substitute for in v, or we can use the relationship derived above (Equation 2.10)): so that which is the velocity.
The extension to three dimensions involving Equation (2.10) requires the solution of a determinant equation but is otherwise obvious.
Example 8
Acceleration may be similarly described as if the velocity is expressed in material coordinates or as if the spatial form is used.
The notation D/Dt is common in fluid mechanics where this form is called "differentiation following the motion" and the two parts (v.grad) v are referred to respectively as the "local" and "convective" .
In continuum mechanics D/Dt is referred to as the material time derivative.
In suffix notation we would write The derivation is as follows: are the velocities of two different particles, for the particle which was at x at time t has moved to a position 
We cannot therefore write acceleration as but we must write it as and this is 
Example 9
For the relation given in Equation (2.11) the acceleration a in material coordinates is easily seen to be .
In spatial coordinates it is given by This may be found easily (in this case) by substituting for the Xi in the material expression above or, somewhat laboriously, by evaluating .
The student should verify the latter method.
Matrix methods
In Equation (2.10) the term occurs.
This clearly relates the two coordinates systems to each other.
Its inverse is called the deformation gradient, and itself is called the inverse deformation gradient.
We may use the matrix form F, where .
Then the matrix product has components C is known as the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor for reasons which will become apparent later.
It is closely related to the strain tensor defined earlier.
Consider the matrix Thus Note.
This definition of is the Cartesian form of the more general definition (Green & Adkins 1970): where are defined later (p.38) in terms of generalized coordinates.
Now we showed earlier that the stretch ratio — is given by the equation and so, using the relation above for we find in matrix terms:
Decomposition of F
It can be shown (Spencer 1980) that the matrix F can be written in either of the two forms F = RU, F = VR, where U, V are symmetric positive definite matrices and R is an orthogonal matrix.
Then and 
We named C as the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor.
B is termed the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, both terms having obvious origins in the definitions given above.
The tensors U and V are called the right and left stretch tensors respectively and R is called the rotation tensor.
The reasons for these terms are as follows.
Consider the transformation of axes where the are as usual, the direction cosines of this pure rotation of axes.
Then F = L, where L is the matrix  by the rules (see Section 2.3) for the direction cosines.
Now , imply that there is no stretch, as would be expected because only a pure rotation of axes has been involved.
In this case the rotation tensor R is equal to the direction, cosine L. 
Example 10.
Shear
Consider the deformation and F = U, as may be easily verified.
Then as before (Section 2.2).
The rotation tensor R causes a rotation through angle 0, where tan and this is the continuum mechanics representation of the rotational part of the general deformation, formerly (p.18) considered as .
2.5.
Generalized coordinates
In the case where Cartesian coordinates cannot be used (for example when cylindrical or spherical polar coordinates, or even ellipsoidal coordinates, are preferable) the strain tensor must be defined in a different way from that used before.
Generalized coordinates are also used in some of the more advanced treatises on elasticity and continuum mechanics (Green & Adkins (1970), Eringen (1976)) as well as in many research papers so that a brief summary of the ways in which the generalized theory differs from the Cartesian is given here; for a fuller account the works mentioned should be consulted.
In generalized coordinates there are two types of tensor which need to be defined (in Cartesian they coincide with each other).
They are:
Covariant tensors, which transform in a manner similar to that of the gradient of a scalar, thus 
2.6.
Stress
Whereas the discussion of strain and its measures involves kinematics only and may be conducted with no mention whatever of the forces that cause the deformation we must when considering stress involve ourselves in mechanics, that is, the nature of the forces operating on a system and the application of  Newton's laws (we exclude in this discussion any relativistic effects).
We must also in any complete discussion of the mechanics of solids (or quasi-solids such as polymers) consider the thermodynamics of the system.
Classical elasticity as detailed, for example, in Love's treatise (Love 1944) developed from Hooke's law (and the relatively simple Bernoulli-Euler theory for example , for the bending of beams) to the rigorous theories of Cauchy and Poisson based upon the concepts of central forces between point particles.
Later in the nineteenth century, following the work of Green and of Kelvin, thermodynamic considerations were introduced a well as the concept of a strain energy function.
The theory of elasticity thus far developed rested entirely on the assumption of infinitesimal strain and the (linear) assumption of Hooke's law relating stress to strain.
The limitations of a theory based on the concept of central forces were discussed by Stokes, and its predictions (notably that there were 36 elastic constants rather than 21 as found experimentally, and that Poisson's ratio was exactly 0.25, contrary to experience) shown to be wrong.
Modern theories of the cohesion forces in crystal lattices in any case rule against the notion of central forces except in ionic crystals.
In polymers new problems arise.
The forces between atoms on a polymer chain are about two orders of magnitude stronger than those between chains.
The polymer liquid, whether in solution or in the melt, may be envisaged as a mass of cooked spaghetti.
In the solid (below the glass transition or in the crystalline state) the "spaghetti" is somewhat less able to slide about than it is in the liquid state.
How then can we set about describing stress in such a system supposing 9a) an"amorphous' polymer such as polyvinylchloride, polymethylmethacrylate or polystyrene, or (b) we wish, following Cauchy, to set up a molecular theory of stress?
Let us first recall the classical continuum definitions of stress and then consider in what ways these need to be modified to have meaning at the molecular level.
In continuum mechanics two types of force are held to at on a body: surface tractions which act on the surface of the volume under consideration and body forces, which act throughout the volume and in the most common case are gravitational or inertial in origin.
The body forces act directly, as the word implies, on a volume element of the system: the surface tractions however act on a surface and the direction of the perpendicular to that surface at the point of action of the traction needs to be specified.
We have, in fact, to generalize the "common sense" view of stress as force per unit area to the case of any force and any area.
This leads to the definition of stress as a tensor quantity of rank 2.
Ignoring, for the present, the body forces, consider any area S in the body with normal n, and let Q be a point on S. Then in statics it is shown that any system of forces acting on a body can be reduced to the sum of a force F, say, and a couple G acting at the point Q. In the limit of infinitesimal area the ratio F/S tends to a limit —, the traction at Q, while in classical elasticity the ratio G/S is supposed to vanish.
In polar field theories (see, for example, Eringen & Kafadar (1976)), the latter assumption is  not made and material points are held to possess properties similar to those of rigid bodies (micropolar media) or deformable particles (micromorphic media).
These theories have found applications in the fields of composites, suspensions, blood, turbulence and so on, but will not be discussed here.
The traction — is referred to a set of coordinates which in classical elasticity are in the undeformed material, but in large-strain elasticity may alternatively be in the deformed material Consider at first the classical theory; if the traction — acts on a surface with normal n then we write for the components of the traction, and the scalar product —.
n the projection of — on n, is given by (not summed over n), where the are the direction cosines of the normal n, and has the meaning "the force acting along j on the unit area which has normal along n" .
The general components of the stress tensor can be shown to bear the relation to where is now the force in the j-direction on the unit area with normal along i.
Consider the tetrahedron in Figure 2.6 bounded by the three coordinate planes and the triangular area of size with normal n.
Then along the 1-direction we have the forces and so on and for equilibrium In general, therefore, as stated.
That stress must be a tensor can be seen   as follows.
Both force F and area S are vector quantities, but stress is force/area, which we cannot be defined using vectors.
We have by definition, but and by tensor transformation, where are the components of F, S in the new coordinate system.
Hence the transformation law for a second rank tensor.
By considering the equilibrium of a unit cube it can be seen that the moments of the stresses must sum to zero and this implies the symmetry of the stress tensor .
We may also derive the stress equilibrium equations in a simple manner.
Consider a unit volume dV in which there exist body forces f per unit mass and on the surface of which act stresses .
Then for equilibrium we must have is the density.
The second integral may be reduced, by Gauss's theorem, to a volume integral, so that, in suffix form, Since this is true for all volume elements we have 
Equations of motion
If the material is not at rest but under displacement u per unit time the equilibrium equation becomes by application of Newton's second law.
(The abbreviated notation is often used.)
Thermodynamical considerations: the strain energy function
In a displacement the kinetic energy per unit volume is say.
Now the First Law of Thermodynamics states that the increase in internal energy of a body is equal to the work done by the external forces plus the heat given to the body.
The increase in internal energy is of two forms: kinetic and intrinsic, the latter being calculated with reference to "a standard state of uniform temperature and zero displacement" (Love).
(This state is not the molecular state — the units we are concerned with must be large compared with molecular dimensions.)
Denoting the intrinsic energy change by —U we have the equation and for the whole body Now the rate at which work is done by the external forces is The second integral converts by Gauss's theorem to Now is we assume infinitesimal strains we may write and the second term vanishes in the summations.
Hence But as we have shown above, following from the equations of motion of the body and, therefore,
We may now eliminate the kinetic energy from our energy equation giving, per unit of time, Under an adiabatic change of state of the body from which we deduce that is an exact differential and there exists a function W, the strain energy function, such that and, in this case, W = U.
If the change in state is isothermal then —U = 0 and we again have a perfect differential form for but the strain energy function is now not equal to the internal energy U but to the Helmholtz free energy A = U — TS.
For a fuller discussion of these points see Green & Adkins (1970), Chapter 8.
2.7.
The continuum mechanics approach
In the analysis of large-strain elasticity and in continuum mechanics it is usual to refer stresses not to the original (unstrained) configuration but to the current configuration (strained).
When strains are infinitesimal as in the classical theory of elasticity the difference between the two definitions is of second order and is negligible but this is not the case when large deformations are being considered.
For example, rubber may be extended some three or four hundred per cent .
The cross-sectional area, assuming incompressibility of the substance (which is a good approximation), must therefore be considerably decreased and stresses calculated on the original area will be seriously in error if used to determine constitutive relations on the strained material.
The definition of stress as force in the j-direction on the deformed area with normal in the i-direction is historically due to Cauchy and such stresses are called Cauchy stresses in the literature.
The referral of stress to the undeformed area is due to Piola and to Kirchhoff.
Such stresses are therefore called Piola-Kirchhoff stresses and, denoting such a stress by the symbols (the upper case K reminds us that the normal is referred to the undeformed state, while the lower case j refers to the deformed state) we have the relation where J is the Jacobian, defined earlier (p. 15), J = det.
(In matrix form we would have .
This stress is not symmetric and it is little used in continuum mechanics, although certain expressions become more compact when it is used.
The conservation laws of continuum mechanics are those of Newtonian mechanics; namely conservation of mass, momentum (both linear and angular) and energy.
The first, conservation of mass, is known in fluid mechanics as the continuity equation.
It states that the time rate of increase of material in any volume must be equal to the rate at which material is lost by flow out of the volume.
Consider a volume dV, then is the rate at which matter is increasing within the volume.
This must be equal to the integral over the surface were v is the velocity and — the density; n is the outward normal to the surface S which enclosed V. By Gauss's theorem we may write and hence Since this must be true for any volume element we have the equation of continuity The conservation of momentum in continuum mechanics relates the rate of change of the momentum integrated over a volume V to the resultant of the forces on that volume.
This is written as where is the density of body force and the surface traction per unit area.
The surface integral may be converted to a volume integral by Gauss's theorem as was done (p.42) in the infinitesimal theory.
Thus Also, as shown by Spencer, in view of the equation of continuity.
Assuming, as before, the relation to be true  for any volume V, we have where is the acceleration.
This is the equation of motion for a continuum.
For angular momentum we have where is the surface traction in suffix form.
This equation in suffix notation reads 
In the absence of couple stresses this equation leads to the symmetry of the stress tensor .
If couple stresses exist then a term needs to be added on the right-hand side of the equation.
Such stresses are normally of second order but are of importance in some fluids (Eringen 1976).
When they are present the stress tensor is not symmetric.
The conservation of energy
As with infinitesimal strains we must consider the conservation of energy during a deformation.
We have previously the equation Now the internal energy U can be defined as where e is the internal energy density and T the kinetic energy is 
The rate of doing work is, as before, compounded from the work done by  body forces and surface tractions.
Further, the heat (or other energy) supplied may be supposed to be a flux across the boundary of the volume under consideration.
The material time derivative D/Dt must be used and the law of conservation of energy then becomes where 
The surface integral converts by Gauss's theorem to a volume integral, as before, so that But and we know from the equation of motion (2.18) that .
Hence the expression above becomes where is the rate of strain tensor.
The product is therefore the rate of doing work.
In the reference configuration the density — has the value and the term is the internal energy per unit mass, being written as W, the strain energy function.
Hooke's Law
The generalized form of Hooke's law relates the components of infinitesimal strain and the components of stress defined with respect to the undeformed coordinates by the linear tensor equation  and its inverse 
The fourth-rank tensors are called the stiffness and compliance tensors respectively.
Although they would, as fourth-rank tensors, have 81 components each the symmetry of and of reduces the number of independent components to 36.
Where the strain energy function exists thermodynamical considerations imply that (and ) and this reduces the number of independent components to 21 for the case of lowest symmetry, that is, the triclinic crystal.
In monoclinic symmetry 13 elastic constants remain, 9 for orthorhombic, 5 for hexagonal and 3 for cubic symmetry.
In isotropic materials only 2 elastic constants are required.
These are commonly the Young modulus E and the shear modulus G, related by the equation G = E/2 (1 + v), where v is Poisson's ratio.
Symmetry and the relations between the elastic constants are discussed more fully in (MP) and in much greater detail in Hearmon (1961) and Lekhnitskii (1963).
A notation that is frequently employed particularly when discussing anisotropy of crystals or of polymers is that of Voigt (Lehrbuch der Kristallphysik (1910).
In this notation the six independent components of stress are written as respectively, while the strains are written .
The relation between stress and strain is then contracted to with the inverse The relations above may conveniently be written in matrix form as with .
Further details are given in (MP), Chap.
6.
A common form of symmetry found in drawn polymers is fibre symmetry, more correctly termed transverse isotropy.
In this symmetry, which requires five elastic constants for its description a unique axis (usually taken as the 3-axis) lies along the draw direction (for example the fibre axis in the case of synthetic textile fibres).
All directions transverse to this unique axis have the same properties, that is, the 1 an 2 axes are interchangeable.
The stiffness matrix C is therefore given by It is difficult in practice to determine all these elastic constants (or their inverses) although several experimental studies have been made.
(See, for example, Raumann & Saunders (1961), Raumann (1962), Ward (1962), Ladizesky & Ward (1971), Arridge & Folkes (1972), and Crowson (1977).)
In the case of drawn polymers the elastic constants bear relations to the draw ratio which are not simple.
They my also be approximated by the use of composites theory combined with experimentally determined orientation functions (Ward 1975; Seferis et al.1976).
Some details of this are given in (MP) and will be discussed later.
For isotropic materials subjected to small strains Hooke's law reduces to the form where — the Lame constant, is given by .
Now the equation of equilibrium under no body forces states that Applying this relation to the above stress-strain law gives Rearranging terms we have 
Strain Invariants
It is frequently convenient to express functions of the strain tensors in terms of invariant quantities, that is, combinations of the individual components of the strain tensor which do not change their functional form under a change of axes.
Such combinations are termed invariants.
An elementary account is given in (MP).
For a thorough treatment see Spencer (1971).
For the there are three invariants:
The Strain Energy Function
In classical elasticity the strain energy function W is a quadratic in the infinitesimal strains .
This follows from the linear law of Hooke relating stress and strain and from the definition given earlier that .
In large-strain elasticity and in continuum mechanics the stress-strain law is non-linear and W is no longer a quadratic function of the strains.
A general function W is used written usually in terms of the deformation gradient tensor, but sometimes in terms of the coefficients or their invariants.
It can be shown that the most general form of W in an elastic body is W = and there are two simple forms of this relation applicable to rubbers (which are considered to be incompressible at all events in mathematical terms though they are not in the strict sense incompressible physically).
For such materials .
The simplest form of the function W is a linear relation connecting .
It is convenient to write such a relation in the form The first relation was proposed by Rivlin to describe rubber elasticity.
It is the same form of strain energy function as is found by using the Gaussian random walk theory of molecular configurations, in which case the constant C has the value , where n is the number of chains per unit volume.
This is discussed in Chap.
6.
See also Treloar (1975).
Rivlin's form of the strain energy functions reduces to the classical quadratic in the when only small strains are involved.
Rubber elasticity.
The relation between stress and strain in rubbers and other polymers capable of high reversible extensions cannot be that of Hooke's law except at the   start of the deformation where the strain approaches an infinitesimal value.
The observed relation is shown in Figure 2.7 and is clearly non-linear.
The first attempt to describe rubber elasticity analytically was that of Rivlin, who proposed a "neo-Hookean solid" having the property that the stress, measured in the deformed state, was related to the components of large strain in the case where there is no rotation by the equation In this equation E is a modulus, equivalent to Young's modulus at small strain, while P is a hydrostatic term to be determined by the boundary conditions.
Example 13.
Uniaxial extension of incompressible rubber
From Example 2 we see that a stretch of — along the 1-axis will be accompanied by contractions along the two other axes.
Then: is referred to the deformed cross-section which is times the undeformed one.
the stress, referred to the original cross-section is therefore This relation fits quite well the behaviour of rubbers for values of — up to about 1.5 (50 per cent strain) but is not accurate thereafter.
In terms of the strain energy function W the stresses 
For many practical purposes it is convenient to use the form for an incompressible rubber where P is an arbitrary hydrostatic pressure, to be determined from experiment and has the values 1, 2 or 3.
Substitution of the Rivlin form for For sheet materials stressed in their plane one of the Then it is easy to show that who showed that a form , with f a decreasing function of gave the best fit.
This is a more general form for W than that of Mooney-Rivlin, referred to earlier.
Experimental determinations of the form of the strain energy function have led to many proposals of its nature.
For a recent review of these the reader is referred to Treloar (1975)(3rd edn) and to the literature.
A radically different form for the strain energy function, not defined in terms of the invariants I, was proposed by Ogden 91972).
This theory is reviewed in Treloar's treatise.
The constants G and — in fluid flow become coefficients of viscosity, usually written with other symbols but left unaltered here to stress the analogy between shear modulus G and shear viscosity and between bulk modulus where x lies along the axis of the tube and r is in the radial direction.
The limiting form of the pressure gradient along the tube is .
Writing this as rearranging terms and integrating gives 
The Couette viscometer.
Motion between coaxial cylinders
Let the inner cylinder be at rest and be of radius .
The outer, which is of radius rotates with angular velocity.
The only component of fluid velocity which is non-zero in steady flow is , the transverse component.
The shear rate is given by and this must equal the transverse stress divided by the viscosity.
The couple exerted by this stress is over a length of cylinder l and this is the total couple M exerted on the  inner cylinder, since this couple must be the same at all radii.
Then 
When there is, as physically there must always be, an and effect in the Couette viscometer it may be taken into account by performing measurements with various values of the fluid column length l or by using the exact theory for a conical end derived by Mooney & Ewart (1934) and used in the Cone and Plate Viscometer.
In this device a flat plate rotates beneath a cone, the torque on which, caused by the fluid motion resulting from the rotation of the plate, is measured.
The viscosity is given by the expression where — is the angle between cone and plate .
This expression is derived from the fuller analysis of Mooney and Ewart as follows.
Making the assumptions that in the geometry shown in Figure 2.8, the only non-vanishing velocity component is (in spherical polar coordinates) and that the only non-vanishing stress since there are no body forces and no acceleration.
(The equations of motion for a fluid in spherical polar coordinates are given, for example, in Love (1944).
whether in solution or in the melt, are capable of supporting tension, and flows in which the tensor is diagonal are termed extensional flows.
Demonstration experiments in which a polymer solution is shown to possess the ability to extend under tensile forces are described in"Elastic Liquids' by Lodge 91964).
Examples from everyday experience arise in the"tackiness' of rubber solution, or the ability of polystyrene, for instance, to form threads when softened by solvents such as are used by model makers.
The ability of polymers in the melt to support tensile stresses is exploited in the synthetic textile industry, where nylon and terylene (Dacron) may be part-oriented by this extensional flow.
The possibility of high chain extension in polymer solutions was pointed out by F. C. Frank in 1970, and the experiments of Mackley using extensional flow fields generated by two opposing jets indicated that very high extensions were attainable, as was shown by the birefringence observed in the flowing solution.
Frank further drew attention to the fact that in shear fields the velocity gradient tensor contains a rotational term (for and this will prevent high extensions being attained.
In extensional flow, however, provided the strain rate exceeds the relaxation rate, that is, the rate at which a chain attempts to re-coil itself in order to increase its entropy, full extension of a chain can occur and it is even possible to cause chain scission, as evidenced by molecular weight studies made on solutions which have been subjected to high extensional flows.
The relaxation times for polymers depend upon the molecular weight in ways which are not yet fully understood (for accounts of the Rouse, Zimm and de Gennes theories see Chap.
6), but for a polymer of molecular weight 1000, for example is of order .
Very high rates of extensional flow are therefore required in order to extend polymer chains, the criterion for the critical strain meaning that may need to be about .
In fibre spinning is only of order but higher rates are possible, in limited volumes, with opposed jets (Figure 2.9.), the four-roll mill (Figure 2.10) or stable vortex motion such as the Taylor vortices which occur in the Couette viscometer.
The references should be consulted for fuller accounts of experimental work on extensional flow, but present work seems to support the Zimm non-free-draining model (Chap.
6.
Equation (6.27b)), which gives the relaxation time , although there are anomalies when the concentration is high.
An account of recent work in the field of extensional flow is given in miles et al,(1983), which also gives references to earlier studies.
The sphere in viscous fluid — Stoke's Law
When there is no acceleration and there are no body forces the Navier-Stokes equation becomes 
Non-Newtonian viscosity
In the discussion of shear we found (p.17) that a term proportional to the square of the angle of shear appeared in the diagonal of the strain tensor when the large strain tensor was used (but not in infinitesimal strain when is used).
In the same way when the are used to describe flow in fluids a"normal stress' term appears which is ignored in the simpler Newtonian assumption that the shearing stress in fluids is proportional to the rate of strain .
These"normal stress' effects may be measured, for example, using the cone and plate viscometer, as a vertical force lifting the cone while it undergoes torque from the rotating plate.
They have been extensively studied and molecular interpretations of the effect (Weissenberg effect) proposed.
Precisely similar effects occur in the large strain torsion of a rubber.
They have been studied by Rivlin & Saunders (1951) and related to the theory of rubber elasticity; see, for example, Treloar (1975)(3rd edn), Green & Adkins (1970), Ferry (1970).
It should also be noted that such normal stress effects are to be found in metals when subjected to very large torsional strains.
They were first noticed by Poynting and the effect is named after him in this branch of materials science.
Thermoelasticity
In most of the foregoing discussion we have assumed that the deformations which we have related to stresses have been carried out at constant temperature.
In this case the free energy A is equal to the stored elastic energy W. In general, however, deformations are not carried out under conditions of uniform temperature (although good temperature control of the specimen is  de rigueur in sound experimentation).
If the material is a poor conductor, as most polymers are, temperature gradients inescapably exist and heat will therefore flow.
The correct equations to use are those of thermoelasticity, although in most cases the use of the equations of elasticity is justifiable on the grounds of simplicity.
Neglecting inertia effects, body forces and internal sources of heat the equations of thermoelasticity are (Biot 1956):
The book by Nowacki (1975) gives a very thorough account of thermoelastic effects which become important at high frequencies, as in wave motion.
Thermoelastic effects also exist in metals and were shown by Zener (1948) to be responsible for some of the relaxation processes found in metals.
similar explanations of relaxations in polymers are possible, but such effects are usually swamped by the much larger configurational relaxation processes.
These are discussed in the following chapter.
Non-local field theories
As pointed out by Edelen (1976) the inescapability of non-locality (the dependence of stress and body force at a point on the state of the whole body) was first noted by Duhem in 1983 and further emphasized by Oseen's 1933 work on liquid crystals.
Continuum theories have been developed on the concept of contract forces, that is, forces with no range.
Yet real materials, made up from atoms, have cohesive forces which have a finite range which may extend far beyond nearest neighbours, and, as we pointed out earlier, for polymers may extend along the chains for very large distances.
In the theories of lattice dynamics such large-range forces have been considered but the modification of continuum (elasticity) theories to include non-local effects is of comparatively recent origin.
A typical stress-strain law including non-local effects is given by Edelen (1976):
Further reading
An up-to-date textbook on continuum mechanics is that by Spencer (1980).
The classical theory of elasticity is to be found in Sokolnikoff (1956) or Love (1944).
Hearmon's (1961) book gives an admirable introduction to anisotropic elasticity, while rubber elasticity is treated from the practical point of view in Treloar 91975).
The fundamental theory of large-strain elasticity is comprehensively discussed in Green & Adkins (1970).
References given at the relevant place in the text give more detailed accounts of particular subjects.
Recent books on deformation and flow in polymers and other materials are those by Billington & Tate (1981) and Bird, Armstrong, Hassager & Curtis (1977).
time and temperature effects in polymers
3.1.
Introduction
Polymeric materials are noticeably different from other materials (metals, ceramics) in the very large dependence upon time and temperature of virtually all their physical properties.
Metals and ceramics can also exhibit creep and stress relaxation and the associated internal friction effects; their elastic properties also vary with temperature.
Such effects have been systematically investigated and the books by Zener (1948) and by Nowick & Berry (1972) summarize the findings.
Polymers, however, because of the weak van der Waals' binding forces involved in interchain interactions, show time and temperature effects at much lower stresses and over smaller temperature ranges, and the practical consequences of this dependence are many.
The most comprehensive account of the viscoelastic properties of polymers is given in Ferry's book (1980), while a briefer outline of the theory and some examples are given in (MP).
In what follows an attempt will be made to set down the main features of polymer viscoelasticity to enable the connections between the phenomenological and the molecular to be stated, where they are known, in preparation for the discussion in Chap.
6.
The most comprehensive account of the viscoelastic properties of polymers is given in Ferry's book (1980), while a briefer outline of the theory and some examples are given in (MP).
In what follows an attempt will be made to set down the main features of polymer viscoelasticity to enable the connections between the phenomenological and the molecular to be states, where they are known, in preparation for the discussion in Chap.
6.
Experimental observations of time and temperature effects in polymers may be exemplified by the much studied polymer polystyrene (an amorphous polymer) under shear deformation at low strain.
This type of deformation causes no dilatation and so the observed effects may be assumed to be due to one causes only — structural rearrangements which do not cause a change of volume.
Studies of internal friction of polystyrene over a temperature range from near absolute zero to 200°C or more show four distinct "peaks" or regions of energy absorption.
The "spectrum" is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
The most intense peak, centred around 100°C, is associated with the glass-to-rubber transition of the polymer, that is, the onset of large scale configuration readjustments of the polymer chains.
The  transitions occurring at lower temperatures (transitions are commonly labelled ,,—, and so on, starting at the highest temperature) have been assigned to the "freezing-in" of specific parts of the main or subsidiary chains such as the pendant phenyl groups in the polymer.
In polymer science, however, there is yet no formal procedure for relating changes in molecular conformation to specific features of the mechanical spectrum.
In this regard polymer mechanics differs from, say infra-red, Raman or microwave spectroscopy, where the energy spectrum is capable of being exactly related to the molecular vibrations.
The assignments in polymer mechanics have been made largely as a result of experimental work with chemical analogues of the polymer under study — for example for polystyrene by the use of substitutions one the position of the (glass-rubber) and other transitions is observed, and some, largely qualitative, rules laid down.
Polystyrene, and the acrylic polymers (such as PMMA) have been thoroughly studied by this means.
A summary is given in (MP)— for more details Nielsen's book (1962) should be consulted.
Modern configurational analysis (see, for example, Hopfinger (1972)) may afford methods of rigorously relating molecular energetics to mechanical properties — but for any except the simplest molecules the size of the computer required at present precludes the use of this method.
Such studies have, however, been done on defect structures in some polymers, notably polyethylene and the energetics of the —-relaxation now seem to be well understood.
3.2.
Linear viscoelasticity
Measurement of internal friction such as those referred to above have been made for numerous polymers, and relaxation spectra for commonly used  materials are listed in detail in the book by McCrum, read & Williams (1967) and in Ferry's book.
Internal friction, as measured, for example, by damped free oscillations of a pendulum, may be related to creep and to stress relaxation if the deformations are small enough for linear viscoelasticity to be assumed.
These relations were established early in the history of polymer mechanics by numerous workers and the theory comprehensively treated by Gross in 1953.
Staverman and co-workers (1956) paid particular attention to approximations to the solution of the integral equations used in the exact theory, since, experimentally, observations can only be made over limited periods of time (in creep for example) or limited frequency ranges (in dynamic methods) whereas the exact theory of linear viscoelasticity requires the use of infinite integrals.
A short account of polymer viscoelasticity, based mainly on that in (MP) follows.
Hooke's law is a linear relation; so is the relation between stress and strain gradient in Newtonian viscosity.
Linear viscoelasticity therefore starts with a general linear differential equation relating stress and infinitesimal strain:(In this equation — are of corresponding type, for example where the are constants.
Now it is well known that any linear differential equation of order n has n independent solutions, the most general solution being a linear combination of these.
It is this property which leads to the superposition principle first enunciated by Boltzmann, which is of great use in linear viscoelasticity.
The general equation includes particular examples such as: Hooke's law,.
The last two examples give the differential equations of commonly used descriptive models of polymer behaviour in which a Hookean spring and a Newtonian viscous element are coupled either in series (Maxwell) or in parallel (Kelvin-Voigt).
Solutions of the differential equations for steady state and for dynamic loading are given in (MP).
A more valuable model which is widely used is the three-element model termed the standard linear solid — consisting of two springs and one viscous element (dash-pot) or two viscous elements and one spring.
A comprehensive analysis of this three-element model is given in (MP) and is summarized below.
We shall add, however, another treatment of the model, due to Zener, which brings out some of the thermodynamic aspects.
It should perhaps be stressed at this point that the three-element model, while modelling many of the features of solid polymers, remains only a model.
It is incomplete and it has also no structural significance although it is tempting to  describe for example the "springs' in terms of contractile polymer chains (entropy springs) and the" dash-pots' as descriptive of the motion of chains through holes or barriers to motion caused by adjacent chains.
Consider the assembly of springs and dash-pots in Figure 3.2 (a).
This is one of the four possible three-element models all of which are analyses in (MP), Chap.3.
The relationship between stress — and strain e for the springs is the Hookean law while for the dash-pot we assume the Newtonian viscosity law .
Then since we assume that the first, parallel coupled, part of the assembly moves with equal strain e in each part, we have the equations The same form of equation but with different constants is found if we use the mechanically equivalent form of the three-element model given in Figure 3.2 (b).
The solutions of Equation (3.2.) are considered under three categories common in practice:
(a) Constant strain (a stress relaxation experiment)
(b) Constant stress (a creep experiment)
(c) Dynamic stress at a constant frequency Other solutions can be built up from these using the superposition principle.
Stress systems
The reader will have perceived a lack of rigour in our reference to "stress' and" strain"in the discussion of spring-dash-pot models above.
It would perhaps have been more accurate in the discussion to use terms such as load and extension.
However, it as valid to postulate a relation such as the linear differential Equation (3.1) and its particular cases (Maxwell, Kelvin, three-element), as existing between the infinitesimal stress and strain tensors and as an extension of the linear (Hooke's law) relation.
If this is accepted, then certainly in the simple cases of pure shear the extension should be acceptable and be capable of experimental test.
For the more complex general case of the analogous time-dependent form may prove unwieldy and in any case involves much deeper consideration of non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
where K is the bulk modulus .
The forms are termed the deviatoric parts of the respective tensors, while are called the dilatational parts.
For an isotropic material G and K are the two independent elastic constants.
In time-dependent form therefore we may expect one relation between the deviatoric stresses and strains and another, independent one between the dilatational parts.
Deviatoric and dilatational elements of a tensor
Experts in pure shear involve only G. Experiments in tension involve both G and K by the relation for Young's modulus: For this reason measurements on polymers are usually conducted by experiments using shear (torsion) rather than tension.
Measurements of bulk modulus can be mae suing the tube method of Arridge & Crowson (1979) or by direct-pressure dilatometry, but these are not commonly done.
We shall discuss the general time-dependent forms of Equations (3.3) after considering models with multiple relaxation times.
Multiple relaxation times.
Relaxation spectrum
The simple models so far considered (which illustrate rather than justify the linear differential Equation (3.1)) approximate to the behaviour of real materials but do not describe it exactly.
An exactly analogous state of affairs occurs in the use of the Debye model in dielectric theory (see, for example, Frölich (1958) or Daniel (1967)) where the behaviour of a dielectric cannot be represented exactly by a single relaxation time model.
In many relaxations in metals however, as Zener (1948) has shown, the three-element model is sufficient.
In the descriptive sense all that is needed is to take a series array of Voigt-Kelvin models or a parallel array of Maxwell models, writing for the behaviour of the latter under a constant strain for the former under creep conditions.
The values of the in either case are called the "spectrum" of relaxation times although it must be stressed that the values have no structural significance.
In the limit a continuous distribution may be postulated thus:
The dynamic forms of these moduli are more difficult to arrive at and we must retrace our steps to the three-element model in order to introduce the concept of complex modulus.
The complex elastic modulus and operator forms
Consider again the differential equation for the three-element model: where we have substituted for the various constants in terms of the relaxation times complex constants.
Then, substituting in the differential equation, we have 
Bland also discusses the use of the Laplace transform technique in linear viscoelasticity and shows that the solution of a viscoelastic problem can be found from the solution of the corresponding elastic problem provided that the Laplace transforms of the boundary conditions exist, by a correspondence principle.
In the elastic solution the dependent variables and the boundary conditions are replaced by their Laplace transforms and the elastic moduli by the corresponding "p-varying" moduli.
These are just the quantities such as found above with replaced by the transform variable —.
Then inversion of the expressions so obtained for the transforms of the dependent variables gives the viscoelastic solution for these variables.
We shall give examples from Bland and from the literature on viscoelastic materials.
Expansion of a reinforced cylinder by internal pressure
A thick right circular cylinder of viscoelastic material is surrounded by a band of elastic material and both are maintained in plane strain.
The cylinder is subjected to an internal pressure and the outside band is stress-free.
The internal and external radii of the cylinder are a and b respectively and the thickness of the band .
The solution for an elastic cylinder in place strain is need to be found from the boundary conditions, Now if is the circumferential tension in the thin band it is equal to b times the interfacial pressure .
The circumferential strain in the band is, since where are Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus for the band.
At the interface the circumferential strain in the cylinder is and we may now eliminate finding This gives one relation between .
The other is found by the condition that and we obtain, finally: Now form the Laplace transforms of these two expressions by replacing by and .
The term contains the elastic constants.
The "p-varying" form of these will require a knowledge of the type of material either from experimental data, from the assumption that it can be represented by the differential equation or from the assumption of the spectrum of relaxation times outlined on p. 73.
For example, for a Voigt model the shear modulus G(p) = Cp + D, where C and D are constants.
Assuming, as is often the case, incompressibility so that the values of E(p) and v(p) may be obtained: Substituting these back in the expressions for and and performing the inverse transform if possible yields the time-dependent forms of the radial and transverse stresses.
It is clear that while use of the correspondence principle is always possible in theory considerable computational effort may be needed to obtain applicable results.
Extension of a tube by internal pressure
An example where the problem is fairly straightforward comes from the time-dependent form of the expression for the linear extension of a tube under pressure (Arridge 1974).
The elastic expression, derived in books on elasticity (Love 1944), for axial extension z of a tube of wall thickness h, length l and mean radius r, under internal pressure P is where K is the bulk modulus.
The method was used by Mallock in 1904 to measure bulk moduli of various metals.
The time-dependent form is shown to be Applying the Laplace transform to both sides gives so that the transformed bulk modulus There is a fuller discussion of these topics in (MP) and in references (Ferry 1980), McCrum, Read & Williams 1967) including the representation, due to Gross (1953), of the relaxation functions as Laplace integrals.
Experimental determinations of the relaxation functions
In the theories relating viscoelastic response to a spectrum of relaxation times, and in the formulae relating static and dynamic expressions, infinite integrals are used.
Whether the integral is over time or over frequency its empirical form can never cover an infinite range.
Experiments lasting longer than 1 day (100 000 seconds) are not frequently performed, and since in relaxation studies most quantities behave logarithmically, periods of 10 days, 100 days and 1000 days (3 years) are needed if ranges of time are to be significantly increased.
Some studies, for example of ageing effects in polymers and of creep, have extended as long as 3 years but these are few.
Approximate methods have been required therefore for any practical use of relaxation theory.
The simplest and earliest of these is due to Alfrey and consists of taking the spectral function as the negative slope of the relaxation curve in a static (stress relaxation or creep) experiment (Figure 3.5).
Formally, if where GR is the relaxed modulus and the relaxation time, then Alfrey writes This is derived quite simply by substituting a step function for exp () in the expression for G(t) above.
(The use of the term for the spectrum of relaxation times follows conventional practice.
Its relation to the form used in Equation (3.4) is straightforward.)
Better approximations for (and the inverse quantity which describes compliances) have been developed, largely by Staverman and his associates.
They involve higher derivatives and are therefore somewhat less easy to apply than the Alfrey approximation.
A brief account of these is given in (MP).
See also Ferry (1970) and Staverman (1956).
Relaxations as functions of temperature
In all the foregoing discussion of viscoelasticity temperature has not been a variable yet one of the most spectacular properties of polymers is their sensitivity to temperature.
Indeed many of their most useful characteristics derive from this.
For example polymethyl methacrylate (Perspex, Plexiglas) may be moulded to any desired shape by warming it to temperatures little over 100°C and cooling it in the deformed state.
The same is true of polystyrene and many other thermoplastic, amorphous, materials.
The polymer undergoes a transition from a glassy to a rubbery state at some temperature called the glass transition temperature Tg.
There is a full discussion of the glass transition (MP), Chap.
2, and we shall merely summarize the most important physical aspect of it as it affects relaxation phenomena, namely the time-temperature superposition principle and its  relation to free volume (the so-called WLF relation).
The glass transition in polymers is by no mens fully understood and the student should consult recent reviews of the subject.
3.4.
Time-temperature superposition
If experiments such as creep or stress relaxation are performed on the same sample of a polymer over a range of temperatures a pattern of behaviour is apparent that as long ago as 1943 led to the proposal of a "master curve" to which all observations could be reduced.
An example from the recent work of Crowson (1977) for shear creep in an epoxy resin is shown in Figure 3.6.
This shows plots of log J(t) the shear creep compliance, as a function of log t for a range of temperatures covering the glass transition.
The individual plots can be superposed by horizontal shifting by an amount log to form a master curve of sigmoid shape.
This first curve is shown in Figure 3.7.
This master curve is typical of those obtained on a number of amorphous polymers and to be found in the literature.
It is to be seen that the fit is not perfect and improved fits require vertical shifting as well as horizontal.
there are a number of theories which predict the correct vertical shifts to be used.
One of the most satisfactory, for the rubbery, high-temperature part of the curve, is that of Ferry & Tobolsky whose method is to multiply each J(t) value by the ratio where are the reference temperature and density at that temperature and T,— the same quantities for data being modified.
The ratio T/To in the above compensates for the change in terminal modulus in the rubbery material (where rubber elasticity theory predicts GT) while the density ratio arises from thermal expansion.
The correction has no physical interpretation below the glass transition, McCrum and Morris propose a more general procedure which takes this into account.
Vertical shifting affects the values of log and the modified plot of log against l/T is shown in Figure 3.8 (T is measured in kelvins).
The meaning of the shift factor 
The plot is not linear.
Now is the viscoelastic process followed the pattern of chemical rate processes and was describable by an Arrhenius relation for the relaxation time , namely   then we shall show that the plot would have been linear.
The fact that it is not linear for a glass transition led to the development of the Williams-Landel-Ferry (WLF) relation (1955).
The linear relation is found, however, for secondary relaxations and it is logical to discuss these first and the WLF relation later.
The low-temperature relaxation is usually modelled as a double-potential well process in which the probability of the system transferring from the one equilibrium state to the other is biased by stress.
Zener (1948) analysed the double-potential well for relaxation in metals.
The theory is as follows.
In a mechanical relaxation experiment we estimate stress and strain from observations of the loads and displacements on the specimen, making the assumptions of specimen homogeneity and a linear stress-strain relation.
From these estimates of stress and strain we calculate the elastic modulus E or G, according to the type of experiment.
It is the behaviour of E or G as a function of frequency or time, or more usually of temperature that constitutes the relaxation experiment.
To relate these variable quantities to molecular processes is the purpose of many theoretical and experimental investigations.
A common and simple theory is  based on the double potential well model in which an element (chain segment, defect or other unit) is free to move between two sites of differing free energy over a free-energy barrier.
Consider a volume v under shear stress — in which there are N elements capable of changing heir position.
Of these N let be the equilibrium numbers under zero stress conditions and Ni the corresponding values under stress —.
Let be the transition probabilities, in the absence and presence respectively of stress, between sites i and j.
Then referring to Figure 3.9 we have where D is a constant.
In the stressed state Supposing that the initial compliances were equal we would have, removing the primes, that is, the compliance at a temperature T is the same as that at temperature To but for the reduced time .
If we use a log plot then the shifting procedure becomes clear, namely (The origin of the correction factor for vertical shifting now becomes clear.
It is just the ratio of initial compliances , which must be applied to the observations of J(t) before they are plotted.)
In general, however, we have, as in Equation (3.4) and its analogues, a spectrum of relaxation times so that we write Two assumptions are now usually made.
The first we have already used, namely that , and this is held to apply to all relaxation times in the distribution.
This implies the rather restricting condition that they all have the same activation energy and there are doubts upon this point being raised in recent research.
The second assumption is that the shape of the distribution remains unchanged with temperature, that is, the magnitudes of each relaxation change uniformly with temperature.
Then with, perhaps a constant multiplier on the right-hand side.
3.5.
The Williams-Landel-Ferry expression for log 
If plots of J(t) against log time are made for a temperature range including the glass transition and log aT is plotted against l/T straight lines are not obtained.
Thus either the theory or its assumptions are wrong.
In some cases the (log aT, 1/T) plot appears to separate into two approximate straight lines — suggesting two activation energies and a transition between two different rate processes.
It is possible to interpret data this way and, if independent evidence supports the dual process hypothesis, it may turn out to be the correct one.
Williams, Landel & Ferry (1955) found experimentally that 1n aT followed a relation of the form and further that C1 and C2 seemed to be universal parameters with values C1 = 20.4, C2 = 101.6 and Ts a reference temperature, which is different for each polymer but generally found to be about 50° above the glass transition temperature Tg.
If referred to Tg as a reference temperature the WLF relation becomes The validity of this relation is in the range from according to Williams, Landel & Ferry.
That it is valid in this region is shown by Figure 3.8 from Crowson (1977).
Its derivation from and relation to free volume theories of the glass transition has been thoroughly discussed in the literature.
A short outline of the theory, adapted from the account in (MP, Chap.
2) is given below.
For more details the text by Ferry (1980) and the literature references given at the end of this chapter should be consulted.
The free volume theory
Free volume is an ill-defined but useful concept closely related to the hole theory of liquids.
The total volume per mole v is pictured as the sum of the free volume vf and an occupied volume vo.
Ferry takes vo as including not only the Van der Waals' radii but also the volume associated with vibrational motion.
The free volume is therefore that extra volume required for larger-scale vibrational motions than those found between consecutive atoms of the same chain.
Flexing over several atoms, that is, transverse string-like vibrations of a chain rather than longitudinal or rotational vibrations will obviously require extra room.
It is assumed that the temperature coefficient of expansion of the free volume   is greater than that of the occupied volume above Tg (Figure 3.10)(from Ferry (1980)).
Tg is defined on the free volume concept as that temperature at which vf collapses sensibly to zero, or at any rate to a frozen-in value.
Hole mobility has therefore been totally restricted and the only movement below Tg is that allowed by the occupied volume vo.
There are numerous theories for the type, number and distribution of the holes that make up the free volume but we shall discuss solely the use of the free volume concept in the derivation of the Williams-Landel-Ferry (WLF) equation, Equation (3.11).
Doolittle (1952) reconsidered Batschinski's suggestion that the resistance to flow of a liquid depended upon the free-space available to a molecule rather than upon the temperature.
Thermal expansion of a liquid without change of phase can then be regarded as an increase in free volume.
Taking the specific volume at any temperature the specific volume at temperature T will be where T is the coefficient of thermal expansion at temperature T. This equation is true for small temperature increments.
The fractional increase of volume fv in this case is and the specific volume of free space, or free volume Now if the coefficient of expansion remains constant throughout the entire range of temperature the fractional free volume fv is just .
In general is of course not constant.
Doolittle (1952) considered the accurate calculation of the total thermal expansion from absolute zero to the temperature of measurement.
This required consideration of methods of extrapolating to absolute zero.
Doolittle defined free volume fv in terms of the specific volume extrapolated to absolute zero, giving This definition of fv is, of course, different from that given above [Equation (3.12)]and fv is not a linear function of temperature in this case.
In experimental work on the viscosity of the alkanes over a wide range of temperature Doolittle found however that the simple relation where A and B are constants gave a very much better fit to the experimental data, than the Andrade equation From the discussion we have given it is clear that fv is only a linear function of T if the expansion of the liquid is given by the linear equation and this is only true over small temperature ranges.
Hence we should expect the Andrade equation to hold for small temperature increments only.
An equation of the Andrade form is derivable from double potential well theory and in this case the constant B takes the meaning of an activation energy.
In the Doolittle equation however B is a constant without immediate physical meaning.
In adapting Doolittle's theory for low-molecular weight liquids to the case of very high molecular weight polymers, Williams, Landel & Ferry (1955) took a different definition of the fractional free volume defining it as where is the fractional free volume at a reference temperature is a coefficient of expansion of free volume.
If this value of fv is substituted in the Doolittle expression for viscosity we find An equation of this type had already been suggested by Williams, Landel & Ferry as an empirical way of combining data derived at different temperatures into one master curve.
They found that the ratio derived from transient or dynamic measurements or from viscosity measurements could be accurately given by the relation If Ts is given the value Tg then Cl and C2 become 
It is not necessary to consider volume alone as the"excess' parameter which becomes significant at Tg.
Goldstein (1963) has shown that either the enthalpy or the entropy may be used to derive an equation of the WLF type, and that if either excess enthalpy He or excess entropy Se were used to determine Tg then whereas if excess volume Ve determines Tg we should expect .
The evidence at present therefore suggests that free enthalpy or free entropy would be better parameters to use than free volume, but that it is not possible to choose between them.
In any case the WLF equation retains its validity (for glass transitions, and primarily for the region between T g and Tg + 100).
It is only the mode of its derivation from the Doolittle equation which would be changed.
3.6.
The glass transition
Glass, familiar for centuries, is a solid material showing no crystalline structure.
It is often described as a supercooled liquid with a viscosity exceeding .
Glasses soften rather than melt, thus enabling their characteristic working into complex shapes.
The traditional glasses were inorganic — mainly oxides or mixtures of oxides and have softening temperatures in the region 600–1500°C (although some lower-temperature glasses exist).
With the advent of polymeric materials however a new range of glassy materials has become important.
Examples are polymethylmethacrylate and polystyrene.
These are sometimes used as substitutes for oxide glasses in, for example, aircraft windows.
In fact all polymers can enter the glassy state, even though there may be crystal phases present as well, and the glassy state can exist in a very wide range of materials which are not polymers — such as ethanol, propylene glycol, glycerol and sulphur.
We shall talk about polymers only, but the theory is general and applies to all glasses.
The region of temperature over which the viscosity of the liquid increases to the glassy level is called the "glass transition" .
It is sometimes wrongly called a second-order transition but we shall show below that this is an incorrect use of language.
The glass transition is particularly marked in rubbers where, because of the cross-linking between the chains, the liquid phase has become a rubber, capable of reversible large-scale extensions.
When these materials are cooled below their glass transition they become brittle and shatter easily with a blow.
We normally use rubber (polyisoprene, polybutadiene or a similar polymer) above its glass transition and have to cool it well below its normal temperature region of application to make it glassy.
Polymethylmethacrylate (Perspex or Plexiglas), however, we use in its glassy state (as said before, as a substitute for window glass, for example).
If we heat this above about 100°C it becomes rubbery.
We can also show the transition in cross-linked polymers such as epoxy resin.
The change in elastic modulus between the two states is similar for both these materials and is of the order of 100 times, or more.
Most glassy polymers have a shear modulus of about .
Rubbers have shear moduli of or less.
Definition of the glass temperature
We must now take a closer look at definitions and measurements regarding the glass transition.
If a curve is plotted of the specific volume of a polymer as a function of temperature it will in general be of the form shown in Figure 3.11.
The specific volume changes linearly with temperature up to a transition region where a change of slope occurs, after which the curve continues linearly but at a steeper gradient; Tg is usually defined s the point at which the tangents   to the two curves intersect.
Such curves are obtained by dilatometry which is a slow experiment and therefore capable of giving reproducible results for the glass transition temperature which, as we shall see, is strongly time-dependent.
Now if the polymer had been crystallizable the curve of the specific volume against temperature would have shown a discontinuity at the melting point as in Figure 3.12.
Here Tm represents the melting point and Tg1, Tg2…the glass transition temperature obtained at various (decreasing) rates of cooling.
The behaviour shown in figure 3.12 is typical of any material capable of forming both glassy and crystalline phases.
In the region between Tm and Tg, supercooling occurs and sudden crystallization can take place.
Below Tg, however, the viscosity has risen so far that rapid crystallization is not possible and the material remains in the disordered glassy state.
If the cooling rate is slower the supercooling persists to   lower temperatures and the transition Tg2 occurs at a lower temperature than Tg1.
If infinite time were allowed a limiting value would presumably be reached.
It is reasonable to consider that the glasses obtained by different cooling rates from the melt are different from each other.
They certainly differ in density and may also differ in other respects such as entropy.
For this reason it may not be correct to relate thermodynamic quantities obtained from one cooling curve to those obtained by another as has been pointed out by Gee (1966).
The Ehrenfest definition of a second-order transition is derived as follows.
For equilibrium a reversible change of state is necessary.
If this is to take place at constant temperature and pressure, the Gibbs free energy of the whole system must remain constant.
That is,.
For two neighbouring points on the (p, T) diagram this means Expanding by Taylor's theorem about and using the first equality gives where are changes in v and S respectively at the transition.
Now is there is no latent heat and no change in specific volume at the transition, then and we have a second-order transition.
Furthermore, we are assuming that the absence of latent heat and a change in specific volume is true not only at one point but along a finite part of the (p, T) diagram.
This implies continuity of v and S across the equilibrium line and gives two equations  
Many experiments on polymers have been made in order to determine whether or not these relations hold at the glass temperature [for a discussion see Gee (1966)].
In general they do not, and for most polymers: It is therefore preferable to refer to glass-rubber or glass-liquid transitions in polymers invariably as glass transitions rather than as second-order transitions to avoid implying that they are true thermodynamic second-order transitions.
The approach to equilibrium
How do we explain the results shown in Figure 3.12?
Obviously the glassy state is a time-dependent one.
Yet there is a pronounced asymmetry between the approach to equilibrium during cooling and the behaviour on heating.
This behaviour suggests that the rates of approach to and from equilibrium are determined by the actual non-equilibrium state of the material.
This type of behaviour is termed "co-operative" or "auto-catalytic" and many theories have been proposed to explain it.
Consider Figure 3.13.
The straight line represents the equilibrium relation between V and T. Let us consider a polymer or specific volume V2 at temperature T2, which cools fast to temperature T3.
There is no time for equilibrium to be established and instead of reaching it reaches Vo.
In time, at temperature T3, it will then relax towards .
Now in general suppose the rate of change of volume dV/dt during this process is proportional to the difference in volume.
That is, where we have made an obvious substitution of the constant -C.
This is a simple, single relaxation time model for the approach to equilibrium.
Goldbach & Rehage (1967) propose a more general form: or where for the simplest case).
Kovacs (1963) defines the fractional free volume and where is the ‘occupied’ volume (compare our definition earlier).
Then , where δ is the fraction so that the Goldbach–Rehage formula above becomes or This can be written in terms of, the relaxation time at the glass temperature, since where is a shift factor and Hence or, if the material is being heated or cooled at a rate we have where is the decrement of the expansion coefficient of the glass and , as before.
The equation can be integrated numerically and Figure 3.14 shows Kovacs' results.
The cooling curves are shown by arrows and correspond to two different rates 0.5 deg/s and -0.01 deg/s.
The behaviour is representative of experimental results.
For heating, however, the theory predicts a fundamental asymmetry similar to, but not exactly the same as, that observed experimentally.
One heating rate +0.01 deg/s was used, but starting at different values of V (and thus —).
The curves overshoot the equilibrium line and then suddenly rise to it.
The coefficient of expansion shows a pronounced peak, similar to that observed experimentally and often confused with a first-order transition.
In  fact the agreement with experiment, though qualitatively correct, is not very good and better results are obtained by the use of a set of relaxation times rather than only one.
Statistical theories of the glass transition
Kargin, Kitaigorodskii & Slonimskii (1957) considered that amorphous polymers have an ordered bundle-like structure, determined by the chain structure of the macromolecules.
Volkenstein (1959) draws the analogy with ferromagnetism and considers the transition from completely amorphous to bundle-like structure as being associated with a second-order transition, similar to the transition from the paramagnetic to the ferromagnetic state (the Weiss theory of ferromagnetism).
Another theory is that of Gibbs & di Marzio (1958), who apply a lattice model of a polymer to a statistical calculation of the configurational entropy.
By making the assumption that one orientation of a link in a chain relative to its neighbour is energetically preferred over all others they show that a temperature exists at which the configurational entropy vanishes, giving a true second-order transition at this point.
Gibbs and de Marzio postulate that the number of available states in the statistical mechanical sense is not constant through the glass transition but reduces to zero at some temperature which, however, may never be reached i an experimentally realizable time.
This temperature will depend on the chain rigidity and on the energy of intermolecular interaction.
Physically the process of cooling a polymer through its glass transition would then be as follows.
At high temperatures the configurational entropy will be high and there will be many ways for molecules to be packed, with no one configuration preferred over another.
As the temperature falls however two processes occur:(a) low energy configurations start to predominate and (b) the volume of holes decreases.
The number of ways of packing is reduced since the empty volume available becomes more and more correlated with the molecules.
Eventually the limit is reached where no further packing would be possible and where the configurational entropy therefore vanishes.
This is T2 the proposed second-order transition.
Although the statistical theory of Gibbs and de Marzio has had some success for polystyrene in predicting the variation of T2 with molecular weight, the variation of specific heat with temperature, it has met with criticism.
Volkenstein (1959) criticized the theory, mainly on the grounds that it concentrates entirely on barriers to rotation, neglecting intermolecular cohesion, and that it is not applicable to low-molecular-weight polymers, which also form glasses.
However, the theory does explain the variation of Tg found in copolymers and, in a later modification, by considering the temperature dependence of relaxation in terms of a "co-operative rearranging region" dependent upon the configurational entropy, a relation similar in form to the WLF equation was found and the prediction made that .
This temperature difference may in fact have significance in that the WLF equation has an infinity for a temperature about 50° below Tg and there is some evidence that the extrapolation of plots of equilibrium data below Tg gives intercepts at about 50° below Tg.
In other words Gibbs and di Marzio's temperature T2 should be considered as a theoretically derived equilibrium glass transition temperature which would in theory be attained by an infinitely slow cooling from the melt.
Recent reviews of the glass transition in amorphous polymers include those by Haward (1970); Kovacs, Hutchinson & Aklonis (1977); and Kovacs 91963).
3.7.
Non-Linear viscoelasticity
The cases where the relation between stress and infinitesimal strain is linear have already been discussed.
Strain measures suitable for large strains have been suggested and the definition of stress in this situation given.
Experimentally it is found that while Hooke's law and its viscoelastic analogue of Boltzmann's superposition principle hold adequately for very small strains (typically less than 0.1 per cent) they certain do not hold for large strains of 10 per cent or more.
We have earlier discussed the Rivlin and Mooney-Rivlin relations for large recoverable strains (for example in rubbers).
Do similar relations hold (by analogy perhaps with the Boltzmann principle) for viscoelastic materials at large  strains?
While it is true to say that there is no simple relation of general application in the case of materials at large strains there are certain general principles which have been formulated by the theoreticians and which in particular cases lead to expressions capable of experimental test.
What is being sought?
In Chap.
1 we examined the purposes of research into materials and considered what could be termed the theoretical, the practical and the analytical approaches to materials research.
In the first of these a great deal of effort has gone into the development of exact theories of continua under conditions of complete generality.
This subject is broadly termed continuum mechanics and is an academic discipline in its own right.
However, just as engineers and physicists find practical use for some of the results of classical elasticity theory (usually in semi-empirical forms) so rheologists, polymer scientists and material scientists in general wish to find applicable parts of continuum theory, particularly when the simpler linear theories we have discussed earlier in the chapter fail.
In some respects this wish can be granted, but in general even if applicable theory exists it is often of too great a complexity to be of use to practical scientists.
There is in fact a great need for research in this area of the applicability of continuum mechanics.
There are indeed many fields where this is actively being pursued, but the work at present lacks cohesion.
Attempts to provide the necessary cohesion are made, for example, by the organisers of the international biennial conferences on continuum models of discrete systems.
Turning to what has been termed the analytical approach to materials in which the reasons for the macroscopically observed behaviour are sought in molecular configurations and other aspects of microstructure, there has been a recent acceleration of research into polymer chain configurations and their modification by stress and deformation.
We shall endeavour to outline some of this research in Chap.
6.
In this chapter, however, we want to adumbrate the principal features of the continuum view of non-linear viscoelasticity.
Constitutive relations
In classical elasticity the relation between stress and strain, both defined for infinitesimal displacements, is assumed to be linear.
In the more general field of continuum mechanics it is the relations between displacement gradient and the forces causing the displacement which are sought.
Such laws, which may be empirical or based upon macroscopic or molecular models, are termed constitutive relations.
Whereas classical elasticity is firmly based on Hooke's law (even if, as in the early nineteenth century, explanations in terms of interatomic forces are sought) modern continuum mechanics rigorously defines deformations and stresses and seeks general connections between them.
If we seek a constitutive relation which is to be characteristic of a material  but not dependent on its dimensions then the use of stress and displacement follows, for otherwise the behaviour of two differently sized samples of the same material would be seen to be different.
(If a rod of length l and cross-sectional area A is stretched by force F it will stretch by an amount —, say.
The same force on a rod of twice the area will not deform by — but by —/2.; Hence if we are to form a constitutive relation for the material of the rod it must not contain the dimensions.)
The first ad simplest relation between stress and deformation gradient would be a linear one.
The most general would be a polynomial There is, however, an important assumption made here, that is, that both and are evaluated at the same point.
Classical elasticity assumes this to be the case and it has been very successful with continuous media.
Where the medium is not continuous on the scale of the measurement being made the assumption is not so plausible.
So-called non-local theories have been developed which take into account these "granular" effects.
There are, however, even more important considerations to be made regarding the general constitutive relation.
Time is not considered in classical theories yet no experiment can be made which does not involve time.
When a stress is applied to a solid the response cannot in reality be instantaneous and, in polymers, in particular, elastic"after-effects' (to use the phrase of Weber in 1835) are found.
We have discussed these in the practical, linear case earlier in the chapter when the Boltzmann principle was referred to.
Here we must consider the inclusion of time effects in more detail.
It is found experimentally that practical materials "remember previous deformations to which they have been subjected…stress depends on…strains to which the material was subjected at all times up to and including t" (Lockett 1973).
Or again, "the fundamental assumption (of rheology) is that the stress at time t in a given element is determined — by the history of the shape of that element" (Lodge 1974).
The ultimate source, therefore, of the theories must lie in experiments and the need to interpret such experiments.
This was indeed the case in the original proposal of Boltzmann, when in 1876 he sought to explain the experiments of Weber and Kohlrausch on the elastic after-effect in twisted wires.
Without any recourse to molecular interpretation Boltzmann proposed that "the forces which act on the surface of an elementary parallelepiped at the given time but also on the previous extensions, with the promise that the longer the time since they took place the smaller their effect." 
He took the effect of a deformation  occurring at time for a period d to be proportional to and was thus led to his superposition integral which in modern terminology is 
In this equation G and — are the Lame constants, is the dilatation and are functions of time.
Boltzmann showed how the function — was related to the gradient of torque in an experiment on the twisting of a wire (we would refer to it as a time-dependent shear modulus) and gave the results of such an experiment.
Now in modern mathematical terms a dependence of stress on strain history (and vice versa) is expressed by the use of functionals.
A functional is a quantity or function which depends upon the entire course of one or more functions rather than on a number of discrete variables.
The domain of a functional is the set, or space, of all admissible functions rather than a region of coordinate space.
It is thus a function of functions.
For example the length of a curve y = y (x) between is given by and therefore depends upon the form of y.
In the literature a "simple" material is referred to as one in which the stress depends only on the history of the deformation gradients F (dependence on higher-order gradients has been considered but at present seems to be of little practical value).
Expressing the above statement in terms of functionals we have where is some functional to be determined.
In Boltzmann's theory the functional is the integral but more general forms may be found which then allow representation of the non-linear properties of materials.
Analogous to the series we have the functional .
So also, analogous to the bilinear form we have the functional bilinear in the function x(t).
The general form is Under certain conditions it is possible to show that any functional y may be expressed in the form (Frechet 1910).
We see therefore that Boltzmann's superposition integral is a special case of a more general functional relationship between stress and deformation gradient in which and has the special form in which the kernel function K1 contains t and only in the combination (t —).
This restriction of the kernel function K1 is discussed by Volterra (1931) and shown to be a requirement of the theory of hereditary  phenomena, when the phenomenon always follows the same course as it passes successively through the same conditions, whatever may be the relative position of these conditions in time.
Volterra terms this "invariable heredity" .
If the restriction on the kernel function to be a function of t — is removed then material ageing is allowable as Lockett (1973) points out.
The more general form of K will not be discussed further here.
The general expansion of a functional y in the series with the kernel functions being of the invariable heredity form was used by Green & Rivlin (1957) to give the general form for the constitutive relation in a non-linear solid:
To date very little practical use has been made of such general relations because of the vast amount of experimental work required to test any but the simplest expansion in two or three terms.
References and outline of the work are given in (MP).
3.8.
Molecular theories
To attempt to review all the molecular theories of the mechanical properties would require a very considerable amount of space and it is not the purpose of this book to do this.
There are excellent review articles in, for example, Advances in Polymer Science, which provide up-to-date information.
Here we shall give accounts of two molecular theories which have been moderately successful and which will in any case serve to introduce the student to this subject (see also Chap.
6).
The Bernstein-Kearsley-Zapas (BKZ) theory
Bernstein, Kearsley & Zapas (1963) started by recognizing that theories of viscoelastic materials related the history of stress at a material point to the history of the deformation gradients at that point, the stress history being expressed as a functional of the deformation-gradient history.
However, they pointed out that each and every deformation-gradient history yielded only one value of the  argument of the functionals involved.
It is therefore impossible, from the results of one deformation-gradient history to predict the results of any other.
What is needed is some basis for estimating the functional from a finite number of experimental results.
They proposed two simplified theories — one for an incompressible solid, the other for an incompressible elastic fluid, which can be compared with experiment.
The theory for an incompressible solid assumes a functional of the deformation gradients (Where, compare Equation (2.14) and the right Cauchy-Green tensor, is given by and, because of incompressibility det ).
The stress at time , is assumed to be given by where p is an undetermined hydrostatic pressure.
The functional may be written, by Frechet's theorem (see p. 104), in multiple integral form in the manner of Green and Rivlin.
Bernstein, Kearsley & Zapas (BKZ), however, consider only the first term of such an expansion and write (Compare the form of this with the Boltzmann expression (3.5).)
The further assumption is made that the material is isotropic.
This implies the existence of three material constants M, R and — as well as two material functions such that we have 
BKZ consider, as an example, the case of a uniform strip extended at t = 0 by an extension ratio — and then constrained.
They obtain an expression for the stress  as a function of time In this form, and at long-term equilibrium the material resembles one considered by Signiorini (1955), whereas if A/2 + B = 0 it is of Mooney form and if A = B = 0 it is Rivlin's neo-Hookean material.
BKZ also consider the case of an incompressible elastic fluid of the type referred to in the literature as Coleman-Noll.
In such a fluid, the stress at time t depends upon the previous history of the configuration existing at time t.
BKZ consider that this effect of previous history results from the stored elastic energy in the configuration at a previous time and they then assume the stress at time t to be the sum of all the contributions from all .
The equation obtained for stress is 
There is good experimental evidence for the applicability of the BKZ Equation (3.19) and it is also similar in form to a more recent constitutive equation derived by Doi and Edwards and based upon a primitive chain model.
The Doi-Edwards theory
The argument of Doi & Edwards (1978) is as follows.
They make three assumptions:(a) the real polymer chains move in a mean field called the cage, and in the cage field each chain is confined in a tube-like region, the central line of which is defined as the primitive chain;(b) the equilibrium conformation of the primitive chain is a random walk with step length a and arc length L;(c) the primitive chain, as a whole, moves as a Brownian particle along itself, with curvilinear diffusion constant D. 
These three assumptions characterized the equilibrium theory.
To account for dynamical properties under flow Doi and Edwards introduce a fourth assumption — a slip-link network — whose junctions are not permanent cross-links but rings through which chains can pass freely.
Then,(d), each slip-link point changes its position by affine deformation (homogeneous deformation as in rubber elasticity theory).
This causes a change in the lengths of the primitive chains and the tensile forces acting on their individual segments are no longer in equilibrium.
The monomers then redistribute so as to restore balance in what is termed the first relaxation.
The second relaxation is a disengagement of the primitive chain from the deformed tube and is analysed by the kinematics of the primitive chain.
The stress on the primitive chain at time t is found as where is the disengagement time, that is, the time required for chains to disengage completely from surrounding entanglements (it is the longest relaxation time for a chain), c is the number of polymers in unit volume so that cN is the number of chain segments in unit volume, and is a function of the deformation.
The theory makes important predictions regarding the change of chain configuration during deformation and relaxation and these are measurable by monitoring the radius of gyration tensor.
The general constitutive equation is found to be where and is now an integral involving the deformation gradient.
It is calculated for two cases: shear deformation and uniaxial stretching and compression.
The complex viscosity in oscillating shear flow is derived and shares the form of the Rouse theory (see Chap.
6) but is qualitatively different:
Of more interest is the derivation by Doi and Edwards for heir molecular  theory of a constitutive equation for non-linear viscoelasticity.
This turns out to be a special case of the BKZ equation but gives an explicit form for the memory kernel with the dependence of the rheological parameters on molecular weight and concentration.
It also predicts a stress-superposition law which has been observed experimentally.
There is further discussion of the Doi-Edwards theory in Chap.
6.
For additional information the original papers should be consulted.
Further reading
The subject matter of this chapter is covered fairly fully in the author's earlier book (Arridge 1975) while Ferry (1980) may be referred to for the most comprehensive account.
References are given in the text for specific matters such as the glass transition and time-temperature superposition.
The most complete atlas of mechanical properties of polymers is still that by McCrum, Read & Williams (1967).
polymers as composite materials
4.1.
Introduction
Only an amorphous polymer can be considered as homogeneous.
(but even this statement needs to be qualified for the molecular scale.)
It cannot necessarily be considered as isotropic because if highly draw the chains become oriented and the elastic and other (for example optical) properties differ between different directions.
Crystallizable polymers consist of a mass of tiny crystals, usually mis-oriented with respect to one another and embedded in non-crystalline material.
Such a material we term a composite, taking the word in its most general sense as being equivalent to multiphase or to heterogeneous.
Some polymers are ore obviously multiphase than others; for example, block copolymers separate into different phases of quite large dimensions.
A great many of the physical features of polymer composites are shared by all composite materials and we shall devote the largest part of this chapter to the topic of the mechanical properties of composites in general before particularizing on the features peculiar to polymers.
We need to consider four problems:
1.
The anisotropy of a "unit cell" of the polymer
2.
The properties of assembles of such cells with a given orientation distribution function
3. the effect of deformation of such structures by drawing, extrusion or other practical processes
4.
The orientation of the chains of amorphous polymers on deformation.
Only the first two of these problems are discussed fully here.
An outline of the effects of deformation is given in (MP) but fuller accounts are to be found in books, dealing specifically with the yield and deformation of polymers, such as Ciferri & Ward (1979) and Ward (1975).
4.2.
The unit cell: scale effects
Inhomogeneous materials, both natural and man-made, may be classified according to the following factors:
(a) Scale — macroscopic, microscopic, molecular, and so on.
(b) The spatial distribution of the inhomogeneities — random, pseudo-crystalline, crystalline.
(c) Local geometry — whether the inhomogeneities are spherical, ellipsoidal, lenticular or needle-shaped, and so on.
(d) The elastic symmetry of the inhomogeneities — which may not coincide either with the lattice symmetry, if any, of (b) or with the local geometrical symmetry suggested in (c).
Scale
Consider the following solids:
1.
Window glass; 2.
A polycrystalline metal; 3.
Sandstone; 4.
Concrete; 5.
A brick wall; 6.
The surface crust of the Earth, with folds and intrusions.
In each case we can choose a scale above which the material may be considered homogeneous, but below which the structure needs to be considered.
Roughly, for he list given the scale is: a few nanometres, a few microns, a few millimetres, tens of millimetres, a tenth of a metre, several kilometres.
We never in practice achieve the homogeneity of physical properties we should like to assume in the applications of elasticity theory.
This is partly the result of scale effects, which we ow need to define more exactly.
One of the earliest considerations of scale in solids was by Sander (1930) in his work Gefügekunde der Gesteine, translatable as "Structural Petrology" .
In it he states "a body is statistically homogeneous when the average of the internal constitution in any volume element is the same for all volume elements with dimensions not smaller than the scale under consideration" .
He uses the term "fabric" (German gefüge) to denote the internal ordering of physical and spatial data in an aggregate.
(The word "texture" is more common in metallurgy and in polymer science.)
The components may be crystal grains and their arrangement is not generally subject to the three-dimensional periodicity and the energy-dependent packing laws of the crystal lattice — so that the permissible kinds of order differ from those of crystals.
The symmetry of a fabric or texture is defined statistically by Sander and expressed in term of point group symmetry because translational symmetry is absent in petrology.
There are five types:
(a) Spherical — random orientation of fabric elements
(b) Axial — spheroidal symmetry with one unique axis
(c) Orthorhombic — the symmetry of a triaxial ellipsoid
(d) Monoclinic — a single plane of symmetry with a diad
axis normal to
it
(e) Triclinic — no planes of symmetry Similar considerations of symmetry apply in other systems; for example, nematic liquid crystals and aligned short fibre composites have symmetry , smectic A liquid crystals have , while in copolymers and certain fibre composites examples of hexagonal symmetry may be found and translational symmetry may also be present, which is not found in petrology.
In 1963 Hill defined the representative volume element (RVE) in a consideration of general properties of composite materials.
The definition is more exact than Sander's, which it includes.
The representative volume element is a sample that (a) is structurally entirely typical of the whole mixture on average, and (b) contains a sufficient number of inclusions for the apparent overall moduli to be effectively independent of the surface values of traction and displacement so long as these values are "macroscopically uniform" .
That is, they fluctuate about a mean with a wavelength small compared with the dimensions of the sample, and the effects of these fluctuations become insignificant within a few wavelengths of the surface.
In 9a), for consideration of the representative volume element, Hill calculates the volume average of for example the stress as the integral taken over the volume, divided by that volume.
Thus The determination of"sufficient number of inclusions' immediately involves questions of scale and also of the method of testing when experiments are being designed.
If ultrasonic methods were used, for example, anomalous effects would be observed when the wavelength was of the order of the phase dimensions.
It is worthwhile to consider some models of polymer structure and ascertain their usefulness as representative volume elements (RVE).
Of the structures actually perceivable in polymers one may consider the spherulite in a semi-crystalline polymer as being unsuitable as an RVE because the boundary is not included.
However, an assembly of spherulites would be acceptable, since it would contain sufficient to make it entirely typical of the bulk and because such an assembly would have moduli independent of the surface tractions and displacements.
The linear size of such a representative volume element of spherulites would be perhaps several hundred microns.
The RVE for an amorphous polymer may be expected to be no more than 10 nanometres or so.
Where a melt crystallized polymer has been processed by drawing, rolling or other means to produce an aligned structure in which lamellae as well as polymer chains have discernible order a pseudo-crystalline unit cell is present.
Provided that this unit cell contains elements of the crystals as well as the boundaries between crystals and that it is entirely typical of the material as a whole then it could be considered as a RVE within the meaning defined above.
The lamella crystal itself, sometimes considered as embedded in an amorphous matrix, would not seem to be an acceptable RVE because its modulus is dependent upon the surface tractions.
The boundaries between lamella crystals in the matrix must be included in an acceptable RVE.
Our reason for stressing the concept of representative volume element is that it seems to provide a valuable dividing boundary between continuum theories and molecular or microscopic theories.
For scales larger than the RVE we can use continuum mechanics (classical and large strain elasticity, linear and non-linear viscoelasticity) and derive from experiment useful and reproducible properties of the material as a whole.
Below the scale of the RVE we must consider the micromechanics of the material.
4.3.
Calculation of elastic moduli
At present there re two preferred approaches to this problem although other methods and, for particular geometries, exact solutions exist.
These are (a) the determination of bounds and (b) a self-consistent estimate taking into account the shape of inclusions.
In (a) no geometrical details are allowed for and the bounds depend only on the relative volumes of the constituents.
In (b) to date only certain shapes of inclusion have been considered such as spheres, ellipsoids, rods and discs.
Bounds on elastic moduli
The widest bounds — between which all elastic moduli must lie — were set out long ago by Voigt and Reuss.
Following Hill we shall show that all estimates must lie within these bounds.
Better bounds can be established by using energy principles as was done by Hill and by Hashin & Shtrikman (1963) for isotropic materials and by Walpole (1966) for anisotropic ones.
Derivation
We follow Hill in using the elastic constants K (bulk modulus) and G the shear modulus as the best pair to use for discussing isotropic materials.
Young's  modulus E and Poisson's ratio v are given by The volume concentrations of the phases are respectively with .
By average of stress or strain is meant the volume average, that is, the integral over a specified region divided by the volume of the region.
The notation introduced by Hill is convenient.
Second-rank tensors, stress and strain, are treated as vectors in 9-dimensional space and the fourth rank tensors of elastic constants as (9 x 9) matrices.
Thus being the inverse of .
The energy density is written if in quadratic form.
Then the overall mean stress and similarly At any point in the phases we have with inverses We are assuming each phase to be uniform and isotropic, so that the same relations must hold between averaged stresses and strains, namely 
A representative volume is, as the term implies, a volume large enough to include sufficient of each phase for the overall moduli to be independent of surface traction and displacement.
Within such a volume, there will be a unique dependence of the average strains in the phases upon the overall strain in the mixture.
Let this be written , the unit matrix.
will depend on concentration, phase moduli, and so on, and will in general be asymmetric.
Then if we write 
If, therefore, the average stress or strain in either constituent can be found for arbitrary values (so determining one of the As or Bs), the elastic properties of the mixture are completely specified by Equation (4.4) or (4.5).
To express this in another way, consider the "representative volume" illustrated in Figure 4.1.
The average strain will be a unique function of the average strain in the mixture through the displacements this will impose on the boundary.
It does not matter what method of straining is chosen if it can determine A1 since the volume is a representative one.
Thus, if we can find A1 by whatever means, the mixture is completely specified, because .
This important result is due to Hill (1963).
For a mixture whose overall properties are isotropic we need consider only two independent strains, dilatation and shear.
For a pure dilatation the corresponding overall stress is given by Again, if we know the as and bs we have the required solution.
For shear, using is a pure shear and a pure shear strain we find the a "and b" standing for functions of the averaged shearing stress and strain components.
The Voigt and Reuss bounds
Voigt (1910) in considering polycrystalline assembles assumed strain to be uniform throughout the mixture.
Hence .
Now L1 and L2 are isotropic tensors, so that These are also obtainable from the equations of (4.7).
The Voigt assumption is therefore a simple volume average of the stiffnesses.
The dual assumption of Reuss (1929) is that of uniform stress, or a volume average of compliances.
Then .
Hence Neither assumption is correct, as Hill pointed out.
The stresses implied in Voigt's cannot be in equilibrium at phase boundaries: the strains in Reuss's are such that bonding between phases must fail.
The difference between the Voigt and Reuss estimates is and a similar one for shear.
Hence the Voigt estimates are greater, the difference being second order if the phases are only slightly different.
Energy approach
The theorem of minimum potential energy (see, for example, Sokolnikoff (1956)) states that the strain energy for any fictitious non-equilibrium state of distortion is always greater than the actual strain energy for the same surface displacements (or equivalently, that the minimum strain energy is only found for the equilibrium state).
The dual principle of minimum complementary energy applies for non-equilibrium  strains comparing two situations under the same surface tractions.
The strain energy can be expressed as a scalar product of the two 9-vectors Consider any volume of the mixture, subjected to prescribed surface displacements of the kind that would produce a uniform strain in a homogeneous material.
This is then also the average strain in the inhomogeneous material, since the average is uniquely determined by the surface displacements irrespective of the material (provided it does not rupture internally).
The total strain energy, the integral of the energy density over the volume, can be evaluated as the integral of .
To see this write: Now since — is an equilibrated field of stress while , a virtual strain field, is derived from a continuous displacement vanishing on the surface.
In more detail: equilibrium requires while is derived from , say, which must vanish on the surface, since —, which generates , is the surface displacement;—"has the function, within the composite, of generating differences from .
The energy expression contains terms such as Consider the first term .
This is equal to Integrating by parts gives In the brackets the first term is zero because —"vanishes at the surface.
The second term, combined with two similar terms in is zero because of equilibrium.
The terms are .
Hence the average energy in any region can be calculated from the average stress and strain when the surface constraints are of a specified kind.
A similar proof holds when surface tractions, of the kind that would produce uniform stress in a homogeneous material, are specified.
It can be shown that is the increment in average energy per unit volume and therefore a perfect differential.
Hence L (and M) are symmetric tensors.
If the region under consideration is a representative volume then the relations between average stress and strain are the same for both types of boundary condition and therefore (Note.
Such relations do not necessarily hold within a phase if the average stresses and strains for that phase are substituted in the above.)
The theorem of minimum potential energy then applies, so that the actual strain energy in the mixture is less than or equal to that of any unequilibrated state of distortion with the same surface displacements.
If the state of uniform strain is taken as the comparison state with energy density in one phase and in the other, then, for a representative volume, for arbitrary .
Hence is positive semi-definite and restrictions on its components can be written down — giving an upper bound on each modulus appearing in the normal or "canonical" form as a coefficient.
(That is, a form expressed as a sum of squares of independent linear combinations of the components of average strain.
Any quadratic form can be reduced to such a canonical form by suitable linear transformations).
For isotropic materials the condition reduces to by setting equal to a pure dilation and a pure shear, respectively.
Similarly, by using a uniform field of stress and the principle of minimum complementary energy we find and, for isotropic materials,
Now the Voigt assumption was of uniform strain in the composite whereas that of Reuss was of uniform stress .
We have therefore shown in the foregoing argument that the Voigt and Reuss estimates are upper and lower bounds respectively on the overall moduli of the composite, whatever its internal geometry may be.
The bounds are not particularly close except when the phases have somewhat similar properties.
Better bounds result from other choices of strain or stress states and have been obtained notably by Hill, by Hashin & Shtrikman and by Walpole.
Before considering these it is worth pointing out that, for isotropic materials, while are upper bounds and lower bounds, the simple"rule of mixtures' relation for Young's modulus is not an upper bound since is not a linear combination of the phase moduli.
In fact .
By contrast and is a lower bound.
Improved bounds, Isotropic phases 
Bulk modulus
Hill (1963) showed that for equal phase rigidities, G, the following result holds exactly for any geometry whatever where are the Voigt and Reuss estimates found earlier.
Now if the mixture is isotropic or has cubic symmetry, but the geometry is otherwise arbitrary, it is apparent (and can be proved) that the overall bulk modulus would be increased (decreased) if both phases had a common rigidity equal to the larger (smaller) of their actual values.
Hence the bounds follow:
Shear modulus
For shear in isotropic materials Hashin & Shtrikman (1963), using extremum principles, showed that with .
The inequalities reverse when and failure occurs when or vice versa.
In Equation 4.11 For most materials other than rubbers .
Walpole generalized the above bounds on K and G as follows:
The methods used by Walpole to derive the above bounds were later applied by him to the case of transversely isotropic inclusions in a homogeneous matrix.
Since such inclusions could be needle- or disc-shaped and since such shapes are to be found in semi-crystalline polymers we shall give an account of his method, although for greater detail the original papers should be consulted.
Again, the notion of a "representative volume" is used, and the tensor of overall moduli L defined by the equation are the average stress and strain.
respectively, within this volume M is defined as the inverse of L. Then the tensors are defined as the weighted averages of the tensors of each phase r: thus where is the volume concentration of phase r (that is ) and, by analogy with the isotropic case discussed earlier on p. 115, are concentration factor tensors such that and where I is the unit tensor.
(Note.
It is important to distinguish between (a) the actual strain field e,(b) the overall average strain field , and (c) the phase average strain field .
See Figure 4.2.
Similarly for the actual, overall average and phase average stress fields respectively.)
The comparison material.
Polarization stresses
for any given inhomogeneous material L the determination of the stresses and displacements under a given set of boundary conditions (the boundary value problem) is simplified by considering a comparison material Lo which is homogeneous.
Then the terms: polarization stress and polarization strain — are defined by the equations When the "first boundary-value" problem (prescribed displacements on the surface) is being considered the strain field e is derived from a displacement u which takes the prescribed surface values.
Then in the comparison material the  stress field and when in the volume will be identical to the actual stress and strain fields in this volume.
Other choices of will thus generate fields and e which are approximations to the actual values.
Similarly in the "second boundary-value" problem where tractions are prescribed the polarization strain — is defined, with stress field — and strain field .
The values of — and — may be expressed as integrals of the field due to a point force in the comparison material and in certain cases these may be evaluated.
However, the approximate fields generated by conveniently chosen polarizations may be inserted in the classical extremum principles (minimum potential energy and minimum complementary energy) to bound the overall energy and consequently provide bounds for the overall moduli.
Such fields are usually piecewise uniform — that is, they are uniform within each phase (but not as in the Voigt and Reuss treatments, throughout all phases).
Thus the best piecewise/uniform fields are defined within Vr as where and are the average of e and — respectively over the volume Vr
Then within Vr, we have 
The extremum principles
Fort he first boundary-value problem the prescribed surface displacements are compatible with a uniform strain (the average strain).
The approximation field e is derived from a continuous displacement which satisfies the same boundary conditions and is such that is a self-equilibrated stress field.
Then the principles of minimum potential energy and of complementary energy state that, for strain energy W and These may be converted to the forms where by using the equality and substituting .
Similarly for the "second boundary-value" problem where the surface tractions, compatible with the uniform stress are specified, the classical extremum principles show that which may be written, using the equality as 
The integrals may be dropped, providing that the integrands may be made positive definite by suitable choice of comparison material.
Now it can be shown that are both positive definite or both negative definite together.
It follows, after some algebra, that the following two theorems provide bounds on the overall moduli:
The approximating field
These are derived by considering a distribution of body force in the comparison material following Eshelby (1957).
The details need not concern us  here (the reader should refer to Walpole (1966), Hill (1963), and Eshelby (1957), but there is an interesting connection with a classical spherical inclusion problem).
The mean strain in the phase r is the same as the uniform strain inside a spherical inclusion, composed of the material of the rth phase; this is perfectly fitted into an infinite matrix consisting of the comparison material, which is under uniform strain at infinity.
The fields are:
Substituting these in the theorems (4.16) above gives, after separating out the requisite components of L, M, the inequalities (4.12) and (4.13).
Walpole applied the theorems (4.16) to the case of anisotropic materials in a later paper.
Using the notation the bounds proved by Walpole for aligned transversely isotropic elements are: where the upper bound is where are the greatest of the values and the lower bound is where are the least of these.
Note.
They do not need to belong to the same phase.
Walpole also gives bounds for randomly oriented fibrous inclusions in an isotropic matrix but these are not easily stated and the reader is referred to the original paper (Walpole (1969).
Self-consistent method
This method relies on the exact solution of the elastic problem for an inclusion of known geometry (an ellipsoid) surrounded by an infinite matrix.
The composite problem to be solved is that in which the included phases are ellipsoidal in shape.
Selecting one as the reference ellipsoid, the effect of the remainder is approximated by a continuum surrounding the reference ellipsoid, thus reducing the problem to one for which there is an exact solution.
Finally, the result obtained has to be self-consistent with the properties assumed for the continuum.
The method was used first by Kröner (1958) for the elastic moduli of cubic polycrystals and has been applied to composite materials by Hill, Walpole and many others [see, for example, Laws & McLaughlin (1978) for references].
An outline of the theory derived mainly from Walpole's paper is given later.
Here we quote Walpole's formulae for an arbitrary dispersion of spherical inclusions dispersed throughout a matrix of another material in a homogeneous and isotropic distribution on average.
The bulk modulus K and shear modulus G are given as where subscripts 1 and 2 refer to spheres and matrix respectively, and c is the concentration of spheres.
The equations are not, of course, explicit since each contains a starred term which is a function of both K and G.
For aligned transversely isotropic elements the self-consistent method gives (Walpole 1969) the relations: where the quantities c, p, m, k are as defined above (Equation 4.17) and v, E are Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus respectively.
Again the equations are not in explicit form.
Laws & McLoughlin (1978) solve the problem of the viscoelastic ellipsoidal inclusion in anisotropic materials and then use the self-consistent method to calculate the overall viscoelastic compliances for a composite.
The self-consistent theory involves three stages
The three stages are:
(a) The misfitting inclusion in an infinite matrix
(b) The perfect inclusion under strain at infinity
(c) the "self-consistent" problem of an inclusion in a matrix of
elastic
properties equal to the composite of similar inclusions (a) Consider a inclusion of arbitrary shape in an infinite matrix.
Let its elastic modulus tensor be denoted L1 with inverse (compliance) tensor M1 and let the matrix have elastic tensors L and M.
Now suppose the inclusion to be removed from its environment, deformed  by a strain e and then replaced.
The stress s required to return the deformed inclusion to its original shape will be given by — and the equilibrium state of the inclusion after replacement will be with strain — and stress .
The average strain and average stress in the inclusion are defined as The sequence so far is as illustrated (Figure 4.3).
(b) Now consider a perfectly fitting inclusion and apply at infinite distance a uniform strain field with stress to the matrix in which the inclusion is held.
The inclusion has now become a misfitting inclusion in a medium of elastic constants L with strain and stress .
The stress s used in the previous part now becomes and the average strain in the inclusion becomes 
In principle the tensors P1 and Q1 can be calculated for any shape but spheres and ellipsoids are the usual shapes used with cylinders and discs as the limiting cases.
Walpole (1969) gives calculations for the latter.
Eshelby (1957) for spheres, and Kröner (1958) for spheroids. (c) The self-consistent and problem Consider two phases, the inclusion and the matrix, with constants respectively.
Let the concentration of phase 1 be c1 and that of 2, c2.
The average strain in the inclusion is given by and in the matrix by where is the average overall strain and denotes the average over all orientations and inclusion shapes.
(The corresponding stresses respectively).
Then 
This may be seen as follows: The overall average strain 
4.4.
Models
In 1963 Takayanagi proposed models for polymers containing separate phases and carried out experimental studies on composites made up from a hard polymer and a soft rubber.
In his parallel model the two phases undergo equal strains and the composite modulus is where the suffixed refer, respectively, to composite, polymer and rubber.
This is, of course, the Voigt assumption in another guise.
Similarly the Takayanagi series model gives and is the Reuss form, appropriate for the situation of equal stresses.
In expressions for the elastic moduli of composites, such as those given in earlier parts of this chapter and above, it is justifiable to substitute complex quantities (see Chap.
3) for the elastic moduli involved and so to obtain the time-dependent behaviour of the composite.
(The validity of this procedure is discussed by Biot (1954), Rogers & Pipkin (1963) and Hashin (1969).)
using complex values for .
Takayanagi calculated the real and imaginary parts of the complex modulus for a range of temperatures — 160°C to +120°C.
For the series model the modulus of the composite closely approximates the rubbery modulus, showing a glass transition at about -20°C, whereas the parallel model exhibits the behaviour of both components with transitions at -20°C (rubber) and at 80°C (p.v.c).
In this case, therefore, the parallel (Voigt) model is preferred.
Tests of the compound form (Figure 4.4) were also made, with very good agreement with experiment.
Further details are given in (MP).
In consequence of the practical success of the Takayanagi models they are still used by many polymer scientists to describe experimental results, particularly in the "compound" form illustrate in Figure 4.4.
With the dotted line separating the parallel P/R mixture from the pure P we calculate while the chain-dotted line in place we find 
Now the above models, while useful descriptions of experimental results, cannot add to our knowledge of the distribution of stress in a composite solid for several reasons.
First, the models are one-dimensional only and cannot be applied to a real solid.
Secondly they assume uniform stress throughout each portion and neglect any interfacial effects.
In addition, of course , they assume separation of the components into geometrically convenient shapes and locations.
In practice, however, many investigations have shown that the assumption of uniform stress in a composite (the Reuss assumption) is very often close to reality, particularly when semi-crystalline polymers are concerned.
This is probably because the different regions in the polymer rapidly adjust themselves to the applied stress either by orientation and alignment of the tie-molecules between crystalline regions or, as may be more likely, by slip of the crystalline parts.
Such processes will be temperature-and-time-dependent and so the uniform stress assumption would be expected to fail at low temperatures and the composite elastic moduli to approach the (Voigt) upper-bound values.
Ward (1971) found good agreement with the lower (Reuss) bounds on elastic moduli when considering the effects of orientation in low-density polyethylene, but in cold-drawn polyethylene terephthalate the elastic compliance lay midway between the Voigt and Reuss bounds.
In nylon he found the Voigt average to be closest to experimental data.
Experimental tests of the Hashin-Shtrikman and Hill-Walpole bounds, which lie, of course, within the Voigt and Reuss bounds do not appear to have been made for single polymer systems but, as discussed later in this chapter, they have been applied to a styrene-butadiene-styrene system and to a composite of glass beads and epoxy resin (Arridge & Crowson 1979).
We have already discussed the generalized approach, where the geometry is unknown, in earlier sections of this chapter.
We shall not outline more particular models namely the "unit cell" and "short fibre" models which are applicable when some geometry is known.
Ordered heterogeneous materials with phases considered as continua.
The unit cell approach.
I two dimensions the problem of an array of elements of one material embedded in another has attracted attention because of its relevance to fibre reinforcement.
Square arrays and hexagonal arrays of circular or elliptical elements have been analysed by using classical elasticity with the complex variable method an by numerical methods.
The results are also applicable to three-dimensional ordered arrays such s are found in filament-wound structures and in other situations such as copolymers of styrene and butadiene.
Agreement with experiment is generally good except for the transverse properties which are sensitive to the choice of array and the method of calculation.
In most of these unit cell analyses the assumptions are made that:(a) strains are small, so that infinitesimal elasticity theory applies;(b) the phases are of uniform density and elastic properties; and (c) the phases are isotropic.
Some extensions to the cases of anisotropic phases have been made.
The unit cell approach has the following advantages: prediction of the overall elastic moduli in terms of the phase moduli; knowledge of the stress distributions within phases (relevant to the prediction of failure mechanisms), and usable formulae in which the phase moduli and concentration can be substituted or, by working backwards from the overall moduli, from which the phase moduli and concentration can be deduced.
From this point of view analytic expressions such as those of Van Fo Fy & Savin (1965) are of more use than numerical data (though presumably these could be fitted for comparison purposes by polynomials or other means).
The elastic constants derived by Van Fo Fy & Savin are as follows (the symmetry axis is 3, c is the concentration of the circular reinforcing phase in a hexagonal array, and the compliance constants Sij are quoted):
The explicit formulae given by Rosen (1970) are also of value.
They are derived from a model consisting of a random assemblage of composite cylinders (Hashin & Rosen 1964) and expressed in terms of the axial Young's modulus , Poisson's ratio for uniaxial stress in the fibre direction the transverse plane strain bulk modulus , the axial shear modulus and the transverse shear modulus where and where c = concentration of fibres.
The bar in quantities such as denotes the volume average of the quantity.
Thus .
The subscripts f, m denote fibres and matrix respectively.
Derived from the above is the transverse Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio in the transverse plane These formulae and some others have been compared with measurements of the elastic moduli of a block copolymer showing hexagonal symmetry (Arridge & Folkes 1972).
The material used was a styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) block copolymer which had been extruded.
This extrusion process was shown (Dlugosz et al 1970) to result in a highly ordered quasi-single crystal structure with hexagonal symmetry.
The material was shown to consist of polystyrene cylinders embedded in a polybutadiene matrix with the cylinder axes directed along the extrusion direction.
The cylinders were of 15 nm diameter and the hexagon unit cell lattice parameter was 30 nm.
The system was therefore a microscopic fibre-reinforced composite and the methods given above were successfully applied to it.
Measurements were made of Young's modulus at various angles,, to the cylinder axis.
A least squares fit (figure 4.5) of the relation was then made from which values and could be found.
Physical and experimental considerations implied that and so the following values for were established: The results so obtained were in good agreement with predictions from fibre reinforcement theory (Equations (4.21) or (4.22)) provided that a value of 0.37 for Poisson's ratio for the butadiene phase was used rather than the more usual figure, for a rubber, of 0.5.
This unusual value for the rubber phase was later confirmed experimentally.
Laminate theory has also been successfully used to explain the properties of injection-moulded block copolymers.
An account of this is given in Chap.
6 of  the book; Processing, Structure and Properties of Block Copolymers (M.J. Folkes ed.)
(Barking: Applied Science Publishers 1985).
Short fibre composites (aligned fibres)
A simple theory giving the longitudinal Young's modulus for short fibre composites with aligned fibres was developed in 1952 by Cox and variants of it by Dow and others in the sixties.
It is based on a one-dimensional analysis which assumes the fibres to carry tensile stresses — that are uniform across their cross-section, and the matrix to support no tensile loads, but shear only.
There are no normal stresses at the interface.
The fundamental equilibrium relation assumed is that the increment of tensile load in element dx is equal to the total surface shear over that element, that is 
In addition the assumption (shear-lag) is made that where H is a constant (to be determined below), v is the local displacement at the fibre surface and u the displacement far away from the fibre.
Then 
A more exact three-dimensional analysis of the short fibre aligned composite has been published by Smith & Spencer (1970).
The fibre composite model has been successfully used by the author and his associates to explain the properties of ultra-drawn polymers such as polyethylene and polypropylene.
These materials draw in a two-stage process involving first, necking where the original spherulitic structure of the polymer is destroyed and a new fibrillar structure created (see, for example, Peterlin 1979) and second, a post-neck taper-drawing process in which no appreciable further orientation takes place but during which the longitudinal Young's modulus increases.
The increase is not a linear function of the draw ratio but is faster in polyethylene, and slower in polypropylene (Figure 4.6).
Using fibre composite theory Arridge & Barham (1978) explained this non-linearity in both cases by assuming each polymer to be a composite of needle-like fibrils embedded in a softer matrix.
It was not proposed that the two phases necessarily identified with the fibrils to be observed in highly drawn polymers although such identification is clearly possible.
In fact, by making the assumption that the needle-like fibrils were capable of deforming affinely, Arridge & Barham could explain the change of Young's modulus with draw ratio as a result of the greater reinforcing efficiency of the fibrils as they became longer and thinner.
Using the shear-lag theory we have (Equation 4.23) the tensile stress in the proposed fibril given by It is therefore possible to make estimates of the distribution of stress using this theory although it is not justifiable to place too much weight on such estimates.
Then, considering a fibril embedded in a matrix strained in the direction of the fibril axis, three things may happen:(a) The matrix may extend elastically while constraining the fibril so as to cause plastic deformation in it.
On removal of the overall strain the matrix returns elastically to its former dimensions and deforms the fibril with it, first elastically and then plastically.
We then have a viscoelastic model for deformation of a semi-crystalline polymer.
(b) Both matrix and fibril may deform elastically and yield at the same strain.
This deformation will then be permanent and, it was suggested, be a model for the drawing of semi-crystalline polymers.
(c) The matrix could yield at a strain lower than that required for fibril yield.
This would result in flow of the matrix over the undeformed fibrils giving, again, a permanently deformed product but one in which the fibril length was unchanged.
It can be shown that in the above model fibril yield depends upon the relation between the fibril aspect ratio (length/diameter), A and the yield ratio (yield stress of fibril) /(yield stress of matrix).
If the fibrils will yield, whereas if they will not.
For further details the original papers (Arridge & Barham (1978) and references therein) should be consulted.
Other explanations of the high modulus obtainable by ultra-drawing have been put forward by Peterlin and by Ward.
According to Peterlin it is due to the increased number of taut tie chains, whereas Ward proposes that  crystalline bridges are formed, the effect of which is assessed by Takayanagi-type models or, again, by a fibre-composite model.
Ward and his coworkers (Capaccio, Gibson & Ward, in Ciferri & Ward (1979)), considered ultra-drawn polyethylene as composed of stacks of crystallites bridged by crystalline material or, equivalently, as a continuous crystal with periodic regions of disorder.
The high mechanical stiffness of these materials was then attributed to the crystalline nature of the bridges between crystallites rather than, as Peterlin proposed, to tie-molecules.
(The two concepts, however, can coalesce when bundles of tie molecules are considered.)
The increase of modulus on drawing, on the crystalline bridge model, is then attributable to the increase in the number of crystalline bridges occurring when the material draws.
The relation derived is where is the degree of crystallinity and p the probability that a chain within the crystalline phase will traverse the disordered region to enter an adjacent lamella.
It is shown that where is the average c-axis crystallite dimension, determined by wide-angle X-ray line broadening and L is the low-angle X-ray long period, indicative of the presence of structures of about 150–300.
L does not change on drawing but does from about 230 at draw ratio 5 to 460 at draw ratio 30, p changing from 0.053 to 0.402 correspondingly.
The chief factor which causes the high modulus on this model (since the crystallinity also increases somewhat on drawing) is therefore the increase in which is a measure of the average longitudinal crystal thickness.
For further details the original papers should be consulted.
Until the microstructure of ultra-drawn polymers can be unequivocally revealed no final answers can be made about the validity of the various models.
Lamella models
The dual to the case of aligned fibres considered above is the case of aligned discs or plates, in which the normals to the plates lie in a preferred direction.
Such a material might be produced by rolling or by the type of lateral crystallization found with the "shish-kebab" structure formed in stirred polymer solutions, Walpole (1969) gives formulae for the elastic constants of arrays of disc-like inclusions while the author (1976) has calculated the longitudinal elastic properties of the two-dimensional "lamellar stack" model (Figure 4.7), which has applications to the morphologies found in drawn and rolled polymers as well as to laminates made of two polymers co-extruded into multilayer sheets.
The deformation of such a stack in the direction of the lamellar normals is of barrel and pincushion type with maximum, hydrostatic, stress at the centre of each   layer — positive in the barrel part and negative in the pincushion.
In the latter case voiding can, in principle, occur and this may explain the stress-whitening found for example in high-density polyethylene under high strain.
The longitudinal modulus depends strongly on the aspect ratio (length-to-diameter ratio) of the elements of the stack.
If this is high the layers deform quasi-uniformly though with high shear stresses at the interfaces.
If the aspect ratio is very low, so that the stacks are wide and thin, the stress may again be quasi-uniform but the constraint placed by the stiff layers on the less-stiff increases the overall longitudinal modulus very greatly, particularly if the less-stiff material has the Poisson ratio of a rubber.
Details are given in Arridge (1976) and some theoretical modulus values in Table 1 below.
4.5.
Orientation other than full alignment
(a) Methods of describing orientation
(b) Calculation of composite elastic properties (a) We use the reduced elastic constants Sij and Cij explained earlier.
Any crystalline element referred to its own symmetry axes (1,2,3)(Figure  4.8) has elastic stiffnesses Cij and compliances Sij.
Referred to a new global or overall set of axes (1 ", 2" , 3") we need to perform the required tensor transformation to obtain the reduced constants  in the global axes.
Thus  (and the analogue for , after which the reduction to Voigt can be made.
If we know the orientation function of the crystal elements in the global axes then estimates of the overall elastic constants can be made.
has the following meaning.
The number of elements with axes (1, 2, 3) lying in the solid angle is give by 
Then the mean value of is 
It is, of course, possible to use the more restrictive bounds given by Walpole for the case of random orientation.
These will give closer overall bounds on E and G than the Voigt and Reuss sums above.
The next most tractable situation is that of fibre symmetry, where there is a unique axis (the 3"axis) around which there is transverse isotropy.
Then is a random variable and integration over it is simple.
If, also — is allowed to be a random variable the analysis, though still tedious, takes on a degree of order that is valuable.
Consider again the Voigt sum on the giving .
Written in full this is 
The integration over involves only and on the assumption of overall fibre symmetry (a case common in polymers in the fibrous form; but not, of course, necessarily so in the sheet or bulk forms) we can assume that is a function of only and integrate over — and also over .
This introduces a factor 2–so that which reduces to the previous result for the random array.
However, we may insert other expressions for in the above integral and derive Voigt (and similarly Reuss) sums for these orientations.
(It is also, of course, possible to insert the general expression for if this is known.)
It is very convenient to use an expression of in terms of Legendre polynomials.
It can be shown that as far as mechanical properties are concerned, where the elasticity tensor is of fourth rank, no terms higher than are required.
Further, for the case of fibre symmetry, only the even Legendre polynomials are needed.
Now if the material is crystalline, X-ray diffraction affords a means of finding the distribution function .
(See, for example, Roe & Krigbaum (1964).
however can be found for a general polymer from birefringence and n.m.r. studies.
(See for example, McBrierty and Ward (1968).)
Infra-red dichroism also yields a value for and Raman spectroscopy can give and therefore .
For birefringence, if the maximum value for fully aligned elements is then the birefringence for elements distributed with a distribution function is given simply by .
With infra-red dichroism, if the transition moment vector lies at angle to the chain axis and the chain axis lies at angle to the fibre symmetry axis, then the ratio where are the optical densities of the electric vector of the polarized infra-red wave.
The derivation of these relations is to be found in Read (1975).
Matrices similar to those found for may be found for the compliances, using the Reuss summation over all orientations.
They are identical to those for when expressed in terms of the fourth rank tensors but  
For a composite material consisting of a concentration of particles with orientation described by and elastic constants of a second phase, which may also be of general elastic properties, the Voigt scheme would lead to sums such as 
It is possible, of course, to use summation schemes other than the Voigt and Reuss ones to provide better bounds on the elastic constants of composite materials.
Those derived by Walpole may be employed if the averaging is done correctly.
Explicit formulae for the overall elastic constants have not been obtained, however, by the method.
The self-consistent method referred to above may also be applied to arrays of inclusion with a distribution function .
Referring to Equation (4.20) we aim to find the value of the tensor L subject to the averaging procedures implied in the terms and .
Transverse isotropy is assumed with the five elastic constants (in Walpole's terminology defined earlier) k, l, m, n, p.
Following Walpole we use the abbreviated notations 
Then the averaging procedure for transverse isotropy leads to the expression where the are defined below, from which the components of l may be extracted.
Suffix 1 refers to the particles, 2 to the matrix, V to the Voigt sum as above and a term with no suffix to the self-consistent overall value.
The common elastic moduli for a transversely isotropic material, the longitudinal and transverse Young's moduli are then given by .
other elastic moduli may be obtained by manipulation of the k, l, m, n, p or of the corresponding in the usual way.
Since the expressions for the involve the quantities being sought the solution is best approached iteratively using plausible critical values for the k, l, m, n, p.
Convergence is usually found after four or five iterations.
Some results found by the author are as follows.
The model assumes 50 per cent by volume of crystals of polyethylene in a matrix of elastic properties corresponding to those of a glassy polymer with The elastic properties assumed for the crystalline units were 
Figures 4.9 (a),(b) show the behaviour of the "self-consistent" composite moduli and the longitudinal shear modulus p as a function of orientation angle.
The Voigt sums are given for comparison.
McCullough et al.(1976) have given expressions for the stiffness tensors for various fibre orientations using a different formalism from ours in which orientation functions and are used and the various integrals in sines and cosines expressed in terms of these.
Seferis, McCullough & Samuels (1976) use"moments' of the distribution defined for example as where defines the number of chain axis directions (a normalized orientation function).
Other descriptive methods: the Halpin-Tsai equations
Halpin & Tsai (1969, 1976) have devised the useful descriptive scheme for composites known as the Halpin-Tsai equations.
These are simplified forms of the results of the self-consistent models of Hill and later workers together with engineering approximations to make them suitable for the designing of composites.
In a two-dimensional composite such as a fibre-reinforced plastic where the symmetry axis is along the 3-direction they write where and and are defined as follows, using the notation of Equation (4.17): is the composite modulus k, p. or m. is the corresponding fibre modulus and is the corresponding matrix modulus is a measure of reinforcement which depends on the boundary conditions.
In later work it was referred to as a "contiguity factor." 
Prevorsek et al.(1973) used the Halpin-Tsai equations with to interpret data on the drawing of Nylon 6 fibres.
In this analysis the aspect ratio was shown to increase as the material drew.
Arridge and Barham pointed out that the Halpin-Tsai equations are equivalent to those of shear-lag theory if is taken as 
To first order, for a material like polyethylene,.
McCullough et al.(1976) also use the Halpin-Tsai formalism in a discussion of the increase of modulus on extrusion.
4.6.
Finite element methods
The finite element method of finding numerical solutions to problems in elasticity, viscoelasticity, plasticity and fluid flow has risen to considerable prominence in the last 15 years.
The method has many advantages for the modelling of the structure of polymers and composite materials.
The basis of the theory is most simply illustrated in two dimensions (although it is equally applicable to three).
Consider the arbitrarily shaped sheet in Figure 4.10, where the boundary has a distribution of forces and displacements under equilibrium.
Now imagine the same boundary maintained under the same forces and displacements not by the real continuum but by an arbitrary network of "finite elements' in each of which we consider only the forces and displacements at their junctions, or" nodes'.
The relations between forces and displacements may then be expressed in matrix form and, using modern computers, many practical elastic and other problems may be solved by manipulation of this matrix.
We illustrate the method by choosing a two-dimensional lattice of constant mesh size, Figure 4.11.
(In practice the meshes need not be of constant size nor   need they be of uniform shape.)
Let the mesh be (a, b) and the nodes be denoted by two figures giving the number of multiples of a and b for the x and y directions respectively.
Each mesh is then described by the two figures in its top left-hand corner (origin corner) and the coordinates of mesh (i j) for example are:(i, j); taking the corners in anticlockwise order.
The displacements u, v may be written as simple functions of the continuous coordinates x, y namely Only four coefficients are allowed in this case because there are only four boundary conditions (the nodal displacements) for their determination.
These nodal displacements are designated and the mesh displacement vector is defined as or .
Inverting, we have , assuming that B is a non-singular matrix, which will be the case if the relations between are correctly chosen.
In the general case the matrix B is a numerical quantity containing information on the geometry of the chosen mesh.
The relations for u and v taken above are the simplest, corresponding to simple elastic strains in each mesh.
Thus .
(Other assumptions regarding displacement may be made, for example, for plastic or viscoelastic bodies.)
A strain vector can now be defined: Now for any mesh the relation  is a matrix of elastic coefficients and  the stress vector .
The total strain energy for a mesh is The work done by this vector is and this is equal to the internal strain energy.
Then, since are independent of x and y, we have and the stiffness matrix for mesh ij is 
For any mesh the value of N may differ from that for any other (for example, if inclusions or crystalline areas are considered) as in the model of a composite.
Thus may differ from mesh to mesh.
Now combining the into one global matrix the relation between the boundary forces and boundary displacements is found in the form of one large matrix equation.
This is the power of the finite element method.
This matrix may have as many elements as the size of the computer will allow and, once set up, the solution of the matrix equation subject to the imposed boundary conditions may be found by standard numerical procedures.
The book by Zienciewicz (1977) gives full details of the finite element method with computer programs.
The author (1976) has applied the method to the solution of the lamellar stack problem referred to earlier in the chapter above and to the problem of the distribution of stress in a highly anisotropic plate subject to end-loads and discussed in the following chapter (Figure 5.1.)
Further reading
The subject of this chapter is not usually to be found in books on polymers.
The treatment here is thought to be novel.
References are given in the text to original papers where relevant.
A general reference on the subject of composite materials is Broutman L.J.
& Krock, R.H. (eds), 1974–77, Composite Materials (New York: Academic Press).
The forthcoming Encyclopaedia of Materials Science and Engineering (Oxford: Pergamon) is to be recommended.
the measurement of mechanical properties: theory and practice
5.1.
Introduction
There are at least three reasons for making measurements of the mechanical properties of materials.
First and foremost, of course, is that of the user, usually an engineer, whether in mechanical or civil engineering, in aircraft or in textiles.
The engineer wants to know the simple answer to the question "how much load will this structure or piece of material take before it deforms irrevocably by yield or by fracture?" 
In most engineering applications the materials parameters needed are: elastic modulus, yield point, fracture strain, and so on.
Such quantities are determined by standard tests on standard samples and the data collected in the relevant literature.
A second reason for measurements is the more theoretical, put by Love as "the discovery of numerical relations between the quantities that can be measured…to serve as a basis for the inductive determination of the form of the intrinsic energy function." 
In Chap.
2 we discussed the strain (intrinsic) energy function and showed its importance in determining the relation between stress and strain in materials.
The form of this function may be discovered in some, but not all, cases by experiment.
A third reason for experimental studies of mechanical properties is perhaps the most important to the materials scientist concerned with the nature of matter.
Such experiments provide another probe, besides those given by optical, X-ray, n.m.r. and other physical techniques, into the substructure of the material in question, which in other respects is considered as a continuum.
There are therefore some techniques of measurement preferred by the engineer or other materials user as giving the information he or she needs in design, whereas different techniques may be used by the materials scientist in probing the microstructure and molecular structure of the material.
Sometimes  these techniques are the same, but very often, and particularly in polymers, they are not.
We shall consider the following tests:
(a) The simple tensile test
(b) The dynamic tensile test
(c) Bend tests, both 3-point and 4-point
(d) Torsion testing, both static and dynamic
(e) Tests of bulk modulus
(f) The spherical and other indenters
(g) Resonance methods, the vibrating beam
(h) Ultrasonic testing The list is not exhaustive.
Many other test methods exist and are described in the literature.
The above methods are however well tried, possess adequate theoretical bases and in general, are simple tests, that is , they test only one quantity and are not derived tests which combined several variables.
For example a useful practical derived test of the properties of leather in shoes would be to flex a real shoe in a test machine to determine the relation between loads and displacements relevant to the wearer.
Such a test is of obvious value to the shoemaker and is the correct test to use but it is not an easy one to analyse in terms of material as opposed to constructional variables.
Similarly rubber tyres can be flexed in an apparatus designed to determine their properties in use on motor cars, but this is not a test of value to the materials scientist.
In both these cases and in many others a proper analysis of the results may be very time-consuming but may also be very valuable in uncovering the relations between material properties, construction and texture.
Such tasks are undertaken by research workers in many fields of industry.
From what has been written above it should be clear that the design of a test method which gives information about the mechanical properties of a material irrespective of the geometry of the sample and the manner in which load is applied is not a trivial matter.
In the last resort all that a test can give is a relation between two or more quantities such as load, displacement, time and temperature from which it is inferred that this is the general relation connecting these quantities throughout the body, for the assumption of such a general relation is at the basis of elasticity theory and continuum mechanics.
We therefore need to ask the question of each test method: "It is valid to assume from the observed relation between the measured quantities (which may be the movement of a pointer or the change of a voltage) that a certain universal property exists in the body being tested?" 
Such questions may seem pedantic, but it will be seen later that quite large errors can be made unless they are correctly answered.
5.2.
The simple tensile test
In this test a load is applied to the two ends of a long bar of uniform cross-section and either the displacement of the ends or that of two fiducial marks on the surface of the bar observed as a function of the applied load.
The assumptions are made that:(i) the load is applied along the axis of the bar;(ii) no surface tractions exist other than at the ends of the bar;(iii) the distribution of stress is uniform across the bar; and (iv) the bar does not bend or twist.
Then, if the 3-axis is taken to be the axis of the bar where L is the applied load and A is the cross-sectional area.
All other stress components are zero as are the strains except for which is given by where u is the displacement measured on a fiducial length l.
The relation between and is Young's modulus E = and the test is a standard one for this quantity.
Let us consider the assumptions made in performing this test.
Assumptions (i) and (iv) are fairly self-evident but become important with specimens of awkward shapes, or as will be seen later, anisotropic material.
Assumptions (ii) and (iii) may present considerable problems in practise for in reality loads are never applied to the ends of a sample, but to its side-ends, and so the uniformity of stress across the sample is called into question.
Saint-Venant (1855) considered this problem and the related ones in torsion and in bending.
He proposed that the assumed uniform distribution of forces over any section within the specimen was a limiting state to which the forces in the real specimen approached, the further away from the extremities was the section under consideration.
This proposal has become known as "Saint-Venant's principle" , often interpreted as implying that local eccentricities of stress are not felt in distances greater than the largest linear dimension of the area over which the forces are distributed.
In specific cases exact solutions of the stress distribution resulting from a given distribution of surface traction can be found.
If these are available then the problem of finding a suitable specimen shape and size does not arise.
In general, however, such solutions are intractable except to mathematicians and the rule of thumb has arisen that is a specimen is about 10 diameters in length the stress at its centre under any form of end loading can be considered as uniform.
There are also standard shapes for tensile test specimens, laid down by the standards bodies (BSI, ASTM, DIN) in various countries, which have been developed as a result of stress analysis.
These apply to isotropic materials which are homogeneous and of regular shape.
Objections to the tacit assumption of Saint-Venant's principle or the above rule of thumb arise however.
1.
If the cross-section is irregular (for example, of dog-bone shape) then the principle does not apply (Toupin 1965).
2.
The principle does not apply for anisotropic materials, where the "decay length" after which stresses are uniform is not of the order of one diameter d but  rather of order where E, G are the longitudinal Young's and shear moduli respectively and C is a constant (Horgan 1972).
3.
It is not valid for a composite material in which the lateral dimensions are comparable with those of the separate phases and, in any case, the phase stresses may differ considerably from the overall average stress.
In precision work it is usual to attach a strain gauge to the specimen surface and to use this as a measure of the strain under given load.
This method should eliminate end effects provided that the test section where the gauge is mounted is itself far enough away from the sample ends to ensure uniform strain.
This is relatively easy to ensure using any of the standard test pieces recommended for isotropic materials, but may still present difficulties when anisotropic and/or composite specimens are used.
The high value of E/G in some materials such as carbon-fibre composites, highly oriented polymers or certain copolymers may mean that the decay length — is much greater than the length of the standard specimen.
In such a case the strain is non-uniform across the specimen cross-section because of "stress channelling" so that surface strain gauges do not measure the true strain.
Only by suing specimens with length/ diameter ratios as high as 100 or more can uniform strain across the test section be assured.
The best procedure in such situations is to use several specimens of different test length, continuing the study until uniform results are obtained.
Finite element analysis (Chap.4) has been used to illustrate the effects of anisotropy.
In this study a 400-element array was used to represent a rectangular plate in plane strain, loaded only at its four corners by forces parallel to the longer dimension of the plate.
Figure 5.1 shows the distribution of principal stressed in a plate of aspect ratio 5:1 when it is (a) isotropic and (b) of a material of high anisotropy such as fully oriented polyethylene.
As can be seen, in the isotropic case the irregularities of stress near the points of application of the load are smoothed out within about one lateral dimension, that is, the central part of the plate is under uniform stress.
In the anisotropic case, however, the non-uniformity of stress is channelled in the outer portions of the plate and, for this case, of aspect ration 5:1 the central portion is very far from being under uniform stress.
In fact aspect ratios of 40 or more are needed for such uniformity to exist.
The subject of testing has been reviewed recently by Arridge & Barham (1982), where these points are discussed more fully.
Non-axiality of load and bending or twisting of the sample before stretching both have similar effects, namely to introduce couple stresses into the specimen which is not then being deformed under pure tensile stresses, but under a mixture of stresses and couples.
For large tensile specimens most test machines use swivelling or gimbal grip mountings to avoid such effects of non-axiality, but when small specimens are used, of a few millimetres in cross-section as is common with polymer tests, axiality may become more difficult to achieve because the mass of the swivelling grip requires considerable stress to rotate or move it into the axial position.
Careful alignment of the loading system in the vertical plane, before putting  in a specimen, is necessary as well as clamping of the specimen using self-centring grips.
A travelling microscope may be necessary, if the specimen is thin, to ensure perfect axiality of loading.
The problems of end effects discussed above apply also to dynamic methods.
5.3.
The dynamic tensile test
In this test the sample is subjected to a periodic load (or displacement), and a complex modulus is found which, for linear viscoelasticity, relates the stress — to the strain, these no longer being in phase with each other as they are for elastic materials.
For viscoelastic materials the results of dynamic testing are presented usually as plots of against frequency or, more commonly for polymers, against temperature.
The resulting "spectrum" is then interpreted in terms of molecular or other structural elements if possible.
It is appropriate at this point to discuss the possible"program's of stress or strain application.
The term "program" is used because, increasingly, computer-controlled test machines are used to gather the data from mechanical testing of materials.
There are three commonly used test programs: sawtooth, square wave and sinusoidal.
Such programs may be for application of load, extension or strain or a combination of these.
For viscoelastic materials such as polymers the sawtooth mode, in which load, extension or strain varies linearly with time up to some preset value is the least useful for the materials scientist.
In the older screw-type test machines it was the only feasible test program, but with modern servo-hydraulic machines very rapid rise time is possible and creep and stress-relaxation tests are feasible, as well as dynamic tests at a range of frequencies.
As detailed in Chap.
3, square-wave tests (creep or stress-relaxation) and dynamic sine-wave tests yield more useful information than sawtooth tests, although in principle the results from one type of test are comparable with those from the others.
In practice, because an infinite range of frequencies or an infinite time of testing is never achieved, the interconvertibility of creep, stress-relaxation and dynamic data is not possible and approximations have to be used.
If a sawtooth program of testing is used then a meaning has to be attached to the observed"modulus'.
This may be the secant modulus, which is the slope of a line drawn from the origin to the stress-strain curve at a given strain; or it may be the tangent modulus, which is the slope of the tangent to the stress-strain curve at the given strain.
In both these definitions the value of the strain and the strain rate must be quoted if comparisons between measurements made by different workers are to be made.
For creep (stress-relaxation) experiments the modulus (compliance) is a function of time and the load (extension) applied.
It is then usual to determine E (or e) or J (or —) as a function of time at more than one stress (extension) level i order to have a check on the linearity of the viscoelastic response.
The modulus obtained at very short times should correspond to the unrelaxed value, and that at very long times to the relaxed one (see Chap.3).
Figure 5.2(a) illustrates a modern servo-hydraulic test machine of commercial manufacture (Dartec), while Figure 5.2(b) shows the low-frequency device used at Bristol University for studies on polymers at low temperatures in vacuum.
If an XY recorder is used to plot the results an elliptical plot is produced (Figure 5.3) and from the plot may be derived the values of the loss factor.
If r1 and r2 are the major and minor axes of the ellipse and A, B its widths in the strain and stress directions, that is, the strain and stress amplitudes, respectively, it is possible to show that 
In many modern machines the stress and strain values are collected digitally and processed by a small computer to give direct values of and tan —.

5.4.
Bend tests: 3 point and 4 point
The usual practice with bend tests is to assume the Euler-Beroulli theory, that plane sections remain plane and that there is no Poisson contraction or expansion.
For many purposes this is quite sufficient and the values of Young's modulus obtained compare well with those from other tests.
However, for highly anisotropic materials the non-uniformity of stress near the points of attachment  of loads becomes important as in the end effect for tensile tests.
Also, if the material is soft it may buckle easily at the inner side of the bend and vitiate the result.
Again, the span/depth ratio is an important quantity to consider when discussing the validity of Euler-Bernoulli theory.
Of the two types of bend tests the four-point is the more reliable since only a pure bending moment is applied to the centre section of the beam and the relation becomes exact, for small curvature, since the deformation is truly into a circular arc.
In three-point bending the arc is not circular.
When viscoelastic materials are being deformed in bending care must be taken that the deformations are small, sine if the material is not linearly viscoelastic the stress gradient across the vertical section may not be linear, rendering the Euler-Bernoulli theory invalid.
Provided that the maximum surface strain does not exceed 0.1 per cent such problems do not usually arise.
Again, however, a definition of modulus whether secant or tangent, together with the strain at which it is measured, needs to be made for comparison between the results of different workers.
Formulae to use: 4-point bending (Figure 5.4)
If the radius of curvature of the bent beam is R then Euler-Bernoulli theory gives EI/R = M, where I is the moment of area of the cross-section and M the bending moment in the central section of the beam far from the points of  application of the loads.
Then for a section of length l the deflection y is given, to a good approximation by 
3-Point bending (Figure 5.5)
If the load applied at the centre point is F then the deflection at this point is given by where l/2 is the distance between the line of action of the central force and that of each of the two supports.
The bend tests describes above assume that the beam is freely supported, that is, not clamped anywhere.
The case of the clamped beam or cantilever, is discussed below, under resonance methods (g), since a common resonance test — the vibrating reed test — uses a cantilever beam.
5.5.
Torsion testing
One of the commonest methods used in materials science for the determination of shear moduli is the torsion test.
In such a test a uniform cylinder is twisted by torques applied at its ends and the relationship between torque and the twist per unit length taken as a measure of the shear or rigidity modulus.
It is possible to write a general solution, in terms of the applied torque , the relevant longitudinal shear modulus G, the twist per unit length , and a form factor F, thus F depends on both the shape of the specimen, and on the symmetry it possesses; for isotropic or transversely isotropic materials (such as hexagonal symmetry), some examples of the value of F are:
Circular rod radius a twisted about its axis:
Circular tube radii twisted about its axis:
Rectangular prism twisted about centres of rectangular cross-section:
.
where These solutions derived by Saint-Venant, apply only to small values of and to isotropic materials.
A basic assumption of the Saint-Venant theory is that the displacement U is given by where the axis of the twisted cylinder lies along the 3-direction and f1 is a function of only, determining the warping of the cross-section.
It is shown in works on large strain elasticity (Green & Adkins 1970) that when is large there is a normal stress term proportional to .
For anisotropic materials torsion is discussed in the books by Love (1944), Lekhnitskii (1963) and Hearmon (1961).
The torque with such materials depends not upon one elastic constant only, as in the isotropic case, but upon two.
This makes the determination of shear modulus by a torsion test a difficult task and it requires careful experimentation.
Early work on this for polymers was done by Raumann (1962), by Ladizesky & Ward (1971) and by Arridge & Folkes (1972); the theory is as follows.
If a circular cylinder of orthotropic symmetry is used with axis along 3, the apparent shear modulus to insert in Equation (5.3) is so that for this geometry a unique value for is unobtainable.
If a rectangular cross-section is used, as in the studies above, the torque is give by with and .
In the above expression one must be careful to choose the dimensions a, b to lie in the 1- and 2-directions respectively, the cylinder axis lying along the 3-direction.
By performing experiments with different values for the aspect ratio a/b of the cross-section it is possible to estimate the elastic constants but precise values are not obtainable except by considerable labour.
There is, as in the tensile case, a further complication from end effects which may be very considerable with highly anisotropic specimens.
First, if the specimen is subjected to axial stress — as well as the twist, then as Biot (1939) has shown, Equation (5.3) needs to be modified so that where is the applied torque and I the second moment of area of the cross-section with respect to the twist axis.
Second, the Saint-Venant principle needs to be modified, as discussed above, if the material is highly anisotropic, and very high length-to-diameter ratios may be necessary, of the order of 100 or more.
As with tensile and bend testing, torsion testing may be done under various stress or displacement programs.
A common technique for torsion tests is to apply a constant torque (electrically or by pulley wheels) and observe torsional creep.
The apparatus of Lethersich (1950) is classic in this respect.
Stress relaxation tests are rarely performed in torsion, but dynamic tests, either in forced oscillation or, more commonly, free oscillation, are common.
In the latter case the test apparatus is called a torsion pendulum and is usually of inverted type, having a counterpoise to remove end loads from the specimen and to test the Biot correction.
This type is illustrated in Figure 5.6, which shows the pendulum used at Bristol for studies at low temperatures in vacuum.
Specimen geometry
The stress distribution in any (except thin-walled cylindrical) specimens is non-uniform so that torsion tests share with bend tests all the problems   associated with non-uniform stresses and non-linear viscoelastic effects.
The preferred geometry is therefore that of the thin-walled tube, but this is not usually a practical specimen shape and the rectangular section specimen is commonly used.
End effects and errors due to misalignment are very important in torsion testing.
The subject is fully discussed in the review article Arridge & Barham (1982) cited earlier, but is briefly summarized here.
1.
For isotropic materials the length/width ratio should be at least 10 and the maximum strain at the surface less than 0.1 per cent.
2.
For anisotropic materials length/width ratios of at lest should be used, as in tensile tests, and if the ratio E/G is not known tests of  specimens with increasing lengths should be made until consistent results are obtained.
3.
End loads should be avoided.
Preferably the experimenter should apply known end loads, determine apparent moduli and extrapolate to zero load.
Then, if the specimen is correctly aligned a plot of end load against apparent modulus [or (period) -2]will be a straight line as predicted by the Biot correction, the period decreasing as the load increases.
If misalignment is present, however, the first effect of the load is to "pull the specimen straight" and the period will then increase dramatically with end load.
The effect of misalignment is illustrated in Figure 5.7 for a highly oriented polyethylene specimen of 0.1 mm minimum dimension:() correctly aligned;(b) with the lower clamp laterally displaced by 10 —
5.6.
Tests of bulk modulus
Bulk modulus is not an easy quantity to measure although, for isotropic materials, it is of more fundamental importance than Young's modulus to the material scientist.
It may be measured by dilatometry if the bulk modulus of the containing fluid is known and ultrasonic methods may also be used (see 5.9 below).
Here, however, we describe a method originally used in 1904 for tubes by Mallock and adapted for linearly viscoelastic materials by the author (1974).
If a thin tube of length l, radius r and wall thickness h is closed at both ends and subjected to internal pressure P, the extension z due to the pressure is given by Kz = prl/6h, where K is the bulk modulus.
This relation is derived in books on elasticity.
The author has adapted the tube method to the case of viscoelastic materials showing that the relation above is replaced by the integral equation  or, for tubes of appreciable wall thickness, where the radii are respectively, the equation The derivation is straightforward, following from the use of the Boltzmann superposition principle in the form where and e are the deviatoric and dilatational parts of the strain tensor eij (see Chap.
3).
A radial displacement u(t) = A(t)r + B(t)r is assumed and the longitudinal displacement is z(t).
The strain tensor is diagonal with The strains and e may be found from these and substituted in Equation (5.12).
The boundary conditions are that while the stress is given by by consideration of the equilibrium at the tube ends.
Straightforward algebra leads to the integral equation quoted above (Equation 5.11).
This equation may be solved using Laplace transforms if z(t) is a simple function of time such as a polynomial.
Then it is found that where the i are the roots of a polynomial derived from that assumed for z(t).
It is also possible to find explicit expressions for the bulk compliance B(t) and the shear compliance J(t).
These are given (Crowson 1977) by the equations  
If the radial strain at the outer surface of the tube is measurable, the tube method, for an isotropic material, gives both the elastic constants in one experiment.
The same tube may also, of course, be extended without pressurization to give Young's modulus simply: it may also be twisted by terminal couples to give an independent measure of the compliance J(t).
In the latter case the specimen is of near perfect geometry for a torsion test.
For isotropic elastic materials it is not difficult to show that internal pressurization allows the determination of the plane strain bulk modulus A torsion test will give a fourth elastic constant , the longitudinal shear modulus.
Analogues of these elastic relations apply for viscoelastic materials as for the case of isotropic elasticity considered before.
Crowson made a detailed experimental study of the experimental requirements for good results using the tube method for B, in particular the effect tube ends have on the measured compliance and the optimum value of the length-to-radius ratio.
He showed that the value of B for short tubes exceeded that for long ones by as much as 15 per cent and that for l/d greater than about 10 the values of B were independent of length.
For accurate work both temperature and pressure have to be precisely controlled and spurious effects due to the difference between the temperature of the specimen and that of the pressurizing gas allowed for.
Taking all sources of error into account Crowson concluded that the total error in using the tube was of the order of 5 per cent.
The disadvantage of the method is the requirement that the sample must be in tube form but in other respects the method has many advantages.
5.7.
The spherical and other indenters
Although indentation testing as a measure of elastic modulus is not well known as a laboratory test method it is the basis of many hardness tests used in industry particularly for softer materials such as rubbers, where the indentation made under a standard load is large enough to be easily measurable.
The "Shore" hardness test for rubbers is well known in the rubber industry and may be used to derive a value for the modulus E.
This is given (Roff & Scott 1971) by the expression where P is the load in kgf,— the indentation (mm/100) and R the ball radius in millimetres.
This formula differs somewhat from the classical Hertz expression for elastic deformation of a plane by a rigid sphere.
In this (Timoshenko 1951) the displacement where a is the radius of the circle of contact, and By combining these two expressions we find If v = ½, for incompressible materials such as rubbers, then If a circular-ended flat punch is used then where R is the radius of the punch.
Recent work on adhesion has shown that these classical formulae need to be modified to take into account molecular attraction, which increases the area of contact.
At stable equilibrium the elastic displacement is reduced from the Hertzian value by the effect of contact angle, resulting from interface and surface energies.
These modern developments are reviewed in a paper by Maugis & Barquins (1979).
5.8.
Resonance methods: the vibrating reed
Young's modulus in bending may be determined with, again, due regard to clamp and end effects by resonance methods such as the free-free beam or the cantilever beam (vibrating reed).
For free longitudinal vibrations of a beam the resonant frequencies bear simple harmonic relationships to each other, but for transverse vibrations the equation of motion is where x is measured along the cantilever, y is the deflection of a point on it from its equilibrium position, k is the radius of gyration of the cross-section of the beam, E is Young's modulus and — is the density.
The solution of the above differential equation is where , A, B, C and D are arbitrary constants and the angular frequency = 2 —f.
For the particular boundary conditions imposed by clamping one end cosh ml. cosh ml = -1, where l is the length of the cantilever.
(If both ends are free the boundary condition is cosh ml = + 1.)
The values of (ml) i obtained for the clamped-free case are: The ratios of the frequencies of harmonics to be expected from theory if there is no frequency dependence (that is, an elastic bar) are:
For elastic materials the above ratios of harmonics are found with an accuracy of about 1 per cent up to ninth order or more.
For viscoelastic materials the change of E with frequency alters the resonances so that, for example , for nylon, the ratio of the sixth-order resonance to the fundamental becomes 89.3 instead of the value of 84.9 predicted.
The method has been used to study the frequency and temperature dependence of viscoelastic moduli for many years.
It is convenient and quick and the apparatus is easily made, although there are commercial instruments also available using the vibrating reed principle or a variant of it (e.g. Du Pont Dynamic Mechanical Analyser).
If the frequency difference between half-power points on the resonance curve  is then it can be shown that, for small loss, the loss factor The vibrating reed method may therefore be used to plot the loss-factor/ temperature "spectrum" (although for precise work the change of resonant frequency with temperature needs to be compensated for by, for example, time-temperature superposition.
See Chap.
3).
5.9.
Ultrasonic methods
Three techniques have been used to determine mechanical properties of solids by ultrasonics.
One is a resonance technique developed by Bell (1968) for ultrasonic thermometry, another is a reflection method, the third the measurement of wave velocity.
In the resonance technique a series of pulses of either compressional or torsional waves is transmitted down a long rod mechanically coupled to the specimen under investigation.
The reflected signal is studied as a function of frequency and the resonant frequency, together with higher orders, is then measured.
The frequencies obtained in longitudinal or in torsional vibrations are harmonically related to each other, as was not the case in flexural vibration (the vibrating reed).
Thus for longitudinal vibrations the resonant frequency is related to Young's modulus by the equation for a beam free at both ends.
For torsional modes, if the form factor (see 5.5 above) is F and the moment of area of the specimen cross-section about the axis of twist is I, then 
For a circular rod of radius a the form factor F is the same as the moment of  area and so for a free-free torsional resonant vibration and for a clamped-free resonance.
With care, about 12 harmonics may be obtained so that about an order of magnitude of frequency range is available.
By varying the test temperature, part of the frequency-temperature relaxation plot may be obtained, for example in the —-relaxation region.
The method is, however, very dependent upon carefully prepared specimens and is very much a laboratory tool.
The ultrasonic reflection method depends upon measurement of critical internal refraction of sound at a liquid-solid interface and is analogous to the reflection of light at an interface.
When an elastic wave is obliquely incident at a fluid-solid interface, the refracted wave splits into two components: dilatational and transverse.
For an interface where the transverse velocity in the solid is greater than CL, the velocity of the bulk wave in the fluid, the refracted angles are greater than the incident angles.
This is analogous to the optical case of light from a source immersed in a liquid beamed at the surface and is thus capable of giving rise to similar critical "internal reflection" conditions.
As in optics, a Snell's law exists: where is the angle of incidence and are the angles of refraction, and and are the solid velocities.
Energy in the incident beam is shared between the reflected and refracted waves.
If the amplitude of the reflected wave is monitored while the angle of incidence is increased from zero to the critical angles of incidence, there is a peak in amplitude associated with each angle.
If the solid is isotropic, the following mechanical parameters of the solid can be calculated from a knowledge of only CD, CT and density — of the solid:
Unlike other ultrasonic methods (such as the measurement of wave velocity) of assessing dynamic modulus in any direction, the goniometric technique does not require a special form for the solid.
As long as the specimen has an accessible surface that is greater than about 2 cm in diameter and is unattacked by a suitable coupling liquid, the method will yield all the moduli together with Poisson's ratio in five minutes plus the time taken to do the required calculations.
Because some forming processes lead to materials with surface properties different from the bulk, it is necessary with a surface-based technique like this to take steps to ensure that the result is the desired one; that is, of the bulk or of the surface.
To a rough approximation the depth of the analysis is where F is the frequency used.
At 5 MHz, for example, the depth of analysis in epoxy resin is 0.3 mm.
Care should be taken to remove surface effects that might have occurred, by machining away an appropriate amount.
The results derived by this technique are subject to temperature effects.
The choice of the coupling liquid is primarily controlled by Snell's law; that is, by the expected shear modulus.
For the criticality to occur at an angle of incidence less than 90°, the shear velocity in the solid must be greater than the dilatational velocity in the coupling liquid.
Consequently, for polymers, the most careful liquid — water — is frequently not applicable.
The other requirements are that the liquid should not attack the specimen an should not be impracticably toxic.
Carbon tetrachloride with a dilatational velocity of does not attack epoxies for example but can form carcinogenic vapours (trichloroethane is the next best choice).
The ultrasonic immersion method developed at the National Physical Laboratory uses the measurement of wave velocity on accurately made specimens with parallel sides.
It enables accurate determinations to be made of the elastic constants of anisotropic materials and in principle all the elastic constants can be found.
In the method, an ultrasonic beam passes through distilled water in a bath between two transducers, one acting as transmitter and the other as a receiver.
The time difference between pulses emitted by the transmitter and received by the receiver with or without the specimen in place can be measured to the order of 1 ns.
The wave velocity so determined is related to the relevant elastic modulus by equations which are simple if a symmetry axis coincides with the direction of wave propagation, but more complex otherwise.
Full details are given in the book by Read & Dean (1978).
For isotropic materials the wave velocities are given by for longitudinal waves and for transverse waves.
Young's modulus is given by and the bulk modulus .
For low-loss materials the method can still be applied and the loss factor tan — derived from a measurement of the attenuation.
Further reading
A good account of test methods is to be found in Ferry (1980) and in Read & Dean (1978).
Certain aspects of the problems of testing anisotropic materials are discussed in the review article by Arridge & Barham (1982).
relationships between molecular and macroscopic properties
6.1.
Introduction
As we have seen in Chap.
1 a polymer molecule consists of a large number of identical monomer units strung together in a chain (linear polymer) or in some other geometrical arrangement, which may be quite a complicated three-dimensional one.
Our main concern is with linear polymers and the ordered or semi-ordered structures which they may take up in solution, in the melt or in the solid state.
Except where the packing is perfect, as in paraffins and in some polyacetylenes, the chains do not adopt a unique structure but may partake of crystalline order in some regions; while in other parts a quasi-amorphous state is found, with all possible grades of disorder between.
This may be described in three-dimensional space by defects in crystalline order, by a para-crystalline array, by micro-crystals or clusters in an otherwise amorphous matrix, by "composite" models (see Chap.
4) or by other means.
We can describe by mathematical modelling, certain extreme cases; the random chain of equal links, the chain with bond angles, the extended chain and the perfect crystal.
In the general case we have to use several descriptions, often appropriate only to the polymer under study, rather than one or other of the more exact descriptions.
We commence with the idealized freely jointed chain, which may be described exactly and also by several very useful approximations.
We seek the following information about such a chain.
1.
What is its equilibrium shape (a) in a solvent,(b) in a melt, and (c) in the solid state and how is this dependent upon temperature, the solvent, stress, velocity gradient, and so on?
2.
What are the scattering properties of the chain (light, x-rays, neutrons)?
3.
How do the properties of the chain manifest themselves in the bulk?
That is, how are macroscopic properties such as modulus, yield strength or viscosity related to the molecular properties such as chain length  (molecular weight), configuration, shape, and interchain and intrachain forces?
4.
How do chains move relative to each other?
What are the diffusion constants involved?
It is not possible in an introductory text to provide answers to all these questions, some of which indeed are still unanswered.
There is a very large body of literature on the above questions and our aim here is to provide the student with some of the basic knowledge required in order to study this literature.
Our starting point is the freely jointed chain.
It may be described using the statistics of random walks but it must be noted that even this cannot be exactly true, since by its very nature the chain must avoid itself.
Hence not all directions for a given link are permissible although we shall in the first instance assume that they are, that is, that a chain can pass through itself.
This concept, often called the "phantom chain" concept, is very useful an in fact describes reality very well.
The phantom chain concept was introduced by James (1947) and further developed by Flory (1976).
See also the recent review by Staverman (1982).
Refinements to the phantom chain include so-called self-avoiding walks (s.a.w.), walks where there is a severe energy barrier when an excluded volume is approached, chains where realistic energy barriers to link rotation are coupled with realistic bond angles, and so on.
The random walk in one dimension is discussed in textbooks of thermo-dynamics, as is the three-dimensional random walk.
Here we shall briefly remind the reader of the theory of one dimension, outline that for three dimensions (noting in passing that it can be reduced to the product of one-dimensional walks) and then give the Markoff chain theory, which is often not included in elementary tests.
6.2.
The one-dimensional random walk
Consider a journey of n steps, each of equal length, in which the decision whether to proceed forward or back is taken at random.
If we call the forward steps positive and the backward ones negative then the final position may lie anywhere between +n and -n steps from the origin.
We want to know this position after many repeats of the process — that is, we want to know the probability of arriving at a point within the range (-n, n).
Now the probability of any one step being positive or negative is ½, so that the probability of having, say, r positive steps and n — r negative ones is This is not the probability of arriving at the point m = r = (n-r) =2r-n, however, since the successive steps may be taken in different ways.
We  have here an example of the well known binomial distribution with .
The probability So that while the mean position after n steps is at the origin, the root mean square (r.m.s.) path length is .
This we shall find also applies in three dimensions, but we need first to develop an approximation for P(r) which will be useful later.
Taking logarithms of both sides of Equation (6.1):
The asymptotic expression (6.4) is accurate for quite small values of n, as is shown in Table 6.1 (from Chandrasekhar (1943) for n = 10).
When n is large the approximation becomes indistinguishable from the correct expression.
We have not so far introduced the length of each step into our expressions.
Let this be l so that x = ml represents the net displacement from the origin.
Now m = 2r — n so that x changes by steps of 2l.
Within any interval , small compared with x but large compared with l, x can be considered as a continuous 
6.4.
Markoff chain theory
The above analysis is lacking in rigour, although the final outcome is correct.
A more general treatment in which path lengths and directions may take any values is possible using the method of Markoff.
This we shall now describe, following the account by Chandrasekhar.
Consider a "chain" of N successive displacements in Cartesian space, rj,(j = 1,…,
N) and let the end-to-end vector .
(The subscripts here are labels and do not denote tensor character.)
We want to find the probability that the sum-vector should lie in the region is the probability density or probability per unit volume and we understand by dR the volume element dX dY dZ.
Now if we write as the probability that rj lies in the range then clearly is proportional to the product of the individual .
However, as in consideration of the one-dimensional random walk there are very many ways of ensuring that R is in the required region.
For the one-dimensional case this number was given by a binomial distribution.
Here, however, we write it as an integral over a portion of the 3N-dimensional configuration space represented by the N vectors rj and the 3 coordinates required for the specification of each one.
Hence subject to the constraint that where Ro is some pre-assigned value of R. The integration can be extended over the whole 3N-dimensional configuration space by setting whenever the inequality (6.10) is satisfied and otherwise, and writing Mark off showed that , far from being only a device to select the correct region of configuration space led to a new interpretation of the probability density function 
Consider the Dirichlet integral The link between continuum and molecular models of elasticity
Using continuum mechanics we have obtained in Chap.2 descriptions, which re both mathematically and physically sound, of the relationship between stress and strain or, in the broader sense, between forces and displacements.
The problem is to explain these continuum concepts in terms of molecular forces and motions.
Now in the sphere of crystal physics the problem though complex, does not involve any new concepts, rather the question of scale only.
As Born first showed there are precise relationships between the crystal elastic constants and the interatomic forces in a regular crystal lattice.
We know where the atoms are in a lattice (or at least we know their mean positions).
If we now take the opposite extreme, that of a gas, we do not know the positions of atoms, merely their mean velocities, and the only relation we can obtain between load and displacement derives from the gas law from which we can obtain the "bulk modulus' of the gas and this" modulus' is entirely entropic in origin, no elastic forces being involved.
A perfect gas can sustain no shear forces so that the above bulk modulus is the only relevant one.
Now a polymer represents a different state of affairs from either a crystal or a gas.
We must consider ways of describing the molecular structure as a continuum, such descriptions involving the idea of "embedding" , or we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that we can never do this and work entirely with a kinetic theory of molecules with the aim of deriving their properties including elastic ad viscous properties from the equations of motion.
The former approach has been the classical one, dating from the early statistical models of rubber elasticity based on random walk theory; the latter has been followed by the rheologists, those who study solution properties and in recent years developed in new directions by de Gennes and Edwards and their collaborators.
We discuss first the embedding theories.
To describe the positions and velocities of atoms in a polymer requires choosing a set of global axes, defining a continuum, with reference to which we may describe the positions and velocities of the atoms.
Where, however, can these reference axes be taken?
Whereas, in a crystal we may choose the axes of symmetry, in an amorphous polymer there is by definition no symmetry and all we know about the atom in a chain is where its topological nearest neighbours are but not where its spatial neighbours are, except that they lie within a"van der Waals radius' of the chosen atom.
The terms topological and spatial were used by Flory to describe atoms lying, respectively, along the same chain and on different chains.
Now suppose we could describe the position of every atom in some global continuum, then we  would be "embedding" the entire system in the continuum and, for example, if we applied an homogeneous displacement .
R to the continuum then every atom would move to a well defined new position.
Now we know that such a deformation cannot take place in a polymer, for if it did some atoms would move relative to their topological nearest neighbours by far more than covalent forces would allow, dissociation would occur (chain scission) and the nature of the polymer would change.
Furthermore the elastic moduli of the polymer would be very high, as in a covalent crystal such as diamond, and this is not the case.
(However, in highly oriented polymers, such moduli can be found and chain scission does occur.
These are crystalline polymers with chain orientation virtually perfect in one direction.
The arguments we are using above apply to amorphous unoriented polymers.)
We see, therefore, that for amorphous polymers or rubbers it cannot be possible to consider the embedding of every atom in the continuum.
Furthermore we want to embed the chains in such a way as to use the random walk statistics we have derived for freely rotating chain segments.
The solution used in the classical theories of rubber elasticity is to consider the network junctions as embedded, the chains between the junctions being undefined in position and considered as statistical variables.
We then, following Flory, must consider the topological and spatial network junction neighbours.
Any one network junction has topological neighbours, that is, junctions connected to it along a common chain, but it also possesses spatial neighbour junctions — junctions which may in fact be nearer to it in the continuum space but which belong to other chains.
It is difficult, therefore, to conceptualize in any rigorous way the embedding of junctions for if we define the continuum using the topological neighbours of the origin junction then an equally valid interpenetrating continuum may be defined by using the spatial neighbours and their topological neighbours.
The relation of the one continuum to the other is not possible using Newtonian mechanics.
These conceptual difficulties have not prevented the development by James, Guth, Flory, Staverman, Duiser and others of the network theory of rubber elasticity.
James and Guth introduced the idea of fixed and free junctions.
The fixed junctions are embedded in the continuum moving with it, for example in an affine deformation .
The free junctions which are connected topologically to the fixed junctions must therefore also move but it is their mean positions which are embedded, moving affinely with the continuum.
Fluctuations about these mean positions are held to be Gaussian and not dependent upon the strain.
Because of this the neighbours of a junction will change and not be the same.
On this model the fixed junctions are the sources of load for the network, such loads being transferred along chains to the free junctions, moving them in accordance with the strain.
This is the type of load transfer we envisage when considering the RVE model (Chap.
4).
An explanation of stress relaxation in amorphous polymers and rubbers can now be sought in the adjustment of the network of permanent and temporary (entanglement) junctions as strain is  applied to the fixed (boundary) junctions.
Thus a deformation may be instantaneously affine, but as the chains try to revert to states of maximum entropy by rotations and translations the network junctions take up new positions, eventually reaching in equilibrium.
This is the source of viscoelasticity in polymers.
The free energy for a deformed network
If we conceive the junction points to be embedded then we can consider the lengths of chains between junctions using the random walk arguments of the earlier part of this chapter and derive the free energy for the continuum and therefore all the physical quantities we need.
We must assume either that all chains between junctions are of equal stretched length or that there is some definable length distribution.
In molecular weight terms this would mean that MN (between cross-links) is uniquely defined or that we know{ MN}and its moments.
The simplest assumption is, of course, that all chains have the same length N1.
Then, assuming "phantom" chains, the change in free energy per chain as the end-to-end vector R changes to is Averaging over all chains and remembering that we have For a network of n chains per unit volume the change in free energy will be n times this.
The strain energy function for isothermal deformations is therefore This is the stored free energy per unit volume of the rubber and an isothermal change of state.
Comparison of this expression with that derived in Chap.
2 for the strain energy function shows that the shear modulus G in a rubber described by the above analysis has the value G = (½) nkT.
The Gaussian theory is only adequate for small strains; at higher values of strain the assumptions made in deriving the entropy break down and the more complex Langevin expression (6.16a) is needed.
In addition the increasing orientation of chains under uniaxial strain 