

The Unity Of Man
I have already put a good deal of stress upon two contrasted aspects of what seems to me to be the central paradox of anthropology considered as an intellectual discipline.
The first of these is that while anthropology purports to say things about man and humanity at large, anthropological practice has fairly consistently been concentrated upon the study of "primitive" man rather than man as such.
The second complementary point, which applies particularly to social anthropology in the British style, is the (usually unstated) claim that we can exemplify the ways of humanity in general by making a series of close studies of particular examples of very small-scale and usually quite exotic forms of social life.
The present chapter gives further consideration to the first of these apparent inconsistencies.
The majority of contemporary social anthropologists regards the distinction between "primitive" man and man in general as anachronistic and untenable, yet to the newcomer it must seem that their methods of research and the themes to which they devote most of their attention take this distinction for granted.
In so far as this is still true it is a hangover from history.
When modern social anthropologists write about "primitive" peoples it is for want of a better vocabulary; they could just as well be writing about "other" peoples.
In their own minds there is no implied derogation.
But the issue is not simple.
In the earlier academic anthropology of the colonial era, which  was only beginning to lose its grip when I myself became involved in the subject, we can easily discern an implicit equation which reads:
civilized: primitive:: master: slave
This is now embarrassing.
No contemporary anthropologist, social or other, would want to argue that people of different culture must on that account be automatically ranked in a hierarchy superior/inferior.
And indeed, since social anthropology is centrally concerned with the diversity of culture, it would be quite absurd if it could somehow be inferred from what social anthropologists teach that cultural diversity is both politically and morally deplorable.
My purpose in this chapter is to give an historical perspective to the antithesis cultural diversity/human unity.
Thereby I hope to provide moral justification for the non-egalitarian presuppositions of the methodology that is presented elsewhere in the book.
At the very end of The Order of Things Foucault makes the seemingly baffling observation that "man is an invention of recent date and one perhaps nearing Its end" .
Even allowing for the contemporary French intellectual fashion which puts a premium on witty forms of oracular paradox this seems a bit far out.
What could Foucault mean?
Perhaps we can get some clue by considering a much earlier remark by another French intellectual, Joseph de Maistre, who was commenting, as an aristocratic refugee, upon recent developments in revolutionary France.
The date is 1797:
I have seen in my time Frenchmen, Italians and Russians.
I even know, thanks to Montesquieu, that one may be a Persian, but as for Man, I declare that I have never met him in my life; if he exists it is without my knowledge.1
De Maistre is saying that there is surely a contradiction between the revolutionary dogma that all men are born equal and the observed fact of cultural diversity.
Foucault's comment is even more radical; he is challenging the very root of the Western twentieth-century liberal ethic of tolerance and individualism.
The United Nations Declaration of Human Rights takes it for granted not merely that all individual men are members of a single animal species, Homo sapiens, but that this biological fact carries with it moral implications.
The species is presumed to be so homogeneous that every individual can be treated as the equivalent of every other.
Hence the words man, mankind, humanity have come to be treated as interchangeable synonyms.
Foucault's claim is that the very idea of such homogeneity is a very recent notion generated in, and appropriate to, the special political climate of Europe in the late-eighteenth century.
This idea may now be on the way out.
I find this an intriguing proposition.
Let us see where it takes us.
The potential ramifications of such a theme could be vast so let me start somewhere in the middle.
I shall assume that the zoological species Homo sapiens is indeed a unity in the sense that in the hypothetical absence of all cultural restraints interbreeding between the members of any randomly selected human population of randomly selected individuals would be random, just as it would be in a randomly selected pack of mongrel dogs provided always that particular individual dogs were prevented from asserting dominance over their neighbours.
Dogs, like men, can look very different but when it comes to sex they all know that they are members of one species and they are not culturally inhibited from taking appropriate action.
Dogs are polymorphic in appearance because they  have been made to look different by selective breeding controlled by their human masters.
Human beings are comparably polymorphic because, in the remote past, relatively isolated, relatively small breeding populations were selectively adapted to fit in with very different environmental situations.
But all men, like all dogs, remain a single species.
But as we all know, in all practical situations, the interbreeding of domesticated men, like the interbreeding of domesticated dogs, is very far from random.
Because of their cultural inhibitions all men everywhere behave as if they were members of many different species.
Once that is recognized it becomes quite obvious that the concept of man as a mythical universal being, born free and equal, which is today so popular among intellectuals and slogan-spouting politicians in all parts of the world is not shared by humanity at large.
For the ordinary individual the concept man, or its local equivalent, refers to "people like us" and the extent of such a category is often very narrowly restricted.
It follows from this that there has never been, and never could be, an empirical human society of other than miniscule size in which all the individuals were, even approximately, "equal" , other perhaps than in the theological sense of "equal before God" .
But the fact that we should now have come to believe that such a society might be both possible and desirable is certainly interesting.
My theme then is the dialectic between (a) the fact of the unity of man as a species,(b) the fact of the disunity of man as a social being, and (c) the mixed up ideology of equality and inequality.
First of all let me emphasize our common experience that most human relationships are asymmetrical.
Within the domestic household, where the triggered social
responses of the adult human being are first generated, perfect symmetry only occurs in the unusual relationship that may develop between identical twins.
The normal dyadic pairs which are represented by the category oppositions husband/wife, parent/child, elder sibling/younger sibling, brother/sister, are always asymmetrical and can never function as relationships of completely balanced reciprocity.
Hierarchy is not necessarily involved but individuals of opposite sex or different age status can never be socially identical except by some cultural contrivance as when the King of England is a Queen!
Likewise in the wider society of the modern industrial world most relationships are of the asymmetrical hierarchical type: employer/employee, teacher/pupil, doctor/ patient and so on.
Almost the only relationships which are presumed to entail symmetry and equality are those which we slot under the labels "friendship" and "enmity" .
In the kinds of society which anthropologists usually study, where kinship links of one kind or another ramify throughout the individual's social world, this contrast is often explicit.
The opposition between "consanguinity" and "affinity" , that is between relationships based on ties of filiation as against relationships based on ties of marriage, frequently matches the contrast between asymmetrical hierarchy and symmetrical equality.
The prototype model for both friendship and hostility is then provided by affinity.
 "We marry our enemies." 
My brother-in-law is either my bond friend or my mortal foe.
This is not a general law.
Sometimes the relation between brothers-in-law is asymmetrical like that between elder brother and younger brother and sometimes affinity itself is asymmetrical so that the categories "wife-givers" and "wife-takers" are distinct; but these are technical matters which lie  outside the scope of the present discussion.
But to come back to enmity.
While the friend of today may become the foe of tomorrow and the friend of the day after that, there is another fundamental category opposition which lumps friends and foes together as "people like us" in contrast to strangers who are "people not like us" ; indeed they are not really people at all!
There may be times when you feel entitled to exterminate strangers but strangers do not engage in quarrels, nor do they intermarry.
Correspondingly, when we quarrel with potential friends, we still recognize them as people like us", both sides will conform to the same rules of the game.
In sharp contrast, in wars of conquest and extermination against total strangers, there are no rules of the game.
Strangers do not rate as human beings at all.
The relevance of these observations about the varieties of symmetry and asymmetry, social solidarity, subordination and hostility will become apparent as we proceed.
Cutting a whole sequence of further corners I shall now take it for granted that the total process by which we habitually segment and classify the things in the external world and recognize them as belonging to species entities originates in an introspective self-awareness that "I" can be distinguished from "my body" .
This Cartesian illusion is directly linked with the universal belief that "we" (people like us) can be distinguished from "they" (people who are like us in external form but not like us in their inner essence).
The central persisting human problem is not just "Who am I?" but "Who are we?" 
We of course are men.
But in what sense are we men?
Where is the boundary between man and non-man?
Let us review some of the facets of this particular strand in the history of ideas.
Pre-Renaissance views of man
All human societies, great or small, elaborate or simple, have their traditional histories.
Whether true or false or just part true, part false all such stories function as myths of origin, as charters for human existence; they explain to the initiate or to the newcomer how "we" began and how "we" came to be where we now are.
Mytho-history of this kind provides a cosmological setting for the time and space of ordinary experience but, in addition, by exhibiting the contrast of possibilities, it offers a rationale for the complex rules and conventions which characterize "our" particular way of doing things.
In some cases the corpus of story may imply a whole hierarchy of discriminations: "we" are distinguished from "others" , friends from foes, recognized neighbours from unrecognized strangers, gods from men, men from animals, "real" animals from monsters, and so on.
The Christian Bible with its progression from a wholly imaginary Garden of Eden to an authentically historical Roman Empire by way of a geographically very mixed up Land of Egypt and Land of Canaan is prototypical of a species of origin saga which can be encountered in all parts of the world among all kinds of people.
There is no clear-cut distinction between the plausible and the fantastic.
The topographical environment is of great significance for the story but it is not ordered in a straightforward way according to the canons of empirical geography and empirical zoology.
In such cosmologies the concept of man emerges only indirectly.
 "We" must be credited with primal parents, a first father and a first mother, who were mortal like us, who procreated children like us, who, like us, were different from  other animals and other beings, both real and imaginary.
But this egocentric/ethnocentric viewpoint generates a very restricted conception of what man is.
There are a vast variety of natural human languages which contain no word for man other than the tribal name by which the people in question identify themselves.
The corollary of this position is that whatever we are not, that is what the others are.
It is thus characteristic of traditional mytho-history that the real world of experience is surrounded on all sides by another world of the imagination which is inhabited by superhuman gods on the one hand and by sub-human unnatural monsters on the other: dog-headed men, men with tails, Amazonian women, cannibals, giants.
With the coming of literacy and the eventual separation of secular interests from religion, the world corpus of mytho-history has served as a quarry from which many different kinds of specialized literature have been extracted, poetry and drama especially.
But it is not only the artists and the entertainers who have recapitulated, for their own purposes, the fabulous elements in primitive tradition; the academic writers, the learned purveyors of supposedly factual knowledge, have done just the same.
Surviving materials from the classical world of Greece and Rome, from medieval China, from Arabia, and from Renaissance Europe offer many examples of this process.
So long as the traveller historians and geographers, such as Herodotus and Pliny the Elder, Chau Ju-Kwa and Ibn Batuta, Friar Odoric and Marco Polo, are writing as eye-witness observers, most of what they report is entirely factual and authentic.
But as soon as they move to hearsay they lapse immediately into the purely fantastic, and the stuff of which their fantasies are constructed is lifted direct from mythology.
Thus Marco Polo confidently assures us that the Andaman Islands were inhabited by dog-headed cannibals, while the Amazon women, whom he reported as living on an island near Socotra, turn up again, in identical form, in Columbus' report on his second voyage to the West Indies, only this time they are inhabitants of Martinique.
Dog-headed cannibals were especially popular.
An alleged eye-witness account of the Mongol invaders of Hungary in 1240 AD provides gruesome details of their combination of sexual and dietary depravity.
It would seem that in Capadocea they were even converted to Christianity for, in that region, St Christopher is often depicted with a dog's head.
But the case of Columbus is especially relevant to my theme.
The Greeks and the Arabs and the Chinese developed an extensive, and on the whole remarkably accurate, body of information concerning the geography and ethnography of "the known world" .
But though the extent of what was thus known was very great it was not felt to be unbounded.
There was always the possibility that there might be other places, beyond the limits of the known, which were inhabited by the unnatural monsters of fable.
Consequently, in classical and medieval times, there was no radical inconsistency between description based on the accurate observation of empirical reality and continued belief in a world of fable, inhabited by otherworld monsters.
But once it was understood that Europeans might hope to reach the fabled East by travelling West, then explorers could reasonably hope that before very long they would have mapped the whole surface of the globe.
This is crucial to my theme because the concept of the unity of mankind could only become a fully meaningful idea when it became plausible to suppose that there was no hitherto undiscovered, unmapped, corner of the world where man-like but sub-human creatures might still survive.
It has been a slow business.
The editors of tabloid newspapers are still prepared to finance expeditions to  search for the yeti, the Abominable Snowman of the Himalayas.
As late as 1942 I was myself assured most positively, by an otherwise sane Englishman, that, in an inaccessible valley just the other side of a visible range of mountains, he himself had encountered men with tails.
The development of systematic geography has provided an unhealthy climate for the survival of mythological anomalies but this has in no way frustrated the human imagination; the world of fable has simply been transferred to outer space.
Science fiction has taken over the fantasy-forming role of traditional mythology.
But this is all very recent.
In my youth I could read Jules Verne and H. G. Wells who took their hero explorers to the moon and to the depths of the ocean, but the imaginary worlds of Rider Haggard and Conan Doyle were still located here on earth in unmapped corners of Africa and South America.
In this context the first reactions of Europeans to the reality of the native inhabitants of the Americas is of particular interest, for here, in a very explicit sense, experience and fantasy were brought face to face.
As it so happens, Columbus' personal reactions can be reconstructed in some detail from documentary evidence.
He first noted that the Caribs were ordinary human beings and not monsters.
He did not register much surprise at this important discovery, but it needs to be borne in mind that he supposed that he had reached islands near the eastern shores of Asia rather than a land mass inaccessible to the descendents of Noah!
Having commented upon the gentleness and generosity of the Caribs, he immediately reflected upon their vulnerability and upon how easily they might be enslaved.
But then, within a very short while, fantasy reasserted itself and we find Columbus and his fellow travellers telling stories about  other islands, as yet unvisited, inhabited by tailed men, cannibals, Amazons.
Among untravelled Europeans fantasy remained dominant for more than a century.
Nearly all the earliest printed illustrations of American Indians concentrated obsessively on the gory details of their supposed cannibalism.
Indeed the word cannibal itself, like the name of Shakespeare's Caliban, is derived from Carribales, Columbus' name for the Caribs.
In actual fact it is doubtful whether any of the Indians with whom Columbus had direct contact ever ate human flesh.
The illustrations, though mostly absurd, were based on later and more authentic accounts of cannibalism among the coastal peoples of Brazil.
The close association in European minds between savagery and cannibalism has recently been discussed by Arens (The Man-Eating Myth, 1979).
It is an interesting topic but unfortunately this particular author abandons scholarship in the interests of sensationalism.
Genuine cannibalism has certainly been a characteristic of human culture in many different parts of the world at many different periods of history; but it is also true that explorers, missionaries, and respected anthropologists have all, very frequently, given credence to stories about cannibalism which have no basis in any kind of evidence.
The stories have arisen in the first place because cannibalism is a fairly standardized imaginary attribute of the bestial "others" , not just among Europeans but in the world at large.
By the time that Captain Cook was engaged in his voyages of exploration in the Pacific in the late-eighteenth century it was taken for granted that the inhabitants of the newly discovered islands would be men and not monsters, but cannibalism was still seen as somehow sub-human.
Cook was thus greatly distressed and bewildered to learn that the New Zealand Maori, for whom he had developed a  respectful admiration, ate their defeated enemies without compunction!
But let us get back to the sixteenth century.
From the very start of "the expansion of Europe" the invaders tended to treat all the newly discovered peoples of Southern Africa and the Americas as less than fully human, a convenient doctrine which implied that they were legitimate objects for enslavement, exploitation and extermination.
The criteria by which this "sub-humanity" was defined deserve to be noted.
Three captives put on exhibition by the English adventurer Sebastian Cabot in 1502 were described as "clad in beasts" skins, eating raw meat, and speaking an unintelligible language".
Similar exhibits shown in France in 1506 were "sooty in colour, black haired, possessing speech but no religion" .
In other words the essential parameters by which European Christians felt they could decide whether a particular other creature was, or was not, a human being — a person like us"— were then, as they still remain, physical appearance, intelligence (as manifested by language), religion.
The whole issue of the humanity or non-humanity of the American Indians was formally, but inconclusively, debated in tracts delivered to the University of Salamanca in 1551.
Sepulveda justified the enslavement of the Indians on the grounds that they were the natural slaves mentioned in Book I of Aristotle's Politics; the Dominican Friar Las Casas admitted the frailty of the Indians but argued that they were all the more children of God owing to their very lack of capacity and skill, which still implies a sort of sub-humanity but of a different kind.
Not long afterwards the intrinsic intellectual inferiority of the American Indians was formally proclaimed by papal decree.
Montaigne
Montaigne's famous essay "On Cannibals" , written around 1 579, adopts a stance which contrasts with both these points of view.
It is of great significance for the subsequent history of anthropological thinking.
In this case the cannibals were real, not imaginary.
Montaigne claimed that he had obtained his information by careful interrogation of a "plain simple fellow" who had lived for more than ten years in the French Huguenot colony which had been established around 1 540 close to modern Rio de Janeiro.
Although Montaigne's ethnography is meticulous his purpose is philosophic rather than descriptive.
His central thesis is that the only sense in which the people he describes are barbarous is that their customs are other than our own.
But other than does not mean worse than.
On the contrary, Montaigne argues that the legal procedures common in the Europe of his day by which "under the cloak of piety and religion…neighbours and fellow citizens [were allowed]to tear by rack and torture a body still full of feeling, to roast it by degrees and then give it to be trampled and eaten by dogs and swine" were a more horrible form of savagery than anything he had described as prevailing among the Brazilian cannibals.
Elsewhere he remarks,"we seem to have no other criterion for truth and reason than the type and kind of opinions and customs current in the land where we live.
There we always see the perfect religion, the perfect political system, the perfect and most accomplished way of doing everything.
These people [the Brazilian Indians]are wild [sauvage]in the same way as we say that fruits are wild, when nature has produced them by herself in her ordinary way…they are still very close to their original simplicity…they are still governed by natural laws and very little corrupted by our own".1
Here in embryo is not only the issue of moral relativity, about which I shall have more to say in my next chapter, but also the sentimental concept of the Noble Savage.
Two centuries later this latter notion emerged fully fledged in the writing of the more romantic of Rousseau's imitators.
It retains a surprising vitality in certain branches of radical anthropology even today.
The idea that the horrors of civilization represent a decline from a golden age of natural virtue in which ancestral man lived in an unspoiled Paradise, is an almost universal characteristic of myths of origin, the story of the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden being a very typical example.
But a new element in Montaigne's essay was its suggestion that the earthly paradise might be a still existing real place.
The savages, whose natural nobility was compared favourably with our own, were not the imaginary inhabitants of another world, but, most emphatically, real people about whom Montaigne had received reliable information from an eye-witness observer.
Potentially at least, the concept of man was here greatly enlarged.
And indeed it would seem that it was only at about this time, in the Europe of the late-sixteenth century, that a few thoughtful men first began to think seriously about the moral nature of mankind as a whole, as against the older, narrower concept of the moral nature of "ourselves" , God's chosen people, ranged against "the others" , the barbarians, who were only part men, unnatural monsters, beasts.
Savage and civilized: one skies or many?
Of course grandiose ideas of this sort can never be said to be entirely new.
In Aristotle's various treatises on the comparative physiology and classification of animals there is a consistent presumption that man is a single species.
Apart from asserting that dwarfs are usually unintelligent, the author offers no comment on the morphological differences between human physical types.
But the implied unity of mankind seems to stem from indifference.
Aristotle shows no interest in savages.
In the Politics the existence of the city-state is taken for granted.
All stateless individuals are presumed to be lawless vagabonds.
Within the state, the polis, all the inhabitants are rated as men, in the sense that they are not monsters; but it is not assumed that, by virtue of being men, they are all of equal moral standing.
On the contrary, some men are natural slaves; others are natural rulers.
Aristotle and his Athenian contemporaries were well aware that some barbarians were very different in physical appearance from themselves.
Some of the Hippocratic authors took the "Darwinian" view that this was "caused by" adaptation to differences of climate and general ecological circumstance.
Detailed illustrations on vase paintings and embossed metalwork show that the Greeks of this period were quite familiar with the physical appearance of African negroes.
However, since representations of satyrs are often given negroid features, there is a suggestion that negroes were considered to be in some sense monstrous.
But there is no evidence that the Greeks ever became seriously concerned with problems of ethnic classification; nor do they seem to have worried about the practical problem of  how to distinguish between strange men and monsters.
But in Western Europe in the sixteenth century the situation was quite different.
The size of the known world had, suddenly, been greatly enlarged.
Overseas exploration and colonial settlement opened up vistas of fabulous riches; the existence of the barbarians could no longer just be taken for granted; they had to be fitted in and given their proper place in the ordinary man's picture of world geography.
In this context it became highly relevant to ask a quite novel question: What precisely are the species limitations of mankind?
The debate was conducted on two fronts.
The first was religious.
Although most educated men were predisposed to believe that white-skinned, richly clothed Europeans like themselves must belong to a species altogether different from that of the dark-skinned, naked savages described by the traveller-ethnographers, there was the awkward fact that the book of Genesis declares that the whole of mankind is descended from Noah.
And whatever the scholars of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries may have said or thought in private, there were very few who were prepared to come out into the open and publish opinions directly at variance with Holy Writ.
The curse of Ham could be used as an excuse to justify the enslavement of African negroes but that did not make them members of an entirely different species; and anyway the American Indians were not even black!
The second front on which this issue was developed was part of a debate between philosophers, who were concerned with the moral nature of man at an abstract, idealist, level and the biologist-naturalists, who were concerned with the delimitation of man considered as a zoological species.
The former were inclined to present their arguments within a mould of imaginary social history which assumed that, in his  essence, man is a"unity even though human societies are different; the latter were preoccupied with classification and were therefore predisposed to distinguish the varieties of mankind in the same way as they were accustomed to distinguish the varieties of animals, birds, plants and insects.
Folk prejudice was on the side of the naturalists rather than of the philosophers.
During the seventeenth century and for long afterwards philosopher-humanists of Montaigne's colour remained a small minority; Shakespeare's Caliban, beast rather than human being, was the common man s stereotype of the newly discovered savages of Africa, America and the South Seas.
At the present time, in the context of the 1980s, politicians and academic anthropologists alike usually find it expedient to write and talk as if the psychic and species unity of mankind were a self-evident axiom.
The scientists affirm as dogma that all existing men are members of one biological species, Homo sapiens, and all arguments about the significance or non-significance of racial variation in men are conducted within the framework established by that prior assumption.
But, in the past, the species unity of mankind has been hotly disputed.
An early version of the alternative doctrine polygeny, according to which the global category consists of a set of quite separate races of quite distinct historical origin and wholly different psychological attributes was advanced by Paracelsus in 1520, but of much greater significance for the history of anthropology is the fact that, during a critical period between 1 850 and 1 870, polygeny was the dominant orthodoxy in scientific circles throughout Europe and America.
The theory is now in disrepute but in side paths of the groves of Academe it still finds plenty of support.
And it is  still firmly embedded in the common man's common sense, a fact which unscrupulous politicians are all too eager to exploit.
For obvious reasons it has special appeal for those who, on either political or temperamental grounds, feel a need to justify such institutions as chattel slavery, colonial domination, or any other of the cruder forms of economic exploitation.
By the same token the most vociferous upholders of monogeny, the thesis that all men are members of a single species, have often been deeply committed to political doctrines of social equality.
This contemporary mix-up of science and emotion is unfortunate, for the scientific issues are much more complicated than the doctrinaire polemicists on either side are prepared to admit.
But religious and political prejudice and scientific obscurantism have been closely entangled throughout the whole history of this debate and the resulting jumble bears directly on my general theme.
Even when the discriminations of the zoologists began to be based on systematic classification rather than fantasy the criteria that were used to distinguish man from non-man remained very uncertain.
Among orthodox men of learning the biblical axiom that species are fixed entities established by God at the Creation gradually became qualified by the doctrine of plenitude, the Great Chain of Being, which declared that God, as artist creator, would necessarily have created all possible creatures in all possible worlds, and that the creatures which we now know on earth are but a fraction of those which exist in the universe.
But, so far as this world of common experience is concerned, all living creatures, including perhaps some that are now extinct, can be arranged in a continuous hierarchy, lesser to greater, with man at the summit, as stated in Genesis.
But if the total variety of creatures is so great and the
difference between one hypothetical created species and another so small, where is the boundary between man and non-man?
What sort of creature stands immediately below true man in the hierarchical chain?
In 1677 Sir William Petty, an English scientist-scholar of distinction, declared that "of man itself there seems to be several species to say nothing of Gyants and Pigmyes or of that sort of small men who have little speech and feed chiefly on fish" , which is all of a piece with Sir John Mandeville's wholly fictional fourteenth-century quest for "diversities of folkys and diverse shap of man and beistis" .
In 1699 another English scientist, the anatomist Edward Tyson, basing his demonstration on the dissection of an orang-utang, made the influential pronouncement that pygmies represent "an intermediate link between Ape and Man" , 5 a proposition later adopted by both Linnaeus and Rousseau.
Biblical anthropology
Arguments of this sort which confused the "lower sorts of men" with the "higher sorts of ape" were not simply exercises in increasingly refined scientific discrimination; they were closely meshed in with an ongoing dialectical debate, the original purpose of which had been to establish a synthesis between the theological doctrine of the Fall and the newly discovered facts of human geography.
The discovery of the Americas and of southern Africa had synchronized with the beginnings of European printing and, throughout the sixteenth century, the expansion in European understanding of world geography and world ethnology coincided with a tremendous spread of general literacy, which was in turn accompanied by the revived and intensive study of the Bible in vernacular languages.
This new learning posed many problems.
How should one fit the discoveries of the explorers into the geographical and temporal dogmas of the book of Genesis?
If the chronology of the Bible is correct how had the American Indians managed to get to where they are in the short interval since Noah's Flood?
For that matter, how was the history of the Ancient World, as preserved in documents surviving from antiquity, which were now, for the first time, coming under critical scrutiny, to be made compatible with the divinely inspired, and therefore unquestionable, history of mankind as embodied in the Pentateuch?
The debate on these issues continued for several centuries and the proposed solutions were very varied, but all of them had the ultimate implication that only the civilized Christian Europeans deserved to be rated as true men in a fully human sense; all other "men" being variously rated as sub-human animals, monsters, degenerate men, damned souls, or the product of a separate creation.
For example, writing in 1655, the French Calvinist Isaac de la Peyrere propounded his pre-Adamite heresy according to which there had been two separate creations.
Only the Jews were descended from Adam and only the Jews had been contaminated with original sin as a consequence of Eve's disobedience.
Noah's Flood had been confined to the Middle East.
The rest of mankind, including the American Indians, were of quite separate and earlier stock, all members of which are, by their nature, lost in primeval savagery, except the Christians who have been redeemed by the grace of Christ and thus belong to God's Elect.
There were other ways of arriving at much the same conclusion but one logical consequence was that the non-biblical "gentiles" and the "savages" were lumped together as a kind of historical residue of "first men" .
Thus Vico restricts himself to "gentile" history (which includes that of the Greeks  and Romans and North American Indians) but carefully avoids any challenge to the Old Testament.
Likewise the celebrated ethnographic account of the Iroquois Indians, written by the Jesuit Père Lafitau early in the eighteenth century, carries the title Moeurs des sauvages Amèriquains comparèes aux moeurs des premiers temps but is largely concerned with parallels between the customs of the American Indians and those of the Greeks and Romans.
Somehow the doctrine of the Fall had been stood on its head.
An optimistic theory of evolutionary progress was surreptitiously beginning to replace the pessimistic doctrine of universal decay.
But the benefits of such progress were reserved for the white-skinned Christian Europeans.
The concept of Natural Man
The logic of this inversion deserves attention.
Traditional mytho-history had simply polarized the time-bound, mortal existence of ourselves in This World of Imperfection against the timeless, immortal perfection of The Other World of.
Paradise.
In this kind of mythological scheme This World and The Other World coexist in different orders of time (e.g. as between waking time and dreaming time).
But the stories in mytho-history necessarily have a linear structure in which one thing happens after another.
As the stories are presented, the timeless Paradise is always placed at the beginning and the time-bound here-and-now at the end, though in some versions, as in Christianity, there is also a vision of an eschatological future when mankind, redeemed, will once again get back to the Paradisal beginning.
In a framework of this kind the processes of history are necessarily viewed as a decline from a Golden Age.
But the picture can be modified if we insert into it the concept of a  primeval Natural Man, who lacks the corrupting appurtenances of modern civilization, and is, on that account, closer to Paradise than ourselves.
Versions of this archaic theme appear in the eighteenth-century philosophies of Vico, Rousseau and Lord Monboddo, all of whom managed to invert the orthodox Christian doctrine of cyclic redemption.
In place of a fall from grace which is ultimately to be followed by a return to Paradise, we have the notion that mankind originally evolved out of a sub-human stage of bestiality.
The beginnings of language and the beginnings of social intercourse are man-made cultural inventions which mark the beginnings of true humanity.
In principle, just as society was first invented by man, it could also be perfected by man; but in practice, under the influence of civilization, the intrinsic nobility of the first true men becomes corrupted.
Thus progress always overreaches itself and mankind falls back into a new barbarism.
But because these social theorists recognized the possibility of a stage-by-stage perfectibility of human society, they implicitly thought of culture as superimposed upon nature.
It was this that led them to postulate an original state of affairs in which a hypothetical, pre-human, pre-cultural Natural Man was a cow-like creature, without society and without language, living in the wild in a Garden of Eden forest.
The underlying thesis that the unity of man is natural while the diversity of man in society is cultural is a still prevalent orthodoxy among all Marxists and a qualified orthodoxy among most contemporary anthropologists, including myself, but it originally emerged, in the course of the late-seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, as a dialectical response to Hobbes' (1651) formula that, in the beginning, man had been like Cain, a wanderer in the wilderness, whose  life was one of"continual fear and danger of violent death.
solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short".
Vico and Rousseau simply took the biblical imagery one step further back to a pre-Adamite, non-rational, world of peace and innocence.
The state of continual fear which Hobbes attributed to natural man outside society was, for Vico, a characteristic of emergent civilized man inside society, and this became the generative source for much of human culture.
Meanwhile Hobbes' low opinion of natural man as an individual was given a different twist by Locke (1690) who emphasized that not only is man outside society an amoral being but that the distinction between moral and amoral behaviour itself depends upon social conventions.
Locke supported his thesis concerning moral relativity by citing a whole string of entirely fanciful ethnographic horror stories such as: "it is familiar among the Mingrelians, a people professing Christianity, to bury their children alive without scruple.
There are places where they eat their own children.
The Caribees were wont to geld their children on purpose to fat and eat them
The Great Chain of Being has here become a matter of moral variety rather than biological species variety, but it is quite plain where Locke would have wanted to place himself.
It is his own culture which represents moral respectability; the amoral others are perceived as monstrous cannibals.
The underlying ethic is that of the traditional folk mythology from which we started out.
Versions of Locke's doctrine of cultural relativity are still staunchly upheld by many professional anthropologists of high repute, though my demonstration that it incorporates the traditional proposition that the opposition "we" / "they" is the equivalent of "human being" / "monster" should serve as a warning.
But the dilemma is more subtle than that.
From 1650 onwards, in partial imitation of Hobbes, a variety of authors managed in their different ways to transform the biblical thesis that civilization reflects a decline from a pristine state of grace into a cynical doctrine which declares that the observed condition of man in society has been superimposed by social restraints or cultural conditioning upon a pre-human condition of animality in which "man" was a solitary brute devoid of any kind of natural humanity.
Whether you welcome this idea or view it with horror will depend upon who you are.
Gramsci's reading of Marx according to which "there does not exist an abstract fixed immutable human nature;…human nature is the totality of historically determined social relations" is in line with this style of thinking; so also is Rousseau's earlier, portentous but shocking prediction that, because of human avarice, men would have to be "forced to be free" .
Let us consider this paradox.
It arises because the concept of the unity of man is being used in two quite different senses.
On the one hand, unity is seen as equivalence.
All human individuals are on a par, but each is separate from every other like the matches in a match box.
Alternatively, unity is viewed as social solidarity.
Here, in the ideal case, the network of social relations would embrace the whole of mankind: "all men are brothers" .
But the political objectives implicit in these two versions of humanity are diametrically opposed: liberal individualism on the one hand; socialist solidarity on the other.
Populist theories of political democracy which suggest that meaningful forms of social organization can emerge from a principle of "one man, one vote" fudge the issue.
In effect, demagogy of this sort pretends that societies are indistinguishable from crowds.
That is not how things are.
And indeed the main task of the social anthropologist is to demonstrate just how  fundamental is the difference between a social group and an unstructured crowd.
All actual human societies, as we can now observe them, whether they be large or small, complex or simple, are hierarchically ordered.
The division of labour is always reflected in differentiation of status.
Admittedly, ethnography presents us with a few (but very few) examples of value systems in which inequality of status is viewed as a moral evil; but these cases are so exceptional that they probably always represent transient states of society.
The followers of a charismatically inspired prophet may, for a while, feel and act as if they were all equally members of God's elect, but if the community is to survive, the "routinization of charisma" , to use Weber's term, always recreates a hierarchically ordered social structure.
In the vast majority of cases hierarchical inequality is taken for granted as part of the natural order of things.
And this is hardly surprising, for without hierarchy there can be no legitimacy, and without legitimacy there can be no enduring social order.
In a society in which egalitarian notions are taken seriously each individual sees himself as being personally directly inspired by the ultimate divine source of morality.
My actions are their own justification.
I recognize no human moral authority outside my existential self.
There is no allocation of legitimacy to others.
Human authority is then an evil in itself and the social relations which constitute the fabric of society are constantly being dissolved.
Hence all egalitarian doctrine is fundamentally millenarian, revolutionary and transitional.
Despite the claims of the late Chairman Mao the notion of "permanent revolution" is a contradiction in terms.
We know very little about the world history of such ideas and their dialectical development, but we do know a good deal about how things have gone in the main literate civilizations over the past four thousand years.
We know that, in general, the literati became the bureaucratic agents of the established political order and that they always took it for granted that hierarchy is part of the natural order of things.
The periodic appearance of literate philosophers who preach the equality of man is thus itself a kind of paradox.
As has often been noted, such individuals very seldom practise what they preach.
The concept of political freedom, which is now so frequently bandied around by the coiners of political slogans, was, so far as we know, first developed in Athens in the fourth century BC where at least two-thirds of the population had the status of chattel slaves.
Egalitarian Rousseau lived out his life as the spoilt plaything of eccentric aristocrats.
Jefferson, whose eloquence on the theme of natural equality is constantly reiterated and was even written into the American Declaration of Independence, remained a slave owner to the end of his life.
Marx spent his last thirty years in very comfortable middle-class circumstances in Highgate and was an employer of domestic servants.
What I am getting at is that, in these historical cases, egalitarian ideas were tied in with the presumption that the proposition "all men are born equal" can be glossed "all men (who are people like us) are born equal" .
Equality does not extend to natural slaves or to those who are rated as infantile because of their seemingly intrinsic intellectual limitations.
The eighteenth-century revolutionaries in America and France coined some splendid slogans about "government by the people for the people" , "no taxation without representation" , "one man; one vote" and so on, but after some disastrous preliminary experiments with mob rule, they quickly settled for compromise; only the existing owners of property should be qualified to vote!
To some extent it may  be that things are now different, but then it could be that parliamentary democracy is no longer a truly viable form of political organization.
Equality of voting rights certainly does not result in equality of power or the disappearance of hierarchy in government.
Indeed, in Marxist regimes, despite a certain genuflexion to egalitarian slogans, democracy has become, quite blatantly, a brand name for despotic rule by a self-appointed oligarchy.
Prior to the eighteenth century the Europeans seem to have handled the ethnographic aspects of these dilemmas without much difficulty.
In the early years of the Spanish and Portuguese colonial expansion the Church militant got itself into some considerable moral tangles, but these did not prove insuperable.
The medieval Church had laid down categorical rules about the impropriety of Christians enslaving other Christians but these rules were waived when it became a matter of enslaving black Africans.
In their overseas colonies the Portuguese and the Spanish alike took vigorous steps to convert the local inhabitants to Christianity.
To that extent at least they recognized, from the start, that these "others" were "men" ; but they were only second-class men.
As early as the middle of the fifteenth century, as part of a political deal with the King of Congo, the Portuguese actually managed to ordain a black African bishop.
But the official church hierarchy strongly disapproved.
No other African became a bishop until well on into the twentieth century!"
In general, from 1450 onwards, non-European Christians were taught theology to a level at which they might function as parish priests, but they were not admitted to the religious orders such as the Jesuits and the Dominicans.
When Goanese Christians complained of this discrimination they were told to start their own order, which they did very successfully.
But they were still rated as "other" , a race apart.
Yet it would seem that, in the latter half of the eighteenth century, the movement of thought which generated the idealistic rhetoric of the American and French revolutions began to affect even the Roman Catholic Church.
The boundary limitations of genuine mankind became uncertain.
Sometime around 1745 Rome suddenly reversed its earlier policy and began, in theory if not always in practice, to treat all Catholics as members of the same species whatever their skin colour or cultural affiliation.
Who this kind of change at this particular time?
Clearly there can be no simple answer to such a question, but we need to appreciate that, until the eighteenth century, the speculative moral philosophers who concerned themselves with such issues did not have to bother about the practical implications of their argument.
Whoever the child-murdering Mingrelians might be they were certainly a long way away.
They could be invoked to illustrate an argument, but they did not present a practical problem of social and political relationship.
But as communications improved and trade intensified under the aegis of industrial capitalism and European imperialism, it became ever more necessary to come to terms with the paradox: if "all men are equal" only when "men" means "people like us" , then where do the "others" fit in?
Most of us have not really solved that puzzle even today, but what did the question look like in the eighteenth century?
First of all it is important to realize that the anthropology on which the eighteenth-century philosopher-scientists relied reflected an indiscriminate mixture of biological and sociological concerns.
Most of those who discussed human variety were talking about the differences in the physical appearance of human individuals, though they often mixed up characteristics which now seem to be plainly innate, such as skin colour, with characteristics which are plainly  cultural, such as mode of dress.
But other writers or perhaps even the same writers in other contexts, were concerned with institutional differences, varieties of law, of systems of government, of property relations, of forms of the family.
It was because these two radically different approaches to a single subject matter, man, were barely distinguishable that the varieties of man came to be discussed under such vaguely defined labels as "peoples" , "races" , "nations" , "tribes" , and, more recently, "cultures" , "language groups" , "speech communities" , "social formations" .
The parameters by which one such unit was distinguished from another varied according to the occasion but might include skin colour, stature, style of dress, morality, intelligence, language, religion, geographical locality and mode of subsistence, but there was always a clear presumption that the different kinds of criteria physical, cultural, linguistic, regional, institutional, economic — were all coincident.
Linnaeus provided the model for all the rest.
He listed the European and the African as two sub-species of Homo sapiens.
The European was "fair, sanguine, brawny; covered with close vestments; governed by laws" .
The African was "black, phlegmatic, relaxed; anoints himself with grease, governed by caprice" .
We laugh?
But open any British mass circulation newspaper any day of the week and you will find comments on the inhabitants of the Third World which rest on precisely such "racial" discriminations as these.
Moreover although, with hindsight, such a classification appears scientifically absurd it is zoologically perfectly sensible.
A modern bird-watcher's manual will distinguish varieties of finch not only by colour, size and other physical attributes, but also by psychological characteristics such as timidity and aggressiveness, as well as nest-building behaviour, feeding habits, sociability, seasonal and regional  variation, and so on.
If such discriminations are appropriate to birds, why should they be inappropriate in the case of men?
Until very recently the standard present-day answer to that question, at least among anthropologists, has been that man has culture and birds do not.
It is a wholly unsatisfactory kind of answer.
At the empirical level culture and nature cannot be discriminated in this way.
And indeed I would argue that Linnaeus, in his role as classifying naturalist, did a better job at putting the varieties of mankind into their mutual relationships than did idealist philosophers like Rousseau and Jefferson.
For Linnaeus the varieties of men were like breeds of dog, different in their appearance, different in their manifest behaviour, but indifferently equal in their moral quality.
I much prefer that kind of viewpoint to the egalitarian doctrine which declares that all men are equal but only if they accept my point of view.
Unfortunately it is the latter doctrine which dominates present-day thinking in the Western democracies, not only in the political parties of both the right and the left but also among most of you who are likely to be reading this book.
Let me return briefly to Foucault.
If you read his book you will see that what he seems to have had in mind when he coined the phrase about man being "an invention of recent date and one perhaps nearing its end" was something like this.
The unitary, all embracing, concept of man which is postulated by such expressions as "Anthropology is the science of man" is really a by-product of the post-Cartesian attempt to objectify everything in the world, to view human relationships as commodities, to see everything as quantifiable and predictable and governed by simple laws of cause and effect.
A concept of man, in this sense, only became  necessary when an objective, "science of man" came to be envisaged as a desirable and attainable possibility.
In this context Foucault argues that whereas economics, sociology, demography and other mathematicized (statistical) social studies are,-despite their limitations, "sciences" , in the sense envisaged, psycho-analysis, ethnology and linguistics should be regarded as counter-sciences since they lead to a dissolution of man considered as an objective entity.
I would like to believe that he is right though I notice with regret that the academic professions of social and cultural anthropology are in fact full of people who would like to objectify "man" by loading down their publications with tables of statistics.
Yet it is true that, although Foucault's "counter-sciences" , by repeatedly demonstrating the apparently endless variety of what is humanly possible, have constantly served to enlarge the scope of "us" at the expense of "other" , they have, at the same time, ended up by making the generality man so imprecise as to be almost meaningless.
Perhaps a future generation will come to recognize that the most misguided, though well intentioned, feature of our present age was that, having discovered by the methods of genuine science that man is a single zoological species and thus a unity in his physical nature, we tried, by political coercion and propaganda, to impose on man, as cultural moral being, a comparable sense of unity which contradicts the very essence of our human nature.
3 Humanity and Animality
As I stated at the beginning of this book, the common thread that runs through the different chapters is the problem of continuity/discontinuity.
"The time and space of ordinary experience seem to be continuous.
There is an oscillation between light and darkness but no particular moment of time when day becomes night or night day; as I walk across the landscape I may sometimes be on a hill top and sometimes in a valley bottom but at no point does the surface of the earth come to an end.
By contrast, the time and space of the man-made world of social events and human possessions is marked with discontinuities whichever way we look or feel or listen: "at the third stroke it will be seven fifty-nine precisely…
PIP
PIP…
PIP,"says the voice on the radio clock.
Our quest for order within disorder leads to fragmentation.
Fences, gates, barriers of all kinds bar the way.
We only feel emotionally comfortable when everything can be tidily sorted out according to categories.
Is it a boy or a girl?
Is he a child or an adult?
Are you a Marxist or an anti-Marxist?
Are you a man or a mouse?
In the past that last question has not always seemed quite as simple as it might now appear.
But in a slightly different form the problem is still with us.
If all men are human beings, why should we need two categories instead of one?
Is our humanity in any way different from our animality?
Our classifications depend upon who we are.
Botanists
will divide the world of plants into hundreds of thousands of different species; I find I can get along quite happily with a few dozen.
But when it comes to the varieties of anthropology I get fussy, as you saw in Chapter l.
Some parts of our classifying schemes are essential.
The species could not survive if men and women could not recognize that they were both alike as members of one species and different as individuals of opposite sex.
Also we must recognize the difference between food and not-food and so on.
But the methodology of modern laboratory science and of modern industry, whereby the first step in analysis always consists of breaking down continuous unity into innumerable separated discontinuities, certainly goes too far.
We need to know how things are related, not just how they can be taken apart.
It is partly because of this distinction that, for the past fifty years, the physical anthropologists, who have by now become laboratory scientists par excellence, have barely been in communication with the various kinds of socio-cultural anthropologists.
The physical anthropologists concern themselves with the history and distribution of the varieties of mankind considered as species and sub-species.
Their methods are those of the anatomist and the geneticist.
They treat the physical body of the human individual as a naturally existing unit separate from all others and proceed to take it to pieces.
Until quite recently the socio-cultural anthropologists have adopted a very similar stance.
They too have assumed that there is something natural and self-evident about the human individual as a separate physical body, but then, in order to distinguish their own field of enquiry from that of the physical anthropologists, they have reified their special concept of culture to a point where we end up with the implicit definition: "Culture is everything which concerns the  life and behaviour of human beings which is not an aspect of human nature, as the physical anthropologists perceive it." 
Plainly this kind of polarized demarcation is absurd.
Physical anthropologists and socio-cultural anthropologists have different fields of interest but their respective territories are not separated by an impenetrable wall; or at any rate they ought not to be.
Socio-cultural anthropologists do not need to be expert anatomists or geneticists or specialists in the biology of nutrition but they are likely to talk a lot of nonsense if they do not take account of what experts in such matters have been able to discover.
Correspondingly studies in the biological aspects of human adaptation need to be supplemented by ethnographic and socio-cultural investigations of various kinds.
But since the biologists operate within the quantitative framework of statistically based natural science, while the socio-cultural anthropologists mostly argue on the basis of intuition, communication between the two sides is very difficult.
In this chapter I shall not be attempting to show how this problem might be resolved.
My purpose rather is to discuss the underlying issues in general terms and at a somewhat philosophic level.
At one remove my purpose is also to show where my admiration for functionalist empiricism stops short and my interest in structuralist idealism begins.
The underlying themes have been spelled out already.
What is the relationship between human nature and human culture?
Is anthropology a science or an art?
Do the protean variations of culture somehow reflect a principle of social evolution through adaptation to the environment which is directly analogous to the process of physical evolution that is postulated in the Darwin-Mendel theory of the "survival of the fittest" through genetic natural selection?
Should the  social anthropologists abandon the pretence that they are natural scientists in disguise and think of themselves only as "scientists" in Vico's sense — scholars in pursuit of understanding?
In that case should they perhaps think of variations in human culture as expressions of permutations in the working of the human mind?
Almost all the alternative possibilities that are opened up by possible answers to such questions have quite recently been supported, sometimes with great passion, by anthropologists of international renown.
I am not myself wholeheartedly committed to any of them but they deserve our attention.
In one form or another these issues, which are really all variations of the same issue, are of very long standing, but the style in which they are presented is liable to change very rapidly.
Contemporary (and doubtless very temporary) fashion tends to represent the anthropology-as-science]anthropology-as-art opposition as the contrast between E.
O. Wilson-style sociobiology and Levi-Strauss-style structuralism.
But the anthropological arguments presented in Wilson's On Human Nature (1978) are of such startling incompetence that, in those terms, a debate could never get started at all.
On the other hand the cautiously scientific, but unsensational, studies of population geneticists such as Cavalli-Sforza are usually too technical to provide a basis for any dialogue with the intuitionists.
So I will evade current controversy and take a step back into history.
The culture-as-an-aspect-of-nature/culture-as-an-aspect-of-mind antithesis has a respectable antiquity.
Modern science, which is commonly held to have been given its philosophical base by Descartes, has nearly always presupposed precisely this kind of dualistic contrast between objective matter and introspective mind.
Figure 3.1 is intended to represent Cartesian dualism in a schematic, highly simplified form.
Contemporary scientific orthodoxy still operates, for the most part, within this framework.
The scientific observer conceives of himself as a rational mind looking out through a plate-glass window on to an inaccessible "nature" .
This "nature" is what is really there, not just what appears to be there.
It is governed by discoverable mechanical laws which can be expressed in mathematical and chemical formulae.
The model of the natural world which the scientific observer thus builds up in his mind is testable and "true" , but it is different from nature.
The mind of the human observer is endowed with creative imagination; this allows the scientist not only to make discoveries about the laws of nature but to tamper with them and exploit them to his own advantage.
Now I doubt if any modern scientist really believes that mind "and" matter"are distinguishable in this simple  dualistic way; it is simply that the experimental research worker, in his laboratory, is bound, by the context of his work, to act as if he believed it.
For if he did not assume that "mind" is an exclusive property of the observer, he would have to suppose that the stuff he observes possesses the same qualities of imagination as he claims for himself.
In that case nature would be capable of wilful deception and all scientific investigation would be a waste of time.
Now you can see that if a scientist of this kind tries to study man he is in difficulty.
For he must then begin to assume that the object under investigation has the same characteristics as himself.
This is immediately relevant to our problem.
Sociobiologists claim that they have a general theory about animal behaviour, and the category "animal" includes "man" .
But the theory is a mechanistic one; the individual creature is genetically pre-programmed to act in the way it does; statistically speaking it has no choice; within a narrow range of variation, it always makes a predictable response to identifiable patterns of stimuli originating in the external environment.
But in that case what is the status of the sociobiologist himself?
If he too is just an automaton driven by his genetic predispositions what can be the scientific value of his observations?
This is the converse of the main theme of Chapter 2.
There the issue was: Can there be other creatures who resemble men in appearance, but are not true men, not really "people like us" ?
Here we are concerned with the larger problem of the relationship between men as a class and other animals as a class.
This question too has had a long history though it is only quite recently that it has become a precisely defined issue of zoological theory.
But questions of this sort are not just matters of zoological taxonomy, they are also the  necessary central problem for all religious systems and this is what brings them within the scope of social anthropology.
If, as human beings, we have moral duties both towards non-human living things, as the first chapter of Genesis suggests and the environmentalists believe, where do we draw the moral (as distinct from the zoological) line between the human and the non-human?
For example, in Buddhist ideology the theory of the transmigration of souls implies that taking animal life in any fashion is a sin.
But this doctrine is often coupled with another which denigrates the status of women as a class.
Evil men may be reborn as sub-human animals, but virtuous men have at least the prospect that they may escape from the cycle of rebirths into the nirvana of final extinction.
But the best that a virtuous woman can hope for is that she be reborn as a man.
This is a long way from sociobiology, but we are back again at the problem of continuity/discontinuity.
The criteria for discrimination are very variable and when European writers of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries at last began to realize (perhaps inadvisedly) that the word religion might be applied to other systems of thought besides Christianity this was one of the factors on which the classification of religions was based.
Totemism was low and primitive because men and animals are there represented as having a confused common origin.
Animism was likewise low and primitive because it was said to imply that souls inhabit animals and trees just as they inhabit men.
But Christianity was a high religion because it implies a clear-cut discontinuity between ethically conscious human beings, who have souls, and irrational beasts, who do not.
On this issue the debate between T. H. Huxley and Bishop Wilberforce at the British Association meeting of 1860 over the significance of Darwin's recently published The Origin of  Species has entered into our mythology.
As is usual in such cases the myth seems to be somewhat remote from the historical facts but, for what it is worth, Wilberforce is supposed to have remarked that: "Whatever certain people might believe he would not look at the monkeys in the Zoological Gardens as connected with his ancestors', to which Huxley replied: " I would rather be descended from an ape than a bishop", which has merits as repartee but is hardly a contribution to science.
What was really said on that occasion is not on record but Wilberforce had just written a long review of Darwin's book in the Quarterly Review and from this it seems clear that the good Bishop was by no means the fundamentalist reactionary which he is commonly supposed to have been.
He fully accepted the interpretation of fossils which had recently been put forward by Lyell and also the general interrelation of species in a Great Chain of Being.
Where he differed from Darwin was mainly on the critical issue of evolution, i.e., the proposition that one species could change over time into another species, but his arguments on these matters were by no means obscurantist or naive.
Indeed a modern zoologist would probably find that he could accept almost as much of Wilberforce's argument as he could of Darwin's.
But although the myth misrepresents the historical Wilberforce, it correctly represents a very fundamental opposition between two styles of explanation of human behaviour.
It is something of an accident that the mythical protagonists of the two points of view should have come to be represented as Darwin and Huxley on the one side and Wilberforce on the other.
The champions might equally well have been Epicurus and Lucretius ranged against St Paul.
What then is the crux?
The materialism of Epicurus can be
summarized by saying that: "The soul is a material body of fine parts and is distributed through the whole bodily structure sense perception is a purely material process.
Substitute "genetic endowment" for "soul" in this specification and you have the essence of contemporary sociobiological doctrine.
It follows logically from such a position that the difference between men and other animals is simply one of degree, a heightening or lessening of certain kinds of sensibility.
The contrasted metaphysics of the Christians requires us to believe that the human soul is a thing apart, which can exist independently of the human body.
The body is no more than a temporary earthly frame for a separate special creation; it is the soul rather than the body which is endowed with intelligence, sense perception and moral judgement.
More crudely the materialist Epicurean approach implies that we are different from other animals because of our education.
Each individual man starts out as an animal with a potential (genetic predisposition) for acquiring culture; we become civilized human beings by virtue of our training; our moral judgements derives from that training.
All of which is, as you will appreciate by now, the strictly orthodox view propounded in most standard textbooks of cultural anthropology.
The opposite, orthodox Christian, doctrine is that man is different from the start and that moral judgements are absolute and known directly from divine inspiration.
Wilberforce saw very clearly that this was the issue and that evolutionism was damnable because it implied moral and cultural relativity.
In his review article he cited, as counter to Darwin, a seventeenth-century commentary upon the twenty-first verse of the third chapter of Genesis.
The original biblical text simply says that after the
expulsion from Paradise: "Unto Adam also and his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins and clothed them." 
The commentator sees this as a housing of man's immortal human soul in an animal body and proceeds as follows:
And of a truth vile Epicurism and Sensuality will make the soul of man so degenerate and blinde, that he will not only be content to slide into brutish immorality, but please himself of this very opinion that he is a real Brute already, an Ape, Satyre, Baboon; and that the best of men are no better, saving that civilising of them and industrious education has made them appear in a more refined shape, and long inculcate precepts have been mistaken for connate Principles of Honesty and Natural Knowledge, otherwise there be no indespensible grounds of Religion and Virtue, but what has hapned to be taken up by overruling Custome.
Which things, I dare say, are as easily confutable as any conclusion of Mathematicks is demonstrable.
But as many as are thus sottish, let them enjoy their own wildness and ignorance, it is sufficient for a good man that he is conscious unto himself that he is more nobly descended, better bred and born, and more skilfully taught by the purged faculties of his own mind.2
Well there you have it in seventeenth-century language.
Are we educated apes, or sons of God clothed in animal skins?
Are our ethical values (the Principles of Honesty and Natural Knowledge) connate, that is "known to us instinctively by virtue of our divine origins" , or are they no more than "long inculcate precepts" which depend simply on "what has hapned to be taken up by overruling Custome" ?
Is morality nothing more than a set of cultural conventions?
The problem of moral relativity is still a burning issue both
among anthropologists and among philosophers but I dare say that most readers of this book would like to situate themselves somewhere on the Epicurean side of the fence; so would I, but the intellectual difficulties which flow from that position are very great.
If you believe yourself to be simply an animal without an immortal soul but you also believe that you are capable of making moral judgements, you will need to ask yourself whether cats and mice and birds and insects are also capable of making moral judgements.
And if you decide that they are not, then you are back where you started.
What is the non-animal quality which men possess which other animals do not possess?
What is it that distinguishes humanity from animality?
Could Koko the gorilla become a Christian?
Western philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who speculated on these matters usually emphasized two criteria:
1.
Man has the faculty of speech;
2.
Man is rational; and they tended to see the one capacity as closely related to the other.
They were also inclined to distinguish reason from imagination and to regard the latter as a sensual quality corresponding to the animal nature of man whereas intellect corresponded to his divine nature.
Some writers even saw the transition from imagination to rationality as an evolutionary process; Vico and Rousseau, for example, both suggested that natural man would have spouted poetry before he acquired rational speech.
In the same vein there has been a long-standing tendency to equate rationality with logic, and logic with mathematics.
Despite the salutary scepticism of David Hume this scholastic convention has survived right down to the present day and is perhaps best explained by saying that when intellectuals who have the mental habits of university  professors are invited to specify the distinguishing criteria of human beings they end up by producing a self-image of themselves.
Detached objectivity in such matters is clearly very difficult but since it is quite evident that migrating birds and fish and even insects are often capable of solving the most intricate and unpredictable problems of solid geometry it hardly makes sense to argue that a purely mathematical rationality is an exclusively human characteristic.
All the same, the fact that we are consciously mathematical, that we consciously incorporate straight lines and rectangles and arcs of circles into our artifacts, that we measure things and reckon by numbers, does seem to be a very fundamental human characteristic which is of great importance for the way we organize our lives.
And all the varieties of human kind that we know of do these things.
All the same, as against the scholars of the Enlightenment, my own general view is that it is precisely the non-rationality of our behaviour which marks us out as human beings.
Science, as it has developed right across the board since the end of the sixteenth century, has operated with the axiomatic assumption that events in the material world, out there, external to human minds, are governed by regularities which are so coherent and consistent that they can be treated as "natural laws" .
This all-embracing assumption is most improbable but it is justifiable since it never lets us down.
When we investigate experimentally the"stuff of the world it never tells lies, it never changes the rules in the course of play.
If we shoot a rocket to the moon and bring it back ten days later we can calculate before the start, within a matter of seconds and a few hundred yards, just how long it will take and where it will land, provided always that in the course of the proceedings there is no human error.
Nature cannot make mistakes but human beings can and do…
Men do alter the rules in the course of play.
Time and space "in nature" are continuous; we make them discontinuous for our human social purposes, and we do so in a great variety of different ways.
That is what the "diversity of human culture" really amounts to; the variety of different ways which human beings choose to cut up the continuities of their animal experience.
But what has the arbitrariness of the decoupage got to do with human fallibility?
Let me take it slowly.
The question whether a capacity for error reflects our divine intelligence or is, as the theologians would have us believe, an invention of the flesh and the Devil is by no means a trivial issue of medieval scholasticism.
It is precisely because human beings can "change their minds" and "tell lies" that if you try to apply the methods of orthodox science to the study of human behaviour you will nearly always get it wrong.
But are we quite sure that this quality of unpredictability, which is, after all, only another name for "free will" , is really a human rather than an animal peculiarity?
What about animals other than men?
As a general rule the strictly orthodox laboratory study of animal behaviour has always ignored this possibility.
Psychological experiments of the rats-in-mazes kind are always set up in such a way that, even if the animals concerned had been capable of exercising individual judgement in such a way as to wreck the experiment, this fact would escape detection.
It is assumed from the start that it is the experimenter rather than his subject matter who is in control of events.
Accordingly, if anomalies appear in the results, this is attributed to defects in the experiment rather than to wilfulness on the part of the animals under investigation.
But there are other ways of studying animal behaviour and they have gradually become increasingly influential.
The  ethologists, some of whom prefer to call themselves socio-biologists, endeavour to observe their subjects in the wild, in circumstances where the gadgetry of scientific apparatus will have only minimal consequences for what is going on.
And they pay special attention to the ways in which individual animals interact with one another to form social groups.
In such circumstances the superficial similarities between animal behaviour and human behaviour sometimes become very marked.
A major difficulty here for an anthropologist is that the ethologists tend to describe their observations in language which takes the anthropomorphic analogy for granted.
They regularly assert that the significance of an observed action is symbolic (rather than functional) and they start off with a basic assumption that emotions and attitudes are just as much observable characteristics as colours or structures.
Once it is conceded that non-human animals might have qualities of this sort the observer is challenged to interpret the alleged symbolism and the alleged symptoms of emotion and attitude.
And this is what the ethologists and socio-biologists proceed to do, often with reckless lack of caution.
The outcome is predetermined by the terminology.
If a human observer sets out to interpret the "emotions" of a rat what else can he do except say of himself: "Now if I were that rat, how should I feel?" 
The issues here are complicated and I only have space to give a rough indication of where the difficulties lie.
The main difference between the sociobiologists and their ethological predecessors is that, whereas the latter were preoccupied with demonstrating the adaptive value of certain kinds of signalling behaviour in non-human animals, the former are much more dogmatic about the actual evolutionary mechanisms which have brought these (and many other) behavioural adaptations into existence.
Sociobiologists are liable to find themselves in confrontation with the cultural and social anthropologists because they are specially concerned with interactions (especially mating behaviour) between individual animals which are closely related biologically.
They have this interest because such mating could affect the likelihood that an individual's genetic constitution would be reproduced in an individual of a later generation.
According to the sociobiologists, competition between individuals of the same species to achieve this end is what it is all about; the Mendelian modification of Darwin's dogma concerning "the survival of the fittest" is made to explain almost everything.
The worry for the anthropologists is that some sociobiologists jump directly from their impressively careful observations of the mating behaviours of lions and deer and ostriches to sweeping assertions about the causal determinants of mating behaviour among men.
This riles the anthropologists because theorizing about the rules governing mating between close kin has been a major anthropological preoccupation for well over a century.
The anthropologists have not solved all their problems in this area but they feel, with some justification, that where human behaviour is concerned, most of the arguments now being put forward by the sociobiologists as if they were major scientific discoveries were effectively disposed of sometime around 1865.
The new-style sociobiologists, like the old-style ethologists, couch their arguments in highly anthropomorphic terms.
It is true that when they use words like "aggression" and - "altruism" (which they do a great deal) they make a pretence that they have somehow dissociated these terms from their human behavioural origins — but it is only a pretence.
If an observer interprets a piece of animal behaviour as either aggressive or altruistic he is, in effect, saying: "If that creature were a man I should describe his behaviour as aggressive or altruistic as the case may be." 
As far as the humanity/animality issue is concerned, this begs the question.
And indeed the anthropomorphism of the sociobiologists goes much further than that since they regularly employ a language which derives directly from the ideology of twentieth-century capitalism: investment, costs, benefits are central elements in their vocabulary.
I do not want to get involved in the technicalities of such arguments but, for good or ill, the anthropomorphic style of sociobiological interpretation, together with its exaggerated insistence that virtually all patterns of animal behaviour (including those found in man) can be explained by evolutionary hypotheses, has lately served to reinforce and extend Darwin's original Epicurean thesis that the difference between man and other animals is simply one of degree, that there is no natural discontinuity.
Although Darwin himself published a book entitled The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals most of his early anthropological followers ignored the possibility of a psychological bridge between the animal and the human.
Physical man was supposed to have evolved from an ape by way of a "missing link" , but psychological evolution was discussed only within the defined limits of Homo sapiens where it was postulated that there had been a progressive development from the childhood of the race to its maturity.
As a consequence it has been possible, for over a century, to adopt two apparently quite contradictory positions simultaneously.
Even those who have fully accepted the thesis that all varieties of animal, including man, had a common origin in remote geological time have still managed to believe that a clear-cut distinction may be drawn between the culture of man and the mechanistic responses which we  can observe in the interaction processes of other animals.
The following quotation comes from Buettner-Janusch's authoritative textbook of physical anthropology published in 1966:
Man, unlike a dog or a chimpanzee, can actively determine what meanings a vocal stimulus will have.
This is the great difference between chimpanzees and men: men can arbitrarily impose signification upon vocalisations, chimpanzees cannot.
A man can teach another man that a red light means "stop" ; a man can teach this to a chimpanzee; a chimpanzee cannot teach this to a man, and one chimpanzee cannot teach this to another.4
Although I myself believe that this statement is broadly true there are a number of serious research workers who now believe that it is false.
The grounds for doubt are very varied but there are now several cases of chimpanzees, and at least one gorilla, who have first been taught to communicate with their human mentors in an apparently rational way by means of stereotyped signs invented by their teachers and have then gone on to use these signs grammatically, generating novel sentences as if the signs formed a genuine human language.
Or soft is said.
On the other hand there are well-informed sceptics who hold that, despite the honest intentions of the research workers, these expensively trained animals are just performing circus tricks.5
Both the evidence and its interpretation are clearly pretty shaky.
The gap between the linguistic creativity of even the most intelligent ape and even the most backward of human beings is immense.
But it is becoming increasingly difficult to maintain that the behavioural products of human imagination and of ape imagination are wholly different in kind.
On the other hand it has to be understood that, by the time that Washoe, Koko, and the rest of the humanized-ape fraternity have been endowed with elements of human culture in this drastic fashion, they have long since ceased to be ordinary apes.
Although the process has not turned them into ordinary men they have, in some degree, become betwixt and between.
Here, at least, an anthropomorphic jargon seems legitimate.
Perhaps, from an ape point of view, they have acquired attributes of the supernatural!
When the human teacher of the chimpanzee Nim Chimsky could no longer afford to continue his researches, Nim was returned to the community of zoo chimpanzees from which he had originally come.
Him immediately established complete domination over all his companions.
But Buettner-Janusch's formula, cited above, contains a further difficulty.
 "Man can arbitrarily impose signification upon vocalisations" seems to imply that "I" and "my voice" are separate entities.
But where is this "I" located?
If "I" am not a metaphysical soul how should this "I" be able to choose to say one thing rather than something else?
So we return to the original crux.
If Darwin was right when he argued that there is no fundamental discontinuity between man and the higher mammals in their mental faculties, and we accept, as surely we must, the general validity of the Darwinian theory of evolution and the connectedness of species, then where does morality come in?
At what stage in the evolutionary process, and by what means, and to what end, does the possibility of making value judgements and exercising moral choices come into the picture?
The puzzle is fascinating and very probably irresolvable; but anthropologists need to remember that the roots of morality are also the roots of prejudice and intolerance.
On that ground alone they should be on their guard against  accepting any of the glib answers that have so far been put forward either by theologians or philosophers or biologists or even fellow anthropologists.
However my own opinion, for what it is worth, is that the possibility of making moral judgements is inextricably mixed up with the possession of language capability in quite a different form from that which has been shown to exist in experimental domesticated apes.
And that takes us back to the issue of continuity/discontinuity between animality and humanity.
When I say we must accept "the general outline of Darwinian theory" I do not mean that we must accept the dogma of gradualism which Darwin felt to be crucial but which is now becoming increasingly suspect.
I fully recognize the scientific value of the sociobiologists' application of straight Darwinian doctrine to the study of animal behaviour in free, as distinct from laboratory, environments.
But caution is needed.
The gap between the human and the non-human is much wider than many sociobiologists would admit.
The value of the ethological study of apes, monkeys and baboons is what it tells us about apes, monkeys and baboons; only in very special circumstances, and in a very tentative way, should it be seen as a metaphorical alternative by means of which we can study man himself, as in a mirror.
The technical question of how far the biological continuity between man and other animals is already fully understood is complex.
In genetic terms men and apes appear to be, in some respects, very similar, in other respects, very different.
Quite apart from the hotly debated issue of language capability, the existing great apes are all creatures which can survive only in very limited numbers on specialized diets in specialized tropical conditions while the species Homo is just the reverse.
It is constantly increasing in numbers and  finding new ways to live off all kinds of foodstuffs in all kinds of environments.
Most of this adaptability depends upon cultural invention but, in a limited fashion, Homo also seems to undergo quite rapid genetic adaptation to specialized local conditions.
The contrasted physical appearance of the different "races" of man (stature, body shape, skin colour, hair-form etc.) originated as adaptations to life under varying climatic and dietary conditions as did the fact that resistance to particular diseases varies markedly in different populations.
Some of these adaptations are probably quite recent, a matter of thousands rather than millions of years.
Yet the latest genetic discoveries indicate that, on a different level, man is so close to the great apes that one researcher has seriously suggested that a man/chimpanzee hybrid might be a viable creature.
Such a suggestion implies extreme stability.
Most palaeontologists have hitherto supposed that the nearest common ancestor of man and the modern great apes died out about 30 million years ago.
That would imply a 60-million-year evolutionary gap between ourselves and "our nearest zoological cousins" .
Even if that figure were now to be drastically reduced orthodox interpretations of the fossil evidence together with orthodox evolutionary theory would require that the last generalized man/ape, the "missing link" of the early Darwinian imagination, must have died out an exceedingly long time ago.
Yet it seems quite certain that our direct ancestors were walking around on two feet with an upright posture like our own at least four million years ago and no creature in the non-human line of descent seems ever to have done that.
So perhaps it really all came about rather differently.
The early bipedal hominids were smaller than us so it is not surprising that they had smaller skulls, but there are no good grounds for supposing that men have gradually been  evolving into creatures of greater and greater intelligence.
Brain size and cleverness do not go together.
And anyway, even if we really understood how to measure intelligence, that is not the point.
We are looking for discontinuities.
From a socio-cultural point of view, the crucial issue is not what our remote ancestors looked like, or the hypothetical level of their IQ, but when or where or why or how they first learned to talk.
The short answer to that is that we don't know.
Because they hold that the difference between a talking creature and a non-talking creature reflects a quite fundamental discontinuity, most social anthropologists might be described as operationally anti-Darwinian!
Evolution evidently took place; how it took place is unclear; but, since man has language and other creatures do not, man is, after all, for all practical purposes, "a separate creation" .
Who should social anthropologists hold that language makes so much difference?
My own answer to that difficult question would be: Because language has the effect that relationships, which among other creatures are generated by inbuilt, genetically endowed, "instincts" (as in the social insects), or by individual stimulus/response mechanisms (as in the mating behaviours of birds and mammals), are, in man, reified as verbal concepts, and thus become matters for group determination rather than individual determination.
That is a complicated formula but it contains the central issue that keeps on cropping up in"the debates between the socio-cultural anthropologists and the sociobiologists.
For the latter, mating behaviour, which results in the perpetuation of the species, is the outcome of competitive strategies of individual "investment" .
Whether the game is played out aggressively "or" altruistically "or in any other way, it is always the interests of individuals that are being served (or, in some variations of the theory, the interests of another kind of biological entity, an" aggregate gene pool").
In the language of sociobiology, "kinship" , outside the immediate bond of mother/infant and, perhaps, sibling/sibling, is a biological relationship which may be discovered by the research worker but which is not known to the actors in the scenario under observation.
But, in the language of social anthropology, "kinship" has very little to do with biology; it refers rather to a widely ramifying pattern of named relationships which link together the individual members of a social system in a network.
The naming is crucial, for not only does this make it possible to contrast one kind of relationship with another, it also allows the group as a collectivity to determine what the "proper" behavioural concomitants of the relationship should be.
The naming of relationships marks the beginnings of moral sanctions.
Language of course does other things besides that.
It allows us to segment the external world of experience in all manner of arbitrary ways and to create artificial internal worlds to suit our convenience.
Indeed it is impossible for us to imagine a social system operated by human beings which was not ordered by language; human culture, as we know it, could not have been invented by a society of deaf mutes.
But that comment shows anthropomorphic prejudice.
Culture, in the sense of "patterns of learned behaviour transmitted from generation to generation by learning rather than by genetic endowment" , is a characteristic of many other species besides man.
Bees and ants have extremely elaborate, highly organized, social systems which appear to get along without any concept-forming medium of communication which is even remotely similar to that of human language.
But I am making a different point.
Human language is not just a tool by which we control other people and control the material world out there; it is also a device which allows us to formulate metaphysical concepts, and to recognize, at a conscious level, the binary oppositions which are basic to the structure of ordered thought.
A speechless ape presumably has some sort of feeling for the opposition "I" / "Other" , perhaps even for its expanded version "We" / "They" , but the still more grandiose "Natural" / "Supernatural" ( "Man" / "God" ) could only occur within a linguistic frame.
If language is, in a certain sense, a necessary component of human reason (though ordinary languages are usually very inadequate for the purpose), it is also a necessary component of human art.
This is really the heart of my thesis; the eighteenth-century philosophers said that true men differed from sub-men because they were rational philosophers rather than poets; the nineteenth-century positivists said that true men differed from sub-men because they were scientists rather than superstitious believers in magic; I am saying that men are men and not non-men because they have created artistic imagination which is bound up with the use of language and other forms of patterned but arbitrary expression, e.g. dancing and music.
You might put it this way: We are human beings, not because we have souls but because we are able to conceive of the possibility that we might have souls.
Let us think about this.
As I have just indicated, the anthropologists of Tylor's generation would have viewed such a suggestion with contempt.
They were Darwinian gradualists who thought of human progress in terms of ever-increasing rationality.
They believed that, in the fullness of time, as scientific thinking comes to supersede religious thinking, the whole category of the "supernatural" will come to be recognized as illusory.
Mythopoeic thinking will fade  away because it will be seen to be, as Max Muller called it, "a disease of language" .
Modern technology and scientific ingenuity has, in a certain sense, achieved this end, though not quite in the way that was expected.
The supernatural performances of the characters of traditional mythology have become the natural real-life activities of twentieth-century space travellers; and this has occurred along with an apparent lessening of the gap between man and other animals.
 "Conversations with a Gorilla" is not the title of a children's fairy-tale but of a supposedly scientific contribution to the National Geographic Magazine.
But in using the Comtean notion of progress from superstition to science as the mental counterpart of Darwin's physical progression from ape to man the Tylorians simply evaded the issue.
For no one suggested that apes have the imagination to be superstitious!
A fundamental dis-continuity between human thinking and non-human thinking is already presupposed in the very arguments which were used to describe the imagined evolution from the one to the other.
But in any case it has been clearly apparent to all fieldworking anthropologists for at least sixty years that the various kinds of performance which have, in the past, been assigned to the categories "magic" , "religion" , "magico-religious" , are expressions of artistic creativity rather than misguided attempts to control the material world by mechanical means.
And it is against the background of this kind of ethnographic experience that I am saying that the recognition of a distinction Natural/Supernatural (Real/ Imaginary) is a basic marker of humanity.
But this is simply a roundabout way of reaffirming once again the fundamental significance of the fact that while men can use the apparatus of spoken language for "thinking" , other creatures cannot.
In making this categorical assertion I am admitting that, as a social anthropologist, I really have very little to say that touches on the roots of our problem.
It is for the linguists rather than the anthropologists to tell us how language originated and how language is generated by human brains.
But although the literature on these questions is very large and continually increasing, it is very clear that none of the specialists concerned know any of the answers.
Currently the most widely known (and also most widely criticized) theory on the subject is that of Noam Chomsky who has pointed out that, although children have to learn the meanings of individual words from their elders (which would make language a phenomenon of culture), they seem to know how to string words together so as to distinguish sense from nonsense long before they have acquired any substantial vocabulary.
Chomsky explains this phenomenon by suggesting that human individuals are innately endowed with a deep structure grammar of language.
Extending these ideas, there have also been suggestions from socio-cultural anthropologists who have a leaning towards sociobiology, that, although the details of customs and moral rules and relational behaviours have to be learned afresh by each individual they are matters of culture — we may already know in advance how to organize such conventions into structured patterns by virtue of a genetically endowed predisposition to become enculturated.
And why not?
After all this is just what the theologians have been saying all along: We have had an innate knowledge of the difference between good and evil ever since Eve ate that apple in the Garden of Eden.
For my part, I find this revival of the ultra-metaphysical
doctrine of original sin under the guise of a genetically determined bio-grammar of cultural values, by colleagues who would clearly like to think of themselves as hard-boiled scientific rationalists, both amusing and disconcerting; but it points up the difficulties of the problem!
If there were any genuine cultural universals it could well be that they are universal because they are "natural" , i.e. a part of our genetic endowment.
Many highly esteemed scholars have made suggestions of this sort.
Freud proposed the Oedipus-complex as such a universal; Jungian psychologists have proposed various other kinds of "archetype" ; Levi-Strauss has suggested the incest taboo; and so on.
I am sceptical but, if there are such universals they are of a much more abstract structural kind.
Here is a possible list which fits in with what I have been saying earlier:
I. In every human society, language and social behaviour, in conjunction, serve to establish a category distinction between what is normal, natural, correct on the one hand and what is abnormal, supernatural, incorrect on the other.
This distinction applies to the things that men make as well as to the actions which men perform.
The distinction is arbitrary and it varies very greatly as we move across the map.
However, where technology is concerned, the nature, of things out there, external to man, sets limits to what can be considered normal and correct.
The "correct" way of constructing a building could never be such that it would immediately fall down when it was completed.
On the other hand "correct" forms of action which approach the impossible may acquire aesthetic merit in the process.
I am reliably assured that King's College Chapel in Cambridge, which has stood as steady as a rock for the past 450 years, could never be built today because the design would never  be accepted under the safety limits of the building regulations!
2.
There are all sorts of ways in which this correct/incorrect distinction may be expressed but I suspect that one of these is always geometrical.
Correct forms are regular and simple, e.g. the English language usage by which straight is a metaphor for honest and crooked a metaphor for dishonest.
The universal element here is that human beings use their resources of language and technology to simplify the world of experience so as to bring it under control.
Nature is said to abhor a vacuum; human beings abhor complexity.
3.
This moral valuation of the geometrically simple is a markedly human characteristic.
Very simple geometrical forms exist in nature out there but most of them are ordinarily invisible to the naked eye.
You need a very powerful microscope if you are to see the fundamental crystal structure of our environment.
And so also with living things other than man.
When a man has cut down a bamboo it becomes a straight pole with a cylindrical hole down the middle, but that is not how it appears in the wild.
Some "birds" nests are hemispherical, but only on the inside; you must cut a honeycomb with a sharp knife if you want to see the accurate hexagons of its construction; the geometry of spiders' webs is astonishing but much less regular than it at first appears.
It is true that the non-human world of living things is packed with symmetries and topological transformations of smooth forms but the simplest shapes of all — regular straight lines, rectangles, triangles, circles, ellipses — hardly ever turn up except as the result of human intervention.
Yet such forms are entirely characteristic of human artifacts.
Housing the world over is compounded"-1 r straight lines, right angles and segments of circles.
Human machines  everywhere are built up from mechanisms involving combinations of motion in a straight line and motion in a circle.
The latest micro-chip technology has, at its heart, the simplest principle of all, the flip/flop, open/shut, give/take, reciprocity which, in one form or another, is encountered in all kinds of societies in all kinds of contexts everywhere.
As we shall see later the social anthropologist's view of society as a network of person-to-person relationships almost takes it for granted that all human interactions can be broken down into elements of binary exchange of this kind.
What I am suggesting is that this use of ultra simple "binary logic" , which is tied in with the way we recognize speech sounds, is an inbuilt feature of our psychological make-up which distinguishes us as human beings.
What I have here described as the "normality" which human beings regularly attribute to what seems to them simple, intelligible, logically ordered, in contradistinction to the "abnormality" of disorderly unintelligibility, might, from a slightly different point of view, be seen as the opposition between the "rational" and the "emotional" .
At this point the whole argument not only takes us back to the eighteenth-century speculations about poetry versus reason, but begins to tie in with recent neurological discoveries concerning the workings of the two halves of the human brain which have been derived from experimentally induced conditions of aphasia.
Roughly speaking, plain, unemotional, ordered "talking" , which is heavily dependent upon our ability to recognize and encode binary discriminations (distinctive features in phonology and logical oppositions in argument), has been shown to be a function of the left hemisphere of the brain, while emotional responses, which are the consequence of reactions to sensory inputs from outside, are a function of  the right hemisphere.
The complete human being has to be able to combine both these kinds of mental function, the rational-semiotic-orderly on the one hand and the sensory-emotional-disorderly on the other.
But most of us are frightened by our emotions so we like to pretend that rationality Is normal.
Anyway, the implication of my argument, and of the neurological experiments to which I have referred, is that the functions of the left side of the brain have been developed in a very special way in the human species and that this specialization is reflected in the universals of human culture, including the general structure of language, all of which are reflections of the fact that the left side of the brain operates in binary logic.
If that was all there was to it, we should simply be highly sophisticated digital computers.
What makes us interesting is that we have a right side of the brain as well.
But if normal/abnormal equates with simple/complex, logical/illogical, intelligible/unintelligible, where does natural/supernatural fit in?
If we move from the material world of technology and physical experience to the metaphysical world of moral ideas and the imagination we find that there is enormous discrepancy about what may be considered abnormal in different circumstances, but attitudes to the abnormal are always ambivalent.
Normal is neutral; abnormal embraces both extremes, the morally good and the morally bad.
The ideas which in English are represented by the paired oppositions:
dirt purity
sickness holiness
power (potency) impotence have their approximate equivalents everywhere and serve to designate a focus of abnormality.
Both components of each  pair represent the extremes; normality lies somewhere in between.
Thus dirt and purity are, in one sense, opposites but both are equally abnormal in relation to ordinary living.
In relation to "normality" they form a kind of triangle as in the -, 0, + scheme of my Introduction.
But it is not the objective facts that are abnormal, it is the circumstances in which they are observed.
A room which is thoroughly comfortable when it is felt to be simply "untidy" becomes uninhabitable as soon as it is perceived as "dirty" .
More critically, sexual activity, which is in itself a normal part of normal life, can suddenly become abnormal when it is classified as "dirty" .
Levi-Strauss' argument that the incest taboo marks the crucial bridge between nature and culture is untenable in the form in which it was originally propounded, since it is contradicted by the ethnographic evidence.
Yet, at one remove, his thesis is correct.
It is where culture sets limits on our sexual (reproductive) activity and where sexual capability sets limits on what is culturally possible, that our humanity and our animality interact.
That is why the social anthropologists are justified in devoting such an inordinate amount of attention to the field of kinship.
Whatever is felt to be abnormal is a source of anxiety.
Abnormalities which are recurrent and frequent become hedged about by cultural barriers and prohibitions which have the force of signals: "Danger; keep out; don't touch!" 
Breach of such prohibitions constitutes the prototype of moral evil; the essence of sin is disobedience to a taboo.
Since the nature of the taboos varies between one society and another and even as between one situation and another within the same society, there is no particular action which is universally considered to be sinful in all circumstances: to kill a neighbour is a crime, to kill an enemy may be a duty.
Customary rules and conventions permeate the whole of social life.
We are of necessity constantly breaking the rules and thereby committing sin, but some kinds of offence are more disturbing than others.
Murder, sex, and sacrilege arouse emotion in a way that tax evasion does not.
Such biases are not necessarily universal.
In some societies breaches of conventions concerning dress and food and personal deference can arouse the most violent emotions; elsewhere such matters may be considered trivial.
But sex, homicide, and religious cult are categories which we somehow expect to be hedged about by taboo, everywhere, always.
Why?
I don't really know the answer though it seems a fair question.
Sin and sex do somehow go together and this seems to tie in with the distinction I made much earlier on between the scientific view that man differs from other animals only in degree and the religious view that there is an essential difference in kind.
Sex is an animal quality which must somehow he pushed on to the other side of the great divide.
The general effect of moral rules linked with the category distinction normal/abnormal is to provide us with a sense of social order.
It establishes boundaries and compartments in an otherwise chaotic social living space.
It provides us with a map; it tells us where we are and who we are.
We are the prototype of normality; abnormality is the other.
What we need to know about "the other" , whether animal or human, is where he, she or it fits in.
Of animals, are they close or far, food or not-food, pets or vermin, domesticated slaves or savage monsters?
Can we kill them with impunity, or only on set occasions in a special manner, or are they sacred and untouchable?
And likewise with human beings, we need to discriminate between close kin, more"remote kin, friends, enemies and  strangers.
The categories in each case are artificial and social rather than self-evident, but they are necessary so that we can conduct our affairs in an orderly manner.
Within their own scale of operations all animals need to be able to impose an appearance of order upon their environment; they need to be able to discriminate favourable (normal) from unfavourable (abnormal) situations.
Sexually dimorphic creatures must be able to discriminate members of their own species from other species, males from females, and so on.
A peculiarity of human beings is the very weak degree to which we are endowed with "natural" discriminating powers of this sort.
In man, a culturally controlled sense of sin largely replaces the species-wide boundary-recognizing mechanisms found in other animals.
This leads to ambiguity of two kinds.
On the one hand, as we saw in the last chapter, we are uncertain about the limits of our own species.
On the other, we are all highly adept at creating socially defined sub-categories of man and then treating the members of the groups thus specified as if they belonged to quite different species from our own.
It cannot be said that there are any completely universal cultural devices by which we achieve these ends but certain kinds of taboo-loaded discrimination are very common.
Some of these are familiar to readers of this book.
For example, there is nearly always a critical distinction between the body which is naked and unadorned, which is animal, and the body adorned, which is human.
There will then be taboos against appearing "naked" in inappropriate situations, though just what counts as either naked or inappropriate varies greatly from place to place for no very obvious or logical reason.
Covering the genitals, as in the Genesis story, is by no means an invariable symbol of modesty and minimal bodily adornment; and it would surely be very difficult to give an entirely rational explanation as to why it should be permissible to walk around in the nude on parts of Brighton beach but an offence against public decency to do so in Throgmorton Street.
But though one can find exceptions to all generalizations concerning taboo, it is broadly speaking the case that nearly all societies, either implicitly or explicitly, make the following three fundamental distinctions between humans and non-humans:
1.
Men make use of fire not only to keep themselves warm but to process their food
Other animals do not
2.
Men engage in sex relations with other human beings
Other animals do not
3.
Men alter their "natural" body form by painting or mutilating the body or by wearing clothes
Other animals do not
And, granted that much, "We" then further discriminate ourselves from other men by elaborations of these same three distinctions:
la.
True men prepare their food as we do
Other men do not
2a.True men conform to our conventions regarding sex relations
Other men do not
3a.True men adorn their bodies as we do
Other men do not
In the outcome, food, sex and "nakedness" are nearly everywhere the primary foci of taboo.
But further approximate generalizations are also possible.
Quite apart from discriminations as to what is or is not  permissible food and how it should be prepared ( "edibility" in a strict nutritional sense is a very minor factor here), all human societies have precise rules about the circumstances in which men may kill other men and other animals.
Such rules serve to distinguish further basic social categories: friends from enemies, domestic animals from wild beasts, and so on.
Likewise within any one human society, there are always very complex regulations, partly explicit, partly implicit, about the precise circumstances in which a sexual relationship between two individuals is to be deemed proper or improper, and this again serves to distinguish social categories: close relatives from distant relatives, wives from sisters, lords from commoners.
What does this explain?
Well in a sense it does not explain anything; it is simply an elaborated gloss on my statement that homicide and sex are the expected loci of sin.
But it ties in with my earlier discussion of ethology and my original Cartesian Figure 3.1, and with my assertion that we have a psychological need to perceive ourselves as normal and ell regulated.
As I pointed out earlier, even those scientists who are most eager to assure us that the difference between man and other animals is only a matter of degree always conduct their experiments in a way which implies that the observer is quite different in kind from what he observes.
And so it is with the rest of us.
We need to believe that we are different: that human beings are different from other animals, that "we" are different from our enemies and even more different from total strangers.
And we use moral evaluations about food and sex and homicide and dress and the "proper" way of ordering a household as means of making such discriminations.
We tend to favour simple geometrical shapes and sharply contrasted formal rules  because they make it that much easier to distinguish right from wrong, normal from abnormal.
All of this adds up to a personal credo that we are not just specialized apes but a unique and peculiar species of our own.
But in that credo the dogma that the culture and the nature of man are sharply and easily distinguishable, which has traditionally held a central position in the teaching of both cultural and social anthropology, has no part.
If we are indeed a unique species then many of the behaviours which differentiate us from other animals are likely to be due to our genetic make-up rather than to cultural conditioning; but the difficulty is to know just what these animal-human characteristics might be.
Given our human circumstances, it is extremely difficult for any human observer to investigate a member of his own species as if he or she were a creature of nature, out there, on the other side of the plate glass.
It is a worthwhile form of enquiry but, in this area, it is likely to take a very long time before the scientists can reach a consensus which will seem in the least convincing to non-scientists.
Meanwhile, reckless generalizations based on variations of the Desmond Morris/E.
O. Wilson doctrine that man is "a real Brute already, an Ape, Satyre, Baboon" will not get us anywhere at all.
As I emphasized at the beginning, the issue is not just one of zoological taxonomy, it is a problem of ethics, and unless you are prepared to argue that Koko the gorilla might become a Christian, ethics concern rules which apply to human beings but not to non-human beings.
Academic anthropologists, and they are the majority, who still have their roots in nineteenth-century positivism, are inclined to underestimate the subtleties of such problems.
The differences between human beings and other animals are complex; that is why they worry us.
But if I have been  able to persuade you that Bishop Wilberforce and Professor Chomsky are really saying the same thing, then those of you who are of rationalist or empiricist persuasion have at least got a measure of the difficulties that you face.
The elimination of metaphysics is not the simple matter that some humanist philosophers have supposed.
The fact that we are simultaneously both animal and human poses a real problem as to how the two categories should be distinguished.
It is no doubt all to the good that we should rid ourselves of the delusion that our mortal bodies are inhabited by immortal souls, but, in claiming to be human beings, we are asserting our capacity for exercising moral choice and that implies moral responsibility.
The responsibility is far reaching; whether we like it or not all living species on this earth are at our mercy and in our charge.
This is a situation which the tidy, randomized, and morally neutral competitive regularities of Darwinian evolutionary theory, which the sociobiologists treat as Holy Writ, did not take into account.
The whole argument is relevant for the theme of this book because, in the tradition of Durkheim, as against the materialist tradition of Marx, I myself view the varieties of human society as alternative systems of moral order rather than as a sequence of specialized adaptations to different economic circumstances.
4 My Kind of Anthropology
By this point some of my readers will be up in arms.
What has all this grand talk about moral universals got to do with the micro-scale empirical sociology which I originally held up as the characteristic of my kind of social anthropology?
Actually, I have been slipping in quite a large amount of social anthropological theory while appearing to be discussing other things, though, at the grand scale level, I still have to justify my claim that a mechanical model of functionalist integration is to be preferred to an organic model.
But before I take up that theme let me try to get closer to the ground.
What is it that social anthropologists actually do?
What they are trying to do is to arrive at insights which are generally true of all humanity (including the anthropologists themselves) by observing very small-scale examples of human life.
But how do they go about it?
There is a legend that Malinowski, in one of his more outrageous moments, once defined social anthropology as "the study of man (embracing woman) while learning the local language with the help of a sleeping dictionary" .
Certainly his own study of Trobriand kinship to which he gave the unnecessarily glamorous title of The Sexual Life of Savages in North-Western Melanesia gave the impression that that was the essence of the matter.
In mocking fashion the fable puts stress on two outstanding characteristics of anthropological field research: a central concern with  kinship and marriage and an emphasis on gaining understanding through participant observation and the intimate, first-hand, use of vernacular concepts.
This chapter is intended to justify those priorities.
So far I have been arguing that the essential subject matter of all kinds of anthropology is the diversity of mankind, both biological and cultural, while my own particular concern, as a social anthropologist, is with moral (cultural) diversity within a matrix of (approximate) species-wide biological uniformity.
But what does that entail in terms of anthropological practice?
Well first of all I must distance myself from the image that is presented by nearly all introductory textbooks of cultural anthropology.
These books, suitably adorned with glossy illustrations of exotic customs and part naked ladies, discourse at large upon a variety of supposedly universal characteristics of human culture which are then exemplified by thumbnail sketches of ethnographic miscellanea derived at third or fourth hand from a job lot of long ago anthropological monographs.
The tribal peoples concerned are dotted around the map in quite arbitrary fashion; the arbitrariness being emphasized by dot references on a world map shown on the end covers of the book.
These samples of human oddity certainly exemplify cultural diversity but the choice of pictures immediately makes it obvious that the people who are to be discussed are "primitives" who lack all the gadgetry of modern technology and modern sanitation.
Whatever the authors' texts may say, the whole lay-out of such books implies that anthropology is essentially concerned with the lives of people who are in some way inferior and/or deprived.
We need to escape from this traditional image of what anthropologists do, but it is not easy.
It is virtually dogma among social anthropologists of my
sort that cultural otherness does not carry with it any necessary hierarchy of superiority/inferiority which can be appropriately labelled by such terms as "primitive" , "backward" , "underdeveloped" , "childish" , "ignorant" , "simple" , "primeval" , "pre-literate" , or whatever.
My interest in the others arises because they are other, not because they are inferior.
But in that case why study "others" at all?
If social anthropologists are sincere when they say that their subject is a kind of micro-sociology and when they proclaim that they no longer feel themselves to be members of a culture/society which is intrinsically "superior" to that of the people they are studying, why don't they study themselves?
Who suffer the discomforts of living in a longhouse near the headwaters of the Amazon when versions of what you want to know are available for observation just down the road?
This is a sensitive and difficult question.
Social anthropologists can and do study members of their own society and they have been doing so for a long time, though mostly they do not do it very well.
Certainly, field research of this kind is not something which I would recommend for the inexperienced.
Surprising though it may seem, fieldwork in a cultural context of which you already have intimate first-hand experience seems to be much more difficult than fieldwork which is approached from the naive viewpoint of a total stranger.
When anthropologists study facets of their own society their vision seems to become distorted by prejudices which derive from private rather than public experience.
A case history will illustrate what I mean.
Between 1934 and 1949 the Chinese scholars Lin Yueh-hwa, Martin C. Yang, Francis L. K. Hsu and Fei Hsiao-Tung, all of whom were professionally-trained social anthropologists who had learned their craft under the direct or indirect aegis of  Radcliffe-Brown and/or Malinowski, all published social anthropological accounts of Chinese communities.
In only one of these cases does the fact that the anthropologist was, up to a point, studying members of his own society appear as in any way an advantage.
Lin was writing about his native village but he tried to evade the problems posed by autobiographical honesty by couching his story in the form of a novel.
This artifice did not really work.
It is true that, at a certain level, novelists and social anthropologists are engaged in the same kind of enterprise, but the techniques are different and, in general, they should not be mixed up.
Yang was also writing about his native village but he wrote about it at a distance when resident in New York.
In the outcome the characters in his story are completely depersonalized.
Indeed Yang's self-imposed anonymity reduces his book to a kind of caricature of a European ethnological description of a primitive tribe written around 1900.
Hsu's monograph suffers from the converse limitation; the author expressly claimed that he was studying members of his own society but, by the ordinary criteria used by social anthropologists, he was not doing an)"thing of the sort.
His book is about ancestral worship in West Town which is presented as prototypical of that which prevails in Chinese culture as a whole.
Hsu himself grew up in eastern China but his account is evidently a syncretic blend of what he learned as a child from personal experience and what he learned as an adult, several thousand miles away to the west, during fourteen months' fieldwork in the Yunnanese city of Tali-fu, where he was employed for a while as a teacher in a local missionary college.
The inhabitants of Tali-fu are mostly Min Chia, a population with a distinctive language of their own, and to  Hsu's personal dismay he was treated as a stranger: "though regarded sympathetically, I was always an outsider, despite the fact that as far as physical appearance is concerned I seemed no different from those who made up the community" .
But Hsu was so anxious that "West Town" should typify China as a whole that the Min Chia peculiarities of the local culture are hardly ever mentioned.
This is a palpable distortion but the resulting stereotype picture is curiously static.
The fieldwork was conducted during the period July 1 941 — September 1943 but the book is written as if the culture of "West Town" was timeless and entirely unaffected by the chaos of the surrounding political situation.
Hsu's account of "West Town" may be compared with the explicit account of the Min Chia of Tali-fu published by C. P. Fitzgerald in 1941.
Like Hsu, Fitzgerald had been a pupil of Malinowski, but he did not feel compelled to turn the Min Chia into Chinese.
His research had been conducted in exactly the same locality as Hsu's but in the more peaceful conditions prevailing three years earlier.
His book tells us far more about where the population of Tali-fu fits into the historical geography of Yunnan than does Hsu's more ambitious exercise.
Hsu incidentally never mentions the existence of Fitzgerald's study.
These comments are not intended to challenge Hsu's competence as a social anthropologist (later on he was to become President of the American Anthropological Association), but to point up the fact that the understandable, and indeed  laudable , desire on the part of some social anthropologists to study their own society is beset with hazards.
Initial preconceptions are liable to prejudice the research in a way that does not affect the work of the naive stranger.
But now a counter-example.
Fei's volume was not only the earliest of the series; it was also the most Malinowskian in  style and, most emphatically, by far the most successful.
Fei was not a native of the community that he studied (the village of Kaihsienkung, in the Yangtze Delta, about 1 25 miles south-west of Shanghai), but he had grown up in the same district so that he was familiar with the nuances of the local dialect.
Also it is clearly relevant that his sister, who was in charge of a local, government-sponsored, silk development project, was well-known to all the villagers.
But when one learns that the whole project involved only two months of actual field research (July-August 1936), it becomes obvious that, in this case, the success of the enterprise must have been heavily dependent upon Fei's prior local knowledge.
Incidentally, although Fei called his book Peasant Life in China, he made no pretence that the social system he described was typical for the whole country.
However the merit of Fei's book lies in its functionalist style.
Like all the best work by social anthropologists it has at its core the very detailed study of the network of relationships operating within a single very small-scale community.
Such studies do not, or should not, claim to be "typical" of anything in particular.
They are not intended to serve as illustrations of something more general.
They are interesting in themselves.
And yet the best of such monographs, despite the concentration upon a tiny range of human activity, will tell us more about the ordinary social behaviour of mankind than a whole shelfful of general textbooks labelled Introduction to Cultural Anthropology.
Despite my negative attitude towards the direct anthropological study of one's own society, I still hold that all the anthropologist's most important insights stem from introspection.
The scholarly justification for studying "others" rather than "ourselves" is that, although we first perceive the others as exotic, we end up by recognizing in their "peculiarities" a mirror of our own.
 "We" that is the readers of this book — conduct our daily affairs within a setting which most of us accept without question.
Even a skeletal list of the fundamentally important matters which we thus take for granted would be very long.
It would certainly include: the physical lay-out of the houses we live in and of the settlements of which they form a part; the general pattern of conventional procedures by which foodstuffs and other necessities of life are produced and distributed and finally consumed; the way children are brought up; the way tasks are allocated to different members of the household; the ideas we have about the nature of reality and of the cosmos, our sense of what is the proper way to behave towards kin and neighbours and persons in authority; the kinds of clothes and the styles of language which are appropriate to different occasions, etc.
The catalogue might be extended almost indefinitely, but the point that I want to emphasize is that, for the most part, these distinctive features of our own way of life are not of our own making.
We do not live exactly as our parents lived but whatever we do now is only a modification of what was done before.
It could hardly be otherwise.
Very little of our public behaviour is innate; most of us have only very limited creative originality.
We act as we do because, one way or another, we have learned from others that that is the way we ought to behave.
The whole system of things and people which surrounds us coerces us to be conformist; even if you want to be a social rebel you will still have to go about things in a conventional way if you are to gain recognition and not be rated as insane.
Indeed, in social systems where the position of social rebels is not recognized, such as that of Soviet Russia, you are likely to be reckoned as insane anyway.
This will still be true even if you have been trained as an anthropologist.
It is always exceedingly difficult to look at  oneself within a familiar social setting without falling into conventional cliches.
But social anthropological fieldwork is ordinarily conducted in unfamiliar social settings and, because the fieldworker is initially a stranger, he is not preconditioned to interact with those he studies in any particular predetermined way.
This is a salutary experience.
The anthropological fieldworker who eventually returns to the social setting of his homeland usually finds that it has become quite a different place.
The bondage of our own cultural conventions has somehow been loosened up.
But what do social anthropologists actually do?
I dare say they do many different things.
I can only speak from personal experience.
Fieldwork in this style is a very small-scale, private affair.
The research "team" is usually just a single individual, or perhaps a married couple, with maybe a local assistant.
The field of study is a local community; perhaps just a hundred or so individuals, seldom many more than 2000.
Initially the principal researchers must be strangers to the community; hopefully, before they depart, they will be just the reverse.
They will themselves have become members of the community, at least by adoption.
They will have come to understand the socio-cultural system from the inside through direct participation in the network of transactions which constitutes the daily life of those who are being studied.
To achieve this transformation from the status of unwelcome stranger to that of fictive kinsman calls for great tact and patience.
A high level of linguistic competence is obviously an advantage but a flair for friendship is more important than an impeccable accent or a perfect lexicon.
But what is this paragon of a social anthropologist trying to find out?
It is important here to distinguish between the short-term objectives of the fieldworker and the longer-term objectives of the anthropological theorist.
Many of the best  known theorists in social and cultural anthropology have themselves done very little practical field research and their writings often give a quite false impression of the normal tribulations of anthropological practice.
This practice seems to be very much the same no matter whether the personal orientation of the research worker is materialist or idealist, Marxist or anti-Marxist, structuralist or functionalist, rationalist or empiricist.
Different practitioners would justify these common activities in many different ways.
My own version goes something like this:(a) I am trying to comprehend a totality which might be called the "way of life" of the people under study;(b) this "way of life" consists of the acting oui of an endlessly repeated social drama.
The characters in the drama, the social roles, are more or less fixed, as are their mutual relationships which constitute the dramatic plot.
But the way the roles are played varies from occasion to occasion according to which particular individual is playing which particular part at any particular time.
This distinction between the roles in a drama and the actors who play the roles corresponds to the fact that the data of field research must always be looked at in two dimensions.
The observer must distinguish between what people actually do and what people say that they do; that is between normal custom as individually interpreted on the one hand and normative rules on the other.
When they come to write up the results of their research different anthropologists will, for doctrinal reasons, give very different weight to these two major aspects of the data, but, in the field, the anthropologist must always pay attention to both sides.
He must not only distinguish behaviour from ideology, he must also take careful note of just how they are interrelated.
In so far as my own kind of social anthropology can be
considered "structuralist" as well as "functionalist" , it is because I feel that the structuralism of Levi-Strauss, which pays close attention to the semantic patterning of concepts which operate as normative ideas, has given us new insights into this traditional problem.
Anthropological textbooks, along with the arrangement of the university syllabus, usually give the impression that an alien way of life can always be analysed according to a more or less standard set of chapter headings which divide up the total field into sub-sections denoted by the English language words: economics, kinship, politics, law, religion, magic, myth, ritual.
This is misleading for two quite separate reasons.
First, most professional anthropologists use these words as if they were technical terms, but there is no general agreement about how this should be done.
Secondly, this list of headings conveys a quite false impression of how field research is conducted.
No experienced fieldworking anthropologist in his senses would try to subdivide his observations into categories of this sort.
It is true that there is always an all-pervasive "economic" dimension which enters into every aspect of social life.
The ethnographic data which Marxist anthropologists discuss under the headings "modes of production" and "relations of production" are of central importance in any kind of holistic, functionalist analysis.
Every fieldworker needs to acquire some insight into the basic infrastructure of the society he is studying.
In part this means seeing who teams up with whom in what kind of work situation and why, but it also means looking at the facts in quantitative terms.
It means making maps, and counting heads, and measuring fields and crop yields, and taking account of such ecological factors as climate and soil and protein resources and whatever.
But, since there is really no limit to what it might be desirable to  know about such matters, the sensible fieldworking anthropologist will recognize his limitations of resources, time and expertise.
Social anthropology is not just a branch of biochemistry.
Even the most comprehensive understanding of the ecology and of the prevailing modes of production will tell us very little that is sociologically interesting about the human society that is under observation.
But my other notional chapter headings are not of this same very general, limitless sort; nor are they all on a par.
As now used in ordinary English three of these key words have a quite specific institutional reference while the others are extremely vague.
Politics describes a specialized field of activity concerned with the whole machinery of government; law correspondingly refers to the whole apparatus of the machinery of justice; religion to that which concerns the activities of churches and churchmen.
The division of labour in modern Britain is such that these three major segments of social life can be thought of as distinct and virtually autonomous sub-systems, each with its own set of specialized self-perpetuating roles ministers, "politicians" , civil servants, judges, lawyers, policemen, bishops, clergy — all of which are open, at least in theory, to any individual of appropriate age, sex, and education who chooses to make himself a candidate.
By contrast, the terms kinship, magic, myth and ritual, are devoid of any general agreed meaning and are not tied in with any clearly identifiable set of representative social roles.
Yet anthropologists regularly write as if this whole rag-bag of English language categories together form a unified matrix from which the sub-divisions of a scholarly discourse can be developed.
The paradoxes which then result are very numerous.
Can societies which lack either law courts or judges be said to have a system of law?
It clearly distorts the English  concept of law if one says that they have, but there are scores of anthropological monographs which claim to be concerned with systems of "primitive" law.
Likewise, if anthropologists used the word religion in the sense in which it is ordinarily used by ordinary speakers of English, where it is tied in with such compartmentalized matters as church membership and a professional priesthood, then it would have no application at all to most of the societies which anthropologists usually study.
Yet anthropologists regularly write monographs about particular "primitive" religions and even about "primitive religion" in general.
Such books are in fact mainly concerned with systems of cosmological belief.
There might be some advantage if anthropologists regularly wrote about "cosmology" rather than about "religion" , if only because the former word is not much used by ordinary speakers of ordinary English.
As for magic, which readers of Frazer's The Golden Bough might suppose to lie at the very centre of the anthropologist's interests, I can only say that, after a lifetime's career as a professional anthropologist, I have almost reached the conclusion that the word has no meaning whatever.
And so also with "myth" and "ritual" .
I write about these themes myself but often only for want of a better language.
What I mean by these categories differs quite substantially from what other well-known anthropologists mean.
Confusion is inevitable.
I would like to get rid of both terms but I am not sure how to do it.
But I would retain "politics" .
In the past the term "politics" has caused great confusion when applied to non-European societies.
The ethnography of the colonial era was grossly distorted by the widely held assumption (shared by administrators and anthropologists alike) that all forms of political leadership can be satisfactorily subsumed under a single role stereotype: "the native  chief" .
On the other hand one of the standard definitions of the term "politics" is "the art of rallying support to a cause in which you are interested" and that is part of the fabric of social life in any sort of social system.
Anyway, whatever label he chooses to use, the organization of leadership and of the power that goes with it, is certainly one of the matters to which the field anthropologist needs to pay close attention.
 "Kinship" poses a different kind of problem.
The study of "kinship" really does lie at the very heart of social anthropology and anthropologists argue a great deal among themselves about just what the word is supposed to mean.
What they tend to overlook is that the very idea that kinship can be thought of as a dimension of the total society, analogous to, yet quite distinct from, both "economics" and "politics" , is an invention of the anthropologists themselves.
Kinship in social anthropology
This last point needs elaboration.
Novice readers of anthropological monographs should not suppose that the technical sense in which the term kinship is being employed bears any close relationship to the kinship with which they are already familiar as the result of their own domestic experience.
Novice anthropologists are not all birds of a feather but most readers of this book are likely to have grown up in a modern industrialized society of the sort which presupposes a particular type of major distinction between private affairs and public affairs.
One good reason why such people (if they want to become anthropologists) should start off by studying a cultural system which is radically different from their own is that they can thereby undergo the traumatic experience of discovering that, in other societies, this deeply  emotive private/public distinction may operate in quite a different way.
With us privacy and kinship are felt to be roughly coterminous.
Kin are those with whom we adopt the special style of informal communication which is adopted towards members of the immediate domestic family who are treated in this specially favoured way even when they do not live all together in one household.
The narrowest such "we" -group is that of the domestic family itself, parents and their young children and their co-resident retainers (if there are any), but the category "kinsmen" also embraces grandparents and grandchildren, married siblings and their children, married children, uncles and aunts, first cousins, and perhaps a few more.
Such people are all privileged in limited degree even when they reside elsewhere.
We treat them quite differently from strangers or even from neighbours.
Kinsmen, in this sense, are related to me in a special private way.
But the number of individuals whom I will treat in this intimate fashion is quite small; perhaps a score, seldom much more.
In most human societies the social field is cut up in other ways.
The"we-group solidarity which we associate with the intimacy of kinship, in the sense just described, tends to ramify outwards through the whole social system.
The opposition kinsman/neighbour scarcely exists because all neighbours are likely to be reckoned as kin of one sort or another.
This need not mean that the private/public distinction vanishes altogether but it applies to different domains.
For example, with us, homicide is the prototype public offence, it is a crime which automatically results in the intervention of the police, whereas most breaches of sexual morality are matters of concern only to members of the domestic household and their close kin.
But in many societies the position is  exactly reversed; homicide invites private reprisal, while many types of sexual offence lead to public punishment because they are regarded as sins which generate a condition of ritual pollution and thus endanger the whole community.
It is empirical facts of this general kind which justify the fieldworking anthropologist in putting domestic relationships at the very centre of his research interests.
But here I must draw a distinction of rather a different kind, namely that between biological relationship and social relationship.
Of course we are all very well aware that the distinction exists and that a man's genitor, who made his mother pregnant, was not necessarily the same individual as his pater, the legally recognized father, the husband of his mother.
But because, in terms of our Christian moral code, this is a shameful matter we are inclined to push it to one side and to assume that kinship is the equivalent of "blood relationship" which implies, or should imply, biological connection.
In social anthropology this becomes important for a variety of reasons.
One of these was mentioned earlier on.
Geneticists and sociobiologists are only interested in kinship of the biological sort so when they dip into monographs written by social anthropologists they are predisposed to imagine that the anthropologists' references to "kinship" are to biological kinship.
As a rule this is not the case and grave confusions can result.
But of greater importance for the social anthropologists themselves is that in many societies the distinction between biological kinship and sociological kinship is quite clearly recognized and the degree of their identification or dissociation is a matter of formal rules: "Copulation and marriage are not the same thing" or: "Copulation and marriage are the same thing" as the case may be.
And finally there is the difference of range.
The range over
which we can be sure, or think we can be sure, of biological connection is always very narrow; but sociological kinship, which depends only on our willingness to slot individuals into particular verbal categories, can be extended as far as we like, or rather as far as local convention requires, and that may be thousands of miles and include many thousands of individuals.
Here I must emphasize that, although social anthropologists in the field concentrate a great deal of their attention on day-to-day domestic relationships, it is not really the set of domestic relationships as such which is their ultimate focus of interest.
It is rather that"social anthropologists have learnt from experience that the totality of the local community is usually treated by its members as an expanded domestic household; though equally well one might say that a domestic household is treated as a fined down version of the total community.
In either case, the anthropologist, in studying the domestic group and its interconnections with other domestic groups, finds that he is also studying, in model form, the structure of the local community and its interconnections with other local communities.
In such circumstances the language of kinship — that is to say the set of words which fulfil the domestic purposes of the English words "father" , "mother" , "brother" , "sister" , "uncle" , "aunt" , and so on— is used to denote what we might otherwise be inclined to regard as economic, political, legal or religious relationships.
But words which serve such comprehensive purposes are clearly very different kinds of words from the ordinary English terms "father" , "mother" etc., which have a much more restricted scope.
This particular linguistic pitfall has in the past led to a vast amount of anthropological confusion; it still does.
When you read anything that any anthropologist has written on the topic of kinship terminology be on your guard.
The  argument may not mean what you think; the author himself may not have understood what he is saying.
With that warning let me briefly say something about the general topic.
The comparative study of kinship terminologies is one of the longest established traditions in academic anthropology.
It goes back to work published by Morgan in 1871 and still has its committed devotees, especially in France and the United States.
The basis of the whole exercise is the assumption that, in any ordinary human language, the set of terms which can be glossed as "father" , "mother" , "brother" , "sister" etc., because of the way that they are employed within the context of the domestic family, is somehow primary and basic.
The morpheme which is glossed as "father" may have extended meanings when it is used in other contexts, but its real meaning is "father" in its ordinary English sense of "male parent" .
The total set of such terms (that is to say the words in themselves without reference to any associated set of behaviours) is said to constitute "the kinship system" of the society concerned.
It is then claimed that a great variety of fundamental facts concerning the structure and social organization of the society can be directly inferred from a close analysis of "the kinship system" in this verbal sense.
The literature relating to this branch of anthropology is immense; some of it is very sophisticated in form, even mathematical.
Many of the matters which are discussed within this framework are of the greatest importance for social anthropology.
Nevertheless, from my point of view, by far the greater part of this material is completely misleading because it fails to take account of the fact that while kinship words in most European languages are applied, with rare exceptions, only to relationships within the private domain and thus have quite specific meanings, the corresponding words in most other languages are highly polysemic.
There are no grounds whatever for insisting that the private/domestic meaning of such words is primary and the public/community-wide meanings secondary.
Here once again we see the advantage that comes to the novice anthropologist who learns his craft as a stranger within a speech community which is totally alien.
Learning the meaning of verbal categories from scratch is difficult and time-consuming but it is very instructive.
The anthropologist who goes about things in this hard way ought not to fall into the error of supposing that kinship is "a thing in itself" .
The language of kinship and the behaviours which the use of such language provokes are social devices for giving expression to networks of relationship.
But the relationships thus expressed are multifaceted; they stretch outward through the whole society, they are not simply domestic.
Where social anthropologists write about "kinship" , other kinds of scholar might discuss "property" (the relationship between individuals and things or between individuals and land), or "politics" (the power-loaded relationship between individuals and other individuals).
Once that is understood then the answer to my original question: What is it that social anthropologists actually do? becomes easier to understand.
For the answer is that they spend a very great deal of their time observing how and when and where kinship relationships are brought into play, and in trying to understand the discriminations which mark the boundary between kinship relationships and non-kinship relationships.
And here, once again, we are in an area where the inherent ambiguity of the continuity/discontinuity opposition becomes very noticeable.
Much of the difficulty stems from the ethos of individualism which is central to the contemporary Western society  but which is notably absent from most of the societies which social anthropologists study.
We expect, or say that we expect, that individuals will be appointed to social offices of all kinds in their individual capacity and on the basis of their individual merit.
This does not in fact happen, but in other kinds of social system people do not even pretend that it happens.
Typically, the anthropologist finds that individuals hold titular offices by virtue of their position in the kinship system.
Offices are deemed to be permanently related to one another in a structure of kinship.
This is a simple enough idea but when the same structure is made to apply to government, labour relations, the administration of justice, or mystical communication according to context, we find it confusing.
A good example of such kinship-based overlap of social roles can be found in the various volumes of Malinowski's classic, though incomplete, account of the Trobriand community of Omarakana.
We there meet with various semi-stylized characters described as "the Paramount Chief" , "the Canoe Owner" (toliwaga), "the Village Headman" , "the Garden Magician" and so on.
The story as a whole only begins to make sense when the reader appreciates that, in appropriate circumstances, all these roles might be filled by one and the same individual.
But he would do so by virtue of his position in the kinship network not because of his personal qualities.
The model attributes of a "primitive" society
As I have indicated in several other places in this book, the distinction which is frequently drawn between "primitive" societies, which have "elementary" structures and which exist outside history, and "advanced" societies, which have  "complex" structures and are consciously involved in the processes of historical transformation, is much less clear-cut than has often been suggested.
It is true that literacy seems to generate a sense of rigidly structured social order and a consciousness of historical change which is qualitatively different from the loose structural metaphors and the "mythological" view of the past which anthropologists usually encounter in "wild" (sauvage) societies.
Yet what Eliade has called "the myth of the eternal return" is just as characteristic of Hinduism, with its elaborate literary traditions, as it is of the totemism of the Australian Aborigines.
In my own view there is no significant discontinuity in terms of either structure or form between "modern" societies and "primitive" societies.
The social anthropologist can find what he is looking for in either.
All the same, simply in terms of precedent, it seems clear that social anthropologists usually study "primitive" societies.
There is no particular reason why they should, but that is what they mostly like to do.
But, in those terms, taking the very wide range of social systems which were studied by the first generation of British social anthropologists as a model (the list includes the Trobrianders, the Tikopia, the Bemba, the Tswana, the Azande, the Nuer, the Nupe, and the Tallensi among others), is it possible to formulate a useful stereotype of what this notional entity "a primitive society" or "a savage (wild) society" is like?
The answer is: No!
However there are plenty of useless stereotypes around and since they influence the way anthropologists write up their monographs I ought to say something about them.
The following are some of the features that have been said to be characteristic of primitive societies.
In the course of his fieldwork the anthropologist will observe in considerable detail the day-to-day interactions of a few hundred individuals with many of whom he will eventually become intimately acquainted.
If he then writes a monograph about a "tribe" or a "people" or a "social system" and he wants to be recognized as a scientist rather than as an artist, he is under pressure to persuade himself (and his readers) that the events which he saw happening before his eyes were "typical" of what might be going on elsewhere in the system.
Homogeneity is then introduced as an axiom; it cannot be demonstrated.
l.They are homogeneous.
This part of the model is highly suspect.
In the past, anthropologists have made the most exaggerated claims concerning the supposed typicality of their observations.
Latterly it has become increasingly apparent that neighbouring small-scale communities, even when they are lumped together under the same "tribal" label, are just as likely to be sharply contrasted as they are to be very much the same.
The contrast may itself be a significant feature of the overall pattern.
The question whether what the social anthropologist describes is or is not typical of anything in a statistical sense seems to me totally irrelevant.
The population under study is not dispersed at random across the map but consists of individuals who conceive of themselves as belonging to enduring groups which have continuity in a time scale measured in generations rather than in years.
2.
They are segmented.
Such groups may cohere together according to a wide variety of principles, e.g. by identification with a particular locality, a particular herd of livestock, a particular parcel of seed (annually replaced), a particular lineage name transmitted  from parent to child, and 50 on.
Since recruitment is mainly by procreation it necessarily follows that, in most cases, a substantial proportion of any such population will be related to one another as biological kin; but just how they are related cannot be known and, from a social anthropological point of view, this fact of biological kinship is of no great interest.
The crucial point is that, in most cases, group identity is expressed by the people concerned in the language of kinship.
Whatever else "we" may be, "we" are kinsmen.
Alternatively, where the members of the single community under study perceive themselves as belonging to a number of separate kin groups which do not intermarry, this is a matter of great sociological significance regardless of what may or may not be the actual biological facts of the case.
The same principle also applies on a larger scale.
As we move across the map the members of a particular community, "A" , will perceive their relationship to the members of another community, "B" , to be either that of kinsmen or of non-kinsmen and the distinction is likely to be of critical "political" importance.
In many human societies virtually everyone is treated as a kinsman of one sort or another so that alliances established by marriage are simply the renewal of links which have also existed in the past.
Levi-Strauss' arguments about the "elementary structures of kinship" only apply to societies of this kind.
But there is also a wide variety of technologically quite unsophisticated social systems in which social stratification, political subordination and class exploitation are linked to the kinsman/non-kinsman distinction.
For example, it is often the case that the essential characteristic of a "slave" is not that he is in a servile position or economically disadvantaged but that, not being a kinsman, he is denied the rights of a full human being.
In such cases the act of converting a non-kinsman into a kinsman (e.g., through marriage or adoption) can have major political implications.
In a great many social systems the only fully legitimate marriages are those in which the bride and bridegroom are not only already kin but kin of a specific category such as, say, that which includes the relationship mother's brother's daughter/father's sister's son.
The rules are formally protected by supposedly powerful religious taboos, breach of which will result in supernatural punishment for all concerned.
Yet we often find that in such societies the arrangement of highly unorthodox marriage alliances between "wrongly related" kinsmen or between non-kinsmen is an essential part of the fabric of small-scale politics through which men of influence build up their power.
Once again the normal and the normative must be distinguished.
All this simply reinforces my earlier point that not only must the field anthropologist pay close attention to the difference between normative rules and social practice but that the study of kinship is something far more complicated than simply the study of genealogies or the ramifying biological links of the domestic family.
The state of how things are, as evidenced by who has rights over what and over whom, is justified by "myth" , that is to say by tales about the past which have a sacred or religious quality (after the fashion of the Christian Bible), rather than by legislative enactments or precedents recorded in historical documents.
3.
They are mythopoeic.
Furthermore this mythological-cosmological justification of the ordering of the prevailing social system is recurrently exhibited in "rituals" of various kinds.
These may include, sacrifices, shamanistic trances, divinations, magical  performance, sorcery, and even the curing of the sick.
This last because illness tends to be attributed to supernatural causes so that the art of healing is, from another aspect, part of the more general art of communicating with supernatural powers.
It is this range of performances rather than any coherent body of theology which most social anthropologists have in mind when they refer to the magico-religious system.
But since the actors concerned are ordinary members of the community, who probably conceive of themselves not only as kinsmen to one another but also as kinsmen of the supernatural beings whose mythology is being enacted, it once again becomes crucial that the investigator should fully understand the nuances of the kinship language in which the multifaceted relationships between the living and the dead are being expressed.
I am not suggesting that you take this model too seriously.
If "primitive societies" are what social anthropologists study then some primitive societies fit the model quite well.
Others do not.
But the model does provide an explanation of why fieldworking anthropologists set about things in the way they do.
The first essential of intensive fieldwork is that the fieldworker should be able to recognize everyone in his vicinity, not just as a set of individuals but as a set of individuals holding named titles to office who consider themselves to be related to one another in a particular way.
The second essential is that he should be able to gain most of his information by direct observation of how these people organize their day-to-day affairs both in space and time.
How do they arrange the patterning of their domestic environment, their settlements, their houses, their productive and reproductive activities?
How do they behave  towards one another in the great diversity of situations which may arise within this patterned context?
Such observations have value because, although the situations may be diverse, the patterning tends to recur and the web of kinship which links the individuals together persists all the way through.
In this way the fieldworker will come to see that this mesh of kinship behaviour is a manifestation of the social structure, a visible expression of who controls what.
But the researcher must use his ears as well as his eyes.
 "Social structure" belongs to the metaphysics of anthropology.
Part of the fieldworker's problem is to discover how this abstract schema is expressed in the verbal statements by which his informants describe their cosmology.
Just how complicated a problem this may turn out to be is indicated by the following quotations from the opening paragraphs of the first two chapters of Christine Hugh-Jones' very remarkable book From the Milk River, which is a study of Pira-pirana Indians living in the Vaupes region of Colombia, as viewed from the perspective of the inhabitants of a single longhouse community in which she and her husband resided for two years between September 1968 and December 1970:
Pira-pirana Indians see themselves as existing within an ordered cosmos created in the ancestral past.
The world of their present-day experience is a residue or product of the ancestral doings related in myth, ritual chants, and shamanic spells.
From their own point of view, this cosmos and the mythical deeds associated with it control their contemporary social life and provide a moral framework for present-day action…
I work the other way round…
I start with the building of basic units of social structure, families and patrilineal groups, through marriage and procreation.
I begin by showing how  different phases of that temporal process are associated with different spaces in and around the longhouse and end by showing that the very same "space-time" principles underlie the structure of the cosmos The anthropologist must regard the ancestral cosmos as an imaginary projection of present experience, but at the same time it is a projection which both controls present experience and forms an integral part of it.
There is therefore a sense in which each world — the ancestral world and the present-day secular one — regulates the other…
The anthropologist's social structure must be pieced together from a muddling mass of statements that Indians make about kinship connections, group names, ancestral derivations, linguistic affiliations, geographical sites, and so on…
There is no golden rule about how this "muddling mass" should be sorted out apart from the absolute necessity for patience and sympathy.
In the fieldwork situation the anthropologist's aim must be that his informants should treat him as their pupil and that they should be prepared to teach him their way of life by accepting him as a kinsman, so that, as near as may be, he becomes "one of us" .
This kind of rapport is difficult to achieve and it entails an entirely different relationship between the informant and his pupil from that which was assumed by the anthropologists of seventy years ago.
In those days the fieldworker retained his status as a privileged stranger and proceeded to make a catalogue of ancient manners and customs much as if he were a policeman investigating a crime.
I have the impression that there are still quite a number of anthropological research workers who conduct their enquiries by such question and answer methods, but they are gradually being superseded.
Custom that has been experienced as part of  daily life is not at all the same thing as custom that is described in a formal interview.
In a book such as this I cannot say more than that about how the modern fieldworking anthropologist conducts his research.
In fieldwork it is the details that matter and details cannot be discussed in general terms.
If you really want to understand what anthropologists do you will have to do it yourself.
The next best thing is to read, with real care and attention, detailed accounts of modern fieldwork such as are provided by the two Hugh-Jones volumes.
Concentrate on the details of a single system; do not expect to arrive at generalizations by picking up ethnographic snippets from here, there and everywhere.
But don't delude yourself into thinking that either the practice of fieldwork or the understanding of other people's fieldwork is at all easy.
The totality of the way of life of even the simplest sort of human society is exceedingly complex.
5 Debt, Relationship, Power
Throughout my last chapter I kept on emphasizing that the task of the social anthropologist in the field is not simply to observe the details of customary behaviour but to note how this behaviour serves to "express relationships" .
In terms of anthropological theory, this chapter, taken as a whole, may be considered an elaboration of Radcliffe-Brown's formula that the core of social anthropology is the study of society considered as "a structure of person to person relationships" .
I suspect however that parts of my treatment of this theme would have been very uncongenial to Radcliffe-Brown himself.
Other parts of my argument derive from Malinowski, Mauss and Levi-Strauss, as well as from various of my younger contemporaries.
I shall not attempt to distinguish the particular sources of individual ideas.
In the language of social anthropology person's sharply distinguished from individual.
The individual is a living biological animal who is born, develops to maturity, grows old and dies; the person is the set of offices and roles which attach to the individual at any particular stage in his life career.
Parts of an individual's day-to-day behaviour are quite idiosyncratic- in general, these fall outside the scope of social anthropology.
But very often the major part of an individual's activities stem from the duties and reciprocal obligations which fall to him by virtue of his roles as a social  person.
The network of person-to-person relationships formula thus refers to sets of rights and duties which find expression in more or less predictable patterns of behaviour.
When ethnographers refer to customs, the behaviours in question are always of this semi-obligatory predictable kind.
All person-to-person relationships entail reciprocity.
Individual "A" , by virtue of his position in society, has rights and duties vis-à-vis individual "B" .
But individual "B" in turn, by virtue of his position, has complementary rights and duties vis-à-vis individual "A" .
The reciprocal/ complementary behaviours of the two individuals "A" and "B" , in their interactions with one another, may be said to symbolize or express the relationship between them.
But I must emphasize that this concept of relationship is an abstraction, an invention of the observing anthropologist.
As far as the actors themselves are concerned their mutual relationship is their mutual interactive behaviour.
Interactive behaviour, in this sense, can take many forms.
Small infants smile at their mothers who smile back; the infant cries, the mother puts the infant to her breast.
In mature persons interaction is usually initiated by speech; but in ordinary life, isolated speech interaction, as in a telephone conversation, is rare.
The more normal situation is for every exchange of words to take place in a context which allows the verbal activity to be associated with other kinds of activity and other kinds of message.
Thus the English greet one another with a verbal formula, a reciprocal, "How do you do?" , but simultaneously they shake hands.
Neighbours affirm their friendship by reciprocal hospitality.
More distant friends exchange letters or Christmas cards, and so on.
In all these cases the reciprocity is like-for-like and the message that is encoded in the action is roughly: "We are friends and we are of equal status." 
But the majority of person-to-person exchanges are not of
this like-for-like kind.
Correspondingly most of the persons in a close network of relationships are of unequal rather than equal status.
The inequality of the exchange is congruent with the inequality of the status.
For example, in most work situations in our capitalist world the employer gives money in exchange for the employee's labour.
In the dyad employer/employee the relationship is specified and recognizable in terms of who gives what to whom.
And so it is right across the board.
Social person labels, such as teacher, pupil, doctor, patient, master, servant, only acquire meaning when they are brought into association with their dyadic counterpart as in teacher/pupil, doctor/patient, master/servant.
We can then recognize what the relationship is by observing, in context, who gives what to whom.
Failure to see the general principle that lies behind such simple, common-know edge, facts as these has often led anthropologists to write a great deal of nonsense.
This applies especially to the area in which anthropologists consider themselves especially expert — the field of kinship relationships.
Thus it should be obvious (but apparently is not!) that a single kinship category word such as father can never denote an isolated individual.
It is only one half of several, separable, dyadic relationships, notably: father/foetus, father/infant child, father/son, father/daughter.
In relational terms the behaviours involved in these four cases may be very different even within a single social context.
But I have already warned you to be on your guard against anything that any anthropologist has ever written about kinship terminologies, so I will not pursue the matter here.
But the basic trouble with this literature is implicit in my example.
The authors concerned assume that the word "father" (or its equivalent in other languages) has a single  meaning in itself, whereas in fact it has many different meanings depending upon what other term forms the other half of the dyadic relationship.
But to get back to exchange.
Although behavioural reciprocity is implicit in the very idea of relationship, the reciprocity is, as a general rule, neither immediate nor complete.
So far I have given the impression that, if we use the notion of gift in the widest possible sense, then gift exchanges constitute the visible expression of what social anthropologists clumsily describe as networks of person-to-person relationships.
But that account of my overall argument needs to be qualified in one very major respect.
The structure of the relational network is only accessible to the outside observer to the extent that it is visibly manifested in gift-giving performance, but, for the insiders, the actors who actually operate the system, this same structure is felt to consist of rights and obligations.
It is not so much a network of gift-giving as a network of indebtedness.
This has very important implications for our interpretation of the coded significance of gift-exchange behaviour.
From the actor's point of view, the great majority of gift-giving transactions are partial repayments of debt.
I would emphasize the word partial.
In any context, if a debt is ever fully paid off then the relationship between debtor and creditor ceases to exist.
Now some relationships are of just this kind.
If I go to the market to buy a dozen eggs I pay the full price there and then.
I have no residual obligation to come back to the same market stall next week.
However, if I am a regular customer and the stall owner gives me credit because I happen to be short of cash, I do have an obligation to come back.
And when I return I shall no doubt make another purchase and so on.
Indeed that is what the label regular customer really means: a customer who has the potential to go into debt.
And all enduring relationships have this quality; when the relationship is activated the parties concerned engage in gift exchange, but at all other times, while the relationship is quiescent, it exists only as a feeling of indebtedness — that is of rights and obligations between the parties.
Within this very general framework a number of variations may occur though the range of possibilities is not really very great.
let us consider some of them.
1.
The simplest exchanges are unpremeditated and tit-for-tat: children engaged in aggressive play; adults exchanging drinks around a pub bar in token of temporary trust and friendship; casual conversation with a stranger on a bus.
The reciprocity usually takes the form of direct equivalence: an eye for an eye, a glass of beer for a glass of beer.
Narrowly dyadic relationships of this kind show no tendency to proliferate outwards so as to form a wider network, and, since they are usually short-lived, anthropologists have not often given them much attention.
But some forms of enduring relationships have also been said to have this form.
Levi-Strauss rates sister-exchange marriage as belonging to his category restricted exchange, by which he means "non-proliferating" , but my next variation really fits his typology rather better.
2.
As we have seen, whenever the payment of the return gift is postponed, the relationship between creditor and debtor is extended in time.
But this will only be the case if the debt continues to be remembered as an unrequited obligation by both parties to the transaction.
In domestic relationships within the household and in relationships between close neighbours, who see one another very frequently, this is how gift exchange usually operates.
There  is no close accounting of who owes what to whom but there is a tacit understanding by all concerned that there is a moral obligation to balance things out over a period.
In many of the simpler agricultural societies this is also the normal way to organize labour; no wages are paid, but, over a period, each household pays back in labour form whatever it has previously received in labour form.
Wherever I have observed transactions of this kind the balancing of accounts has been very carefully worked out.
Most of the customary marriage arrangements which Levi-Strauss rates as restricted exchange have this delayed reciprocity aspect.
The alliance between the groups which exchange women under a sister-exchange marriage rule or under a rule which specifies marriage between a man and his father's sister's daughter persists through time because of the felt obligation to arrange, at a future date, the counterpart of a marriage which has already taken place.
The underlying general principle has already been stated: persisting relationships only exist as feelings of indebtedness.
From time to time every such persisting debt relationship needs to be made manifest in an actual gift transaction, but the relationship is in the feeling of indebtedness not in the gift.
3.
My third variation corresponds to what Levi-Strauss calls generalized exchange.
The reciprocity is asymmetrical and in consequence it has a proclivity for extending outwards into a network.
Most of the trading arrangements which are encountered in modern industrial societies follow this pattern.
If I wish to buy a manufactured object from a shopkeeper, the shopkeeper must first obtain it from a wholesaler, the wholesaler must then in turn obtain it from the manufacturer, who must in turn obtain components and raw materials from other suppliers further down the line.
There will be no point in the proceedings at which the gifts  which have moved in one direction are directly returned in the reverse direction.
In this particular case, the reciprocal gift is usually money, but here too the transactions are open ended.
In initiating my original purchase I incur an obligation to make a payment in money, but I in turn have to have a source from which I can acquire the money in the first place, and this will, directly or indirectly, put me into at least a temporary relationship with a great variety of people, including the reader who purchased this book from a bookstall and paid out money, some small fraction of which will eventually find its way back to myself.
Levi-Strauss himself uses the notion of generalized exchange in a less general way.
His prototype example of such a system is one in which formal custom requires a man to marry a woman of the category mother's brother's daughter.
The effect of such a rule is that the lineage of the bride and the lineage of the husband are placed in an asymmetrical wife-giver/wife-receiver relationship; the wife-givers then receive "valuables" of some sort in return for the women that they give away.
However, since the rules of exogamy prevent the wife-givers from marrying women of their own group, they must find wives from elsewhere.
The outcome, according to Levi-Strauss, is a generalized circularity analogous to that which I described for the relationship in our commercial system between an author and his book-buying reader.
This is a highly abstract argument and there is a wide discrepancy between Levi-Strauss' theorizing on the subject and how such "systems of circulating connubium" actually operate.
But certain parts of Levi-Strauss' schema have application to a wide variety of ethnographic materials.
For example, the famous Kula system of ritual exchange, first described by Malinowski in 1922, fits the pattern quite well.
The partners to a Kula exchange relationship are commonly members of quite different social groups; often they live in different islands and speak different languages.
The relationship is of long duration and is asymmetrical.
If partner "A" has an obligation to give partner "B" armshells (mwali) then partner "B" must give back necklaces (soulaya, bagi) and, vice versa, "A" can never give back necklaces to "B" , nor can "B" ever give armshells to "A" .
Later research seems to show that Malinowski mis-understood a number of key features of the system he described, but it is certainly the case that the participants in the Kula conceive of it as a circulating system of exchange.
Furthermore the overall effect of this circulation is to link together into a widely ramifying network of relationships a great number of individuals of quite different status and quite different cultural background.
It is also very clear, both from Malinowski's evidence and from later research, that Kula partnerships are viewed by the participants as structures of permanent indebtedness.
Any particular sequence of actual exchanges of Kula valuables serves to manifest this state of indebtedness but at the end of the day the position is as it began.
The reciprocal gift-giving between the partners has in no way reduced the obligation to engage in further gift exchanges in the future.
And that brings me back to my original point.
Relationships ships within society consist of the recognition that individuals in their particular social roles have rights and duties vis-à-vis other individuals in other social roles.
But now I want to shift the argument somewhat.
Structures of social relationship are not only structures of indebtedness, they are also structures of power.
But what is power?
In another context, when discussing the logic of ritual symbols, I have said that "power lies at the interface of categories" .
This may sound complicated but the argument is very similar to that which Victor Turner employs when he comments on the liminality, or "betwixt and between" status, of persons who are engaged in any ritual process."
My usage however is more general than Turner's and depends on a mechanical model.
As a social anthropologist I am mainly concerned with power as an aspect of the relationship between two social persons in a hierarchy: If "A" exerts power over "B" , then the status of "A" is superordinate and that of "B" subordinate.
We recognize the existence of such power by observing that if "A" gives orders, "B" obeys them.
But in English the concept of power has a physical as well as a metaphysical connotation; thus we talk of "water power" , "steam power" , "electrical power" and so on.
In the language of engineers, power is said to "flow" whenever the "potential" at the two ends of a channel is unequal.
For example, if the positive and negative poles of an electrical battery are connected, we ordinarily describe the discharge that is then manifested (as heat, or motive force or whatever) as a flow of power from the positive pole to the negative pole.
The metal connector between the two poles then falls into my specification of "the interface between two categories" .
This interface position is one of danger.
If the metal is too thin to accept the load (as with a piece of fuse wire) it will burn up.
The point of this analogy is that, so long as the two poles are separated, there is no relationship between them; no power flows; there is no danger.
But as soon as the two poles are put into relationship by a "power conductor" the relative potential at the two ends of the connector generates a power flow.
The greater the difference in potential the greater the  flow of power and the greater the danger to the interface]power-conductor.
And soft is also with human affairs.
If a "person-to-person relationship" is made to carry too great a "flow of power" from the dominant to the subordinate position the connection between the two parties is likely to break up in violence.
And much the same is true of the ideological relationships which link human beings to metaphysical powers.
The betwixt and between area of liminality which Turner discusses, in which social differences between individuals tend to be forgotten in a shared feeling of communitas, as among the participants in a pilgrimage, is the interface between human beings and "spiritual beings" .
It is a position of danger where miracles of healing may occur but miracles of disaster also.
Cynics of course would hold that the power potential and the danger that exists at the interface of the physical and the metaphysical exists only in the human imagination.
But for the social anthropologist that point is hardly relevant.
It is because such interfaces are believed to be dangerous that men act as they do in ritual situations.
And for the anthropologist that is all that matters.
Religious ideology usually presupposes that the difference in power potential between human being and "deity" is infinitely great and totally destructive; the power differentials within an ordinary domestic context are less precarious.
But even so, in almost all kinds of social relationship, there is some degree of power flow.
Relationships in which the two individuals concerned are of exactly equal status are very unusual.
As you can see I have set up a set of equations which can be summarized in the following formulae:
state of indebtedness = social relationship
payment of debt = manifestation of relationship
nature of payment = nature of relationship
reciprocal equal payments = equality of status; absence of power flow either way
asymmetrical payments = inequality of status; power flow from "higher" to "lower" 
Further, each statement is reversible.
Every social relationship entails a state of indebtedness just as every state of indebtedness entails a social relationship.
There are several grounds for putting the argument in this way.
First of all it brings out the functionalist point that the different "aspects" of social relationship, in the fields of kinship, economy, politics, law, religion etc., are all versions of the same thing.
Each mode of expressing a particular relationship is metaphoric of all the others.
Secondly it helps to show just how far this functionalist/-structuralist style of argument is, or is not, compatible with Marxist presentations.
The Marxist thesis that power lies with whoever controls the "means of production" , is usually mixed up with an egalitarian thesis that each producer has a natural moral right to the power which his production generates.
This does not fit squarely with my equations but it is not unrelated to them.
Notice for example that the left side of each equation suggests "economic" relationship, while the right side suggests, in the first instance, the domestic relationships of kinship and the political relationships of governmental authority.
Marx and Engels recognized this interlocking equivalence right from the start though they confused the issue by trying to fit their argument into a social evolutionist framework.
The following quotation comes from Engels' Preface to the  first (1884) edition of The Origin of the Family, which was a kind of rewrite, in precis, of Morgan's Ancient Society (1877):
According to the materialist conception, the determining factor in history is, in the final instance, the production and reproduction of the immediate essentials of life.
This, again, is of a twofold character.
On the one side the production of the means of existence, of articles of food and clothing, dwellings, and of the tools necessary for that production; on the other side, the production of human beings themselves, the propagation of the species.
—
Engels then went on to assert that:
The social organization under which the people of a particular historical epoch and a particular country live is determined by both kinds of production, by the stage of development of labour on the one hand and of the family on the other.
Subsequent research by anthropologists has failed to confirm this latter generalization.
There does not seem to be any close relationship between "modes of production" , "relations of (economic) production" , "relations of political domination" and "forms of the family" (i.e. relations of human reproduction).
Nevertheless the anthropologist's favourite stamping ground, "the study of kinship" , becomes arid and thoroughly misleading if the anthropologist concerned ever allows himself to forget that the domestic household, which stands at the core of any kinship system when viewed from the inside, is a social machine for the production of the means of subsistence and the reproduction of human beings.
My phrase "viewed from the inside" is crucial.
The fundamental novelty about social anthropology, as it has developed since the days of Malinowski, is that the fieldworking anthropologist tries to understand alien societies from the inside rather than from the outside.
He does not look at society from afar, through the wrong end of a telescope, as is the usual practice of professional historians.
The anthropologist takes a worm's eye view.
Through partial participation in the events and networks of relationships which he observes all around him, he tries to understand how it feels to be a member of the society in question.
At best, that understanding is only partial, but anthropologists would claim that they have a much better insight into the motives and perceptions of "other people" than do scholars who work within other conventions — whether they be those of pure science or of the humanities.
Most readers of this book are likely to have grown up in one or other of the many contemporary versions of what are often lumped together under the general label "modern industrial societies" .
At the micro-level of domestic, face-to-face, relations these "modern" social systems are just as varied as the "preindustrial" societies which provide the data of conventional social anthropology.
The generalizations which follow are derived from my own experience in one particular sector of British society during the era 1910 to 1980.
The reader should not reject them outright if it so happens that they do not correspond to his own personal impressions.
One of the characteristics which distinguish "modern industrial" from "preindustrial" society is that in the former there is a wide circulation of "money" , where "money" means a general medium of exchange and a store of value which serves equally well as a reward for services rendered and as a  means of purchasing commodities in the market.
By contrast, in "pre-industrial" societies there are often a variety of media of exchange which circulate in different social spheres but which are not interchangeable in any straight-forward fashion.
For example, the mwali and bagi of the Trobriand Kula, which were mentioned earlier, are media of exchange which represent value, but it is not a monetary value which can be converted directly into fish or pig meat or yams.
In modern"systems the primary function of money is its use in economic transactions.
Even so, where money changes hands, it is part of an exchange and thus an expression of the social relationship which exists between the two individuals concerned.
Such relationships are specified by several distinguishable criteria.
First there is the question of who gives what to whom and how much.
In general, the giver of a monetary gift ranks higher than the receiver, but, as between two receivers, the one who receives more ranks higher than the one who receives less.
Members of capitalist systems tend to take such discrimination for granted but the logic of the exercise is far from obvious.
The usual justification for paying the manager of a business a salary which is out of all proportion greater than that received by the men on the shop floor, who have direct contact with the product or with the machinery, is that the extra payment is for "responsibility" but this is just another name for "status in a power hierarchy" .
But in most industrial organizations the hierarchy of status and authority is marked, not only by the relative size of the total pay packet, but also by such distinctions as whether the actual payment is made on a daily, weekly, monthly or annual basis.
Here the general principle is that those who receive the largest amount of money overall receive it at the least frequent intervals and rank highest in  the hierarchy of power.
Within any one system an annual stipend is superior to a monthly salary which is superior to a weekly wage which is superior to ad hoc payment by the hour.
You will notice that the greater the interval between wage payments, the longer the period during which the firm is in debt to its employee and, correspondingly, the greater the security of tenure of the employee.
This fits with my earlier thesis about the general link between "indebtedness" and relationship".
However once one goes outside the immediate hierarchy of industrial relationships the symbolic implication of monetary payments becomes much more difficult to decipher.
Many positions of great influence in British society are filled by individuals who carry out the duties of their office for no monetary reward at all.
And in such situations it is usually the unpaid office holders who stand at the top of the hierarchy and who give orders to their wage-earning staff
At the level of micro-sociology, where one is considering the organization of local small-scale communities and domestic households, this pattern is the norm rather than the exception.
Voluntary work tends to carry higher prestige than paid work.
Marxists and feminists are inclined to see this familiar fact as a form of exploitation, and the current fashion is to be particularly scornful of the honour that is supposed to accrue to the unpaid housewife.
But the issue is complex.
It is true that, to the indignation of many working women, current British tax rules assume that, in an ordinary domestic family, the husband is the head of the household by virtue of his being the breadwinner and in control of the family finances.
In effect the law treats the household as a single social person whose position in the hierarchy of rights  and obligations is measured by the monetary transactions of the unit as a whole.
In a certain sense prestige accrues to the household which pays the most tax.
But it is the husband who is responsible for paying it and who must acquire the money from outside in the first place.
But there are other situations (and there used to be many more) in which the social status of the household is measured by the give/take transactions of the wife rather than of the husband.
And in such cases it is clearly more honourable to give than to receive.
Servants rank below their employers.
A woman who offers hospitality to guests is more honourable than one who has to take in lodgers for a fee.
But here the presumption is that it is the wife rather than the husband who is the household head.
Moreover, according to the prevailing values of this system, any feminist housewife who successfully made good her claim to be paid a wage for her domestic chores would be reducing her status to that of a servant.
Some women (and some anthropologists) might say that this would simply make explicit what is otherwise hidden by the fraudulent "rituals" of society.
But the real point is that, in contemporary Western society, the network of relations within the domestic household is built on an evaluation of exchange transactions which is, in certain respects, just the converse of that which operates in the capitalist world of wage relationships outside.
And that was the purpose of my digression from anthropology to the sociology of monetary exchange.
In the kinds of society in which most of my readers were brought up the coding of behaviour presupposes a sharp division between what goes on within the household and transactions which link the household to the rest of society.
In the pre-industrial societies, which provide the main field for anthropological enquiry, this kind of distinction is either  non-existent or quite peripheral to the main field of the ordinary individual's day-to-day activities.
In such societies it is frequently the case that the individual treats all outsiders "as if " they were kinsmen of some sort.
I made the same point in the previous chapter but it may help if I give a concrete example.
Just what is meant by an "outsider" in such cases is a matter for definition.
The Kachins of North Burma, among whom I carried out much of my own fieldwork, were much inclined to rhetoric.
A favourite opening to a speech, roughly equivalent to Shakespeare's"Friends, Romans, Countrymen
."
could be translated as: "We, elder and younger brothers, affinal relatives, distant relatives, all mankind
The word I have here glossed as "mankind" was Jinghpaw, which is the term by which the people known to the British as Kachins describe themselves.
Kachins are of course well aware that there are other kinds of people who are not Jinghpaw in this sense, e.g. Burmese, Chinese, Indians, British anthropologists, and, in mythology, all these groups, including the Jinghpaw, are descended from a common original Adam and Eve.
But outsiders of this extreme sort are not treated as fully normal human beings.
On the other hand a Kachin will always take it for granted that anyone whom he is prepared to classify as a Jinghpaw is a kinsman of some sort.
On one occasion I was present when, due to the exigencies of war, a Kachin from eastern Burma fetched up hundreds of miles away in a Kachin village in eastern Assam.
It was only a matter of a few hours before the stranger had been slotted into the local kinship network; and the recognition of kinship was mutual.
What this all adds up to is that the coding of give/take relationship in fields quite remote from private domestic affairs is much closer to what the members of modern capitalist societies assume to be appropriate only for the  restricted context of the domestic household than it is to the coding of power relationships within the wider context of the market economy which I was discussing earlier.
In such systems, labour rewarded by money wages (if money wages are a possibility) rates lower than labour directly rewarded by reciprocal labour in kind or by the payment, often after considerable delay, of non-monetary gifts, or by hospitality and the gift of food.
Likewise it is only a few exceptional relationships which have the short-term characteristic of a money purchase in the market.
Normal relationships, whether they focus on economics, or politics, or law, or religion, are all presumed to have the lifelong irrevocable quality which in our modern Western system applies only to national identity and family membership.
In such circumstances the use of kinship language to express all kinds of relationship, which is what anthropologists have now come to expect, clearly makes a lot of sense.
But within this general pattern there is plenty of room for variation.
In our modern Western system the insider/outsider, we/they"opposition roughly corresponds to the distinction between kinship and non-kinship modes of reference.
In the more elementary systems that we are now considering, kinship, of a general sort, is assumed to be all-pervading but there is again a discrimination between the insiders and the outsiders, we "and they" .
Just how the distinction is established varies from system to system but usually "we" , the insiders, are treated as "true" kin.
They are kinsmen because they are somehow of common substance, as with English consanguinity, kinship by common blood.
Here the bond of kinship is treated as a part of the individual's biological nature; it endures throughout life; the individual has no choice.
By  contrast "they" , the outsiders, are treated as related to "us" in a much more optional way.
They are affines, allied to us by marriage.
And entering upon a marriage calls for human decision.
Some anthropologists use this distinction as part of their own jargon.
They write of kinship and marriage, or kinship and affinity, reserving the term kinship for kinship by common substance in the consanguine sense.
And sometimes this fits the ethnographic facts in a quite straight-forward way.
Where the "we" -groups are exogamous, as is very often the case, the "we/they" distinction corresponds exactly to the distinction "those with whom we may not intermarry because they are of common substance with us" / "those with whom we may intermarry because they are not of common substance with us" .
The notion of common substance is then usually associated with belief in descent from a common ancestor (or ancestress): from a male first father by male links only (patrilineal descent); from a female first mother through female links only (matrilineal descent).
Because of the accident that, in the early days, a high proportion of the best anthropological field research wan carried out in societies which were made up of exogamous unilineal descent groups, many textbooks give the impression that unilineal descent is the normal pattern in primitive societies and hence that the distinction between kinship (of common substance) and affinity is normally clear-out and unambiguous.
This is not in fact the case.
A great many human societies operate with "cognatic" systems of kinship, in which common ancestry is traced through both male and female links.
There is then no obvious sense in which "we" , who claim to be of common substance, can differentiate ourselves, on the basis of descent alone, from "they" , who are not of our common substance.
In such cases the implicit definition of "we" always includes some additional factor such as those mentioned on p.128.
 "We" are those who live in this particular locality and whose ancestors have lived here since time immemorial, or "we" are those who derive their livelihood from this particular piece of ancestral ground, or "we" are those who raise our crops from a particular parcel of ancestral seed, annually renewed.
All such variations contain the same general idea: "we" , who are true kin, share a common substance through our shared links with the same ancestral past; but wherever descent is traced through both males and females the distinction between those who are unmarriageable because they rate as true kin and those who are marriageable because they do not so rate becomes very fuzzy.
In Ancient Egypt, where the term for wife was the same as the term for sister, and men frequently married sisters who were full siblings, the distinction seems to have disappeared altogether.
It is for this reason that in this book I ordinarily use kinship in its wider sense.
It encompasses affinity.
But the reader should not forget that, even in those societies where kinship language is all-pervading, the bonds of kinship may be of several different kinds.
It may be helpful if at this point I pull together the underlying theme of the latter part of this chapter with the help of a schema.
I have been elaborating the point, made much earlier on, that one of the really basic features of human thinking as it affects social action is the polarization of "we" versus "they" .
In general what is permitted and expected with regard to our behaviour towards those who are classed as "we" is either expressly forbidden or disapproved of with respect to those who rate as "they" , and  vice versa.
The moral distinction permitted/forbidden is thus context dependent.
In Western capitalist society the domestic household is not only the narrowest "we" -group (see pp. 142–3), it is also by far the most important in the life history of the individual.
Presumably this is fairly obvious.
But those who attach value to studies of "the family" on these grounds often overlook the fact that such domestic groups pass through a developmental cycle.
Typically such a group starts out as a married couple; the couple acquire children; the children grow up, marry and set up nuclear households of their own; the original household declines in size and is finally wiped out by death.
As a consequence, not only is "the family" (in this restricted sense) quite a different kind of entity at each phase of its development but, except in so far as the original householders own property which can be transmitted to their children, there is no continuity of the "we" -group beyond the first generation.
As we all know, the nuclear households of married children may continue to be linked by effective bonds of kinship both with the residual households of their parents and of their married siblings; but such continuing linkage is optional and, in practice, very variable.
I have argued that, in this modern capitalist context, the basic coding of behaviour concerns attitudes to monetary exchange and operates through the following paired oppositions:
By the "permanence" of true-kin relationships in both models I refer to the fact that if two individuals consider themselves to be true kinsmen their kinship will persist in latent form even if they do not interact with one another at all for years on end.
Gift exchange will still be necessary if the rights and duties which are inherent in such relationships are to be activated, but the nature of the exchange will be quite different from that which validates the impermanent relationships in my two right-hand columns.
True kinsmen, who are in permanent relationship, activate their mutual status by giving one another appropriate perishable (i.e. impermanent) gifts, e.g. labour, food and drink, hospitality.
Affinal kinsmen (in elementary societies) and non-kinsmen (in capitalist societies), who are in impermanent relationship, may activate their mutual status by perishable gifts of a very similar kind, but, in addition, they exchange imperishable (permanent) forms of gift, e.g. women, slaves, individually identifiable live animals, material valuables, and, in capitalist societies, money.
This is the essential logic of asymmetrical circulating exchange systems of the Kula type, which I mentioned earlier in the context of my discussion of generalized exchange and which so puzzled Malinowski.
Malinowski recognized that, at least in part, the partners in Kula exchanges seemed to have utilitarian motives.
They exchanged perishable consumer goods which were mutually valuable in the ordinary fashion of barter trade.
But the Kula itself simply drove identifiable valuables round in a circle giving no utilitarian advantage to anyone.
In actual fact the exchange of Kula valuables does a good deal more than that, though to explain how this comes about would require an extended discussion of Melanesian ethnography which would not be appropriate.
But I am making a more general point.
The exchange of what Engels called "the immediate essentials of life" — food and clothing, useful tools, women in their capacity as potential mothers — takes place between "friends" rather than "enemies" .
True-kin do not necessarily love one another, but it is always presumed that they are friends until they are shown to be enemies.
By contrast, non-kin and affines are presumed to be enemies until they are shown to be friends!
In many tribal societies thin [act is explicit.
On quite a number of occasions ethnographers have been told by their informants that: "we marry our enemies" .
Or, to put it the other way round, affines only remain friends so long as they remain affines; they are bonded together by political alliance rather than by common  substance, and, if the parties concerned want to maintain that alliance, they must repeatedly reaffirm that bonding by the appropriate exchange of imperishable valuables of a visible and identifiable kind.
I am also making another general point.
Because social anthropologists take it for granted (sometimes mistakenly) that the distinction between true-kin and affines is of absolutely central importance they expect to find that the behaviour that is appropriate between affines will be a kind of coded inversion of the behaviour that is appropriate between true-kin.
Here is an example of such inversion which I myself observed in operation among the peasantry of North Central Ceylon; brothers were always rated as elder-brother /younger-brother and in a relationship of inequality and restraint, whereas brothers-in-law always treated one another as equals and were in a relationship of joking familiarity.
But most readers of this book will have grown up in a society in which the major comparable distinction is between kin and non-kin, and in which it is assumed, or even insisted upon, that kin relationships ought not to enter into the non-kin sphere at all.
Nepotism, though of widespread occurrence, is formally considered to be an offence against common morality.
So perhaps you feel that while all this talk about kinship and affinity may make good sense in discussions of the social life of Australian Aborigines or of Trobriand Islanders in Melanesia, it really has very little relevance for ourselves who live in a social context in which, as a general rule, affinity is of little significance and the majority of social relationships outside the domestic family are coded in quite a different way.
But all the way through this chapter I have been asserting just the contrary.
The wage-money economy of capitalist society gives the
illusion that relationships in this kind of system are quite different in kind from those which are encountered in more "elementary" systems.
And there is a long tradition in sociological thinking which makes precisely this distinction.
Henry Maine's insistence that there is a radical distinction between the status relationships of early, kinship-based, societies and the contract relationships of "modern" societies goes back to the 1860s.
De Tocqueville made a similar point even earlier when commenting on the individualizing consequences of American democracy: "Aristocracy had made a chain of all the members of the community, from the peasant to the king: democracy breaks that chain and severs every link of it." 
J And in a similar vein Marx argued that wage payments in the capitalist system had the effect of alienating the worker from the products of his labour and reducing both to the status of commodities in the market place.
But capitalist society is nothing like as fragmented and individualistic as both its admirers and its detractors would like to believe.
In practice, the egalitarian individual always occupies a position in a well-defined hierarchy, and this position is repeatedly asserted by the way he behaves towards others and by the way the others react in response.
The "language" in which these assertions are made is only special in that it uses money as a social indicator where the corresponding symbolism of other economic systems might use something quite different.
As an Englishman I express my subordination to the political authority under which I live by paying a certain fraction of my money income to the appropriate official.
When a Kachin householder makes a present to his local chief of the right hindleg of every animal he kills, he is "saying" the same thing.
The tact that in capitalist society money can be used in all
sorts of different exchange situations gives it a specious advantage over other media of exchange.
In (he eyes of professional economists barter is primitive, money currency sophisticated.
And this perhaps is true where trading efficiency is the issue.
But if money payments are being used to express the quality of a relationship, the symbolic possibilities are rather limited.
You can pay money or not pay money; you can pay more or you can pay less; you can make payments more frequently or less frequently.
But that is about all.
And that is one of the reasons why, in contemporary Britain, the "fringe benefits" which attach to a job, which are paid in kind rather than money, e.g. the use of a company car, are often of greater concern to the recipient than the precise quantity of the money wage.
The fringe benefit is visible; it gives status; it differentiates.
The money wage just puts you into a particular sub-section of the general category "wage-earner" .
And who wants to be that?
But, in the exchanges which are encountered by field-working anthropologists, the variety is far greater.
Gift-giving can say"many more things and with much greater precision.
I give you food.
But what sort of food?
Is it cooked or uncooked?
Is it meat or not meat?
Is it the meat of a buffalo, or a pig, or a chicken?
If it is the meat of a buffalo, what precise part of the animal does it come from?
A hind leg?
The neck?
The ribs?
The liver?
And so on almost ad infinitum.
By the time I had finished my Kachin fieldwork I had only to attend an animal sacrifice as a passive observer and then notice how the meat of the sacrifice was shared out among"the congregation and I could know, even down to quite line detail, the precise hierarchy and mutual relationship of everyone present, which might be thirty or more individuals altogether.
But here I am once again running into the kind of  difficulty that I noted at the end of my last chapter when I quoted Christine Hugh-Jones' apposite phrase about the work of the social anthropologist being a matter of sorting out the meaning of a "muddling mass" of detailed data.
Detailed data takes up space so it cannot be presented in a volume of this scale, yet without it much of the theorizing of social anthropologists seems trivial and obvious or merely boastful.
Yet to convince you that the claim I have made in my last paragraph is justifiable would require a full-length monograph at least as long as my Political Systems of Highland Burma which is itself a fair-sized and relevant monograph entirely devoted to the affairs of the Kachin.
So where do we go from here?
I am very conscious that snippets of ethnography used to "illustrate" an argument are often highly misleading.
But I now need to make the point (among others) that it is the details that matter.
So in parts of the next chapter you will be getting quite a lot of detail.
6 Marriage, Legitimacy, Alliance
I am now in something of a dilemma.
I keep on insisting that customary behaviour only makes sense if it is viewed in context against a background of contrast.
up to a point I have been able to illustrate this theme by drawing attention to contrasts which are likely to be familiar to all my readers, e.g. the difference in modern Western societies between monetary and non-monetary exchanges.
But I also keep on emphasizing that the subject matter of social and cultural anthropology is the enormous diversity of customary behaviour world-wide.
This diversity is interesting because it exhibits the creative originality of human beings.
Human beings must everywhere produce and reproduce both themselves and their means of subsistence, and they must also find the means to communicate with one another not just with language but through the coding that is built into the reciprocities that manifest relationship.
The astonishing peculiarity of human beings, as distinct from other animals, is the great variety of ways in which they achieve these ends.
My difficulty, however, is not just to show you that this is the case but rather to show you just what is the case!
What interests me as a social anthropologist is not just that human beings behave in a lot of different unexpected ways but that the patterning of these differences of behaviour also varies; and it is the continuities and the  variations in these underlying patterns which are the real focus of my interest.
For it is the patterning rather than the superficial form of social behaviour which conveys meaning.
As it turns out not only do we find similar "meanings" coded into quite different formal behaviours but we also find that superficially similar formal behaviours may be coded to "say" quite different things.
This exhibits the powers of the human imagination but it is not at all easy to demonstrate in a book of this size.
Let me try to explain what I am getting at.
First of all human behaviour serves both to "do" things and to "say" things.
By "doing" things I mean it alters the state of the world; this is more or less what Engels had in mind with his references to production and reproduction.
But Engels missed the point that human productive activity is not confined to producing the means of subsistence and the tools that go with it and to reproducing the human species itself; there is also the crucial activity of altering the social world by creating new social relationships.
And in this book that is the main kind of "doing" behaviour which is being discussed.
By "saying" things I do not mean simply that men talk about what they do, but that all their social behaviour is "coded" so that it makes statements about what the social situation is and where the actor is positioned in that social situation.
A lot of our discussion so far has been concerned with this kind of "saying" , but I have purposely avoided introducing any of the technical jargon of semiotics (the theory of signs) and this is now leading me into difficulty because the ordinary use of words in social anthropological discourse is crudely imprecise.
Social anthropologists employ comparatively few technical terms which do not form part of the ordinary colloquial language to which they have been accustomed since  childhood.
We can infer from this that when the authors concerned start out to describe the institutions of an alien exotic social system they are using their own society as a model of normality.
By using words which originated in the context of their own society they imply that the institutions of that society have some kind of privileged universality.
A striking example of this attitude was provided by the academic debate which took place during the early 1950s as to whether the English words "family" and "marriage" represented "universal" human institutions.
Those who gave a positive answer to the question of universality seem to have arrived at their position through the following sequence of essentially functionalist propositions:
1.
Human children, if they are to survive and become adults, must be cared for by adults at least until adolescence.
2.
Because of this biological necessity all human societies must have rules which establish the legitimacy of young children as members of a caring domestic unit.
The status of legitimacy puts obligations on the members of the domestic unit to provide care for the child.
Marriage is the institution which establishes the status of legitimacy.
3.
In ordinary circumstances, in the principal English-speaking societies, this caring environment is provided by a domestic household the core membership of which is a single nuclear family of married parents and children.
(This ideal model does not correspond to the facts.
As we all know large numbers of children in Western societies are reared in domestic households which do not have this simplistic structure at all.
But this discrepancy was not brought into the discussion.)
4.
The debate generally proceeded from the assumption
that the word "family" has this restricted meaning.
It was then argued, in effect, that since "the family" (in this sense) is a functionally useful institution it must also be a necessary institution.
Most of the debate was really about an alleged universality of the nuclear family of married biological parents and their legitimate children.
However when the protagonists of the universalist position got into difficulties with the ethnographic evidence they tended to evade the issue by using the word "family" in some quite different sense!
They also produced all-embracing "definitions of marriage" of enormous complexity, the sole purpose of which was to ensure that, no matter what the ethnographic facts might be, there must always be some institution which an anthropologist could feel justified in labelling "marriage" .
This is not just a quibble over words.
Anthropologists of all kinds are greatly concerned to understand just what, if anything, is universally true of human society.
From a biological point of view all men are very much alike; they all have very similar biological needs which must somehow be satisfied by the institutional arrangements of society.
But that does not mean that the particular institutional arrangements of a particular society (namely that which provides the normal context for the use of modern English) can serve as a paradigm for all others.
The form of human institutions is not determined by their functional adequacy in the way that both Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown seem to have believed.
The general drift of my own argument, which in some ways resembles that of Marx, is that what is determined is not the form of particular institutional arrangements but certain basic patterns within the structure of person-to-person relationships.
In any particular economic system the same  patterns will be found to recur in many different social contexts within many different kinds of institution.
That is why customary behaviours seem to make sense both to the actors concerned and to the anthropological observer.
But the relation of pattern to form is problematic and that is what I find interesting.
It follows from this that any anthropologist who selects a particular category word from his own mother tongue, e.g. incest, marriage, family, myth, religion, and then embarks on some kind of cross-cultural study of institutions which he lumps together under such headings, is begging all the questions which are of serious interest!
Yet, on the face of it, this present chapter appears to be a cross-cultural study of "marriage" institutions of just this sort.
Appearances are deceptive.
In the first place I consider only a very small, very non-random set of examples, only four of them in any detail.
Secondly, although it is true that all the institutions that are discussed have been described as "marriage" in the relevant literature, the whole point of my argument is that this very fact tends to mislead.
It may be that, in a very loose, family resemblance sense, they are all institutions of the same general kind.
The similarity, such as it is, is partly a matter of form, partly a matter of function, and partly a matter of what is "said" in symbolic performance and how it is said.
But the gist of my argument is that there is no single cross-cultural matrix into which these several "marriage" institutions can all be fitted.
They cannot be dissected into elements and made the subject of a statistical tabulation in the fashion of the Ethnographic Atlas.
Each pattern is only meaningful in its own wider context.
Nevertheless by providing these several incommensurate and incomplete "examples" I have been able, I would claim, to demonstrate some facts about the  process of forging social relationships which have general rather than particular interest.
And I would make just the same kind of point about the word "family" .
I agree that it is self-evident that any viable human society which expects to perpetuate itself through procreation (rather than through some other form of recruitment) must institutionalize some means of creating an environment in which children may be reared.
But to assume that this must entail domestic arrangements which an ordinary speaker of modern colloquial English would recognize under the labels "marriage" and "family" is a mistake.
Actually what is now taken to be the normal and basic meaning of the English word "family" is far removed from the meaning it carried in earlier times when the economic basis of English society was different.
The Roman familia was a household conceived of as a corporation, the members of which were the servants (familus = servant) of the head of the household, the pater familias.
It was not a kinship group in any biological sense.
Prior to the nineteenth century the English word "family" was used in just this way to denote the members of a household, especially the servants, who, in the more affluent social classes, always greatly outnumbered the inner kin-group of parents and children.
An alternative usage, which goes back at least to the seventeenth century, made "family" a widely dispersed group of relatives, loosely linked by ties of "blood" and affinity, but not necessarily associated with any one household.
Still another set of usages leaves out the linkages through affinity.
A family then consists of those descended or claiming descent from a common ancestor.
In this last specification a family might include all the diverse forms of descent group, unilineal and other, which have subsequently become part of  the jargon of social anthropology, e.g. lineage, patrilineage, matrilineage, personal kindred, ramage, etc.
Indeed it would appear that until quite recently it was rather unusual for the word "family" to mean simply the nuclear family of biological parents and children.
Even now most English people use the word in several different senses.
For example "the members of the family" who gather at a funeral may be related to the deceased in all sorts of different ways but the group as a whole is unlikely to be associated with any particular household or married couple.
With all this variety it becomes almost a truism to say that families exist in all kinds of human society.
But it is a statement that is quite devoid of interest.
So let us go back to marriage.
In ordinary English usage the word "marriage" is used in at least four distinguishable but overlapping senses to refer to:
1.
The legal rights and duties vis-à-vis each other of "husband" and "wife" on the one hand and of "wife's husband" and wife's child"on the other.
Hence marriage provides the children of a woman with a legitimate status in society.
2.
The practical arrangements by which husband, wife and children combine to form a household.
For example, the phrase "their marriage has broken up" refers to the disintegration of the domestic group rather than to the termination of contractual relations through divorce.
3.
The ceremonial (wedding) through which the husband and the wife are put into legally enforceable contractual relations with one another in the first place.
4.
The relationship of alliance which links the two affinally associated "families" which are represented in the persons of the husband and the wife.
At the present time the English tend to play down the significance of affinal relationships but, even so, the statement "she has made a  good marriage" is more likely to refer to the social and financial standing of the husband's immediate kin than to the personal qualities of the husband himself.
In one form or another these different facets of the modern English concept of marriage reappear in most of the cross-cultural examples which I shall mention later though some of the particular forms may strike you as surprising.
But first you need to notice another feature of English marital arrangements which now tends to be treated as secondary even though in the past it was of central importance.
The beginning of a marriage is almost always the occasion for a transfer of valuables in the form of wedding presents, marriage settlements, token gifts.
There is enormous variation in just what is transferred and in who gives what to whom.
Some of the items are highly stereotyped and of symbolic rather than economic value e.g., the wedding ring in contemporary English custom.
But as we saw earlier, the fact that a gift expresses a relationship (as a symbol) does not necessarily imply that it is not also of great economic importance for the parties concerned.
Thus in many African "marriage" institutions, in their traditional form, the husband and his kin made substantial payments in cattle to the male kin of the bride.
The payment was a symbolic expression of the legitimacy of the marriage and of the value that was attached to it.
The higher the payment, the greater the honour to the bride.
From this point of view the appropriate label for the payment is Evans-Pritchard's term: "bridewealth" .
But cattle were also the principal form of economic capital in the societies concerned; the payment was a cost to the payers.
From this latter angle the more usual term brideprice"seems appropriate.
yet it can also be highly misleading.
Christian missionaries at one time tried to have brideprice payments  prohibited by law on the grounds that such payments reduced the bride to the status of a chattel slave!
Those of you who have digested the argument of my last chapter will see why this is quite the reverse of what is really the case.
A chattel slave is a human being reduced to the status of a commodity in the market.
The price that is paid is once for all; there is a transfer of ownership; the new owner has no enduring relationship with the previous owner.
The characteristic of a chattel slave is that he(she) has no recognized kin who have continuing rights and obligations by virtue of their kinship.
But a bride is of the opposite status.
African bridewealth "marriage" establishes an enduring relationship between the husband and his kin on the one side and the bride and her kin on the other."
Brideprice (bridewealth) payments are very seldom made over all at once.
Usually it is a matter of payment by instalments with intervening reciprocities in the form of hospitality and counter-gifts meanwhile.
The enduring relationship is treated as a perpetual debt and is made manifest from time to time by continued gift-giving throughout the duration of the marriage.
As was the case with my more general argument about gift exchange, the two aspects of the transaction, the economic and the symbolic, need to be distinguished.
From the symbolic point of view it doesn't really matter very much in which direction the marriage valuables flow.
Levi-Strauss' thesis that marriage is always a contractual arrangement between groups of males and that the principal valuable in marriage is always the bride herself would imply that, on balance, the other valuables, e.g. cattle, jewellery, money, ritual objects, should move from the wife-takers to the wife-givers.
But this pattern is not always borne out by the ethnographic evidence.
There are cases where, from an economic point of view, the marriage valuables represent the purchase of a husband by the bride rather than vice versa, and the general European pattern, which is met with in many other parts of the world, is for the principal payment to be the bride's "dowry" , a set of assets which she brings with her into the marriage as a part of her inheritance from her own kin.
One of the important variables in such patterns is the degree to which the dowry assets remain exclusively the property of the bride herself and of her future heirs or become a part of the pool of household property which can be used by the husband.
In many such systems the size of the gift is widely publicized within the local community; here once again the greater the size of the gift, the greater the honour to the bride.
And here is one further general point before we start to consider particular examples.
Many of the confusions in the anthropological literature arise from the failure to make an adequate distinction between biological relationship and socially recognized relationship.
Standard textbooks of anthropology usually adopt some version of the formula: "Marriage is a union between a man and a woman such that the children of a woman are the recognized legitimate offspring of both partners" .
It is obvious that such a definition is defective even within the context of ordinary English  usage .
Many English marriages are infertile but this does not invalidate the marriage.
Moreover married couples, whether fertile or infertile may adopt children who are not the biological offspring of either partner and such children are then considered to be the "legitimate offspring of both parents" .
As you will see, definitions of this type fit very badly with the institutions that I shall presently describe.
In most cases the discrepancy arises because "legitimacy" (a social concept) is not tied in with the issue of who is the biological parent of the child.
The rules concerning the possibility of adoption vary very greatly.
Some societies insist that the only genuine relationship between parent and child is the bond established by biology.
But such systems are exceptional.
To suppose, as Levi-Strauss and others have done, that rules about exogamy "those we may not marry" and rules about incest — "those with whom we may not have sexual intercourse" — directly match up, so that one kind of rule can serve as an explanation for the other, is an ethnographic mistake.
My first example, which is very well-known, exemplifies this point as well as a number of the other themes which I have been discussing.
From now on I will use the term "marriage" simply to denote the institution immediately under discussion without prejudging the issue as to whether the different kinds of "marriage" thus presented are or are not members of a single logical class.
Case I. The Nuer (Southern Sudan)
The Nuer are transhumant cattle breeders.
They are organized in segmentary patrilineal lineages.
A contract of marriage entails the transfer of bridecattle from the husband to the male next-of-kin of the wife.
By virtue of the transfer of cattle the woman's biological offspring are ordinarily deemed to be members of the descent group of the husband rather than that of the woman's father; payment of the cattle makes the children legitimate; cohabitation alone does not.
Normally the husband is a living man who is both the original owner of the cattle and also the actual biological father (genitor) of the woman's children, but in exceptional  circumstances the bridecattle may derive from a deceased bridegroom or from a woman owner of cattle.
In either case the original owner of the bridecattle rates as the "father" of the children of the bride.
The identity of the genitor in such cases is largely irrelevant.
The arrangement by which a young man, who dies before he is married, can nevertheless marry and have descendants (provided always that he was the owner of cattle) is rather similar to the biblical institution of the levirate, but the elaboration which allows a woman to become a legal "father" at first seems more peculiar.
It is however perfectly logical.
The Nuer legal fiction is that only men can be the owners of cattle.
However, if a man dies without direct male heirs, his cattle will be inherited by a daughter.
This cattle-owning daughter is then a sociological male.
She can (and should.) marry a wife so as to perpetuate her deceased father's lineage.
The wife (whom she marries with bridecattle in the ordinary way) cohabits with an unspecified outsider, but when the wife becomes pregnant the genitor has no legal standing vis-à-vis the prospective child.
The child's legal father is the woman who paid the mother's bridecattle.
The main point about this example was to show that social roles which speakers of English would ordinarily assume to be alternative titles for the same individual, e.g., "father" , "husband" , "begetter of wife's children" , are not only distinguishable but may be distributed in quite unexpected ways.
This same point about the divisibility of roles which are ordinarily assumed to be interchangeable is further exemplified by my second example which is another piece of classic ethnography.
Case 2.
The "traditional" Nayar (Kerala State, South India)
The Nayar form the dominant cultivator caste in central Kerala.
At the present time their marriage practices are not very different from those of their neighbours though there is considerable diversity in different sections of the community.
The "classical" account, which is summarized below, refers to an eighteenth- rather than a twentieth-century political context.
At that period many of the younger Nayar males were likely to be away from home for long periods of military service.
The royal families of the local principalities were Nayar but many of the major landlords were Brahmins of the Nambudiri caste.
In ritual status they were at the very top of the system and ranked higher even than the kings.
The role of the Nambudiri in the Kerala of that period was rather similar to that of the Catholic church in the Holy Roman Empire of medieval Europe.
The Nambudiri were organized in patrilineal lineages; the Nayar in localized matrilineages known as taravad.
Taravad also denoted the farmstead/joint household of the members of the matrilineage.
In a formal sense a Nayar taravad was the matrilineal equivalent of the patrilineal joint family homestead that is to be encountered in many parts of rural India but with the peculiarity that the incoming spouses (i.e., the "husbands" of the locally domiciled women) had no legal standing.
With rare exceptions complete authority over the affairs and property of the taravad lay with the eldest male, the karanavan.
The other residents who had legal standing were the sisters and younger brothers of the karanavan, and the  children of the sisters and of the sisters' daughters.
The genitors of the children had a recognized standing in relation to their spouses but they visited them only at night and did not take food in the taravad house of their "wives" .
Even this limited access needed the approval of the karanavan.
Although the genitor-lover had no legal or economic rights there were certain public festivals when he would publicly make small token gifts to his "wife" as evidence that he intended the relationship to continue.
The term used to denote the relationship between the girl and her lover was sambandham which in other parts of South India denotes "marriage" of a more  straightforward kind.
It is also the ordinary word for "marriage" in modern Nayar communities where property-owning has become individualised and most of the traditional taravad homesteads have disappeared.
A girl could have a number of sambandham lovers, either at the same time or in sequence.
They could never be of lower caste than herself and the principle of lineage exogamy applied.
The relationship was initiated or terminated with minimal ceremony though it could endure for a lifetime.
A woman's children addressed the man who "was supposed to be their genitor by a term which means" father"in neighbouring communities.
Despite this seeming laxity in sexual affairs the Nayar drew a sharp distinction between the status of an unmarried girl and a mother.
It was highly reprehensible for a young girl who had not been properly initiated into the status of motherhood to become pregnant.
The normal procedure was that, at an elaborate ritual (the tali-tying ceremony) which had to be held before her first menstruation, every girl was "married" to a ritual husband who came from a matrilineage which had the status of enangar in relation to her own.
The enangar linkages between Nayar matrilineages provided a permanent chain of  affinity which linked together all the lineages of similar standing within a neighbourhood.
The relationship was made manifest at the life crisis ceremonials of partner lineages.
An enangar lineage had to provide representatives to attend the naming ceremony of a baby, the first rice feeding in the sixth month, the pre-puberty "marriage" rite of girls, the first menstruation rite of a girl, the first pregnancy ceremony of a woman, and on various occasions connected with mortuary rites and death pollution.
The third of these occasions is the most immediately relevant.
Each lineage had to provide suitable young men to act as "husbands" (enangan) in the tali-tying ceremonials of their enangar which were grand collective affairs held every ten years or so for all the immature girls of the group.
Each such "pre-puberty marriage" lasted three days and nights during which period the couple was secluded together in a room in the ancestral house.
The "marriage" was then terminated by formal divorce.
The enangan had no subsequent special rights either in the girl or in her future children though her children addressed him by a title used as a respectful term for "Father" among some neighbouring groups.
They also had special duties to fulfil at his funeral.
In this case, in contrast to the informal arrangements between an adult girl and her sambandham lover, both the "marriage" (the tali-tying ceremony) and the "divorce" (the cloth-tearing ceremony) were grand public performances.
Their symbolic significance was also very plain.
The tali-tying is a shared feature of most South Indian weddings: the torn cloth showed that the "marriage" was at an end.
There is one further feature of the ethnography which must be mentioned before I discuss the general pattern.
In the patrilineal extended families of the Nambudiri landlord aristocrats only the eldest son was allowed to marry with full  Vedic rites so as to produce legitimate children.
This limitation prevented the continuous fragmentation of the patrimonial estate.
But although the younger sons could not have Nambudiri wives it was quite normal and respectable for them to take women of the matrilineal castes (e.g. Nayar) as recognized consorts.
In Nambudiri eyes these women were concubines; therefore the children belonged to the mother's caste not to the father's caste.
But, from the Nayar point of view, all children belong to the mother's caste anyway and hypergamous unions of this kind were highly prestigious.
The children were treated as fully legitimate members of the mother's taravad.
I have given this Nayar material at some length because it exemplifies such a large number of the themes which I have been emphasizing throughout this book.
Let me draw your attention to some of these features.
If you are interested, as I am, in the symbolic representation of relationships then you must pay close attention both to contrast and to small details.
In stressing the insecure, non-legal standing of the sambandham husband Nayar informants told the ethnographers that the sambandham partner never took food in the house of his "wife" .
The point here is that, in this cultural context, publicly recognized commensality is an index of a relatively permanent bond of relationship.
The complementary contrast is provided by a detail from my own fieldwork experience in North Central Sri Lanka where, despite the absence of any form of lineage organization, much of the ideology concerning marriage is very similar to that encountered in Kerala.
In the Sri Lankan situation "marriages" were distinguished according to whether they were diga (virilocal — wife goes to her husband's house) or binna (uxorilocal — husband goes to  his wife's house).
The marriage in both cases was described as sambandham but, in the latter, the status of the husband was precarious and often very temporary.
When I tried to discover just what was really meant when it was said of a particular girl that she had been "married" in this sense seven times before she was nineteen, I was told that if a girl was seen to be cooking a meal for a man this was evidence that she was "married" to him.
The Nayar case also illustrates my earlier comments on the anthropologists' use of the term "society" and of their attempts to set up typologies of societies of various kinds.
One of the very earliest of these schemes, which has shown exceptional survival value because of its adoption by orthodox Marxists, was the postulate that "matrilineal societies" form a class distinct from "patrilineal societies" and that, in the world scale history of social evolution, the former have always preceded the latter.
However in the Nayar case it is clear that the matrilineal organization of the Nayar taravad only makes sense when it is viewed as a part of the larger society which included the patrilineal organization of the Nambudiri and the military organization of the pre-British South Indian principalities.
It is this larger system, considered as a whole, which is functionally integrated and which was able to reproduce itself within a framework of legitimacy despite the absence on military service of many of the potential genitors of the children.
Matriliny and patriliny are thus complementary rather than contrasted principles and we shall entirely miss the point if we treat the Nambudiri and the Nayar as belonging to different "types" of society.
Another of my themes that is well illustrated by the Nayar material is that the structure of society consists of a network of implicit rights and obligations which link together not only individuals (considered as social persons) but also  larger groups such as households and village communities.
There is also the supplementary point that very commonly the "web-groups that are thus linked together treat their solidarity as deriving from common substance, in contrast to the alliances, which link" we "and" they", which rest on obligations periodically expressed in gift-giving and services.
In the Nayar case the solidarity of the members of a taravad is one of common substance.
They are descended from a common ancestress through female links only and they have been nurtured on food which derives from a common parcel of land.
On the other hand the links which tie the different taravad together through the enangar network, and the links which bond the Nayar to their Nambudiri superiors, are ties of permanent indebtedness which have the characteristics of perpetual affinity.
This is despite the fact that all the more straightforward definitions of "marriage" fail to fit the peculiarities of the Nayar case.
You will notice incidentally that whereas the enangar relationship can be reciprocal because the paired groups are ordinarily of the same social status, the relationship with the Nambudiri, who are of superior ritual standing, is always asymmetrical.
Nambudiri men may cohabit with Nayar women; Nayar men may never cohabit with Nambudiri women.
For my next example I will go back to Sri Lanka for a case which exhibits with particular clarity the general principle that equality of status calls for direct equivalence in reciprocal behaviour.
Case 3.
Traditional marriage ceremonial among upper caste Sinhalese
As with the Nayar example the following ethnography has an eighteenth- rather than a twentieth-century flavour but  weddings of a similar general type can still be observed.
It should be borne in mind that the material comes from the same general cultural context as the young lady who had been "married" seven times before she was nineteen.
The extreme elaboration of the proceedings is intended to emphasize that, in contrast to the kind of marriage which can be entered into or broken off on the spur of the moment, this is a contract which is intended to endure.
It is an expression of alliance between groups of kin rather than a short-term arrangement between two private individuals.
In this respect it is analogous to the Nayar tali-tying ceremony rather than to the Nayar sambandham, except that the bride is physically mature and the ritual husband is her real husband, the presumed genitor of her future children.
In the ideal case the sequence of events was as follows:
1.
The groom's kin opened negotiations with the bride's kin through neutral intermediaries.
2.
Friends of the groom paid a formal visit to the parents of the bride and viewed the bride herself.
The visitors were treated to rice and betel.
1.
A mother's brother of the groom repeated this visit and the horoscopes of the bride and bridegroom were exchanged.
Provided these were compatible an auspicious day was chosen for the wedding.
4.
On the appointed day the parents of the groom sent presents of betel, cakes, fruit, etc. to the parents of the bride.
5.
Later the groom's party set out in three separate ceremonial processions to the home of the bride.
The groom's father with attendants went first followed by the groom's mother and her attendants followed by the groom and his attendants.
6.
Outside the compound of the bride's parents the processions were met by similar processional parties of near  relatives of the bride.
A brother or father's brother of the bride should meet the first group; a sister or mother's sister of the bride the second group; a cross-cousin of the bride the third group.
The bride's parents should not be present at this stage.
(It should be noted here that the groom himself is of necessity a  classifactory cross-cousin of the bride, for the rule is that all marriages must be between kinsmen of the same caste.
All such kinsmen are, from a girl's point of view, either "brothers" or "cross-cousins" and she may not marry a "brother" .
The convention is that the cross-cousin who meets the groom's party at the gate should challenge the groom saying that he, the gatekeeper, has first claim to the girl.
The groom should then pay the gatekeeper a token gift to allow the procession to pass.
This piece of play acting serves to publicize the fact that the forthcoming marriage conforms to the rules of caste endogamy and "incest" prohibitions.)
7.
Between the gate and the decorated central room where the wedding ceremony would take place a ritually clean white cloth had been laid on the ground and the visitors walked on this once they were past the gate.
At the same time a coconut was split in half in honour of Ganesha, the guardian of thresholds.
(The symbolism of both these actions is that of a "rite of separation" in Van Gennep's sense.
The cloth marks a threshold, the boundary between the outside and the inside of a temporarily sacred  precinct .
In Sinhalese imagery the two ends of a coconut represent respectively the penis of a man and the breasts of a woman and the preliminary separation of the two ends is appropriate at the beginning of a wedding which is to unite male and female.
The same coconut rite is a feature of other Sinhalese life-crisis ceremonials, e.g. that which marks a girl's first menstruation; the way the two halves of the coconut fall is taken as an augury for the future of the marriage.)
8.
As the guests stepped off the cloth into the wedding room the business of the coconut was repeated all over again.
9.
In the wedding proceedings proper the mother of the groom gave a valuable cloth and jewels to the mother of the bride; the father of the bride gave a suit of splendid clothing to the groom.
At an auspicious moment the groom threw a gold chain over the bride's neck and presented her with a wedding dress and jewels.
10.
The bride and the groom, now dressed in their new clothes, stood together on a plank covered with a white cloth which was described as a "seed harrow" (poruva).
11.
A mother's brother of the bride then tied the little finger of the bride's right hand to the little finger of the groom's left hand with a gold chain.
They rotated three times on the plank and the chain was removed.
(When Sinhalese thresh their paddy, pairs of buffaloes yoked together are walked round and round the threshing floor at night.
However the seemingly obvious agricultural reference of the symbolism of the marriage poruva and the rotation of the chained couple was not explicitly recognized by my Pul Eliya informants.)
12.
The bride and the groom ate from the same dish.
In Sinhalese imagery this has a quite explicit connotation of sexual intercourse.
13.
There was general feasting by the assembled guests.
14.
A mixed party of kin from both sides, including the bride and the gatekeeper cross-cousin but not the bride's parents, returned in procession to the house of the groom's parents.
At the gate they were met by a close cross-cousin of the groom.
The two cross-cousins exchanged greetings and token presents.
The business of splitting a coconut was repeated.
After being entertained to food the bride's kin departed.
15.
The young couple were now secluded together for a week in a specially decorated apartment.
16.
On the seventh day the bride's mother's brother, who had performed the original poruva ceremony, together with his wife and other relatives of the bride (not her parents) arrived in procession.
17.
The bridal couple again stood on a poruva, this time with their heads covered.
Two new pots were filled with water.
In each pot was placed a gold coin by a representative of the groom who also gave a gold ring to the bride's mother's brother.
At an auspicious moment the latter poured the water over the heads of the bridal couple.
Their head covering was then removed.
(A very similar performance occurs in the concluding stages of a variety of Sinhalese rituals.
The water is intended to wash away the contamination of sacredness of persons who have been acting a priestly role.
If they were not washed in this way they would be a danger to their neighbours on returning to ordinary secular activities.
The potency of such sacredness is supposed to be an emanation from the eyes; hence the covering of the head.
In the case of a bridal couple the ideology is that during the initiatory phase of their marriage the groom and his bride are playing out the roles of a god and a goddess; when they resume their life as ordinary mortals their dangerous divinity must be removed.)
18.
After further feasting the visitors from the bride's home departed.
19.
After an interval of several weeks there were further exchange visits between the two households.
First the bride's parents with attendants visited the newly married couple in their home; then after a further interval the married couple made a similar formal visit to the bride's parents.
It was only at this stage that the dowry of the bride, which would usually have included both jewels and the title deeds to land, was actually handed over by the bride's parents though details of the dowry would have been settled right at the beginning at Stage 1 of the proceedings.
20.
Apart from the various gifts of valuables and food and clothing which marked the exchanges between the principles, there were also certain standard payments in money ) which were made to the washerman who prepared the cloths used at various stages in the proceedings.
The groom paid this money fee to the washerman who decorated the house of the bride's parents; the cross-cousin of the bride paid the fee of the washerman who decorated the house of the groom's parents.
The astrologers who determined the various "auspicious moments" mentioned in my account would also have received a fee, though in what form and from whom I do not know.
From this lengthy account the balanced reciprocity which I mentioned at the beginning becomes very clear but some of you may think that the detail is excessive.
My justification is that the details illustrate a number of quite general anthropological themes which are important quite outside the context of this particular case.
First 1 should explain that my account is a combination of a statement made around 1826 by a Kandyan aristocrat in reply"to an enquiry from the British agent Sir John D'Oyly and of material which I recorded myself in Sri Lanka in 1954.
The high degree of congruence between the two sets of materials shows that D'Oyly's informant was reciting a well-established stereotype.
My alterations to D'Oyly's account in fact "amount to little more than replacing" kinsman of the bride, kinsman of the bridegroom "by" mother's brother "or cross-cousin" as appropriate.
The bedding which I observed at first hand in 1954 in the peasant community of Pul Eliya was nothing like as grand as  the stereotype; but, apart from some minor differences, it had all the same elements and for the most part they occurred in just the same sequence.
This is very much what I would have expected.
Nevertheless the degree to which custom, as directly observed, conforms or does not conform to a predetermined stereotype needs to be looked at very carefully.
If as a fieldworker, you record the "same" myth on two separate occasions, it is very likely that, at first sight, the two versions will appear entirely different.
Yet on closer inspection it will be found that they both contain just the same structural components.
The constituent units may be of quite different length and they may appear in quite a different order and quite different emphases may be given to particular features of the story, but the corpus as a whole will contain the same set of elements.
And so also with ritual performances of all kinds.
If the anthropologist enquires in advance about just what is going to happen, his informants will give him a stereotype.
When he observes the actual performance he may find it difficult to associate what he has seen with what he had been led to expect.
Yet enquiry will show that everything in fact happened just as predicted.
It is simply that a feature, which seemed prominent in the stereotype, may appear insignificant in the performance, and vice versa.
Ritual sequences such as the Sinhalese wedding described above are made up of units which are used rather like the pieces in a game of dominoes.
The units are put together to form meaningful chains of symbolism but the same units may turn up in quite different ritual contexts.
For example, in the case of the Pul Eliya wedding, I was not around to witness the business of pouring water over the veiled faces of the bride and bridegroom which I was told would take place and which is included in D'Oyly's 1828  account.
However, in the same Pul Eliya context, the business of the two pots with the gold coins formed part of the procedure for bringing a spirit medium out of his state of possession, while the business of the head shroud worn by an individual in a state of dangerous sanctity occurred in an elaborate ritual for the painting of the eyes of a new image of the Lord Buddha.
The artist who painted in the eyes gave power to the image but was in turn filled with dangerous emanations which had to be washed off before he could return to ordinary life.
He therefore came out of the temple walking backwards with his whole head covered by a cloth and immediately dipped his head in a basin of water before removing the covering.
The point I am making here is that the interpretation of symbolic action in the context of social relations is not just a matter of inspired hunch.
The logic of the exercise becomes apparent when we observe how the same behavioural detail is used in different ritual contexts.
But what do we mean by same in such an argument?
We are concerned with the quality of relationships as expressed by contrasts rather than with a direct concordance of ethnographic fact.
At the manifest level of observable facts, the differences may be as significant as the similarities.
In the case of mythology the saga teller will always produce a version of the story which puts his own ancestors in a particularly favourable light.
In the case of ritual performance the details sometimes vary simply because the actors have forgotten what ought to happen next!
But differences may also reflect special features in the local situation.
For example, in the case of the wedding ceremony, one of the small ways in which Pul Eliya practice differed from the aristocratic schema described by D'Oyly was that, in Pul Eliya, the washermen were not paid in money but in grain paddy at the end of the year.
The washermen in this system are members of the Hena caste and their caste function is the handling of ritually polluted objects and the provision of ritually clean clothes and pieces of cloth.
Because of their association with pollution they rate "low" in the caste hierarchy.
Sexual relations between a Hena and a Goigama (the cultivator caste of the inhabitants of Pul Eliya) would be considered horrifying.
Nevertheless the Hena villagers, in their ordinary lives, led much the same sort of existence as the Goigama villagers.
In any particular case the link between the Goigama household and the Hena household was permanent and at a personal level relations could be quite close.
The Goigama paid their Hena "retainers" in a formal gift-giving once a year.
The gift took the form of uncooked food, usually paddy.
Two contrasts are involved here.
Gift exchange between fellow Goigama ordinarily took the form of cooked food.
Paddy would only change hands as part of a specific economic debt contracted outside the field of kinship relations.
On the other hand when the Goigama made money payments in return for services or labour it was always to people who were right outside the system such as shopkeepers or Tamil labourers hired on a casual basis.
The fact that D'Oyly's aristocratic informant said that the washermen should be paid for their service with money (ridi) may simply reflect the greater social distance which separated the aristocrats from the Hena, or it could be that, at that date, the distinction between commercial and non-commercial economic transactions had not yet become so clear-cut as it is today.
But D'Oyly's informant still insisted on a difference in kind as between transactions within the caste, that is with kin, and transactions with members of another caste, that is with non-kin.
This is fully in accord with what I have said about the expression of "we/they" oppositions in other contexts.
The Sinhalese wedding case also has general value because it provides an exceptionally clear example of the three-phase structure of rites of passage first recognized by Hertz and Van Gennep around 1908 but which has subsequently been shown to apply to all kinds of social rituals.
The general point is that, in terms of direct experience, the progress of biological time and the distribution of territorial space are continuous.
There is no precise moment or position at which one can say of a particular individual that the child has become an adult or that the man who was outside the house is now inside.
But in social time and social space we make just such distinctions and we do so in a very consistent way.
The social person first moves out of his original position (role)( "the rite of separation" ); he then exists for a time in a liminal condition, a threshold of time and space which is outside the ordinary world of secular affairs and is treated as in some way "sacred" (Van Gennep's "rite de marge" ); finally he moves back into secular society in his new position (role)( "the rite of aggregation" ).
In the first and the third of these phases, roles and statuses are carefully distinguished; in the second they are confused, "we" and "they" are mixed up, behaviour which would be outrageous in ordinary life becomes normal and even obligatory.
In my Sinhalese wedding example, phases 1–5 constitute the rite of separation; phases 6 -15 the "rite de marge" ; 16–20 the rite of aggregation.
Read through the material again and work out for yourself just how closely this three-phase pattern matches that of some "rite of passage" which you know directly from first-hand experience such as a wedding  or a funeral or an initiation/investiture of any kind whatsoever.
But we must move on.
I want now to consider some further aspects of "the creation of legitimacy" which most anthropologists consider to be the crucial function of any institution described as "marriage" .
Our examples do not fit with this formula.
In Case 1 we saw how the Nuer linked legitimacy to the payment of bridecattle; in Case 2 Nayar legitimacy was established by the child's mother being of the proper social age, a "mother" and not a "child" , with the added proviso that the presumed genitor must not be of lower caste than the mother.
But the initiation of a virgin girl into the status of mother "was a" marriage"only in symbol.
By contrast, in Case 3, all Sinhalese children are legitimate members of society provided that the presumed genitor is not of lower carte than the mother.
 "Marriage" , however defined, is not a relevant factor at all.
The dowry of a wife married by formal contract, which moves front the wife's kin to the husband's household, affects the economic prospects of the woman's future children (since they will all have rights in the property of both their acknowledged parents) but is does not affect their legitimacy.
This is important.
Dowry payment in the Sinhalese style is not just the obverse of the Nuer bridecattle which move from the husband's kin to the wife's kin.
But leaving dowry aside, how far is it true that payments of brideprice (bridewealth) from the husband's kin to the wife's kin always serve to "legitimize the children of the marriage" ) As usual the answer is not straightforward.