

Wood Fires
JOHN WYATT
 "The Story of a Man Who Went Back to Nature" is how John Wyatt subtitles his autobiography.
In one sense it's part of every man's dream at some time or other — to make for the country and live off and in nature.
Wyatt made a job of it and is now Head Warden of the Lake District National Park.
Here he describes his early home when he came "back to Nature" .
What I shall always remember most about the hut is the large wood-burning fireplace — and the smoke.
The chimney was a traditional one for the Lake District; a straight, dry-stone cylinder tapering slightly inside as it went up.
If you sat in the fireplace and looked up you could see a disc of sky and several iron hooks in silhouette.
The structure was fine if you wanted to smoke hams or fish, or season walking-sticks; as an accessory to a heat producer it was a failure.
If there was the slightest breeze from any direction the smoke would spread itself evenly between chimney and room in more or less equal proportions, which was why the once white walls had the appearance of very old ivory and the mounted fox heads, hunting trophies which hung on the walls, had a fine coating of brown dust, and their yellow eyes a slightly inebriated, glazed expression.
The smell of the place reminded me of a kipper factory.
I was soon thoroughly cured, inside and out!
At first the wood smoke brought distressing symptoms of choking and crying, and I was continually opening windows and doors — with little apparent effect except to sweep in cold  draughts which swirled the smoke around.
But after a week or so I was acclimatised, and I would laugh at the discomforts of half-asphyxiated visitors.
Strangely, though, the symptoms returned to me every night when I retired to my bunk which occupied a corner of the same room.
I cried like a baby every time I tried to close my eyes.
All my possessions began to smell of smoke; even my better clothes which I kept in a closed cupboard under the bunk.
I soon became a connoisseur of wood smoke.
For fragrance, in my opinion, there is little to match juniper; I would stack this wood aside against the days I had visitors.
Apple and well-seasoned cherry are pure luxury too.
Holly and birch have a clean tang.
Ash, particularly green ash, smells like washing day.
Old oak has an honest, pungent, lusty smell as you would expect.
The other hardwoods are hardly worth a mention smokewise.
The soft woods; pine, spruce or larch are rather vulgar; but there is something to be said for a really old vintage larch root.
Once one gets the taste for smoking wood it is possible to mix and obtain subtle flavours; and invent recipes.
Prepare a fire base of larch kindling; add well-seasoned oak until the logs redden deeply; place one large back-log of holly, and add, from the fire back to the front, one crab-apple log, one of well-dried cherry and one of birch.
An ideal after-dinner mixture…
My daily routine began with wood-cutting for fuel.
There is, of course, a mystique about wood-burning.
Some have romantic visions of crouched and muffled figures dragging log-laden sledges through a savage landscape of snow and ice; frost-bearded Vikings with massive axes, round great fires of pine logs; or raw-boned Northerners squatting over faggot-heated porridge pots.
Many town-dwellers burn wood for pleasure.
One man I know did very well once out of selling "yule logs" by post.
His romantic northern-sounding address, evocative of resinous forest smells and ice-wracked lakes, helped his business more than a little.
His customers were not buying fuel but the magic of dreams and memories of childhood story books.
All wood-burning pundits have their prejudices and the commonest one is against elm.
It will not burn, they say; or it "burns cold" .
Only wych elm grew in the wood and it  burned for me quite well when dry.
For common elm I cannot speak, but the age-old superstition that elm "loveth not mankind" persists.
Does it not, without warning, drop its boughs?
It does.
And is it not the best wood for coffins?
It is.
Yet I knew a Wiltshire man who said that he burned hardly anything else; and it was very fine, he said, when well seasoned.
Ask is the darling of the wood burners.
It cuts well, and splits beautifully, an burns even when it is green; and it is a fast grower.
Alder burns well, dry; but if you use it exclusively you will be sawing all day.
Sycamore and birch, too, burn fast; so for long-lasting stuff you need oak, beech and, best of all, hawthorn: all splendid when well seasoned.
But holly logs are in class of their own.
Yew, too — but this wood is like iron and will break or blunt your axe, your saw, and your spirit.
Of the soft woods pine is good, and larch as well if you in a hurry for a blaze and prepared to roll back the hearth-rug in preparation for the spectacular fusillade.
Wood-burning is so aesthetically pleasing.
Every log, as it is picked up, can be examined as an individual work of art — shape, grain, colour, weight — before being placed carefully on the fire in the correct position, to give its own artistic display of pyrotechnics.
And in an idle moment by the fire's warmth you can take a knife and improve on the art of nature, carving into the wood, or cutting designs into the bark.
Or you can play building and balancing games.
I had to gather kindling too, for storing in a dry place.
Larch and pine logs could be split small and dried by the fire; or kindling could be gathered "raw" .
Holly again would be my first choice.
The thin dead twigs from a holly tree will start a fire even if gathered wet and then merely shaken.
But hollies are rather miserly with their dead twigs, and the only worthy substitute, with a generous yield, is birch.
I have won several bets in my time from workmates, by starting a fire outdoors, in heavy rain, without the use of any dry medium such as paper.
The trick is easy if there are birch trees about; then there is always an abundance of dead twigs which can be snapped easily off the trunks.
From these can be gathered a handful of needle-thin stuff that can be pushed into a pocket while you collect slightly thicker material.
A good pile is made of the birch twigs; then, when all is ready, the handful of needle-thins is taken from the pocket (where they have left much of their moisture), put into the fire centre, and carefully lit with a match.
The wood contains sufficient natural oil to start the fire well.
Once kindled, stroking the fire can be a work of art.
A large back-log is necessary; it should be heavy hardwood — fresh-cut green stuff will do at a pinch — and this acts as a reflector.
Holly is the best, and a good log will burn for two days; a really good green one will last for several days.
The morning fire should be re-kindled from the back-log of the previous day: a smart blow with the poker to break off its embers, small kindling on top of these, a puff with the bellows or breath and she is away.