

It was first love — there had been no time for earlier romance because Nicandra was only eight on April 8th 1904.
She had been christened Nicandra on the insistence of her father who, in his luckier years, had bred and trained and ridden an outstanding winner of that name.
He very much objected to the inevitable contraction of Nicandra to Nico, which seemed to him common.
Perpetually subdued by the rigours of behaviour, and almost unable to express himself outside the vernaculars of Hunting, Racing, Shooting, Fishing and Cricket, he had never been able to make his case against Nico: "Awful, awful" was the best he could do.
It was to her mother that Nicandra clung spellbound in loving (she was born to trouble) since life began.
Love had found its proper expression when she became old enough to repeat little verses her governess taught her, mostly in French, or to stumble ludicrously through songs her mother sang.
She almost knew her performance was good for a laugh, sometimes a kiss.
She was pretty sure of the places to make her baby mistakes.
Few things earned more pleasant congratulation than abstinence: "No thank you," to a second chocolate, and Maman's face lighted gently as she snapped the lid back on the choc box before Nicandra could change her mind.
Her mother's hands were very important — a distant importance for they scarcely ever touched her (old Nan still did up her buttons), or she them; but she felt a longing to  kiss their faintly pink thumbs bite them perhaps, not to hurt, of course.
She enjoyed the faint intoxication in the scent of violet soap or hand cream when Maman pulled her gardening gloves off her warm, dry hands the gloves were gauntlet-cuffed, the right gloves for a very small armoured knight smaller than the suit of armour in the hall, a baby knight.
Love encapsuled every minute they spent together — not many minutes as there was a lot for Maman to do in the day, hours of grown-up stuff which ate up her time.
When she was absent, the shadow of her presence was the assurance of a world of love.
To earn her displeasure was to forgo all delight; through the days Nicandra devised love tokens, as much to stimulate interest towards herself as to express her deep affection.
Nicandra came every morning to her mother's room, accompanying the early morning tea.
Punctually at eight o'clock Lizzie the housemaid, apron fresh and cap on head, carried the tray, large enough to hold two cups, a charming pattern of violets scattered over them, matched by a teapot, also wreathed in violets, and a plate of bread and butter, slices cut as thin as veils, up three flights of stairs.
She knocked quietly, as good discreet housemaids do, on Maman's door.
Nicandra waited breathless for "Come in" to sound, before running to Maman's bed for the first kiss of the day.
Her father would groan sleepily as she hurried her kiss to him through the smell of cigars on his night's breath.
His morning kiss was always rather a trial.
Apart from the smell, there was his gritty chin and his sweeping moustache to repel affection.
Neither could she approve his striped pyjamas, coarse and unpleasing in contrast to Maman's ribboned cambric nightdress.
After kisses, Prayers: God bless Nicandra and kind Maman and Dada, and Aunt Tossie and all of us…
As she prayed, Nicandra squinted through her fingers to watch the  exquisite bread and butter swallowed and followed by gentle sips of tea on her mother's part and grosser gulps from her father's side of the bed.
There was a silver hand-candlestick on each side of the big bed.
Among the stacks of pillows there was not one without its goffered frill.
Nicandra tried to think of something pleasing to say: "Maman, do you think the Little Lord Jesus heard me?" she came out with at last.
 "Of course he did darling." 
 "He's always on the look-out, watching the corner of some covert," her father sounded a bit impatient.
 "Oh give her a lump of sugar," he said; she might have been one of his least favourite horses.
 "It's so bad for her teeth," Maman wailed.
Much as she disliked her pony, Nicandra was undefeatable in her wish to please: "I'll keep it for Ducky," she promised.
She dragged her way slowly towards the door, waiting for Maman to call her back.
Before she had quite shut the door she heard Maman give a tiny laugh, and her voice say"Oh darling, no, not now…
"
She trotted off, content that Dada too had been deprived of something or other.
Good morning with Aunt Tossie was a more comfortable, if a more pedestrian affair.
Before knocking on her door Nicandra had quite a way to go.
Turning her back on Maman's room, and Dada's dressing room, she crossed the pavilion-like hallway — useful only to light the double staircase through its long floor-to-ceiling window.
Passing the proper guest room and its dressing room (where Aunt Tossie did not sleep) Nicandra went halfway down her favourite side of the stair flights to the landing space from which both stairs ascended and descended like swooping birds.
Here a door opened into the older and more modest side of the house, the side where, in stages of inferiority, less  important guests, children and, in a still more distant wing, servants slept.
There was only one bathroom in the wing, the bath in it a classic example of early plumbing furniture.
It was made built rather, for its size was mammoth — of some kind of fortified china, cold as iced marble.
Its great plug was lifted up or dropped down through a tubular cage of brass, and its brass taps gaped wide as the mouths of sea lions.
On either side of the taps, two shells, nearly the size of soup plates, were sunk — the largest cake of brown Windsor soap seemed a wafer in their generous spaces.
The bath was widely rimmed by mahogany, its noble proportions rightly left naked, to descend with dignity into brass claw feet of a proper size.
The hand basin, blue and white china, patterned in a Venetian design, was surrounded by, and supported on, legs of wrought iron with a motif of lilies.
Nicandra thought it might be a good idea to go to the lavatory, next door to the bathroom, rather an adventure as this lavatory was sacred to Dada.
There, sitting on comforting mahogany, she ate both the sugar lumps.
On a plate beside the water plug (a hand-lifted device) Bromo paper was arranged in a semi-circular pattern, kept in place by a white stone.
Lizzie liked perfecting this pretty piece of domestic felicity.
There s always time to make things nice,"she would say with precise pleasure in her voice.
When Nicandra had refastened all three buttons on the placket back of her white drawers, she felt ready to pay her morning visit to Aunt Tossie.
Aunt Tossie, Mrs Florence Fox-Collier, was Maman's (Lady Forester's) elder and widowed sister — widowed for two years but still wearing full mourning regalia.
She knew it became her.
She enjoyed nearly everything, even widow's weeds perhaps most of all widow's weeds, as her married life had not been as exciting as she might have wished, and besides, they were so graceful and pretty.
She ironed their tiny strips of white embroidered cuffs and collars herself, and sewed them on fresh nearly every day.
Now she could fabricate for herself rich and happy memories.
She liked to do that.
She now lived permanently at Deer Forest, family home of the Forester family, fulfilling many useful functions in the household; nothing came amiss to her.
Oddly enough, for one in pseudo-authority, all servants loved her and she liked them and made allowances for their faults and failings.
She enjoyed dispensing their weekly portions from the store room on Monday mornings: a quarter-pound of tea for each that made one and a half pounds and quite enough too; half a pound of butter; one pound of sugar for each and a small tin of Epps cocoa between them all.
Her duties were many, and none of them seemed onerous to her.
She kept her eye on things generally, such as: tactfully suggesting to an under-housemaid (caught out bypassing Lizzie's careful instructions) that pos were meant to be scrubbed till their inner china gleamed, as well as being emptied every morning.
She knew the long list of silver almost by heart and counted it monthly that nothing might go astray.
No dishonesty was suspected, only carelessness.
Brass rods, tethering the red carpet to the flights of the staircase, were importances she never saw neglected.
She loved their pale shining; clean brass was a pleasure, its proper maintenance a pleasure to herself as well as to Lizzie.
Another pleasure was doing the flowers", their arrangement in the drawing room, in the morning room, on the dining room table.
She absorbed praise with delight and laughed off criticism with good humour.
She had a plot of ground in the kitchen garden where no ignorant person could tamper with her treasures.
As well as that, she had a private, unheated, frame for her cuttings.
What more could she want?
The constant diligence she gave was given ungrudgingly.
She never questioned or regretted her position.
She was part of the family.
She had, of course, her private life to maintain.
Some part of her energy was spent inventing her own luxuries  luxuries that preserved a precious self-importance such as: the photograph of herself wearing a train and with presentation feathers in her hair, and the one of Hubert Fox-Collier in full dress uniform, with decorations.
She liked putting things back in their exactly proper places, thus leading to the postponed satisfaction of finding them again, laying a hand on them without thought.
Stockings were rolled; nightdresses folded and piled, sachets between each; camisoles threaded anew with narrow ribbon after every washing all glimmered secretly in a deep drawer.
Gloves were important — always made of chamois leather, white with black stitching, or faintly primrose coloured, soft as kid from careful washing.
They were soaped and stretched on hands and ivory glove-stretchers while drying.
Shoes were kept on wooden trees, never to lose their shape, or seam across with age.
Shoes should be ageless.
Good shoes, made by the right house, were beyond any whim of fashion — a mellowing lifetime lent them extreme quality.
Hair combings from her brush went at once into hiding — a small stoup, designed for Holy Water, concealed their rather sordid twirls — in accordance with the unspoken law that anything ugly should be put out of sight, which applied to more things than hair combings.
One of Aunt Tossie's luxuries was an early breakfast in bed — later she came down to the dining room where she ate a second.
Ignoring the existence of six servants she organized this breakfast herself.
There was a tiny kettle in her room.
Ignorant of the fact that it was Battersea enamel she lit the wick beneath it, well soaked in methylated spirits.
While she waited for the water to come to the boil she put on her boudoir cap to conceal the steel haircurlers (dragon's teeth through the night but never mind that), and her Jaeger dressing-gown (which cost the awful sum of £5), and set forth for her regular deliverance on the lavatory.
This was every morning's adventure, because the idea of meeting her brother-in-law, or any gentleman, on her way to or from her  goal was an excruciating though exciting embarrassment to be avoided at any cost.
Back in bed, breakfast tray on her knees, slowly and attentively she poured out a cup of tea, the cuffs of her nightdress drooping over her hands.
With a gesture almost roguish, as if she slapped a hand away, she tossed the frills back before lifting the lid off the biscuit box (velvet-covered and braided) that stood on her bedside table, to choose from its varied collection the biscuits most suitable for breakfast two crackers and two water biscuits.
She enjoyed the discipline of eating them without butter — the idea of keeping pats of butter overnight in a bedroom was abhorrent to her, incompatible with her picture of herself, swansdown on her bedjacket, broderie anglaise at her wrists, nibbling away in a leisured manner, her widow's weeds for the moment forgotten.
On this and every morning Aunt Tossie greeted Nicandra most agreeably.
"How's my little lamb today?
Done anything naughty yet?"
She gobbled and gabbled in the mornings — that was to do with her teeth, not very pretty either.
But her warm pleasure in Nicandra's arrival was evident.
She was drinking her tea, making a comfortable watery chirrup as her long upper lip drew the tea into her mouth.
Her nightdress was nothing like as pretty as Maman's, no lace, only broderie anglaise the same as edged Nicandra's drawers ( "knickers" and panties"were common words, not to be used.
For the same reason, if you had a pain it was in "your little inside" , not in your stomach — and there were no words beyond "down there" to describe any itch or ailment in the lower parts of your body).
Nicandra felt flattered and amused at the joke about being naughty, but did not comment on it.
I m very well, Aunt Tossie, how are you?"
"Only so-so.
Never mind.
Could be worse.
Be a love and take the cover off Gigi.
Open up.
Let her out.
She's longing for a chat.
Aren't you?
Bless you.
Dear one.
Yes."
The parrot crawled, more an animal than a bird, out of her cage and, helped along by her powerful beak, climbed the various terraces of Aunt Tossie's bed until she reached her pillow where she crept along by shoulder to neck.
There they made love together.
"How's my darling?
Slept well?
Warm enough?
Quite sure?
You are a happy bird.
Aren't you a happy bird?
Promise?"
Each enquiry was answered by a smothered croak of love.
 "You do think she loves me, don't you?" 
Aunt Tossie asked anxiously.
 "Yes, Aunt Tossie, of course." 
Nicandra's answer was inattentive.
During the parrot's walkabout her eyes had been focused on the chocolate biscuit in silver paper protruding slightly from under Aunt Tossie's third and last pillow.
"I get you — the chocky bic.
Do have it.
Please.
You know how I need a bit of comfort in the night.
And bring me my mouth-organ, if you would.
Over there— on the dressing-table."
Aunt Tossie's dressing-table was a picture of proper arrangement, quite unlike her tumbled bed, or the pink satin corset playing fast and loose with the long slit drawers thrown together on a tapestry chair — a chair covered in great beaded roses, laughing at the fun, over one arm black lace stockings trailed negligent as if there was no tomorrow.
In marked contrast, on the white embroidered cloth of the dressing-table lay an ivory family: a hair brush, a hand mirror, two clothes brushes, one soft, one hard.
In the centre of each was a monogram in gold, the lettering shaped like a small shy coronet.
The mouth-organ, big and bright, seemed rather out of place in this quiet company.
Somehow it was more in keeping with all the rather dirty diamond rings, hooked on to and falling around a ring stand in pink china, matched by its china tray, candlesticks, and small boxes for goodness knew what trivial uses.
Nicandra picked a ring from the china tree, a dark blue stone surrounded by diamonds.
The setting that clawed them was as dirty as old teeth.
 "Oo, Aunt Tossie," Nicandra felt very adult pointing out the dirt with disgust and pleasure.
"Yes my darling, aren't they filthy?
They'll be yours some day unless Mummie hurries up with a little brother.
Come along with my organ — Gigi loves a tune."
While she ate her chocolate biscuit Nicandra shared Gigi's enjoyment of the familiar air: Yip-I-Addy-I-Ay, I-Ay, Yip-I-Addy, I-Ay.
Aunt Tossie just failed to reach her top note on her mouth-organ.
She put it down and sang…
 "I don't care chat becomes of me, So long as they sing me that sheet melody, Yip-I-Addy, I-Ay, I-Ay, Yip-I Addy, I-Ay, I-Ay." 
The parrot joined in with a screech of pleasure.
"Hear that?
Clever girl, aren't you?
Isn't she? "—" Yes isn't she, Aunt Tossie, Nicandra agreed.
She was never enthusiastic about successful performances other than her own.
She wandered back to the dressing-table and stood fiddling and picking over every little object on it.
A diamond ring on almost every finger, she approached Aunt Tossie again.
"They are dirty aren't they?
Not like Maman's, are they?"
 "Much better actually — I must put them away in my jewel case, mustn't I?" 
Aunt Tossie paused — in the pause she saw the fat unfriendly child she loved, only approachable when disconsolate.
Once more her eyes consumed the beauty of that sad face — she saw its fruit-like quality (Aunt Tossie loved nectarines) but it was an unripe fruit she saw, greenish in its pallor.
The blonde hair, blonde as barley, streaked its growth into points and levels of untidiness — no  coquetry: no curls.
And no touch of tease or laughter in the long grey eyes, eyes set so far apart that they belonged more to the temples than to the full face.
Under the dark blue pleated skirt and the white drawers, brown woollen stockings were anchored to a liberty bodice; under the bodice and the Jaeger combinations, long-sleeved, Aunt Tossie could see the hairless breastless body of a child.
The thought of it filled her with an immense regret because a child could not stay a child there would be men (a man she hoped) in Nicandra's life, Aunt Tossie thought with pity and some disgust — her mind scampered hurriedly from the contemplation of a subject not forbidden so much as not existing for her.
She spoke again, unaware of the change in her mind: ".
And you'll help me clean up my jewellery, won't you?
I don't quite trust anyone with that job, and they must go back into their box.
Run along to the kitchen and ask Mrs Geary if she has some bread-soda with a bit of fizz in it — we shall have fun, shan't we?
Bread-soda is magical.
We'll see these dirty diamonds shine."
Nicandra pounded down the second flight of the back staircase leading to the ground floor — here one imposing door marked the entrance to the hall, another was the service door into the dining room.
Leaving this area of the house behind her, she ran down the passage as far as the open pantry door.
Here she stopped to watch old Twomey the butler shaving himself with a cut-throat razor.
It did not strike Nicandra as odd that last night's dinner dishes were still lying under the water into which flakes of soapsuds and hair were falling.
She watched the rhythmic strokes of the razor for a moment, then turned her attention to Twomey's own cat which was miaowing and writhing uncomfortably in the wooden wine case which was her quiet bed.
 "What's wrong with Patsy-Budding, Twomey?" she asked.
I think she has a nasty pain in her little inside."
She peered closer.
 "Oh, Twomey, Twomey, she has a kitten in her box." 
 "Out now, out, Miss Nicandra," Twomey turned on her, not surprisingly, for they were not always the best of friends.
He looked very unlike his usual tidy self, his collarless shirt changed him completely, so did the ruffling lather on his chin.
She knew he was hiding something from her about the cat, something nasty, that should not be spoken of, she was sure.
She slunk out of his pantry backwards.
She was on the edge of some nasty secret.
 "I won't tell on you if you don't tell on me," Twomey called after her.
What about?
What about?
Her mind raced round forgotten slips into wrongdoing of her own.
For Twomey to have erred in any way was unthinkable.
The end of the passage brought her to the head of the kitchen stairs the head of a mine-shaft.
Here stone steps, with narrow iron rails, plunged downwards to the basement, a great world of industries and mysteries, a dark place where windows peered up the sides of a steep area.
It was in this dusk, prevailing even on a summer morning, that the throes of cooking came to their birth.
Agnes Geary, something between a witch and a midwife, was the cook.
She was often fierce and always strange, but she was kind and big-hearted in her way.
 "Bread-soda?" 
Mrs Geary made it sound a quite unorthodox request.
"Haven't you a great cheek to go looking for bread-soda at this hour of the day?
In the name of God who wants it?"
She was breaking an egg into a curl of boiling, salty water — the top of the big coal range glowed under a copper saucepan.
Pieces of buttered toast were arranged in a regular pattern on a silver dish — four slices awaiting their crowning with four perfect eggs.
 "Aunt Tossie wants it she wants it now." 
Don't annoy me, child.
I have my breakfast to cook and today's the day of the Two Thousand Guineas, I can't keep my mind on everything at the one time."
Well as she knew Mrs Geary's concentration on the main events of the flat racing season, Nicandra persisted: "It's to clean her diamonds." 
 "Jesus, Mary and Joseph, pity her simplicity, she'll only turn them jewels green — tell her I said so, tell her that's what I said — and say Mr Twomey and myself have a fancy for the Aga Khan's in the 3 o'clock." 
 "Oh please, Mrs Geary — I'm going to help her, it would be such fun." 
Mrs Geary paused, as a musician might pause for a climax, while the water in her saucepan regained its just heat.
She cracked an egg, exact as a pistol shot, and watched its white fold inwards to cover the yolk preciously again.
Then she looked up: "There's not a grain of soda in this kitchen.
It'll be here some time all right, it's on Hanlon's list and today's their day to deliver if the old horse is able, tell her."
"Oh well, thank you.
I'll tell her."
After she left the kitchen, Nicandra delayed her disappointing return to Aunt Tossie by a wander in the lower regions where the doors to other domestic businesses opened out of the kitchen passages.
She could hear Breda, the under-housemaid, Lizzie's supplementary, and Peggy, Mrs Geary's slave, murmuring and giggling in the laundry — their jokes were beyond her.
As well as that, the laundry was a steamy, rather smelly place where sheets were stewed in the boiler and then hand-scrubbed on a ridged board and further rinsed and processed before they progressed in a wooden tub, a girl at each handle, to hang under the sun or the rain in their private drying ground, screened by laurel and flowering currant from the sensitive eyes of the gentry.
The dark passage-ways of the basement had other doors with interests behind them.
The boot-and-brushing room, where Twomey did the hunting clothes and Dada's clothes and boots and shoes; a lesser room for lamps and other  people's boots and shoes.
In the game larder, pheasants and duck and partridge hung by their necks in winter time, and bunches of snipe waited, pin-eyes closed, to be plucked — once Nicandra picked up a little bird, too mangled to hang in the bunch and faced him with a fellow.
She walked them towards each other, their clawed feet bent stiffly inwards, on the cold slate shelf: "How did you get shot, little brother?" each asked the other in a high child's squeak of imitation.
No dead birds in the larder in springtime.
Possibly a salmon.
Nicandra looked in.
No salmon.
Why not?
Dada was on the river yesterday.
The dairy, when you could have it to yourself, was a far more entertaining place than the laundry, and less lonely and special than the game larder.
The game larder was a man's place; it had an affiliation with the billiard room, certainly with the gun and rod room — both on the upper floor.
An altogether lighter atmosphere pervaded the dairy.
For a start, there was the fountain, about the height of a squat sundial, and crowned by a lily; you turned on a tap, pumped energetically on a foot pedal for a minute or two, and water gushed pleasingly from the lily's gaping mouth.
The fountain was the centre-piece of the dairy, circled by a grey marble basin into which the water splashed with a mild exactitude, never exceeding the allowed space for its reception.
Heavy slate slabs ran round the walls — on some pans of milk were set and left to stand until cream rose to the surface, on others there were pounds of butter, ridged by wooden "butter-hands" and stamped with swans, which sweated cold salt like beads or tears to their surfaces.
A wooden churn, big as a barrel, tipped empty on its trestle.
It stood, open and scoured, to breathe the air that purified it from any hint of sour milk.
Eggs were stored here too.
One basket was for the house; a different basket held larger eggs, chosen to be set for hatching.
For winter time, when hens were cold and idle, great crocks of waterglass stood, massive, under the lower shelves to receive and  preserve eggs for cooking — scrambling, perhaps, never poaching or boiling.
Nicandra looked forward to Sunday mornings when she had a soft-boiled egg for breakfast — on weekdays it was porridge and milk, take it or leave it, sometimes fried bread, the fat not always bacon.
Breakfasts in the holidays, when Mademoiselle had gone back to France and Nicandra to old Nannie in the nursery, were of even poorer quality.
Mrs Geary had a low opinion of Nannie a spy and reporter when she wasn't mending the sheets and darning the stockings, and at all times a pensioner to be despised and deprived whenever possible.
Back with her bad news for Aunt Tossie, Nicandra found an empty room and a cold bed with its sheets and blankets turned over its brass footrail and Gigi sulking in her cage.
Aunt Tossie must have gone to the Place, or the bathroom.
In either case she would take her time.
Aunt Tossie never hurried.
To hurry was to dispel any feeling of luxury.
She pondered kindly over all her actions.
Nicandra, on the contrary, hurried from one kind act to the next with undivided concentration and energy.
Now she would feed her pigeons, the fantails whose cote was in the stableyard.
Her special pigeon was a hen, one of a pair.
It had been a birthday present from Anderson, the land steward from Scotland, whom she dearly loved and hoped to marry — if he was still single when she was sixteen.
Anderson was not like the other men on the place.
He was in authority over them and in a class above them.
He dressed differently too — he wore a collar and tie while their shirts were collarless.
He was tall and thick as a tree.
Under the peak of a cap his green eyes shot long glances aware of any trouble or any fun that was going.
He kept  the cock pigeon for himself.
Their shared ownership of the pigeon family and its brood gave Nicandra a happy importance, lending strength to her in her prolonged controversy with Fagan.
Fagan was the gloomy little stud-groom who objected strongly to the pigeons' custom of sitting on his horses' sheeted backs, balancing and cooing, and doing other things as well.
Fagan was standing at the door of the feedhouse when Nicandra approached him, as saucily as she was able, to demand handfuls of grain for her birds.
 "I have the whole damn lot of them fed." 
 "Oh Fagan, why?" 
 "To keep them off my horses' backs and their dirty droppings out of my horses' feed." 
 "They won't want to talk to me now." 
It's a pity about you, Miss Nicandra."
Fagan turned away.
It was in vain that Nicandra cooed and called.
The pigeons, puffed, sullen, full of oats and spring thoughts, kept their distance.
When they needed her there was no familiarity too close for them to keep as they brushed their feathers against her cheek and went toppling along her arms to eat out of her hands — then she could feel they loved her.
Today they cared only about themselves.
She would insist.
She would bribe them with love: "Just a handful, a small handful, Fagan," she pleaded.
 "They have too much already." 
He was not to be persuaded.
Fagan was a bleak and determined little man, tidy and forbidding as only an ex-steeplechase jockey can be.
There was melancholy in all his remembrances, hardly a gleam of satisfaction, even though he had ridden a few unexpected winners in his time.
He wore a neat thread of a handkerchief round his neck which somehow conveyed the idea of important days behind him, but nothing was left from those days except arthritic hips and old concussions, their reminders of sensational falls ever-present.
Now that he had only hunters to school and exercise and Mrs Geary  (who loved the lads) to feed him well, no question about his weight, life was kind and easier; but he was the last to admit it and showed sympathy to nobody, least of all to Nicandra.
 "What about my poor old Ducky," she changed her demands from the pigeons to her pony.
"Just a spoonful for her.
Oh, please, she's always hungry."
"If you give that little rat so much as a teaspoonful you're the one who'll know all about it when she soars into the air with buck, lep and kick.
Who's going to hit the ground then?
Tell me that."
Nicandra turned her back on Fagan, and on two kind deeds frustrated.
The morning was growing, lengthening into a day, a long day to be filled with acts of kindness.
 "Little acts of kindness, Little deeds of love, Make the world around us Like the Heaven above." 
Nannie had taught her that one, and she felt it was very true.
On this bright morning she was especially inspired to follow any clue leading to almost any little act of kindness or deed of love.
She thought of the dark corner in the kitchen garden where discarded violets grew, pallid, but obstinately scented as strongly as their pampered descendants, grown in glassed-over frames and raised on beds of leaf-mould.
Here, near the two fig trees, she would pick a little bunch, and Maman would sniff at it while she was eating her breakfast.
At one end of the stableyard the walls of the kitchen garden joined the backs of the loose boxes — an archway crowned by a belfry was built across the carriage-way leading out of the yard to the great swirl of gravel in front of the house, and onwards down the avenue.
Before the archway came the garden gate — a modest green door.
Close beside it steps ran up to the door of Fagan's flat, which  formed a part of the hay and straw loft.
There was no water in the flat, no lavatory, no bath or sink.
None of these lacks had any significance for Fagan.
Fagan "managed" tidily.
The garden ran uphill.
On one side a stream, full of watercress, hurried down to pursue its tunnelled course through and beyond the stableyard.
The half-acre of kitchen garden was as full of lilacs and wild raspberry canes, unpruned morello cherries and azaleas reverting easily to their ancestry, as it was of vegetables.
Asparagus, ignoring the growth of weeds, sank its serpentine roots far down to where bones, once carrying flesh for foxhounds, now formed the foundation for the greatest asparagus beds in the county; its spears were famed for their luscious, indecent appearance, when served at Sunday luncheon parties from early May to the end of June.
Peonies and the smaller varieties of shrubs grew in a long border, stuffed with other treasures and backed by apple trees, grown espalier.
Carefully grasping a fat little bunch of violets, Nicandra left the heavy dusk of the fig trees behind her and walked in sunlight along the length of the flower borders.
As she went she arranged her violets: "Put their feet together, dear, and the flowers will fall into a pretty natural shape," she had been told; not so easy to achieve when neglected violets had such short legs.
She did her best, and bound the stems tightly together with a thread split from a New Zealand flax — nothing must delay her now, or breakfast in the dining room would be over.
But something did delay her; she stopped and stood to stare at a marvel of nature, so strange as to suspend belief.
Admittedly, it was a rather small marvel, but one of such grotesque rarity as to excite the deepest interest, and to earn the highest possible commendation for its discoverer.
The marvel sat, in its quiet perfection, on the scented, firmly rounded flowerhead of a white viburnum, its four upfolded wings trembling a little under the early sun: it was a double butterfly.
Quietly as a cat stalking a bird, Nicandra approached the heavily blossoming viburnum (first, of course, disposing of the violets; luckily there was a pocket in her pinafore); she very much doubted the possibility of picking the viburnum without disturbing its phenomenal occupant.
Holding her breath, she forced her nails through the softer stem below its blossom she held it with delight and relief at the sight of the still clinging butterfly.
She covered it with her other hand, then, fearing that a hot hand might be enervating, she opened her fingers just wide enough to let in a little air and light.
When she peered through her fingers it seemed to her that the butterfly was quite happy in its warm cage: not a flutter from its four wings as she proceeded carefully along the box-edged paths that led back to the green garden door.
She crossed the stableyard and went into the house, hurrying down the long passage until she arrived, flushed high in expectation, at the service door to the dining room, where Maman and Dada and Aunt Tossie were eating breakfast.
Nicandra opened the door wide and stood a moment, attentive to the breakfast silence into which she was about to break.
Maman sat, her back to the light, lovely as usual with the morning sun in her piled-up yellow hair.
Impossible to connect such beauty as hers with the enjoyment of food.
Aunt Tossie, now in the full regalia of her widow's weeds, was eating heartily but in a subdued way.
Her usual chuckle, hoarse as a nesting pheasant, was silent.
She lifted her enormous Spode coffee-cup with both hands.
She sighed when she set it back in its saucer — and sighed again with pleasure as she bent over her poached egg.
Dada, small and unapproachable in the breakfast silence, gave his absolute attention to the kedgeree that he was pushing tidily under his great moustache — little did they suspect the surprise in store for them as Nicandra advanced, speechless, down the length of the white-clothed table, solemn in her pinafore, carrying her now quivering treasure.
She herself was taut and quivering too — awaiting the cries of amazement, curiosity and wonder that she was about to release.
The big moment came: she opened her hand and laid down the burdened flower by Maman's plate.
"Look!
Look what I found for you!"
Maman looked, but did not speak.
Dada and Aunt Tossie looked, and were silent too quite naturally, they were all too stunned to utter a word.
Nicandra waited.
At last: "A freak, I suppose," Maman spoke without interest, but somehow conveying distaste she put down her coffee-cup and looked across the table.
Complying with her appeal, Dada abandoned his kedgeree and, sucking his moustache inwards always with him a sign of annoyance he picked up the viburnum, still with its precious burden, opened the bottom sash of a long window, and flung out the double butterfly as viciously as if it had been a slug in the salad.
When he sat down again to finish his kedgeree Aunt Tossie gave him quite a funny look, and burst out laughing.
 "Shut up, you prurient old thing," he said shovelling in his kedgeree — salmon kedgeree, Nicandra noticed.
There followed a silence that Nicandra could neither interrupt nor question — they were the Grown-Ups.
Somehow she had erred in deed or manners.
Maman spoke at last: "Have you fed your bantams yet?
Take them this nice scone — and hurry, dear,"she added as Nicandra lingered.
Bewildered and cast down as she was, Nicandra managed a few skipping steps — this jolly movement her evidence that she was not in a state of unattractive sulks.
Out through the service door again, she skipped her way along till she reached the narrow vestibule at the foot of the double stairway and from there proceeded through the entrance hall, where her skipping lapsed.
The hall was not the place for little pounding feet.
It was large, cold, uninhabited — a place as set for arrivals or departures as any railway station.
This relationship with steam trains was scarcely lessened by the portraits of lesser ancestry on the walls, the mahogany chairs with crested  backs, the fireless marble chimney-piece, and all the shining brasses.
For the family it was a place to traverse when coming in or going out: familiar, unnoticeable.
Once through the hall door, massive under its fanlight and fitted with a brass lock as big as a bible, and down the steps on to the gravel, Nicandra changed back into whatever sort of purposeful animal all the long-sustained acts of kindness and thoughts for the happiness of others had left in her.
She ran, sharp and sly as any fox, round the corner of the house and on, beneath the three windows of the drawing room and two of the morning room, until she stopped, chilled in anxiety, under the open window of the dining room, through which her marvel had been cast out.
Flaccid and vacant on the gravel lay the viburnum flower; its double burden had flown.
Parting the thorny pyracantha which spread an orderly growth, regular in its production of white flowers and orange berries, to this level of the window-sills, she searched, meticulously and in vain.
Voices from the breakfast table came to her through the open window.
 "Should we have said something?" 
 "You missed quite an opportunity." 
That was Aunt Tossie.
"Oh not at breakfast.
Too nasty."
 "Rather interesting I thought." 
That was Dada.
"Obviously the bitch had turned.
She can be quite tiresome at times."
 "Beautiful as well." 
That was Aunt Tossie.
 "Not even pretty." 
 "And never will be." 
That was Aunt Tossie again.
 "Plain beautiful; that's all." 
"Oh steady on…
If she was a horse I wouldn't buy her…not on looks…have to be performance."
No point in listening.
Not one word about the butterfly, or her cleverness — only grown-up talk.
Even to the clear hearing of childhood Dada's language was difficult — this time the word"bitch, a forbidden word, stood out like a sore thumb.
Although it could not, in any way, be connected with  her butterfly, its force lingered, linking up with the rejection of her act of love.
At the age of eight, through an incorporate resilience, slighted confidence restores itself.
The life of a day is full of chance and sudden changes.
The hours of liberty are long, full of wonder and narrow escapes, precautions, hidden devices and daring.
There was the bull in the river field to be avoided, the idiot boy in the Gate Lodge to tease until his frenzies frightened her and she had to run.
Now there was her bantam hen to visit that tame favourite who sat on her head when she walked into the drawing room, the admiration of all, whose food she sometimes nibbled at.
Only yesterday Nicandra had found the nine white eggs, distanced from the ordinary into magic by the wild nest her bantam had chosen to build in a broken flowerpot beneath a Ponticum rhododendron, well away from a wire compound, the night-time enclosure of the bantam flock.
Carefully and with love the nest full of eggs and the dozy hen sitting on them had been removed from the wild to a neat little coop in civilization and safety, every convenience for the hatching mother attended to with particular care.
Cheered and keyed up in expectation of the pleasant story-book sight in prospect, her hot hand squeezing the scone in her pocket, she followed the path as it passed under the line of windows, before it skirted the domed conservatory where flowers were grown for the house: cactus, geraniums, gloxinia, palms, bird of paradise, passion-flower, maidenhair fern, all throve here in damp and forceful luxury.
Best of all, her own and the gardener's favourite, calceolaria, puff-jawed, tiger-striped and spotted, flowered each year more grossly perfect.
After its dignified circling of the house and the conservatory followed by a dive into a tunnel of laburnum and lilac, the path became meaner, more secret.
Taking its way along the high sad wall confining the stableyard, it crossed, by a minute stone-walled bridge (gateposts in exact relation to its height and arch were built into the walls tight as ingrowing toe-nails), the same stream that hurried down the garden hill.
With lavish indiscretion the stream was at one point crossed by the baby bridge and, fifty yards further, went underground on its way to feed the sliver of still water called "The Lake" .
Nicandra took the path leading away from pleasure-garden policies, through heavy laurels and on into a grove of hazels patched with sunlight.
Here dear Anderson had built a retreat for her bantams — there was no man kinder or more trustworthy.
The bantams were waiting for her to let them out of their safe house.
They were in her power and at her discretion in all ways — how she loved them.
She could deny them nothing — they sometimes died from overfeeding.
Today they scattered out, bright as Mandarins, then came running back to her, importunate for food.
She turned from them: "Just a minute, chicks," her voice was warmly imperative, its tone taken from Aunt Tossie at the store room door, before, after a suitable delay, she dealt out a rock of coffee sugar to a waiting child.
Using the same pace and gestures, and wearing something of Aunt Tossie's expression, she scattered measured handfuls of grain before bringing a special handful, with all her warm and kindly thoughts, to the mother bird in her secluded nesting-place, so comfortable, so well-arranged.
DO NOT DISTURB was in her attitude as she squatted down in front of the coop and bent to peer in, navy-blue skirt rising above white cotton knickers…
She fell forwards in dismay — no bird sat there, hot feathered breast spread low over her clutch.
The deserted nest, neat as a pin, had a forlorn accusing air.
The small eggs, when she held them, one by one, in her hand  and against her cheek were as chill as glass.
A deep sense of another's ingratitude invaded her — she found this foolish light-minded bird quite detestable in her desertion, in her stupidity and folly, in her lack of recognition of the comfort and safety arranged for her own good, contrived and given with heartfelt care and love.
Tears running down her face, she put the eggs back in their nest a false picture of natural felicity.
They could never hatch now — or, could they?
Anderson would know.
Perhaps, if there was a common broody hen in the yard, she might be a steady foster-mother.
There would be no wild charm in the situation — with her own thought and skill to tame the dangers — but a possible way out of the present disaster.
Anderson, kind and dear, would have an answer.
Her eggs might still be hatched.
On her way to the consultation she hesitated and turned off the path into the hazel thicket where yesterday the treasure had quietly nested.
Sitting on stones under the same rhododendron a small bird spread her wings and dozed.
 "You fool, you fool!" 
Nicandra screamed at her, while some mortal sympathy forbade her to hunt the bird from her barren nest.
Renewed tears flowing, dirty hands in dirty pockets, she ran from that terrible, disloyal little hen — ran as fast as she could to find Anderson, with his promise of comfort and sound advice.
Back down the changing pathway, hazel to laurel, laurel to laburnum, laburnum to high walls, then the bright conservatory and all the long windows of the house; past the terraces falling leisurely on her right hand, then along the back avenue she was still running and crying.
The back avenue was a secondary way from the house, only as wide as a street, it ran between a shrubbery and a park-like field until it reached the farmyard wall.
The wall's length was broken by a green wooden doorway, for the house to use, beyond which, gates admitted carts and horses, cattle, sheep and such stuff from the fields.
Nicandra had to jump her  best to reach the latch on the friendly green door.
When it lifted, the door, with her weight against it, swung wide open…
Anderson, half turned from her, was standing across the way.
On the ground a sheep lay, its four feet tied together, its head flat on the stones, held down between Anderson's boots its white, frightened eyes were turning upwards Anderson stood above it.
His raised hands were somehow triumphant.
He was edging a knife on a scythe-stone.
His green eyes gleamed with pleasure as they started towards her.
He didn't have to tell her to go, she ran away so fast.
She knew she would never be able to love or trust again — she would always remember the wild pleasure in Anderson's bright, expectant eyes.
What she had seen was indecent and terrifying, and she could tell her fear to nobody.
It was a secret as dark as that couplet (written in pencil on the back page of "First Lessons in English Grammar" ) read over and over and never to be spoken aloud: "Pee-Po-Bum-Shit-Piddle-Bugger-Damn" Keep out of the farmyard was all the grown-ups would say if she told, it's not the place for little girls…
They needn't say that again.
The placid green door was the way into Bluebeard's cupboard.
She was enclosed in a darkness where ignorance had no answers and she had no questions ready to ask — wandering back up the empty driveway, kicking a loose stone for company, on this bright and gloomy morning.
She included in her discontent each miscarriage of her own generosity, but nothing was so bad as what she had seen in the farmyard.
It was not so much the death of a sheep that had shocked her.
It was Anderson's wild pleasure in what  he had to do.
She was alone with her shaken heart and her rejected gifts.
Then, as light follows darkness, she saw Maman coming down the drive.
She wore her lilac coat and skirt, braided with deeper lilac; the skirt widened at the hem and floated out over thin boots, the tidy laces criss-crossing on shadowy ankles there was something playful in Maman's way of walking, something jaunty that swayed her hips, and made her straw hat tilt up on her frizzed curls…
From the shrubbery side of the avenue fresh wet heads of lilac bowed over her, heavy in their prime flowering.
She lifted her arm to catch at a branch and, as she held it down, rainwater fell on her face her eyes were shut; it was as if she was drinking the scent of lilac.
Nicandra ran towards all that beauty — although she could not tell her trouble nor make any mention of the displeasing butterfly, she could be close in the adored distance.
"Where are you going?
Can I come too?"
 "Oh, darling, perhaps not just now," Maman parted a sticky strand of Nicandra's green-blonde hair and looked at it sadly for a moment.
 "Maman has to talk to Anderson — a boring old business talk — no fun for little girls." 
Don't go now wait don't go yet,"Nicandra took a handful of lilac skirt and pulled it backwards.
She could not find words to convey what she had seen, any more than she could say aloud "Pee-Po…" and the rest.
Maman retrieved her skirt sharply: "Please, Nicandra, don't be tiresome.
Run along to your banties go and play."
She took her by the shoulders and turned her round to face the house.
She gave her a tiny push.
"Off you go!
Keep running,"she laughed.
 "I'm watching you," she promised.
But when Nicandra looked over her shoulder Maman was not watching her.
She was running, running towards the green door.
Something white flew out of her swirling  skirt as she ran, fluttered its way, unnoticed, to the ground.
A handkerchief?
An envelope?
It didn't really matter much — it was an opportunity to seize on, to keep and cultivate for its potential usefulness: what a useful child…thank you, darling…
It was an envelope.
Next: here comes Dada, neat little Dada, small as a doll on one of his big horses, coming nearer down the drive, stopping his horse gently, quietly turning in his saddle towards her, easy and rather grand, as he never looked on his feet.
As usual, he had nothing much to say, but he was always agreeable.
 "What are you doing?" he asked.
 "Playing," she answered sadly, fiddling with the envelope in her hand.
 "Posting letters?" he laughed.
"No.
Maman lost it — oh go and get her Dada, she's in the yard and Anderson — I don't know what Anderson's going to do to her."
She was crying and jumping up and down.
The young horse took a horrified plunge away from the crazy little object.
Dada swore at him as he pulled the bit through his teeth before he could get his head up.
He bent towards Nicandra.
"Give me the letter.
His words were rough as when he swore at his horse.
Nicandra shrank away — she was not at all courageous about horses, especially when they were fidgeting threateningly and blowing out through their noses at the same time.
 "I'll keep it safe, Dada." 
 "You heard what I said." 
He got off his horse and took the letter gently out of her hand.
She knew he despised her.
Not a word as he put his foot back in the stirrup iron (only stable boys and jockeys jump up from the ground) a hand across the saddle-tree, and he was up, quick and certain as a fly landing.
She watched him ride on, past the lilacs, past the green door and on towards the main gate to the farmyard.
She was more than dispirited now, grudging the loss of that letter.
No stamp on it.
No address, so Maman  would have been delighted to recover it — all thanks to her observant little girl.
There would have been a grateful kiss, kisses, perhaps.
Now the cumulative effects of her morning's efforts turned sour on Nicandra.
Disappointment surged through her.
She had done everything to please her loved ones: violets laboriously gathered — she squeezed their overheated remains in her pocket: the double butterfly, so unkindly rejected and expelled; the pigeons, sated and uncaring before her own hands could minister to their hunger and earn their cooing gratitude.
No gratitude came from feathered friends.
Shock and disappointment joined in the recollection of a nest of cold deserted eggs.
Surely such a sensible little bird, a bantam so civilized as to sit gently and happily on the head of a human child, should have known that her removal from an ill-chosen resting place, in the wilds of hazel and rhododendron, was for her own good and safety?
She ought to have known.
She should have accepted a comfortable change for the better.
At the same time, a nasty backward glance, a creeping suspicion suggested a consultation with Anderson might have been a wise idea before taking the practical action that had ended in such discouraging disaster…
But now the very thought of Anderson was abhorrent.
She had seen what she had seen — she would always see it, and could never tell it.
What now?
She knew a miserable distaste for the day that loomed ahead.
Nicandra could not name Depression, but she had a cure for it: teasing Silly-Willie at the West Gate Lodge.
Any social contact with Silly-Willie was strictly forbidden.
He was six years old, but had no more sense than a child of three.
He was her perfect victim.
The West Gate Lodge was quite a distance from the farm avenue, where now Nicandra stood maturing a change of direction in her  assaults on love and popularity.
Now she was going to be nasty.
The idea warmed her through and through.
Mrs Kelleher, Willie's mother, was keeper of the gate and lived in its lodge — so far as Nicandra knew Silly-Willie had no father.
But that was neither here nor there.
He had a mother and she had been, since an early age, housemaid in Nicandra's house.
Since Silly-Willie's birth she had lived far away at the grand end of the West Avenue, in the Gate Lodge, which she kept as spruce as any bedroom in the Big House.
Few people went in or out to gossip with her.
She was on call to open and shut the gates at any hour, in any weather.
She raked and kept the gravel sweep as meticulously as she kept her house — a convenient house, its well of water only a field distant.
It was a pretty house too; being built beside beautiful entrance gates, gates hinged to cut stone posts, dignified as pillars in a temple, gate lodges were designed with appropriate distinction.
The West Gate Lodge was one-storeyed, as was usual.
It had deep eaves and little stone eyebrows above each lead-paned window.
An architrave, of the exact proportion to become this perfect dolls' house, was over the door.
The door was permitted to be of the cottage order, double, the bottom half, lower than that of a stable door, was designed to keep children in and chickens out — not that chickens were approved, their appearance was not conducive to the small dignity of the Gate Lodge.
Children, too, were rather expected to play, and to play quietly, behind the house no balls or tin trumpets were ever to be left on the gravel sweep.
Silly-Willie spent most of his days shut in a back room.
Well as she cared for him, he was quite an embarrassment to his mother, and the less he was evident in her life the better.
Nicandra knew her way through the tiny, bright garden to the leaded window of that back room.
There were bars across it, behind which Silly-Willie whiled away the time.
In the late evenings his mother would take him  by the hand for walks, and would play the concertina to him when they got home.
But the walks were never long enough to please him.
Mrs Kelleher had her duty to the Entrance Gates to put before the exercise or the amusements of poor little Willie, as she called him kindly in her thoughts.
This morning she was on the farther side of the gates raking the gravel into a pattern exact as a piece of embroidery, when Nicandra came tittupping along, her hat hanging by its elastic on the back of her head.
She was in a rakish mood now, looking forward to her games with Silly-Willie — games that she knew Mrs Kelleher discouraged as too exciting.
This morning, inattentive to everything except the rhythmic ruffle of her rake in the fine gravel, and to the notes of the song she was la-la-ing quietly to herself as she worked, she did not notice Nicandra's arrival, nor see her as she slipped round the corner of the house and pushed her way through the low branches of the Portugal laurels that screened Silly-Willie's window from inquisitive visitors.
Nicandra knocked and tapped against the bars for quite a minute before Silly-Willie's white face, like an oversized moon, filled the small window.
Nicandra jumped up and down in front of him, appearing from and disappearing into, the laurel leaves.
Each time she appeared she made a different face — sometimes a monkey face, sometimes a crying baby.
Now and then she put out her tongue.
 "Pee-Po-Bum-Shit-Piddle-Bugger-Damn," she yelled.
Soon Silly-Willie was yelling too.
 "Shit-shit-shit," he cried, and jumped up and down in unison with Nicandra's unrestrained antics.
The nastier the faces she made, the dirtier the words she chose, the happier she grew.
Long before the fun was over Mrs Kelleher heard the noise.
Poor little Willie was fairly screaming the place down and banging on the barred window that separated him so carefully from the world.
She laid down her rake and ran in to administer a good belt of a stick to whoever might be making little of her darling.
The affair took on quite a different aspect when Mrs Kelleher saw that it was only Miss Nicandra having a bit of fun for herself nothing but smiles now and urgent invitations to a cup of tea.
Tea was very bad for children, Nicandra knew, but in her exhilarated state she accepted it happily, and hoped for a slice of soda-bread to go with it.
"…
And another little slice,"Mrs Kelleher offered ten minutes later as they sat, Silly-Willie sprawled like a baby on his mother's lap, and Nicandra, remote and sedate, quite Miss-of-the-Manor now, sitting on a stool under a picture of the Pope.
"Please play a tune on your concertina for me, Mrs Kelleher, she invited, the ascendancy in her giving kind encouragement to the Peasant.
Mrs Kelleher put poor little Willie off her lap and took her instrument down from its high shelf (roses and blonde ladies were intertwined on its end-boards), spread her knees apart as though to nestle Willie again, then, stretching out the pleats of her concertina, sent it screeching into a wild tune for dancing.
Silly-Willie danced to his mother's playing, his feet flashing and tapping and glancing, his ugly body quiet and still above them as a little gravestone.
Nicandra watched, moved, almost frightened, as the music entered her.
Then she got up, took off her hat and danced too, her dancing awkward as a buffoon's compared to Silly-Willie's complicated steps.
His silly face, so meaningless and without awareness of danger, seemed translated into sense through his return to music, and his entire concentration on the rhythms of the jig — Nicandra felt exhausted and exasperated by the realization that it was not in her power to be either kind or cruel to Silly-Willie.
Fool that he was, he escaped her — his dancing was so much superior to her own that she could not even praise it.
She only wanted him to go on dancing till he dropped.
Mrs Kelleher looked up to the yellow face of the kitchen clock.
She knew the timetable of the Big House.
 "Lunch time, Miss Nicandra," she said, shutting her still breathing concertina decisively.
 "Say" Goodbye "nicely to Miss Nicandra and thank her for coming to pay you a little visit." 
Silly-Willie mouthed some sort of goodbye.
Nicandra responded in a stately manner, at variance with the wild exuberance of the dance, the rude faces, and the exchanges of dirty talk: "Very nice, little boy," she intoned,"very good indeed.
You'll be a great dancer some day if you practise."
She was back in the proper life.
Magic had fallen from the air.
Running back down the avenue, daffodil leaves yellowing on its verges, young beech leaves playing with the light overhead, Nicandra felt purged of the morning's unfortunate happenings: of all of them except the thrust of horror that had pierced her before the death of a lamb.
She thought now that it must have been a lamb, because of Sunday luncheon.
No doubt that was why Maman had insisted so rashly on seeing Anderson.
Nicandra dreaded ever having to see him again this embarrassment and fear engrossed her more fully than her love had ever done.
When the dark blue sidecar, a red coat-of-arms on its tailboard and a grey horse between its shafts, came swirling towards her, iron-tyred wheels crunching merrily along, with the noble sound of a horse's well-shod feet, the very last person she expected to see was Anderson.
But there he was, sitting in a dégagé manner on the left-hand seat of the sidecar, which Fagan was driving.
Anderson was wearing his Sunday suit; not dark blue serge, like the other men, but grey, with a black over-check a dash of a white line through it — a narrow tie, dark and clearly spotted, and a hard black hat, cheekily tilted.
Whatever the occasion, Fagan had not dressed up for it.
He wore breeches the same in which he mucked out his horses — stockings and short laced boots, a neat covert coat and, like Anderson, a hard black hat.
He drove from the side of the car, not from the box seat, where he sat when he drove the family.
Seeing Nicandra flinching on the cut grass verge of the avenue, he took the long, supple driving whip out of its case and flicked his horse into a more dashing trot.
Apart from that gesture of hastening away, neither man took the smallest notice of her.
Before the side-car receded from her along the straight avenue, she observed a gun case (sometimes Anderson shot the bogs with Dada), a rod case, and a bulging Gladstone bag tied together in the space (called the well) situated between the opposite wings of the sidecar.
At half-past one she was sitting beside Maman at the dining room table: Maman who spoke not a word, who ate nothing — Twomey looked quite concerned as she waved away his offerings.
Nicandra was pleased with her own plateful of roast chicken, helped by Twomey at the side table — pleased with everything except the spinach.
Twomey knew she hated spinach; there had been previous arguments about its consumption, so why had an extra-large portion, fainting into the mashed potato and infiltrating the bread sauce, been dealt to her?
Simply Twomey's injurious spite.
She ate a little of it, smothered in bread sauce and leavened by chicken, and through both its heavy bitterness persisted.
The brown-green mountain on her plate loured at her.
She flattened it out with her fork, and hoped for mercy: the mercy of no notice taken.
Dada and Aunt Tossie talked to each other with scarcely a pause, showing a concern for Maman's silence as though to be silent was to be sick.
The form for the Two Thousand Guineas kept them going.
Dada contradicted everything Aunt Tossie said, so they stayed at Newmarket until Twomey brought in the pudding.
When he took Nicandra's  plate away he held it for Maman to see, hoping perhaps that a little annoyance might irritate her back to liveliness.
He was right.
She spoke for the first time since luncheon began: "Darling, your spinach, please." 
She said please in a way that made it a special request of her own.
Moved by love, Nicandra tried.
The spinach was in her mouth when a terrible sound came from her throat the gaping croak of nausea.
She rolled the liquefying spinach into her cheek she could not spit it out.
She could not swallow it.
Dada and Aunt Tossie stopped their talk about racing.
They sat in embarrassed silence.
Talk ought to go on, even if murder went on at the same time; at the sideboard Twomey turned his back before he smiled.
Maman spoke again: "Just for Maman." 
She offered a small forkful as coaxingly as to a baby.
Nicandra burst into tears and, as she opened her mouth for a bellow, the stored spinach and saliva shot out, into her plate, on to the tablecloth, a horrid defilement.
Maman put down the loaded fork with a sigh and turned to Twomey at the sideboard: "Please give Miss Nicandra a clean plate and help her to some spinach." 
Her voice was gentle and emphatic, as if nothing had happened.
Twomey took away one plate and laid the next, in the centre of which a neat pile of spinach kept its cool shape immaculate.
He slipped a clean fork quietly on Nicandra's right hand and moved back to the sideboard, the rhubarb fool and the junket, in his perfect colourless way.
 "Now, Poppet, no more nonsense." 
Maman's voice changed from a coaxing note to one of authority.
Aunt Tossie put her elbows on the table in a rude way and, with her chin in her hands, stared at Maman through the epergne of silver and little vases that came between them.
 "Please, why?" was all she said.
 "Because spinach happens to be good for her and because I say so." 
 "Steady up, Violet, steady yourself, old girl." 
Dada bit heavily into his moustache as he filled a glass with wine and pushed it gently towards her.
He might have been giving an apple to a horse.
Can t you see she's stopped with you poor little brute."
 "Would you mind," Maman shoved the glass of wine away.
I don t want it,"she said.
It could have been spinach she was refusing.
The glass rocked and wavered for an instant before it fell and a dark pool of wine spread over the tablecloth between them.
Tears rolling along her cheeks, Nicandra felt that Maman was now far more angry with Dada and Aunt Tossie than with her.
If only they hadn't interfered she might have been let off minute by minute her situation worsened.
 "And another thing — I mean her to eat it if she sits there till her bedtime." 
…et les pantalons peut-être mouillé, "Aunt Tossie's French was her own invention: " Ou plus pierre,"she added thoughtfully.
 "Good God — yes — anything could happen," Dada said anxiously.
Maman paid no attention to them.
She whisked Nicandra's large linen napkin off her knees and tied it round her waist, then joined her own to it and knotted it securely to the back of Nicandra's chair.
 "There you are, darling, and when you've eaten up your nice spinach, Maman will undo you and give you a chocky." 
Authoritative mother, gracious mistress of this house, she rose, gathering the eyes of non-existent guests (for she would not look near Dada or Aunt Tossie), indicating that luncheon was over and coffee would be in the drawing room.
Alone in the dining room — for Twomey had stopped softly jangling spoons and forks and fitting plates each to each, and gone, quietly as his shadow — Nicandra's mind became a perfect blank.
She did not feel injury, only a sustained sense of misfortune.
Tears dried on her cheeks as time went by and she still stared, impotent, at the unforgiving spinach.
Nothing could induce her to take even a morsel into her mouth — the imperious strength of a child's sense of taste forbade it utterly.
In a secondary sort of way she knew that, beyond the opportunity to please and placate Maman, there was more for her to give if she should eat the horrible spinach.
The other two grown-ups would see that Maman had been right in her judgement.
It would be a kind of "sucks to them" .
It was all to do with the silence, and the wine stain — turning now from red to black as it spread and seeped.
The terrible boredom of her isolation was relieved by the mental exercise in which she told and re-told herself how, in five minutes exactly, she would eat the spinach as a loving sacrifice to Maman, then sick it up, so that her own martyrdom should be apparent.
The green marble clock on the grey marble chimney-piece ticked the minutes away on its golden face.
Next time.
Next time, it ticked, wait till next time.
It was like waiting to jump off a cliff — and then, not jumping.
Twice she was in the very act, loaded fork in her hand, when her breathing quickened, her mouth drew into a forbidding shiver of disgust, and she waited for the next signal to come round.
The dining room door opened — she did not look up, for how could she face Maman?
She truly felt she had sinned and failed.
It was not Maman.
It was Aunt Tossie, leaning over her, picking up the plate and fork and then shovelling the spinach into her own mouth, aborting the sacrifice Nicandra knew she was just about to make.
"Too ghastly, I quite agree, Aunt Tossie put the empty plate back in front of Nicandra and moved towards the sideboard in a predestined kind of way.
She poured a little whisky into a glass, put the stopper back in the decanter, thought for a moment, then took it out and helped herself to a more sensible amount.
 "And I need it," she swallowed  a mouthful slowly.
"All between our two selves, all between you and me — isn't that it, old pal?
Now I think a little lie-down perhaps would be rather lovely."
Glass in hand, she bundled herself out of the room.
A double load was on Nicandra now.
She hadn't eaten the spinach, and in doing so created a martyrdom; now she must restrain herself from the agonizing satisfaction of telling Maman all the truth, thus getting Aunt Tossie into dreadful trouble.
She was near to wishing the spinach back on her plate when Maman came in to bend over her — in her nearness so hot and sweet, her precious body smelling faintly true behind the Rimmel's Toilet Vinegar and Violette de Parme.
 "My precious one," she said, "and I almost forgot her." 
She put down her leather dressing-case the dark green one with a strap across the lid — that went with her on train journeys, and began to untie the knotted napkins.
She hardly glanced at the plate and didn't ask about the spinach.
So, when Nicandra, freed, threw herself uninvited into the depths of an embrace, she took from it no true satisfaction, Aunt Tossie had deprived her of her martyrdom and its crown as well.
Maman put her away, laughingly, and straightened her hat, pulled down her veil, and between finger and thumb, twisted its little knot neatly beneath her chin.
 "Where are you going?" 
Always that was the vital question.
It was the veil that told it was not the garden, then the hat that went to race-meetings and the dressing-case made up the rest of the story: Maman was going away.
Don t delay me, darling.
Fagan's waiting to take me to the station."
"How long for?
When will you be back?
When will you be back?"
Maman smiled brightly.
She swung her heavily stuffed silver-mesh purse on its long chain and made something  like a little skipping step towards the door Nicandra thought she had never looked prettier.
Don t worry, pet.
Just be Dada's little girl.
Promise?"
I'll try — I really will try — only wait a minute, Maman, I've got to tell you — I must say it before you go."
 "Look darling, it's the 4.30, you know it doesn't wait a moment…" 
Maman was gone.
Only a drift of her stayed on the solemn air of the dining room — a drift of Parma violet and a heavy load on Nicandra's mind.
When Maman came back, even if it was tomorrow, the telling would no longer match the moment.
What next?
Who to love?
She decided it had to be Aunt Tossie.
Aunt Tossie wanted help in cleaning her diamonds.
So: the bread-soda the bread-soda was on the list for Hanlon's — Hanlon's pony cart delivered in the morning, bringing the groceries.
She would be Little-Miss-Never-Forgets, obtain the promised bread-soda from Mrs Geary and carry it to Aunt Tossie's bedroom.
A trip to the kitchen first: a reminder to Mrs Geary.
And she was set on her mission of kindness.
In the kitchen there was no sign of Mrs Geary, only a floured pastry-board, covered in tiny circlets of dough, and a rich smell from the oven telling she had been there lately.
It was in the boot-and-brushing room that Nicandra found her at last— after a search through the larders, the dairy, and the empty laundry, its warm steam now subsided into a vaporous chill.
She pushed gently on the closed door of the boot-and-brushing room.
It was Twomey's province, a dark, three-cornered place with a sink, where he cleaned Dada's hunting clothes, scrubbing boots and breeches in  winter time, and boned his shoes and brushed his clothes all the year round.
Here she found Mrs Geary, kindly smoothing Twomey's hair with her hand, while he boned away at an elegant shoe.
 "Will you meet me, Tom?" she was saying as she bent over him, "when I'll have my scones out for the tea." 
Twomey muttered something.
He seemed nervous and displeased.
 "Ah, the ice-house is nice and quiet," she said, dividing his hair between her fingers.
 "Isn't that a fact — you and I know that." 
She laughed.
The sound of her laugh was rich and free as the smell of hot bread on the kitchen air.
It was only then that she was aware of Nicandra standing silent in the doorway, unwilling to interrupt a conversation.
Mrs Geary turned, quick and venomous, before a certain yielding to obsequious kindness displaced the threat in her previous movement.
 "Were you looking for me, Miss Nicandra?" she cooed.
"Did you want something, dear?
Any little thing at all, only say."
I'm very sorry to interrupt,"Nicandra felt that she had indeed erred, in some way, against the conventions.
"Ah, what interruption?
I was just having a little word with Mr Twomey about his silver for the dinner.
The salmon won't hold a minute more for me and fish takes two forks and he's a busy man…
"
While she talked she manoeuvred Nicandra unhurriedly out of the brushing room and towards the kitchen, "What is it you're after?" she asked again.
 "I only want bread-soda for Mrs Fox-Collier's diamonds." 
 "Come on till we see did it come — you couldn't trust Hanlon's man — late today again — and left half the stuff after him I wouldn't wonder…" 
A great cornucopia from Hanlon's tumbled its fruits on the kitchen table.
Every item in it was parcelled separately, most of them tied with string…
"
Ah, here we are,"Mrs Geary pounced on a stout little package, a thick blue paper bag, its mouth folded as securely as a  glued envelope.
 "Take the lot up to Mrs Fox-Collier with the cook's compliments — wait," she said, as Nicandra turned to leave, "there could be a scone ready for yourself." 
She lifted the heavy latch-like fastening of the oven door and took one tiny, golden scone from a shelf-full before she shut the door again, her hand as quiet as a cat's footfall.
Up the long stone stairs from the kitchen, into the green enclosed light of the pantry passage, then on up the next staircase, its turns mean and sudden compared with the twin sweeps of the main stairs, Nicandra plodded her careful way to Aunt Tossie's bedroom door.
There was no answer to her knocking, so, when she had balanced the buttered scone on the parcel of bread-soda, she opened the door and put her head round the jamb.
Aunt Tossie was there.
Still wearing her full widow's weeds, she was lying on her bed.
She was not asleep for her eyes were staring contentedly about her.
An empty glass lay on the eiderdown.
 "And how's my little lamb tonight?" she asked in her pleasant drowsy way.
 "I hope I didn't wake you up, Aunt Tossie — I brought you these," she proffered the scone because she had decided that Aunt Tossie really merited some small recognition for her mistaken act of kindness over the spinach.
Somehow, a silence about that was inviolable.
 "Oo, darlin" , Oo, Bless-oo, oo, I couldn't — thank oo so much."
 "And the bread-soda — shall we clean the diamonds now?" 
Aunt Tossie stared.
She had no words in which to express her present distaste for the idea.
 "Tell you what, lambkin pudding, pie, I mean," she stirred and shifted about among her pillows.
 "Just nip down to the dining room and put the tiniest whisky, only up to here," she held three of Nicandra's fingers against the glass, rolling empty on the eiderdown"very nice, too.
I'll keep it for breakfast, "she pointed to the scone  which Nicandra had laid on top of the po cupboard," I love them…scones."
 "Shall I put soda-water in the whisky?" 
Nicandra asked, willing to please in any way she could.
 "No darlin" , please, no.
There's oceans of water over there,"she waved towards the marble-topped wash-hand stand.
The wash-hand stand was very fully equipped.
A large jug and basin, charmingly ornamented with a design of blue ribbon, was its centre-piece.
Surrounding it were a little hand-basin, a sponge dish with a perforated movable top, a lidded soap dish, a slender jar holding toothbrushes, and a cut-glass watercroft, crowned by its tooth-glass.
Each china object was ribboned like the jug and basin, in appropriately lesser proportions Towels hung neatly on a mahogany towel-rail, hinged in two parts like a screen, behind which stood a slop-pail and a deep foot bath.
Hurrying away on her next mission, Nicandra felt quietly elated because the little act of kindness in donating her scone had been accepted with so much pleasure and a thoughtful reservation for breakfast.
On a small landing at the turn of the back staircase there was the lavatory reserved for gentlemen only — neither Maman, Aunt Tossie nor any visiting lady ever used it; and, of course, he servants had their own "outdoor" in the cobbled courtyard beyond the gun room.
Dada was coming out of this, his special lavatory, as Nicandra, on her return from the dining room, arrived at the landing.
She was going very slowly and breathing heavily in her resolve that not a drop of whisky should be spilled.
Dada was overcome by natural embarrassment on meeting his daughter at that moment.
He would have been happy if he might have affected not to see her.
But, now, as part of the outcome of this very unfortunate day, he felt a new responsibility towards "that funny little thing" , his daughter.
He noticed that she was puffing along with a glass held before her in both hands — he could smell whisky.
 "Did Twomey give you this?" he asked.
 "No, I got it by my own self." 
I didn't know you touched the stuff."
"Its for Aunt Tossie.
She's not feeling up to much."
That was a useful phrase of Nannie's.
 "Oh hell," he said,"not again?
I'll have to speak to Twomey."
 "He's gone to the ice-house with Mrs Geary." 
 "Nicandra, are you sure?" 
"Yes.
When I went for the bread-soda she was patting his headache away, and the scones must be cooked by now."
"Twomey…
Oh, I give up.
All right.
Run along and play."
I'm too busy, Dada.
Please may I have my glass of whiskey.
"Yes.
All right.
I don't know what I'm supposed to do about it.
Don't do it again.
That's all."
 "Not if Aunt Tossie needs a little bit of a refreshment?" 
 "Actually, specially not then." 
Condemnation and worry were joined in his voice — unhappiness consumed the distance between them.
 "Shall I come to the drawing room after tea?" she asked.
Perhaps she could be a help and comfort to him.
That would be nice.
 "Yes, of course," he spoke as if answering a very silly question.
 "Why not?" he added as he opened the door between the two staircases, "Put lots of water in it." 
She heard him running down the stairs, problems at his heels.
"Not asleep.
Just having a think,"Aunt Tossie said when Nicandra roused her with a gentle nudge.
 "This is the whisky and here's the water," Nicandra poised the watercroft over the tooth-glass.
She had thought of everything.
 "Shall I pour it out?" 
"All right, darling, if you must — don't drown it.
Stop STOP!"
 "Dada said to put in lots of water." 
Oh."
Aunt Tossie never seemed worried — but she looked surprised.
Poor little chap, he's had an ugly day,"she said.
Yes, Nicandra thought, it had been a difficult day, what with everything.
 "And now, shall we clean the diamonds?" 
She felt she had earned this amount of entertainment.
 "Certainly," Aunt Tossie sat up and took a sip from her glass.
"First: go to the bathroom and fill the soap dish with warm water, not too hot…
"
The process went on step by interesting step.
Bread-soda fizzed pleasurably in the soap dish of warm water, softening the rigours of Aunt Tossie's toothbrush.
 "Seen worse, this won't hurt it," Aunt Tossie said.
She never made difficulties about little things.
"Now, my jewel-case — no — the second shelf.
I put them in before luncheon I know I did.
Ah, there we are!
And the key — in the onyx snuff-box — now we'll get to work.
Give it to me and I'll hand out the stuff.
You do the hard work — I'll look on."
She fiddled a tiny key into an infinitesimal lock and turned back the lid of her jewel-case.
A tray, divided into small partitions, lined in blue velvet, lay empty.
She lifted it out and peered further in.
She took out little leather boxes and opened them one by one.
Nicandra felt a growing impatience.
 "Can't I start?" she asked.
 "The water's getting cold." 
Aunt Tossie took a long pull at her drink.
Then she shut the jewel-case and took out the key.
 "You haven't locked it," Nicandra said helpfully.
 "Not much use now…look, darling, let's do this job tomorrow, shall we?" 
She wavered a little in her words.
"Aunt Tossie really is rather tired, silly old thing I know — Done in, actually…
Have to think things out…
"
She fell back among her pillows, her widow's veil a curling black crown  behind her head; one narrowly white-cuffed hand still held the glass of whisky erect — there was a magnificence in her yielding.
Whatever it was that had come over her family today, Nicandra could not guess at.
She had done her utmost to excite, please, soothe, serve; yet everything had gone awry.
Pigeons, butterfly, bantams, Maman, Aunt Tossie — she had given her all to each, only Dada was left.
Little Dada, poor soul (as Nannie would say), he does seem upset.
She was hopeful that he would enjoy reading Dora's Dolls' House to her after tea, when she came downstairs from the nursery.
They had just got to the part about Dora's Naughty Friend.
Tea, like breakfast, was taken with Nannie when Mademoiselle was on holiday — Nannie was not really Nannie for a great big girl of eight.
Now she was more Maman's maid, and mender of everything in the house in which she could discern a wear or a tear.
If there was nothing wrong with a sheet or a pillow-case or a chair cover she might take it apart, so that her skill was needed to put it together again.
Quite often she went on visits with Maman — shoots, race meetings, perhaps a ball or two, that kind of thing.
On this evening, Nannie, like everyone else in the house, seemed to be in trouble.
"Come on, eat-up.
Drink your milk.
Time to go down.
Stand still till I do you up."
Nannie was a tiny little woman.
When she sat in a chair her feet didn't meet the ground; they swung about, kicking under her long grey skirt.
Tonight her eyes were red as two fire holes in her face.
 "Have you got a headache like Twomey?" 
Nicandra asked, hopeful that Nannie would observe her kindly anxiety.
 "I have nothing like Mr Twomey, I'm glad to say." 
There was an acid note in Nannie's reply.
"Only my stomach is cramped up under my arms with pain.
Run along now and don't ask questions — and don't worry your father with silly questions either."
For Nannie to use the word "stomach" instead of "little inside" was an infringement of the rules for polite talk.
If she told Dada about Nannie's complaints, she herself would certainly say inside ", perhaps" little inside", as Nannie was smaller than any grown-up person she knew.
When she came down to the drawing room, Dada was looking particularly small, too.
He was sitting behind the tea tray, with its vast load of silver, reading Horse and Hound — Twomey came in to take the tea tray away, and with it the smaller table which held the dish of scones, the plate of sandwiches (Gentleman's Relish), the fruit cake and the plain sponge.
This table was made like a tray; when lifted, its legs could be snapped up or snapped down — a solemn sort of conjuring trick which Twomey performed with quiet authority.
 "How is your headache?" 
Nicandra asked him.
 "It's all right, I expect," Dada answered for him.
Bring your book here, old girl.
It's time for the reading session."
He sighed rather when he opened Dora's Dolls' House.
Couldn't we give old Kipling a run?
This one looks a bit above my handicap."
Its much more exciting than Mowgli, Dada.
Really — Dora has this Naughty Friend and they're just going to — I won't tell you, it's awful."
 "I don't want to read about Naughty Friends, not tonight." 
Dada sounded quite decided.
 "What about the photograph book?" 
 "I do wish I had a Naughty Friend," Nicandra spoke from the bottom of her heart as she lagged her way back to Dada and the sofa, bringing the red leather-bound book that had lain on top of other red leather-bound books piled one  above the other on the lower shelf of a mahogany whatnot.
Dada took the book from her and looked at the first page.
"Good.
Kenya mostly — sit down and I'll tell you about them."
Nicandra fidgeted in the crook of his arm while he turned the thick cardboard pages and gave a commentary on their contents.
"That's a field full of vultures…
That's my lion…
That's my lion again…
That's my loader and my lion…
Half an hour after that was taken, that cheetah bit me through the calf…
That was a very nice bull I shot, but I lost his head…
That's a bitch I once had…
That's another bitch…
I wish I had that bitch now…
That's my sister and Kill and attendant…
That's the layout of the Terraces at Government House…"
 "No, black wives are rather taboo," he answered her only question.
It concerned a picture of a native Princeling in full regalia.
"That's the ceremony of Crossing the Line…
Aha! here we are…
"
At the reappearance of Twomey with the evening drinks tray, he shut the book.
It was quite a performance that Twomey gave every evening.
The ceremony of the drinks tray had a little something sacred in its enactment.
Square-faced decanters of Scotch and Irish whisky flashed the many facets of their globular stoppers.
Sherries showed, primrose or gold, through their elegant bubble-shaped decanters; enamelled labels chained to their stork-like necks declared them dry or medium.
Long, very long, tumblers were for whisky-and-sodas; slender, flower-like glasses for sherry.
"Thank you for listening.
Bedtime now, I suppose."
Dada got off the sofa, pulling her on to reluctant feet.
It was too early for bed, but she wouldn't say so.
Not tonight.
She watched him as, like a boy let out of school, he hurried across the room to the tray of drinks.
There was none of the carelessness with which he usually waited for Twomey to bring him his glass.
 "Good-night, Dada." 
 "Good-night, Nicandra." 
 "Shall I come and say my prayers in the morning?" 
"No.
I'll let you off prayers tomorrow."
 "Till Maman gets back?" 
 "Yes," he shouted the word as he missed the whisky in his glass with the soda-water syphon.
Quite enough to annoy anybody, Nicandra thought.
She went on her way to bed without pausing for the goodnight kiss that he had forgotten.
From the drawing room door she turned to her right into the small vestibule at the stair foot.
The flight flared upwards to its useless and beautiful division.
Standing for a moment on the linking landing between the two worlds, Nicandra felt the blessed evening sun slanting benignly towards her.
She opened the door into the other life where there was only Nannie to be pleased, if not actively loved.
Nannie seemed to have got over her cramped inside.
 "Sit down till I unlace your boots." 
Someone who knew about these things had told Maman how the perpetual wearing of boots might encourage the proper shape of a girl's ankles.
So Nicandra wore white kid boots for after-tea sessions, dancing class and parties; brown laced boots for all lesser occasions.
Nannie was now in a caring mood.
She sat Nicandra down on her own chair, the chair that always smelt, in a hesitating way, of Nannie's bottom, and knelt to take off the laced boots — Maman held to a rather Chinese theory on the suppression of growth; the white kid boots were on the small side and not often replaced because they were French, very expensive, and not obtainable from Start-rite.
There was a minute comforting sound in the soft clack as Nannie worried the laces apart like a gentle dog.
She drew off the boots and put them, lolling side by side, as it were breathing together, before she stuffed them full of tissue-paper to keep their shape.
Next it was the tussore silk smock (Liberty), rather a babyish garment; Nannie had let  it down and let it out since Nicandra was six.
Now she was eight and four months, quite old enough to undress herself without Nannie hovering and undoing everything.
At last she stood naked, her long legs like a jointed wooden doll's, ready for her bath.
Well excuse you your bath tonight — I'll just sponge your face and hands."
Nannie sighed as she dropped the Viyella nightdress over Nicandra's head.
Groping her way into the sleeves, Nicandra wondered uneasily what these unusual indulgences portended.
Dada had excused her morning prayers; now, Nannie her evening bath.
What was wrong with them?
Or with herself?
Suddenly frightened, she wondered if she was going to have an operation and they wouldn't say — never would she forget her tonsils.
She had come back to the nursery ready to sympathize with Nannie about the underarm cramp caused by her inside.
Now she found that, on the contrary, it was Nannie who was offering love and comfort to her.
It was the reverse of what she needed.
She felt especially depleted by the No Bath indulgence, and even more uneasy when she saw the delightful supper prepared for her; honey sandwiches and cocoa with cream floating on its surface.
She felt a change, felt it as though she overheard a secret, and now, sipping at her delicious cocoa, she could only suspect that something really nasty was coming next.
She must beware.
It was when she was in bed, sleepless in the summer light, that the true malevolence of the past day became plain to her.
The lamb turned up its white, despairing eyes.
Anderson towered above it, carefully sharpening his knife.
She was glad to think of him being driven away.
The sound of wheels tearing through gravel engrossed her memory.
The sound of wheels turned in her ears again as she thought of Maman driving off to the railway station as if on some brisk pursuit.
It would be a dinner party, most likely.
She often went by train to some distant party beyond the reach of horses.
Tomorrow she would be back again.
She  knew that Nicandra could not do without her.
She must come back at once.
The Forsaken Merman came to mind: Come, dear children, let us away, he advised his sad family.
The unresolved problem of the spinach still confronted her.
She saw it, glued to its plate, a terrible love token, hers to give or to withhold.
Of course, she would have eaten it if her resolution had not been broken and nullified through a gross and mistaken act of kindness.
There was embarrassment and resentment for this act of a grown-up, taking her part, playing down at equality.
Grown-up people should not make extravagant advances.
Better to be like Dada.
She did not love him, but he knew his place.
He kept his distance.
He was nobody.
She fidgeted between her sheets at the thought of those photograph books, so stupefyingly dull, when Dora's Dolls' House, or a game of Happy Families might have cheered him up.
His evasion of her sensible scheme for his comfort had been another repulse.
On this day, when they had all sinned against her in their separate failings, only Silly-Willie, while of no positive comfort, had been devoid of malice.
With him she was free of any binding love or duty.
He was not entirely harmless either, not when she thought of him spread on his mother's lap.
Then an obscene rootless jealousy came over her, although, of course, she herself would never allow or enjoy such an unseemly embrace.
They had all sinned against her, and in some way rejected her advances.
Not one among them was worthy of trust.
The terrible kindnesses of the evening roused her worst suspicions.
No prayers.
No bath.
It must mean another operation.
She saw a knife, smaller than Anderson's.
She saw her own blood spurting as the lamb's must have spurted out.
Before that you choked and struggled into a sudden darkness of chloroform, then woke to pain that no ice-cream could mediate.
They were going to do this to her again…
Aunt Tossie was bending over her, one hand on the bedrail.
 "I heard you shouting," she said.
"Not me.
It wasn't me,"Nicandra denied the idea of such unrestrained behaviour.
Aunt Tossie was leaning closer.
Nicandra heaved on her mattress.
Aunt Tossie's body, inside the floating black clothes, filled her with a sad disgust.
It was not the body she needed for her comfort.
 "You do know Aunt Tossie loves little Nicandra," Aunt Tossie said.
As she stooped lower her breath, caught in all the black veils, smelled terrible.
Nicandra threw an arm out over the bedclothes and turned her cheek fiercely into the pillow.
Nicandra and her naughty girlfriend, Lalage, were dressing for the Hunt Ball.
"You have first bath, Nicandra implored her friend — she was justly nervous as to the extent of the hot water, and, in every way, she put her friend's comfort before her own.
Apart from her proper feelings as hostess, with Lal's heroic behaviour on the day before fresh in her mind, Nicandra felt her friend deserved every loving consideration.
The girls shared the night nursery, and the day nursery adjoining.
Aunt Tossie, for many years mistress of Deer Forest, understood very well how girls must have their chatter after a ball.
So, ignoring the many bedrooms in which a guest might have slept, poor old Nannie's bed was aired and made up.
Two hot-water bottles slumped against each other in the crevasse that Nannie had left in her mattress.
Nicandra regretted that her friend was not sleeping in the largest guest room, with the biggest possible fire taking the edge off its disused chill; for not many visitors slept at Deer Forest.
The brisk frills that Maman had once draped and ribboned and bowed on dressing-tables, hung now, limp and faintly discoloured by sunlight dwelling quietly in empty rooms.
No one drew the curtains on moonlight either; dead and dormant butterflies clung undisturbed in their folds.
Altogether it was much jollier in the nurseries with their rose-bud patterned wallpapers, and high wire brass-bound fenders guarding fires that never sulked and chimneys that never smoked.
All a bit mingy for such a big house, was Lalage's inward comment.
She was a girl who took everything as it came her way and never felt slighted or rebuffed.
Lalage Lawless was her name.
Her father was a rich and respected solicitor — not quite the right breeding, socially speaking, in County Westcommon, but Lalage's charm and silly looks guaranteed her welcome in many houses to which her mother had never been invited: she and Nicandra had been "best friends" at their English school.
 "All right," she accepted the first bath without hesitation, "shall I leave the water in for you?" 
The idea was slightly repellent to Nicandra.
Hot or cold, her bath water was her own.
But to reject the offer was beyond her.
Refusal might seem ungrateful or unkind: "Oh please do," she said.
When Lalage, neat as a Nannie's child in her blue Viyella dressing-gown, had darted off to the bathroom, Nicandra, for the present absolved from her duties as friend and hostess, wound up her gramophone and, as she undressed, surged and swooned pleasantly to the heart-breaking cadences of the Caprice Viennois.
She grudged the muffling of the violin as she dragged her Fair Isle jersey over her head.
A childish shirt with a round Peter Pan collar she unbuttoned slowly, breathing her way along with the music.
Her grey flannel skirt, hooked, not zipped, at the placket opening, fell round her feet.
She leaned over the high nursery fireguard when she unleashed her paltry breasts from the needless support of that new invention, the Kestos brassiere.
The slight indecency of nakedness, emphasized by her stockings, four times suspended to an elastic girdle, bothered her.
She hurried them away from their anchorage and stripped them down her thin legs.
Anxious that Lally should not return to find her naked, she huddled into a blue satin kimono that had been one of Aunt Tossie's many over-grand presents.
Such presents marked the passing from girlhood to accessible maidenhood; this  state was made manifest on the day when Nicandra's striking blonde hair was pinned, a pale hillock, low on the back of her neck.
Properly speaking, Aunt Tossie should have presented Nicandra at Court, which she would have greatly enjoyed doing.
Dada, however, raised every obstacle and objection he could think of to baulk this plan because, as he put it (only to himself), the dear old girl might feel her oats and something unfortunate could happen.
Apart from the happy circumstance of the Dear Old Place staying precariously solvent owing to Aunt Tossie's money, he was quietly and constantly fond of his sister-in-law.
He considered her sound as a bell in most ways, apart from this mad preoccupation with Nicandra's social life.
That his daughter should need any brighter prospects than the established background of her name, and her eventual inheritance of the Dear Old Place, was beyond him; while, for the present, two good reliable hunters surely provided all the enjoyment and exercise any girl could ask.
Much as he wished that Aunt Tossie might keep her mind on the Form Book, where their interests in beating the Handicapper ran together, he had nevertheless acceded to her insistence on a party, a small house party, for Nicandra's first real ball.
Who to invite had been a difficult point.
"Where have all the young men gone?
I'm always asking myself."
Aunt Tossie asked Dada too.
"And a damn sad answer you'll get.
There's been a war remember…
Charlie Fortescue's two boys Humphrey Bird's little Dickie…that ass Eustace Browning…
"
The list of sons of the right sort, still available in this country, was miserably short in comparison with that of the golden lads who had come to dust in Flanders and other places.
The only certainty was Robert Lester, son of the Bishop of Aherloe, dull but acceptable, although he didn't hunt and was a poor shot; still, he had been to Winchester (on a scholarship).
Miraculously, when invited for the Hunt Ball, he had asked if he might bring an old school friend who was staying with him, hiring horses for a few days' hunting.
As she waited for Lally's return from the bathroom, Nicandra sat on the thick rag hearthrug that Nannie had made.
She pulled the cold embroidered spaces of satin kimono closer to her and pressed her back into the wire of the fender before she drew the basket, full of wounded dog, nearer to herself and to the heat — the little bitch trembled amongst all her luxuries.
But for Lally's courage and abandon, Nicandra thought, she might not be alive and trembling now.
Again she heard the boys' warm approving voices, voices that left her outside the heat of that dangerous moment.
The heat, the danger, the moment were unforeseeable when she and Lally, arm in arm in giggling familiarity, watched from the nursery window for the boys' arrival.
Robert they knew, and all his limitations.
The unknown friend was meat for their curious excitement.
At the window they laughed together and bit a knuckle, like children or housemaids — watching avidly, they saw the two boys get out of a car that could not be Robert's.
Robert's friend stooped over the boot, pulling out suitcases.
He put back a saddle, shut the boot, and stood up.
He was tall.
He was mystery.
He ignored Twomey, fussing over the luggage: a rather yellow suitcase, that would be Robert's, and dark leather for everything else.
The friend's name was Andrew Bland.
Aunt Tossie said she had danced with his father.
Dada stood on the steps in the cold, shaking hands, saying something pleasant through clenched teeth.
He was a child's height compared to Robert's steady bulk.
Robert knew nothing about horses and cared less, unfortunately.
But he had been on the Winchester K — not quite the same thing, of course.
They watched them turn towards the house.
Andrew was asking Dada something.
He stooped gracefully towards the little man and laughed loud and shyly.
Robert took his suitcase out of Twomey's over-burdened hands and followed the other two.
Twomey showed neither gratitude nor approval for Robert's kind act, only a cold embarrassment.
He liked gentlemen to behave as he expected them to behave.
They were gone.
The window was lifeless.
 "Let's go down and get it over, shall we?" 
Lalage suppressed any hint of eagerness.
 "I expect Dada will send someone to tell us." 
Unwilling to make an unheralded entrance, Nicandra quivered in a distance of expectancy.
She was right.
Twomey sent old Lizzie with the summons: "Mr Twomey says, Sir Dermot says, for ye to come down to the morning room — the young gentlemen are here." 
She sounded portentously excited.
Then they had whirled, clattering their way down the back staircase, restraining their gait with one accord at the door dividing Stateliness from the Ordinary.
The swinging mannered flights of the great stairway impelled an obedience to propriety.
Even Nicandra's little dog, Nettie, checked any exuberance and hesitated behind them to the door of the morning room.
"…might stop a few earths perhaps.
Hounds could run through the place tomorrow…"it was Dada's voice, and it sounded desperate.
 "Go on." 
Lally had given Nicandra a little push — no.
She hadn't.
It had been something in her breathing that conveyed impatience.
She followed quietly, a well-mannered guest, as they crossed the crowded length of the morning room.
Low winter sunlight betrayed all it touched in shabbiness and dusty surfaces.
It was a delightful, careless room, untidy and rather deficient in comfortable chairs.
Everything expelled from other places found a haven here, including the only good pictures in the house — a couple of Rose Bartons, bought by Aunt Tossie at a Church Sale, were considered quite pretty and of local interest, but insignificant compared with the photographic portrait of the first Nicandra, standing stripped for a gallop, but without Fagan, much to his disappointment, at her head.
 "Oh good, you're here," Dada turned away from the fire where the group of three stood.
 "Roberts here, dear fellow." 
A dreadful disturbance overcame him.
He could not remember the name of Nicandra's friend.
"…anyway, here's Nicandra and What's-her-name.
 "Oh, Sir Dermot, you know I'm Lally," she laughed and helped out the moment with sly ease, loosening the way through Nicandra's formal how-do-you-do's.
 "I'm Andrew Bland," the tall friend said.
Nobody shook hands.
Robert smiled gently behind his shyness.
Andrew Bland withdrew for a minute with a distant grateful silence, confident, apart, approving and curious.
Silence concluded, he was the first to speak.
 "Do you use Stinko, sir, when you're stopping?" 
Dada was delighted.
"I do.
I do.
Yes, I do.
I cut up a sack and I dip the little bits in Stinko.
Marvellous stuff…"
Robert spoke to the girls: "They're having Manahans Band tonight," he told them with nearly religious approval.
They paid him no attention.
 "Oh, Sir Dermot, please let's come stopping with you." 
Lally was a child, innocently flattering.
She gave Dada confidence and importance.
For this moment he mattered more than the boys.
Did he wish his Nicandra had the same spark?
Nicandra put up a hand to the loose hairpins in her bun, and looked rather miserable.
Robert felt his heart move for her.
 "Oh, I shouldn't think of it, if I was you," Dada was pleased: forbidding a dangerous toy to a child, "you'll smell too awful tonight." 
He must have noticed Andrew's smile dawning, for he shied violently away from his unrestrained remark.
 "Why don't you go down to the Lake Field," he said to Nicandra,"the  yearlings might amuse them.
We have quite an interesting fellow, "he turned to Andrew," out of Nicandra by The Jesuit."
Andrew's smiling ceased.
Now he looked alert and responsible.
This subject was what really counted.
In the gun room, where coats hung and hats of all kinds and all ages lay about on tables, Nicandra squeezed her Henry Heath, its brim bound with corded ribbon, over her bun of hair, while Lally, peering into a mildewed looking-glass, felt her way towards a becoming line.
Picking up their chamois leather gloves, they joined the boys in the hall.
Nicandra led them by all the ways she had known and disregarded since childhood.
Beyond the long line of windows, past the Conservatory and the Laburnum Walk, they came to the winter-bound Pleasure Garden where yellow jasmine crawled over a tree stump, hamamelis, the wych-hazel shrub, thrust out golden hedgehog flowers along its leafless branches, and the stream coming from the kitchen garden — a winter river now — hurried into the culvert that carried it on into the baby lake in the field outside the Pleasure Garden.
Robert said: "I'll stay here.
I want to spy on the shrubs."
Curious fellow: still, he was a man for the dance.
Without comment, they left him to plod about and peer.
Nicandra's little Nettie stayed behind too, she scuffled around in the undergrowth alert for game of any sort — a blackbird squatting low, or a rabbit with fear in its silly eyes.
The other three walked, single file, over the stone bridge into the field where horses stood and stared.
It was now that Nicandra fell into a sudden easy accord with Andrew.
He listened, quiet and attentive, while she conned over the breeding of the yearlings, answering his questions with knowledge and certainty.
They talked until the horses, squealing and nipping at each other, turned away to hurry purposefully across the field and stand afar, clouds of their breath plumed against the winter air.
Lally had no share in the informed conclave.
She found nothing to say about the yearlings and shrank quite sensibly from their forward advances, staying silent and watchful while Nicandra talked and lifted solemn grey eyes to Andrew's, sure of his entire attention.
To rivet all attention on herself was, to Lally, as natural as breathing.
The occasion to hold and secure it came almost immediately, when Nicandra's precious dog was heard crying pitifully in the depths of the watery culvert.
It was not a cry of contest with any game it was a faintly choking cry.
Tears streamed down Nicandra's face.
She stopped calling "Nettie, Nettie." 
She lay on the ground, her ear to the culvert, listening.
She imagined Nettie, held up by her collar, the water backing up to drown her.
Andrew said: "I'll go for the spades.
Come on, Robert, you know the place."
 "I don't know where they keep the spades," Robert stood, hopeless and static, his bulk exaggerated by his suit of plus-fours and his tasselled stockings.
I m too big to go to ground,"he wailed gratefully, watching Andrew failing by any contortion to cram his shoulders into the mouth of the culvert.
 "Let me, let me, I'm the littlest," Lally was lying on the grass beside him when Andrew dragged his head out of the culvert; like a small dark eel she wriggled her way into the watery hole.
 "She can't turn in there she'll drown too." 
Nicandra foresaw a double horror.
It was Robert who padded solemnly across the little bridge, waded into the pond to the culvert's egress, and wrenched the grating from its mouth, setting free a rush of mud and water from which he lifted out, first, Nicandra's dog (exhausted and bleeding but quite ready to bite), then Lally, every stitch she wore soaked and clinging close as a swimsuit to her solid child-size body.
He held her against his tweed-upholstered person while he waded  out of the pond, but put her down immediately when he touched dry land.
 "Oh, thank you," she said, elated, triumphant, then: "Oh, Robert," and her voice fell.
He was a disappointing hero to share her brave adventure.
But in a moment, the others were beside her, praising, questioning, almost adoring her courage.
No one commended Robert's practical act.
 "Her collar was caught on a root." 
Lally gasped and coughed, she even spat, her teeth gleamed against the mud.
She was a star.
The drama gave rise to a sort of wild freedom between them.
They laughed and talked together.
No one listened, except to Lally.
They ran like a group of children back to the house.
Nicandra held her dog to her heart.
Robert and Andrew each held a cold, wet hand of Lally's, half lifting her off her feet between them.
 "We put her through the drain," Andrew explained her condition to Dada.
"Oh, did you?
Good girl!"he commended Lally as kindly as he would any keen bitch, and asked nothing further.
He had to get on"with Stinko and stopping.
He turned back to enquire: "Which drain?
Might get in there.
Mustn't forget that one,"and hurried on his way.
Now, still clutching the slices of unyielding satin to her, Nicandra wondered how it was possible to acknowledge fitly the immediate and selfless gallantry she had seen.
A small opportunity arose when Lizzie came knocking at the door for the ceremonial delivery of two silver-bound shoulder sprays, one, a gardenia, the other an orchid, and a card which said: From Robert.
She decided at once that the orchid should be for Lally
Lally said: "Oh, scrummy oh, divine." 
She was wrapped in her bath towel.
 "Robert shouldn't," Nicandra was troubled.
 "Silly old him," Lally laughed and held her orchid against her bare shoulder.
Not on that evening, but long afterwards, Nicandra was to understand something of Aunt Tossie's efforts for this celebration: this party for her darling, into which she had thrown heart and soul and quite a lot of money.
Then, great kindness and great love were only to be expected and accepted.
Aunt Tossie was the fountainhead of both, the medium through which Dada might be approached for favours.
Money and generosity gave her a kindly power over Deer Forest.
With this power and position, there existed a proper distance for her to keep, and on that evening she was to bridge it fatally; worse, there was a strident note of comedy debasing further the shaming accident…
Before the party, there had been much careful planning and changing of plan.
All the forceful tact Aunt Tossie possessed was needed to convince Dada that only champagne, the best champagne, would be appropriate to the occasion, and then to compel him into the stony depths of the cellars to root with Twomey along the half-empty bins where forgotten treasures spoiled.
Days in advance the bogs had been walked and snipe shot for that famed Snipe Pudding of Mrs Geary's — a pudding more gently extraordinary than any game pie.
On the morning of the Hunt Ball, Aunt Tossie made her descent to the kitchen where orders for the day would be given.
She wore her new heather-coloured cardigan; a blue veil (heather and scabious was her idea) preserved her hair, carefully waved for the night.
Her ringless arthritic fingers guided a slate pencil.
Her writing on the slate was that of a child making pothooks and hangers.
Mrs Geary understood it quite well and disagreed with it often.
But, today, she gave almost pious attention to every scrape of the slate pencil.
This dinner they planned must capture the living memory  of every lucky guest.
Neither she nor Aunt Tossie, sitting there in dignified order, could foresee that the memory to be implanted would not be of the rare perfection of each course, but of a social mishap, a horror that would engross unbelieving attention and sear its recollection, like a scar, into Nicandra's loving.
Aunt Tossie had a faint dribble of desire at the corners of her mouth when, at length, she laid down the slate pencil and rose from her chair to face Mrs Geary, her companion in what was to be an immortal triumph: its finale that most acceptable of puddings before diets and regimens were conceived: a really beautiful Trifle.
 "Layer it up, up into a glorious round mountain," Aunt Tossie adjured.
 "Plenty of brandy, and don't plaster the top with cherries, just one, perhaps on the tip-top, and only a touch of angelica." 
 "Oh, Holy God!" 
Mrs Geary exclaimed, her genius and her dedication alight.
Many other matters and activities were to fill Aunt Tossie's day, all directed towards the success of the evening.
Without her personal suggestion and direction, anything might go wrong, or be forgotten.
The fish for instance: Twomey must be reminded to collect that from the station.
Flanagan, the distant fishmonger, had sworn it would be on the early train from Waterford.
Twomey could forget any vital message to be executed on his morning bicycle trip to the village; any message except the daily gamble to be placed with the bookmaker, and the newspaper with yesterday's racing results.
Twomey was getting on, of course, that must not be forgotten.
But her own feet, her veins, her weight, and her rheumatism were troubles to be ignored on this day and night when her darling girl was to shine in a proper setting.
The setting comprised holly, not very luxuriantly berried, a small greenish collection of ciprepediums, and plenty of ivy.
A vastly increased supply of turf and logs was required for the many fires the occasion demanded.
Two boys, one of them Silly-Willie (simple still, but useful sometimes) carried, between them, great baskets of fuel to hall, drawing room, morning room, dining room and six bedroom fires.
It was quite a performance.
Evening dress, too, was a matter for Aunt Tossie's close concern and consideration — Dada's pink evening coat, its lining and facings frail and splitting with age, must be handled carefully and aired thoroughly; white tie and waistcoat freshly sparked up, and jewelled cufflinks traced to some forgotten place of retirement.
It was one of Aunt Tossie's more endearing habits to discuss with Nicandra every item in her own wardrobe, and tonight was an occasion for special deliberation.
Gigi, no quieter or graver in her advancing years, screamed and flapped, furious at being caged: a necessity, even Aunt Tossie allowed, when velvets, silks, taffetas and bright sequins lay deep on the bed and overflowed the chairs in her bedroom, changes of fashion and flaws of past time limply exposed in the morning light.
 "I think I might look quite lovely in that," Aunt Tossie held blue velvet against her tweeds and woollies.
 "I like you best in black," Nicandra said.
 "What about your black velvet with the huge skirt, wear that." 
 "Well I don't say yes and I don't say no, I say, well, yes, perhaps," Aunt Tossie gave the matter further consideration.
 "No," she said at last, "the lace corsage and the boned neck, a bit ageing, don't you rather think?" 
She strained the black velvet across her distinguished breasts, then turned from the looking-glass,"Nip out all this lace and fuzz and, Bob's your uncle, what do you get?
A sweetheart neckline."
 "Oh, you've got a Kestos brassière — quel absolute chic," Lally picked the bust-bodice out of the pile of underclothes Lizzie had folded and laid, a picture of precision, on Nicandra's bed.
She stretched its modest cups on her hands.
 "Aunt Tossie," Nicandra explained.
"It worries me rather.
Still I know she knows."
 "May I try it on?" 
Without waiting for an answer, Lally stripped off the accepted bandaging of the day.
 "Oh, m'dear, too naughty for words." 
She screamed with laughter.
Nicandra looked disconcerted and prim before a great light of kindness broke, telling her to spread a little happiness at any cost to herself.
 "I'll lend it to you, Lally," she said, "just for tonight." 
 "Oh, Nico, I wouldn't dream," Lally fastened a button more securely on its elastic strap.
The mild uplift of her breasts was frightening in its unexplored possibilities: "If you really mean it." 
Her acceptance was inevitable, as immediate as her plunge underground of the afternoon.
She danced away to her bedroom to dance back a minute later: "I wasn't going to tell you, but I will." 
She had a mystery to share, there was a tinge of the forbidden in her voice.
 "It's called" Odor-O-No".
Mummie says it could give me cancer, who cares?
I'd sooner die than smell, wouldn't you?"
 "Yes, of course," Nicandra sniffed suspiciously at a vacant, scentless strength; "Where did you find it?" 
 "From an advertisement and guess what it said" Are Your Armpits Charmpits?"
Mine are a worry, what about you?"
"Oh dear, I do wonder.
I pad about with Ponds Extract and Lizzie sews dress preservers into everything."
 "You can forget all that with" Odor-O-No".
Try a dab."
 "Strong stuff," Nicandra dabbed nervously.
Her arms, raised in turn, had an air of nonsensical melancholy.
 "Did you really ask Kevin Kelly for it?" 
"Ask the local chemist?
Too embarrassing.
Anyway he only knows about greyhounds and worms in sheep.
Armpits would  paralyse him.
He's very religious."
"He does keep Aspirins.
I buy dozens for the Curse."
 "I expect what you need is a good curetting." 
 "A good what?" 
"Remind me to tell you.
The other thing I'm on is this pill for obesity.
I can't wait.
They say it's pure magic."
 "We aren't really fat, Lal, are we?" 
"Yes, I am, for my height.
You know what I heard Cousin Deirdre saying to Mum?
She is a ripe plum was what she said.
Oh, the cruelty — giving Mummie ideas."
 "Too beastly, and when you think of the shape of a ripe plum." 
 "I hate her," Lalage spoke seriously, I d like to stick a knife in her, and when I got it in — you know what I'd do?"
 "Pull it out." 
Nicandra saw no other solution to this ugly and childish idea.
 "No, when I got it in, I'd twist it." 
Lalage's eyes widened, their pupils melting in the pleasure of her thoughts.
Once, she had emptied her full po over a sleeping brother.
That was in the nursery years.
Since then, nothing had happened to modify any bad intentions.
 "I want to be happy but I can't be happy till I make you happy too," Lally sang.
She was back in the present and she knew how best to fill every moment of it.
Beyond the open door between the two rooms there was silence; each girl concentrating fiercely on making the very best of what looks she had.
In turn, each caught the other, avid in front of the cheval looking-glass, tilting on its mahogany frame; their reflections lighted by the obscure flattery of fresh candles in swivelling brass holders.
Nicandra looked away from what she saw: Aunt Tossie's lavish present, chosen from Debenham's Catalogue: white satin, bateau necked and  beaded, its length stopped an inch too far above the long-toed silver shoes.
Its grace, spread narrowly on her bed, had ravished her.
Now she was shaken by doubts.
She felt her bones, a cold skeleton, inside an expensive shroud.
Aunt Tossie, ever loving, ever kind, had made an expensive mistake.
Her resentment and disappointment became part of the awkward thrust she made to fasten Robert's gardenia to her shoulder strap.
The gold safety-pin, carrying a fox's mask, refused like a horse at a fence, to go through the beaded satin.
 "Till I make you happy tooooo." 
Lalage came hurrying back.
It was the Kate Greenaway look for her; Kestos and green ribbon gave a faint flatulence to the high bodice line — dressing-table muslin skirts were pulled into a flounce at the hem; again the green ribbon tied in a silly bow.
It was not fancy dress, more the naughty nursery look.
 "Can't see in there to fix my orchid." 
It was the excuse for her deep delaying gaze into the looking-glass.
Nicandra stood aside, the bruised gardenia still in her hand.
Mirror, mirror, tell me true, went through her mind as she watched Lalage's reluctance to lose her image.
It was as though she sucked her body away from the glass before she turned to Nicandra.
Nicandra was standing waiting for a second turn at her reflection, her attitude a droop of pure unhappiness.
 "I don't like myself," she said.
Immediately, Lalage knew just what she could have done with that masterpiece in satin.
Poor love, just wrong, always, she thought contentedly.
Aloud, she said: "Nico, what a gorgeous gown so grown-up — not like silly itty-bitty me." 
The kindness in her voice avoided unspoken criticism and commiseration, "Let me," in a moment her quick fingers had Nicandra's gardenia and its drift of green spray firmly in place.
Cheered a little, Nicandra picked an invisible hairpin from a rosy plate, part of the muddle on top of the white-painted chest of drawers that had once held her baby-clothes.
 "No, don't, leave it alone," the irrepressible  cry of one born knowing sprang from Lalage as she watched Nicandra's efforts to control the blonde strands of hair blowing, light as ducks' down, on the back of her neck.
Its too untidy,"Nicandra said screwing in the hairpin.
 "Perhaps now we should go down." 
It was Nannie's voice before the after-tea sessions in the drawing room.
Perhaps she had never quite recovered from the efforts to please she had made then.
She looked round, unseeing, at all the discarded clothes and bath towels looped on the bed and floor.
Lizzie would put everything away; she would turn down the bedclothes at a neat angle and put in the hot-water bottle as late as possible.
None of the muddle in her room mattered.
Only the meek little dog in its basket was important.
She'll be all right,"Lalage, its rescuer, said, impatient to get downstairs where life waited.
Cold hung, a draughtless presence, in the heights and widths of the staircase.
Accustomed and unaware, they did not even shiver as their warm bare"shoulders met its blue embrace.
At the stairfoot, Silly-Willie, on his way to some fire with a vast contribution of logs, put down his load and goggled at them.
When they came nearer he did a little dancing step and curtsied low.
Nicandra smiled and acknowledged the obeisance as if it was from a dog doing its trick.
 "Is he all there?" 
Lalage asked when they were out of hearing.
"Almost.
The nuns did a wonderful job on him, after his mother died.
Mrs Geary looks after him now.
He's quite useful, loves cleaning the boots and the brass and all that stuff."
In the drawing room there was none of the untidy, unmatched squalor that made the morning room a place  where troubles or pleasures could have their breathing spaces.
The morning room was for comings and goings, where odd chairs changed their places for different conveniences, and shoes and boots from the fields were not forbidden.
During springs and summers, the sunlight came in unshaded through high windows and spread a dry pallor along floorboards.
The carpet and chintzes accepted the merging of their colour and gentle rot as, in happy age, the mind obliterates the glories and cruelties of youth.
The drawing room was quite another world.
Three windows had their green blinds perpetually drawn against morning sun or any damage from afternoon light.
Their sashes were lifted regularly to air the room, and shut again with religious punctuality.
There were no stripes of shade down the folds of the yellow brocade curtains.
Their pelmets, white and gold, were a rich memorial to a grandmother.
That they disturbed the Italian plasterwork somehow added to their important grandeur.
In the same way, Sheraton and buhl commodes and cabinets, card and console tables, and tiny escritoires by Hepplewhite contrived a harmony, crowded, but inevitable.
Blue Worcester plates took up nearly the whole of one wall; others overlapped in a china cupboard.
The portrait of Nicandra's mother, in Court dress and feathers, had not been moved.
Saucy and impolite, her gaze was slanted away from proper procedures.
To have taken the portrait down would have marked her flight, distinguishing its importance beyond the dignified acceptance of the Family.
One did not speak of those things.
Aunt Tossie was alone in the drawing room.
She dropped her lifted velvet skirts (she had been warming her bottom in front of the fire burning fiercely in its basket grate) as the girls appeared.
She saw only her darling come down the room Nicandra might have walked alone, so unaware was Aunt Tossie, for the moment, of the little friend.
Lovely, lovely, she crooned to herself.
She was quite uncritical of the  sad, grand dress; she understood only the pale, still doubtful, beauty, so wrong for its present period, so touching in its failure to be recognized or to please.
She had bought this expensive dress to capture notice; she felt it like a blow that the little monster sidling along, sleek and positive, dark hair in brisk waves, silly doll-dress denying fashion, had all the qualities that Nicandra lacked.
Dangerous little thing, she thought as she smiled her warm welcome.
Lalage was well aware of the forbidding quality behind the smile.
She knew she could never trespass on any liking from that robust and distant lady.
She felt a flash of guilt about the borrowed Kestos.
Aunt Tossie's bosoms needed no aids beyond the velvet bodice holding them; holding them separate like two great spoonfuls of cream.
The black lace veiling had been snipped away.
She had pushed a handkerchief, light as a breath, into the cleavage.
A black feather boa, perhaps bought for the Black Ascot, curved lavishly round to cancel any suggestion of nakedness.
She did not need diamonds to complete her magnificence.
 "And how is the poor little dog?" she asked.
Dada came in; Hunt evening coat, waistcoat fitting him with the same exact pinch as waistcoats had when he was twenty.
He looked as clean and pretty as a Chelsea china figure.
But his sad little face had no shepherd's jollity about it.
 "And how's the little dog?" he asked.
The great lady and the little gentleman stood together on the hearthrug.
Behind them hung a gilt looking-glass, Chinese in its style, cool as a breeze in its execution.
A solitary statue, a small silver tribute to the first Nicandra, glimmered alone in the centre of the wide chimney-piece, and below it garlands and Greek ladies twined and danced on their marble plaque.
Dada nodded up at the silver horse.
A second nod was towards his daughter.
 "Nicandra also trotted up." 
Lips glued to his teeth, he indicated his approval to Aunt Tossie.
The boys came in.
 "How's the little dog?" they said together.
Robert, half a beat behind Andrew, felt, as usual, a fool.
It was as though each had prepared a remark to cover his entry.
Robert was embarrassed by such silliness.
Andrew's smile dawned on the joke, enjoying it.
Not yet a member of any Hunt, in his black tails, he was as evasively elegant as a departing swallow.
His slow swoop across the floor to the fireplace was meticulous in its denial of grace.
He settled, as though with a folding of wings, beside Nicandra.
This pleased Aunt Tossie; an omen for the evening.
Were all here, aren't we let's have a glass of sherry,"he said to Dada.
Dada looked startled: "Yes, where's Twomey?" he asked.
 "Busy, I told him to leave it over there." 
Ah, Dada said, "good idea." 
He almost bustled to the far table where glasses and decanters provided him with an interval of escape from the lonely speechlessness that only Aunt Tossie understood.
Robert followed him, ponderous and thoughtful, his white tie limp from over-handling.
Don't they teach them anything these days?
Dada wondered.
I like it dry as a bone,"Aunt Tossie was saying.
I'm a medium kind of girl,"Lalage giggled.
 "Must I?" 
Nicandra looked into her glass.
"Yes, darling.
Drink up."
Aunt Tossie handed her own empty glass to Robert, with a nod towards the drinks tray — her meaning was quite plain to him.
He trudged back and forth, careful and dutiful.
Don t you really want to drink it?"
Andrew had talked to Nicandra a little aside from the others.
No.
The mermaid's eyes were lifted, long and despairingly.
 "Should we change glasses?" 
He took hers and put his empty one in her hand.
No word spoken before he said: "May I have the first dance?" 
Her eyes rounded in gratitude.
 "And the third and fifth and the seventh, all the odd numbers." 
 "I haven't got my programme yet, have I?" 
While shaken by delight, she managed to assert herself primly.
Andrew looked round the great, rich room before he swallowed her glass of sherry.
Dada was sending a horse on for him tomorrow.
 "Dinner is served, Madam," Twomey announced quietly from the doorway.
Without a moment's delay Aunt Tossie got up and sailed down the long room, the ends of her boa floating out behind her, careless majesty in her gait.
Three glasses of very good sherry had put her right with the world.
She felt ageless and she felt hungry.
Alone of them all, she knew how good dinner was going to be.
 "You here, you here." 
She directed them to their places.
Like a great-breasted pigeon, she preened her feathers along the low corsage of her dress, and spread her velvet skirts into perfect order as she sat down.
Robert, on her right, cleared his throat and thought for a moment before, looking from the silver basket of white flowers in the middle of the table, he said: "Your Christmas roses are wonderful.
My mother's are miserable — all a mass of awful spots.
What can she do about it?"
There was no effort or affectation in his ease with old people, or in his good manners.
Through the first course, clear soup so strong that it almost jellied in an empty soup plate, he talked to Aunt Tossie while she supped up her soup delightedly and gave him gardening secrets for his mother.
Then it was Andrew's turn, and the turn of his father's generation.
He conveyed the idea that she had known all of them in the beauty of her youth and theirs, and most of them had been her beaux.
In exchange, Aunt Tossie remembered winners they had ridden, fours and sixes they had hit, centuries they had made, and their handicaps in polo.
Champagne came with the fish.
Hours previously the fillets of sole in their bass carrier-bag had travelled by train, and on the handlebars of Twomey's bicycle, to the  kitchen and to Mrs Geary's genius.
Yesterday they swam to their deaths, tonight, tamed to perfection, they lay in a discreet miasma of herb-scented butter.
Aunt Tossie, calculating astutely that fasting gives an edge to appetite, had put Nicandra on Robert's right hand.
After the first glass of wine, bending solidly towards her: "The orchid was for you," he said.
Nicandra felt his hurt as absolutely as if she loved him: "Oh, Robert, Lal was so longing — you do understand?
Just think what she did for my midget."
And for herself, Robert thought, remembering her disappointed distance when he extracted her from the culvert.
 "I think I like my gardenia more." 
She touched the bruised petals.
With satin sliding over her unpropped breasts, she looked like an overgrown, dressed-up child.
Robert actually trembled in his longing to protect and to keep all trouble from her.
Across the table, Lalage put her mind to the subjugation of Dada.
No more the cutie, she was the serious seeker for information: "Tell me about afforestation.
Why are beech trees dying?
Are ash and oak and alder the native trees?…
Who was Nicandra beaten a length in the Cunnyngham Cup?"
 "Didn't give her running — mares can be funny." 
She didn't ask him to enlarge further on that long-ago disappointment.
She nursed him back into the winning story.
 "Three in a row, how marvellous." 
Her intimacy with those splendid past days was owing to her father's priming.
As Sir Dermot's lawyer, he knew the difficulties of extracting even a yes or no from him.
Tonight, Dada and that little girl, whose company he had so much dreaded, had their heads nearly touching as they bent towards each other, she asking, he elaborating.
While he waited to hand her the fish, Twomey was not amused.
Lalage looked up only when Dada, having completed a diagram of salt and pepper pots, directed her  attention to the flat silver dish she was delaying in its stately passage round the table.
 "Another bottle, Twomey," Dada murmured as he helped himself to fish.
 "Keep tambourine a-rolling," he said to nobody before he went back into a silence that remained unbroken while he ate his fish.
Hearing the sound of a cork popping, Aunt Tossie drained her glass in readiness for Twomey's round.
She knew that her irresistible hunger for the snipe pudding would lower the happy euphoria of the wine holding her airborne, almost exultant; for the maintenance of that happy state more champagne was needed.
When Twomey doubtfully filled only half her glass, she gave him a glance like a whiplash.
 "Madam, Madam, five to come," he hissed respectfully, his whisper turning into a sigh as he poured the amount required.
The slight upwards twist he gave to the bottle took the place of the wry smile he would never allow himself to give.
When she explored the depths of the snipe pudding for a bird she fancied, Aunt Tossie's pleasure rose to its height.
"There it is.
Dear little thing."
Complete and unbroken, the wild corpse kept its tiny crouch on her plate while Mrs Geary's finest and most secret sauce was spooned round it.
Aunt Tossie put the long-handled gravy spoon back in the napkin-swathed pudding bowl and waited in happy expectation for the sea-kale.
It would be the earliest, thongs milk-white and small as a baby's fingers, were even now draining on toast.
Snipe don't sing, they only drum their wings, she remembered, as she cut through the thread-like neck, and holding the bird's head by its absurdly long beak, crunched through the white skull and sucked out the strange delicious brains within it.
She wiped her lips on a vast white napkin and emptied her glass of wine.
She had no hesitation in her pleasure.
Slightly overheated by food and wine, she uncoiled her feather boa and put it to fly and float from the back of her chair.
 "Have two," she said to Andrew who was delving  dexterously about in the bowels of the great basin, "nothing more delicious, is there?" 
 "Are you sure about two?" 
"Yes.
I'm certain."
He found Aunt Tossie most agreeable, and wondered if it was true that she was very rich.
A bit intoxicated, he thought, as she leaned away from him, pulling the dress up on her fat shoulders, and began again on some exploit of an uncle (to him an ancestor) already recounted during the fish course.
Between Dada, who had, naturally, nothing to say to her, and Robert, who preferred other subjects to hunting and horses, Nicandra was spending a disconsolate hour.
Always longing to give and to please, she responded carefully and with an entire lack of interest to Robert's well-sustained efforts towards her attention.
They discussed the rudiments of the Charleston, that still over-sophisticated exercise in dancing, a world apart from the slow foxtrot and not yet a familiar of Irish Hunt Balls.
 "I can show you how," he promised, "but we would have to hold on to the back of a chair." 
 "Could you?" she said.
 "How lovely." 
That ended the Charleston.
 "I forget — are you at Oxford or Cambridge?" 
Robert hesitated — would she accept it?
 "Actually I'm at a Business College," he said.
 "Oh, you are clever." 
A businessman.
What a dreadful future.
How could the Bishop, his father, and a far-away cousin of Dada's, ever allow his son to go into Business.
 "What do you want to do?" 
Robert asked.
I want to fall in love, she thought, looking away from him with helpless distaste.
Aloud, she said: "How do you mean" do", Robert?
Everything one does, of course."
 "What's everything?" 
"The horses, the river, race meetings, shopping, I love.
And I adore reading."
 "Who's your favourite author?" 
 "Dornford Yates, by far." 
 "I haven't read him yet." 
"Oh, what a treat for you.
I'll lend you my Berry and Co."
She thought: If only there was a Jonah calling me M'Lady and running frightful risks chasing after spies all across Europe in a great Bentley.
It was with the trifle that the gross and embarrassing incident occurred, the event that Nicandra was to remember, squeamishly and for always.
Time passing never softened the impact of that moment when she looked down the table to where Twomey waited for Aunt Tossie to give her attention to the pudding he offered.
Well above the rim of the Waterford glass bowl, the great trifle rose in a stalwart bulge of whipped cream, topped by a single cherry.
It was Twomey's appalled stare downwards, past one great, creamy heap to another, that concentrated Nicandra's shocked observance.
Aunt Tossie's left breast bulged out, pale against the background of black velvet.
Suddenly, all saw, and all talk stopped.
The silence welled through the room.
Only Aunt Tossie was unperturbed by the presence of the dreadful thing that, freed of its supports, hung bare and toppled over.
She helped herself to trifle with splendid insouciance.
 "Ah, dear fellow," she said to Andrew,"pick up my feathers for me would you — I think the room's getting a bit chilly.
Do something about the fire, Twomey, please…
Thank you, dear child, how kind,"and she re-coiled the boa's black feathers with appropriate deftness.
In the persistent silence only Dada found his voice.
He gave an indistinct signal towards the sideboard and a bottle of rather sweeter pudding wine.
 "Quite nice." 
He paused before he added: "I think." 
Then they all talked wildly.
Even Nicandra, feeling sick as if she was eating Aunt Tossie, had a question ready for Robert.
 "Do you know the Froth Blowers  Anthem?" 
When she turned to ask him she saw that he was blushing painfully.
Aunt Tossie's misdemeanour became to her forever more indecent.
The road to the Hunt Ball was a long one — Dada drove the car, bestowed on him by Aunt Tossie years ago, when he had been rather upset.
It had proved quite an exciting substitute for lost love, and a pacifier in that time of grave trouble.
He considered it more dangerous than any horse he had ever ridden, and drove it on a tight rein, seldom exceeding 35 m.p.h.
Even so, he had survived some narrow escapes; always the fault of a Rotten Fellow's hopeless driving.
Tonight he chose an even longer road than the direct route to the ball, hoping to lessen any chance of approaching headlights.
Nicandra and Lalage sat with carriage rugs over their knees in the back of the big car.
Aunt Tossie sat beside Dada, a hot-water bottle at her feet and another in her lap, dreaming the time away and sobering up.
Now and then, a hand inside her fur coat, she clutched at her bosoms and pushed them farther down inside her dress.
Lalage grew desperate at the slow speed of their progress.
I could beat him on my bicycle; if it was daytime the asscarts would overtake us, she thought.
Wiping breath from the window, she peered out at the landmarks, all so distant from the place where she longed to be.
Every moment of pleasure missed was painful to her.
She could hear music.
She could see dance programmes filling up, and not a name on hers.
Her distress was evident to Nicandra, who felt nearly as embarrassed by Dada's miserable driving as she had been by Aunt Tossie's disgraceful exhibition.
She wondered if the boys were discussing this as they whizzed along the nearer road in Andrew's fast car.
They came at last to the great, bulky empty house, staring across to parklands through the inspired grouping of its trees.
Ghost of the family that had failed it and sold it, still a stubborn Protestantism held it aloof from usefulness to any new owner.
Now it was due for demolition.
Its death had been postponed, which had enabled the Hunt Ball Committee to hire it for the triumphant last appearance of a house that had outlived its glamour, and all kind importances.
Two men with stable lanterns in their hands waited on the grand sweep, vast as a sea shore, before the house.
They guided cars to the curving verges of grass, once mown close, now high and grown with thistles.
Lalage jumped out of the car and waited, hopping from foot to foot like a child longing to pee, while Dada and Aunt Tossie slowly disembarked.
Nicandra came last, and full of apprehension.
The muffled men with the lanterns lighted their way into the house up a vast perron, where once guests had sat in the sun before luncheon, and on into the hall, music belching into its emptiness.
Two loyal members of the Hunt, a hawk-faced lady and a meeker male partner, his coat a warm flame in the dark crevice where they sat, took their tickets, and money from Dada, and handed programmes, a Hunt button engraved on their backs and a tiny pencil attached to them by a red string.
 "You're a bit late, aren't you?" the stern lady said.
She was shivering in her dark fur coat.
"You know where the cloaks are?
Old Gwen's bedroom,"she said to Aunt Tossie.
They had both known the house when "old Gwen" was its chatelaine.
Then, they were as young as Nicandra and Lalage.
This reminder of a living bedroom was the shaft of an arrow cleaving an accurate way through time.
In the bedless bedroom, a fitted canopy stretched out squarely over nothing.
A forgotten lithograph, the Hounds, the Hunt Servants and members of the local Hunt (numbered for identification) still hung on a wall, stubbornly  reminiscent of better, or anyway, different times.
Aunt Tossie, a survivor from those days, and unconscious of a further decline, looped her feather boa strategically, and called to the girls to hurry.
A sad old woman rose from her chair, as from a dais, to take their coats and hang them on a row of hooks nailed against a wall.
A housemaid had been disinterred from the past for the occasion.
She was too well-trained in the proprieties to smile a recognition at Aunt Tossie; and Aunt Tossie did not remember her.
It was Nicandra who said: "Aren't you cold?" as she took off her coat.
A gust of winter air shook the shuttered windows into a mild clatter of protest.
"Oh, no, miss.
I love to see the style.
The style today is only gorgeous."
She belonged to the present more than to the past of that bedroom.
Her eyes ate up Nicandra's beaded satin, and shifted disapprovingly from Lalage's muslins — a clothes snob to the last.
 "You must be cold," Nicandra insisted.
She had found someone to pity.
 "Don't you want a cup of tea?" 
 "I'm only killed from tea." 
Nicandra recognized a raffish, twinkling suggestion that something stronger might be acceptable.
"Come along, girls.
Come along,"Aunt Tossie was all for the fun of the fair.
Downstairs, it was warmer.
Chimney-pieces and brass-bound grates had been torn out, dismembered, and sold, but fires still roared savagely, or sulked monotonously under cavernous chimneys.
The draughts that had drawn them when politely caged, were now either depleted or charged to fury.
Holly and trails of variegated ivies were nailed to the deeply shadowed squares where pictures had hung, their absence now heavily distinct on the wallpapers — Victorian damask papers, shredding in places to much earlier designs.
Through a string of three rooms they came close to the Ballroom; only an ante-room divided them from it.
Dada, looking very small and distinguished, was waiting for them.
The boys advanced: relieved from the onus of making Dada speak, they were quite eager in their delayed approaches.
 "Ours is nearly over," Andrew said reproachfully, stooping towards Nicandra.
 "It doesn't really matter," her response was awkward enough.
Even more awkward when she said, "Do you think you could get me a small glass of whisky?" 
 "Scotch or Irish?" 
Andrew's enquiry came sharply.
He had not expected to pay for any drinks tonight.
 "Irish," she said at once, surprising him again as he left on his mission.
"Don't wait for us, please, Nicandra said to the other two.
 "Oh, really, please don't." 
Robert hesitated — knowing the destiny of the whisky, Lalage took a chance: "Of course we will," she said — and how right she was.
 "Thank you so much." 
Nicandra took the glass from Andrew as if it was a chalice, and turned away.
 "Where are you going?" 
"To the Ladies' Cloaks.
I won't be long."
Drinking Irish whisky by herself in the Ladies' Cloakroom?"
Andrew looked dazed and slightly shocked.
Lalage was laughing.
 "You won't see her for another half an hour." 
Acting as quickly as when she had gone to ground after Nicandra's Nettie, she took his hand, lightly as a tame bird arriving to perch on a finger; with a touching confidence in his response, she turned her little monkey's face up to him, dropped the hand she had touched and, without a backward look led the way to the Ballroom.
Robert stood alone and waited; he was patiently expectant of Nicandra's disappointment when she should see him.
Aunt Tossie was deep in talk with a friend she hadn't bothered about for years.
Dada had disappeared on some sort of little prowl of his own.
Anything to  get away from the noise, Robert could imagine him thinking.
Aloof and separate from her ugly dress, Nicandra's beauty had an air-blown helpless quality divided from her proper self — the self that carried whisky to cloakroom maids and, in the act, lost her man.
As she came uncertainly to him, Robert felt for a moment the deep pleasure and well-being of sun on his shoulders.
She could never share his contentment, but there were ways in which to please and help her.
She was a bad dancer and he would be happy to improve this lack and ignorance.
Music and dancing were incorporated in his awkward body and gentle mind.
On the dance floor, his shape blew away in the secure grace of his dancing.
He wished they might share this brief delight.
Tonight he knew he was more likely to find the right and athletic partner in the wicked little friend who knew how to dance and how to steal, and how to do both quickly.
 "Robert," Nicandra said, and again, "Robert," changing the inflexion of disappointment to one of pleasure.
 "Robert you're waiting, I'm sorry." 
When he put an arm round her she was unyielding and at odds with the rhythm; he persisted, compelling her compliance not to him but to the music.
 "Ah, you're there," his voice sounded inconveniently deep.
When the band stopped they were both on a tide of pleasure; yet, she stepped away from him as though evading her share in the pleasure.
 "Thank you muchly," he said.
They joined the drift of crowd towards the sitting-out places and the too few chairs.
Groups drank champagne and screamed with laughter.
The loudest and most determined joker was a son and nephew of the house, staying in some house party for the ball.
He seemed bereft of sense as he pulled ribboned holly sprays from the walls and fed them to a sulky fire, cheering as they crackled and spurted heatless flame up the chimney.
His eyes were wild, and he blew on a hunting horn.
The girls mobbed him.
 "Does he mind dreadfully, do you think?" 
Nicandra stared and listened.
 "About the house, I mean." 
 "Not a lot, I don't think, he hunts the country now." 
 "Yes, of course, that must be a comfort to him." 
"Yes, of course.
Lots of noise."
The horn sounded again shrill and pleading a "go home" note over the dying house.
The huntsman was young and rather drunk.
Nicandra stood, transfixed in unwanted pity.
"Would you like a glass of wine?
I see your father has an open bottle."
Robert had to say it again before she heard him and looked across to the table where Aunt Tossie and Andrew were drinking and Lalage was jumping up and down, opening her mouth to catch with complete dexterity the pieces of biscuit that Dada, suddenly lively, was throwing into it.
As they watched, Andrew picked her up as though she was a little dog and carried her, kicking, back to the ballroom."
or would you rather dance?"
"I don't think so.
What would you like to do?"
He didn't want to see her hurt, longing eyes.
After this dance, Lalage must give up her predatory conquest.
Till then he would keep his love safe on a desert shore.
"My mother tells me there's a marvellous Regency conservatory, better than any house in Kew Gardens.
Let's look for it."
He had guessed correctly.
She was ready for a refuge and he would find it and bring her there.
How easily she bruised, he thought.
What did Nannie put on bruises?
Pomade Divine?
And he was offering her a derelict conservatory.
After a time, and the search became a Treasure Hunt, they found the window, shuttered and barred, that opened into darkness.
It was not outdoor darkness, but a place where a star shone through glass.
Carrying an oil lamp, lifted from its brass standard, Robert lighted their way.
They saw a long pool, a puddle of water shrunken to the rotting lily roots on its muddy floor.
Three downward steps stopped above a tidemark of dried moss and waterweed.
Happy and beautiful objects were still in their  perfectly positioned places.
Two plaster horses on folded knees leaned their heads prettily, coquettish, fresh for mischief.
A lead Cupid aimed his arrow from the top of a marble pillar.
Branches lay across the mouth of a pottery urn, their budding twigs stiff and still in a difficult death.
Tubs, their ribs opening, held the corpses of camellias, their desperation for water manifest.
Robert and Nicandra stood quietly in front of a bronze, a lover's head perhaps, placed unnoticeably some time ago.
Like confessions of happy confidences, two chaises-longues turned to each other, broken canework unwinding down their legs.
Robert picked up a wineglass from the low table that stood between them and scratched with a fingernail at the dry stain on the bottom of the glass.
 "And another one," she held it towards him, a very long tumbler.
 "Whisky for him and she drank wine," was his verdict.
It was all so despairing that Nicandra felt quite jolly when they had closed the window and barred the shutters on their escapade and Robert had restored the lamp to its standard.
Aunt Tossie and Andrew were sitting together, an empty bottle and one half empty, between them they looked inordinately distinguished in their black clothes.
Aunt Tossie's bulk was poised with extreme elegance.
Every feather in her boa fluttered and caressed as she lifted her arm and her glass.
Andrew sat close to her, immensely sad and trusting, as though she was his refuge.
Aunt Tossie looked up.
For the moment all the world was her playground.
"Darling, do have a glass of wine.
You look cold, darling are you cold?
Where have you been?
Robert, find two more glasses, please, if you would."
 "Where's Dada?" 
Nicandra asked, not from curiosity, more for something to say.
"Dada's dancing.
With Lalage.
It's the Blue Danube, so he can.
Isn't that lovely?
Two Tinies swirling together."
At the word "dancing" Andrew had risen slowly to his feet.
As though he remembered his manners, he looked an invitation at Nicandra.
She intended to say: Sorry, I'm dancing with Robert.
She said: "Yes." 
They moved away together towards the music.
The waistline of her white dress, belted solid with beads and diamante, gave her the look of a page walking with a courtly gentleman disguised in black — doublet and hose lying in a chest at home an elongated miniature by Hillyard, a gentleman up to no good.
Aunt Tossie could never bring herself to disapprove of any man, however loaded with mischief; she preferred men like that.
But, always kind: "Well, Robert, dear fellow," she crooned when he came back from the bar (where he had bought a third bottle of champagne).
 "Sit here, near me, and let's be cosy…oh, well, perhaps just a touch," she turned her eyes away from the bottle and gazed absently at the passing crowd until her glass was quite full.
Nicandra was happy.
Dada, dear fellow, was happy.
How many years since he had whipped up the spirits for any party?
Obviously this wicked little thing appealed to him.
Another wicked lady once had him in thrall…
Her presence and her loss had been equal disasters.
There was little for his comfort.
He was too old to breed or to ride another Nicandra.
All the good rides went to younger amateur gentlemen.
Life dithered on nervously, and he approved of nothing in it.
He felt rather shy and silly, when he came back to the table with Lalage, skipping along and grabbing for his hand as she went.
 "Oh, so wonderful," she sang a bar in perfect tune,"such a swirl!
Oh, thank you."
 "Yes," he said modestly, "I think I had the riding of it." 
A dream was explicit in the phrase…to get away with hounds, on a good horse, with a good start, and then ride your chosen line of country to the finish of a hunt.
The past showed in his eyes.
There was a quickened magnificence about him, Nicandra, back from the ballroom, thought, as  she had thought once before when he came riding towards her through a spring morning, transformed from little Dada into some kind of royal in his own right.
Then, it was a letter he forced her to give up.
Tonight someone else was his comfort.
 "Well," Aunt Tossie said, "and how was it, my darling?" 
Impatient to play her loving part in Nicandra's fate, whatever might befall her, she looked up from her glass, raising her head like a bird that finishes drinking.
Nicandra's eyes were full of tears.
 "Sorry I didn't hear you," she said crossly.
Recognizing her proper place, outside success or failure or even heartbreak, Aunt Tossie turned at once to her brother-in-law: "And did you have fun, naughty old thing?" 
 "Couldn't stop her, caught hold and fairly hopped it with me," he spoke almost under his breath.
Aunt Tossie knew she had embarrassed him, but it drew attention away from Nicandra.
Dancing with Andrew should have been as magical as when, in dreams, she had danced with Berry or Jonah.
Tonight, she and Andrew ought to have hummed along, two messages meeting on a wire.
It had not been at all like that.
Andrew's reserved, night-club hesitation was foreign to the music, and quite foreign to Nicandra.
Stiff and inelegant, she followed him, more anxious than ever in her life to please.
Rigid attention cramped all response, her feet were corpse-like in their obstinate denial of accord — only his patient skilfulness forestalled disaster.
He persevered silently while the music played, and drew a deep breath when it ended.
Now, as he drank Robert's champagne, and saw her, silent beside him, her head set downwards, a columbine on its stem, and as modestly inaccessible, Andrew knew that good manners and good sense told him to redress the misfortune of that last experience.
He leant over to whisper: "The next?" 
She was beautiful, she was rich.
Each  must recognize the invaluable importance of belonging to the Anglo-Irish "Family" .
That little wanton who had so suited and amused him had all the qualities necessary for a love affair, but none of those he calculated as obligatory in the girl that he might marry some distant day.
Lalage was not on the list.
 "Dada's simply dropping," Aunt Tossie told them.
 "What about beddy-beddy-byes?" 
 "Oh, not yet, please," Lalage jumped to her feet with the music.
She danced a step before Robert, as before a vast idol.
He shook his head.
Then, captured, he followed her to the dance floor.
He supposed he would be the one to drive her home in Andrew's car.
Later, in the hall, darkness grew again in empty spaces as candles guttered down and lamps blinked quietly as closing eyelids.
The ball was over.
Robert knew, as he waited while Lalage laughed with some stranger, that he was standing near a death-bed.
Solemn and clamorous, a choir of young people filed across the hall to the staircase.
The men wore the facings of distant hunts; the girls' dresses were short and narrow as striped rushes.
 "Old Man River," they sang, "he must know something…" they processed, always singing, not knowing that they sang a dirge.
They turned and went up the flight of stairs, a frieze of well-behaved actors.
 "Aren't they heaven?" 
Lalage was back with Robert.
 "It's the houseparty from Mount Martin." 
Her eyes were full of tears as she stared after them.
The reverence she had for glamour touched him.
 "Lovely to be going home with you, you can't believe how badly that old fool drives." 
Her bad taste distanced her again.
Sleepy and cold in the back of Dada's slow, unheated monster, Andrew put an arm round Nicandra's shoulders and pulled  her close for warmth and company.
 "You're cold too," he whispered, and laid a hand on her satin-covered knee.
Nicandra knew that this was a forbidden approach.
Serious, and reluctant, she pushed his hand away, and waited for the kisses on the cheek allowed within the code.
Mistaking her refusal, Andrew put back a less prudent hand to find it struck away smartly as she retreated from the arm round her shoulders.
The car was so big that when she leaned back into her corner there might have been a cold room between them.
Andrew was not going to accept rebuke or defeat from this untutored beauty.
He was a beauty too.
Like a game-cock in arrogance, he lifted her back across the dividing space and pulling away the collar of her, inevitably musquash, fur coat, he dropped his mouth low on the back of her neck, drawing kisses to and fro and nibbling gently across it.
Nicandra's response, the release of her body, was absolute.
There was a wild quality in her innocence that startled him; it was as if he had violated and deflowered her quite by mistake.
In her acceptance she broke the code of propriety, went beyond the established manners in a light encounter.
She should have laughed and snuggled and taken kissing only as a passing pleasure.
As it was he had to find his own way out of an embrace involving him far more seriously than he intended.
Although, in manners bound, he held and played with her hand for the rest of the drive home, he felt that he could have done instead with a nice talk about hunting.
A thermos of soup, cups, a plate of sandwiches waited on an ugly silver tray in the hall; a domestic attention marking the end of the party.
The fire burned hugely; Silly-Willie had been kept out of bed to feed it.
The warmth of the hall was  exaggerated by the absolute cold of the night outside.
This house still lived; there was no possible reason to question the permanence of its long-preserved prosperity.
Dada came in last, a frozen leprechaun he never wore an overcoat.
He had put his precious car away, rugs over the engine, the doors of the coach-house clamped together and bolted.
There was mud on the heel of one evening shoe…
"
Bit of bone in the ground.
Not enough to stop them."
He meant the hounds.
 "Soup?" 
Aunt Tossie invited.
 "When I've let the dogs out," he fussed away.
 "Well, children, I really think, Bed." 
Aunt Tossie threw her coat open.
Then, remembering that she had left her boa in the car, with a totally unhurried gesture, she put a hand up to hold it together at her throat.
Smiling, she waddled her way towards the staircase — a figure from a Russian fairy-tale, Robert might have thought.
Andrew came back from opening the door for her: "Do you think they'll hunt tomorrow?" he asked.
 "I expect they'll draw the woodlands," Nicandra said.
 "They'll never get a fox to leave." 
"No.
They'll be there for the day."
Nicandra felt crippled in their joint politeness.
She wanted to be alone; to escape with her triumphant discovery.
She knew now why she had been born, born for his love only.
The tremor that had spread through her neck and from her neck, told her so.
She supposed that he must share some, or all, of that ecstatic pang.
 "I think I'll go to bed now," her undemanding innocence set him free.
He watched her climb up the first flight of the stairs, saw her stop and turn back towards him.
 "Did you bring your own saddle?" 
 "No." 
 "Fagan Bill be pleased — strange saddles always give his horses' backs." 
Somehow he felt that she had beaten him at his own game of keeping things on a cool level.
He went back to the  tray where the soup and the whisky waited for his comfort.
He poured himself a large drink.
Whisky after champagne?
Which uncle had told him that was a fatal mistake?
He had often proved that uncle wrong.
Before she undressed, Nicandra pulled back the window curtains, cold as glass in her hands, and stood between them to look out at the changed world.
Even the moon was not the same.
It hung lower in the sky, nearer, more golden, since now she loved and was loved.
Once she had read a caption under the picture of a royal bride-to-be.
The royal bride was looking gracefully down into dark water: the caption said: where brook and river meet.
She understood its meaning because she was a woman now.
For always, she promised her love, stretching up her arms to grip the curtains higher; she shuddered and almost sobbed in her happiness.
To hell with Berry and Jonah, and Captain Lawless R.N., for now and always she had a love of her own.
Her dress lay on the floor, the linoleum nursery floor — weighted by its beads, it had fallen into serpentine coils.
Her petticoat fell next; then the cami-knickers; after that the suspender belt with its four suspenders clicking in their release.
Stockings dropped immediately to her lean heels.
A bit raffish in her carelessness she stood with both feet trampling the heap of clothes until her head emerged from the muffling of the white, over-ribboned, nightgown.
This unusual carelessness was her only overt act of celebration.
The reality was in her mind; so much, so soon.
In bed at last, believing and disbelieving, she turned her face delightedly into the pillows, smothering her certainty of kisses.
An hour later, Lalage came tip-toeing into her room where she heard a dog whining gently.
It was Nettie, with a nose under the door.
Quietly as a mouse, Lalage picked  her up and, candlestick in hand, went carefully through the darkened house to the hall door where she waited, the candle flame blowing flat and sideways, until Nettie came back, grateful and apologetic for the trouble she had given.
"Bed now, poor mite!
Isn't that just it?"she asked.
Back in her bedroom she settled the little dog beside the still-warm hot-water bottle in her own bed.
Then she undressed with due care for her dress, unbelievably crisp after its night of stress.
There were only shelves and drawers in the Nannie cupboard, so she was obliged to hang it by the loops of its sash from a hook on the back of the door.
She put trees in her shoes, rolled her stockings into a ball and folded everything else with a natural carefulness.
Then, in her neat blue pyjamas, she knelt as usual at her bedside.
Practical and calculating, never leaving a stone unturned: "Oh, Almighty God," she prayed, "help me to get him." 
Aunt Tossie loved Andrew too.
Old ladies have their fancies.
Andrew, with his lovely looks, his quiet ways, and his proper manner, went straight to Aunt Tossie's heart and head.
His response to her warm generosity, his attention when she swept all importances aside to consider the greater importance of the 3.30 at Newmarket, won her completely.
Andrew enjoyed her company and respected her imperious resilience to the classic effects of drinking.
That immunity could not last for ever, he thought, watching her rise to absolutely steady feet after her fourth glass of sherry.
So far as Andrew was able to think beyond himself, Nicandra's beauty overpowered him.
The vast and easy background of Deer Forest gave hope to a future prospect of marriage.
For the present, prospects were hopeless.
He had left his regiment (to his father's exasperated disgust) to learn about bloodstock and work for a while for a not over-reputable Irish trainer.
Four years after that Hunt Ball, where Nicandra lost her heart for ever, Aunt Tossie broke into her moneybox to endow the marriage of Nicandra Constance with Andrew Julian.
Dada was against the match: "Not a tosser," he said, "and not a very tidy horseman either." 
Aunt Tossie said, "Nicandra's not a horse." 
"Oh yes, I agree, but it's bad blood.
Don't touch it — no stamina — Old Andrew sold up and ran out to  Gloucestershire as soon as there was a spot of bother here."
 "They were burnt out," Aunt Tossie reminded him.
 "That's not the point." 
"No darling, money's the point.
Do I fork out?"
"Oh I shouldn't if I were you — what are we going to live on here?
Everything going out, nothing coming in."
 "If you kept away from the bloodstock sales, Dermot, dear fellow…" 
 "Oh, be reasonable, Tossie, there's this really interesting filly coming up…" 
Despite Dada's sensible advice, Aunt Tossie swept all uncertainty side and broke into her money-box.
To buy happiness for her darling, she bought a rather delightful little house of early Victorian date.
It had been a Church of Ireland rectory once, where some forgotten incumbent, a keen hunting man, had built a delightful little yard, adjoining the house and with every horsebox looking into the sun; with a hundred acres of good limestone land, the place was just the thing for Andrew and his horse-dealing.
After the marriage, the light of Aunt Tossie's generosity continued to spread its rays across the valley between Deer Forest and Kileady.
Andrew gracefully accepted (and expected) all that they were given and welcomed the ritual of Sunday luncheons at Deer Forest.
For Nicandra, it was different.
All the loving and giving of small luxuries and necessities that she had not thought of herself, and the expected regularity of their attendance at those sumptuous Sunday luncheons, encroached dangerously on the precious isolation of life at Kileady.
Some ingratitude within her shrank from Aunt Tossie's possessive sympathy and understanding.
Of course, there was nothing for Aunt Tossie to understand, but her concerned enquiries, sometimes with three meanings embedded in their concern, Nicandra found difficult to negotiate.
She was too stupid to parry questions like: "Don't you want a double bed, darling?
I'll give you a Giant's Affair."
How to say that they felt better, Andrew felt better, in those close twin beds where they lay near, interested strangers, meeting, or perhaps not meeting, in the night…
Nicandra denied to herself that she and Andrew could think differently on any subject.
She was completely and obstinately happy through these their joyous times, these flying years of the"thirties.
The bond of horses was strong between them.
Andrew bought young horses and made them well, Nicandra showed them to their best advantage, she had become a beautiful horsewoman.
Sometimes money was made, sometimes lost: life was cheap and amusing, they had a host of friends — of them all, Lalage was perhaps the closest.
Lal was a rich girl now.
Her clever father was dead, leaving her a small fortune by the standards of the day.
Surprisingly still unmarried, she lived with her obedient mother and spent the hard-earned money in a grand manner.
She had a couple of not very remarkable horses in training; she bought a double horsebox — the first in the County.
Andrew sold her hunters to her, not neglecting a nice little profit, after Nicandra had schooled them into perfection.
Lal rode them, so neatly and prettily, on as many days in a hunting season as her box could carry them to near or far-distant meets.
The double box was a wonderful link between the three happy friends — as often as not it took Andrew's horse on as well as Lal's.
 "You and I can share," Andrew would say to Nicandra, and to her the idea, particularly if it was a difficult horse, made her feel at one with him.
But she always insisted on taking her turn when hounds moved on to the most unlikely draw of the day.
Even better were the days when there was no box and she and Andrew rode home together through the short dark evenings, gentle friends, warm goodnights calling to them, stresses of the day, wonderful or not so wonderful, over and past, the time for loving and giving nearer…
Nicandra, who had never cooked, became expert and  devoted; for the timing of a souffle even love could be denied, the perfect souffle her present for him.
Her real world provided all such occasions for happiness.
She was happy when she starved herself of new clothes and expensive hairdressers, her bun gone, her blonde hair cut short, strict and styleless, by a merciless local hairdresser.
She was happy when she sat up all night to spare Andrew a vigil by a sick or calving or foaling animal.
She would call him when he was needed.
 "Get some sleep, darling, it's Listowel tomorrow" one of his favourite little race meetings.
And to Listowel they would start off early, Nicandra sleepless and dishevelled.
There had been no time to set about her hair, or her blue-white face, only enough time to make a delicious picnic and pack its basket into the boot of the car.
She might sleep then, until he shook her gently off his shoulder, because it was her turn to drive and his to sleep.
Robert found her, smiling and alone, sitting at the back of a stand.
 "You look cold," he said.
He settled his weight down on the step beside her and dwelt anxiously on her state.
There was rain — or was it snow?— in her hair.
 "You look fabulous," (he must remember her voice, unconsciously beautiful as the lonely bird).
Her eyes were on his new sheepskin coat.
 "Where did you find that coat?" 
There was a quiet smell of money about Robert, his business throve.
 "Do you know your size?" he asked.
 "What size are you?" 
 "I meant, for Andrew." 
Oh, he said carefully,"I think I've got the last of this breed.
Shall we have a drink?"
"No, I have to slip along pretty sharpish and get some money on to Lal's horse before they go out.
Now, look what I've said."
 "You know I don't have a bet." 
 "You don't talk either." 
She looks so silly and so beautiful, he thought; not surprising that she gets the money on.
 "After this next then?" he invited.
 "Love to, and Andrew and Lal?" 
She left him.
He watched her going down the steps of the stand, nervous and intent as though on a holy mission.
She was too tall and untidy, but her quality shone out like a light as she passed into the crowd, and the noise and the tension that are part of even the smallest race meeting.
Before he saw Nicandra alone on the stand, he had noticed a different kind of tension; it was in the bar, where Andrew was having a drink with Lalage, while now, he guessed, Nicandra would be getting the money on to Lalage's horse.
 "Well watch my race and tremble together, shall we?" 
Lalage said.
Robert noticed a long, thirsty — or was it hungry?— look exchanged between them.
Poisonous little whore, he thought, and too rich.
She looked rich too.
That new Jaeger overcoat was belted in a vice-like grip and her perch on the shooting stick was that of a tiny, very well-balanced, bird.
All Nicandra remembered about that race meeting was her pure delight at getting the longest possible odds on Lal's runner and Lal buying a bottle of champagne after her race, the three of them were celebrating when she remembered her tryst with Robert.
 "One must be kind," she said apologetically, when she saw him waiting and called over to him to join them.
By the end of the"thirties, Aunt Tossie wondered for how many years she had been paying for interesting yearlings, and with very uninteresting results.
It had been worth it.
There was a time when Dada could have done something  really silly, like…well, like shooting himself.
Time passes.
Tragedy gets tidied away — mortal injuries subside.
No point in saying money doesn't help.
When Aunt Tossie gave, or spent, she was as exuberant as a child, tossing a ball into the air.
 "All right," she would say, "but don't be silly about it." 
It's not long ago, Aunt Tossie thought (or said to Gigi — who was still  eking out her parrot's longevity) that we used to be rich, dear bird.
But it was not often that events of the past ten years paraded their shadowy happenings for her attention; very uncomfortable some of them were too — one unhappy little gamble of Dada's emptied her purse quite considerably.
The endowment of her darling girl had meant a surprising depletion in her income.
Some exciting advice — relayed by Andrew from a knowing uncle in the City — had jacked it up for a time, before an even bigger hole was left gaping by the failure of that magical investment.
If she could not provide a remedy for life's major troubles, she accepted a way round.
There was excitement in some of the greater changes that time dispensed over Deer Forest.
For instance, the afternoon when Twomey's touch with the tea tray's unfolding legs, successful for forty years, failed him, and teapot, Spode teacups, scones, sandwiches and blackcurrant jam crashed to the floor.
The shame of it may have caused the slight stroke that overtook him, or perhaps it preceded the disaster.
The upshot of it was: his due pension, and his departure to live with a faraway niece.
Dada drove him to her little house beside a lake in Co.
Donegal.
Twomey sat silent for all the two hundred miles of road, holding his cat under his good arm.
His dead hand he arranged, in a careful imitation of life, on his knee.
Twomey's niece had prepared what she considered "a nice meal" for the travellers, but Twomey would not allow anything so unfitting as sharing a High Tea with Sir Dermot.
He urged him to go to the local hotel, only twelve miles in the wrong direction.
The thing  Dada remembered most distinctly about the uncomfortable occasion was the very nasty look Twomey's niece had given to Twomey's cat.
After Twomey: the deluge.
Lizzie died, quietly and by herself, giving nobody any trouble.
One morning, on his way down to breakfast, Dada saw her kneeling on the left-hand flight of the double staircase; thinking she was saying her prayers, she was bent so low, Dada stepped past her politely.
After breakfast someone found her, sprawled in difficult death.
Lizzie, mentor and bully of all under-housemaids, was a very important part of the established way of life at Deer Forest.
But Mrs Geary was integral to its service.
So it was quite an upset, though not quite a mortal blow, when shortly after Twomey's departure, she took to having very funny turns, sometimes active, sometimes depressive.
Only Silly-Willie was able to calm or cheer her.
When she threw five eggs (and the hens were laying badly) at the kitchen maid, he caught them cleverly as they sailed through the air.
The funniest turn of them all took her one evening when, bent on success at all costs, she added a frothing soap powder to her immortal cheese souffle.
Minor disturbances, such as threatening the postman with a knife when, for the twentieth time, her expectancy of a letter was disappointed, were passed over, but the soap powder was a little frightening.
With extreme tact and gentleness, Aunt Tossie persuaded Mrs Geary into an Old People's Home.
Following on Mrs Geary's departure, a new and surprising interest opened in Aunt Tossie's life.
She, who had never made more than toast at a schoolroom fire, became an enthusiastic, if variable, cook.
Her delight in her cooking was that of a very young child offering imaginary foods to dolls or sympathetic adults.
Her admitted object was the instruction of the kitchen maid, who had absorbed none of Mrs Geary's genius.
Mrs Geary kept her secrets to herself.
Aunt Tossie had no secrets to keep.
With no Mrs Geary to guide her, she plunged her ambitious way through the exotics of  the European Cook Book.
Her morning descent to the kitchen was for her a moment of happiness and importance.
She suspected that for her to cook was a debasement of proper status, perhaps embarrassing for the kitchen maid, at her elbow for lowly tasks, or, more particularly, for Silly-Willie who waited at the stairhead to escort her safely down.
She corrected this idea by always wearing a hat, as though she had just looked in on her way to the garden.
For Silly-Willie the household difficulties and decay supplied an outlet for boundless energy.
He was drunk with a new importance, knowing himself to be irreplaceably useful.
He had learnt the proper way of cleaning and boning Sir Dermot's shoes and "doing" his lovely old clothes.
He acquired a new dignity when he brought in the five o'clock tea tray.
He did so smiling to himself in rapture at his achievement.
His finest moment came the first time he opened the hall door to a visitor and, standing a little aside, intoned, "Follow me, sir," before proceeding with due dignity to announce the guest at the door of the morning room.
His adaptation of Twomey's words and manner had in it something like the meticulous grace of his dancing to his mother's music.
Now he danced to the airs of a dying house, keeping its remote stateliness alive above the enveloping neglect that clouded the memories of Lizzie and her slaves.
He was so small that Sir Dermot's old suits had to go through considerable abbreviations and pinchings-in before they fitted him.
The blue suit that no longer went to the Curragh race meetings or the Dublin Horse Show, was his evening wear.
By day the grey alpaca coat, left behind by Twomey, covered him like a night-shirt; the turned-back sleeves often fell over his hands to hang for a moment with a pierrot's sadness.
Dada accepted all the changes at Deer Forest, not so much apathetically as with genuine indifference.
Comfort had never been important to him.
He was indifferent to good living in the matter of food, or wine, or warmth.
He  never cared if his feet were wet or dry.
In the most dreadful weather he would stand and wait in a wet grove of ash and hazel for a shot at a woodcock.
Of course, as time went by, he missed more birds than he killed.
One late afternoon, swinging on a crossing bird, he slightly peppered Silly-Willie who only laughed and jumped about delightedly.
One matter Dada found extremely puzzling, but he was far too well-behaved to open the question with Aunt Tossie.
What puzzled him was her reasons for meeting all expenses, and some absurd generosities, out of her capital, never opening her legendarily replete jewel box to assuage them.
She was distinctly a bit funny about her diamonds, always reputed to be fabulous.
The tiara had not glittered in Nicandra's wedding veil.
She had endowed the marriage (and he could never really like the fellow) most extravagantly out of her invested money, rather than taking a dip among the jewels that she never wore.
There was the time, too, when her refusal to recognize any point in the purchase of a most promising yearling had both distressed and exasperated him.
Again, she had kept the lid securely shut on her jewel box.
By slow degrees, the world of the bloodstock sales lost the best part of its consuming interest for Dada.
Now, at Deer Forest, two brood mares were all that was left from former dreams and ambitions.
Both he and Fagan were outgrowing the proper age for coping with forward two-year-olds — hence the breaking and making of the Hunter class of horse they reluctantly put behind them.
Before long, there was a new interest and activity in Dada's life — an interest provided and paid for by Aunt Tossie, who had once divined how the extravagant purchase of the Bentley and the Purdey guns might, in some practical  way, alleviate the loss of her wicked sister, his Love and Life; would at any rate restore something to his self-esteem.
Now she decided that an active and harmless occupation was what he needed, a pursuit within the powers she knew to be passing from his skill and prowess with horses.
She bought a vast and expensive motor mower, a machine that required skill and nerve for its direction and management.
She pointed out that the piebald donkey in leather boots that had for years pulled the mowing machine which cut the acres of grass at Deer Forest, was at the end of a useful life, and, in any case, the whole performance took up two working days of the farm labourer who drove her in long reins — reins thin as thread and cracked with age: there was nothing economical about that.
Countering Dada's insistence on the mechanical incompetence of every man in the place, she stated firmly that he, Dada, was the only one fit to touch the new toy that great virginal machine louring in its magnificence in the coach-house beside the stately Bentley and broughams and phaetons of other days.
Lack of space was not one of the problems that affected Deer Forest.
There, nothing was abandoned, nothing thrown away.
In the late"thirties, relics of previous lives and times were preserved in dignity and absolute uselessness.
Not all at once, but by degrees, Dada made a conquest of this stallion of modern technology.
He learnt to moderate its speeds, and the cutting levels of its great blades.
He had a magic touch on the string that jerked its engine into rather terrifying life.
The wide passages he cut so clearly across the overgrown lawns and terraces delighted him.
He expanded the area of cut grass to encircle nearer trees — this was his own idea and it pleased him hugely.
Crippled as he was from many falls, only lately taking their toll, he found in the lawn mower a kind of substitute for the experiences of earlier, dangerous days.
There was the nip of uncertainty: would she start?
Stop?
Get round that tree without disaster?
It stimulated memories; perched aloft in  his iron seat with mown grass a violent cloud behind him, he sometimes felt almost as though he was riding round Liverpool again.
The sensation was particularly poignant when the weather turned wintry.
Apart from this absurd recall, the lawn mowing was a worthwhile employment filling dull hours of long days.
It was on one of the most delightful afternoons of late summer, when Dada was getting round his bends most economically, never losing a yard of ground, that he saw Nicandra walking up the drive.
She was alone.
This was very unusual; she came only too seldom, and never without Andrew.
He would be glad to see her.
But not now.
He knew she would understand.
Important work had to take first place.
The house, grey and unsmiling, looked north down the slopes of Dada's well-kept lawns.
Empty windows stared — there was nobody at home except Aunt Tossie in a distant wing, stitching away at another exotic parrot in her gros point.
The kitchen was empty because the kitchen maid had special leave of absence to attend a party given for her aunt who was making her profession in the Religious Life.
Silly-Willie was killing ducks.
Nicandra was walking very fast, almost violently, through the hot afternoon.
She had left her dogs in the car at the gate.
There was always trouble between hers and Dada's darlings.
She passed a grove of birch trees, their limbs mottled and elegant as a herd of giraffes.
The stones in a wall seemed to ripen in the hot sunshine.
A rook, picking at a dead rabbit's eyes, hesitated before he lumbered up and flew away.
She walked with total indifference to what she saw.
She was concentrating on the speed and length which her stride might attain as she hurried up the long  slope.
At the end of the"thirties she had other things on her mind besides horses and cooking, dogs, bantams, geese and Love Eternal.
Andrew had not been pleased, not at all pleased, when she told him: told him with an almost religious reticence.
In his want of pleasure, in his obvious anxiety, he might have opened a bank statement ending deeply in the red.
 "Are you sure?" he asked.
His anxiety, his thought for her, went to the quick of her loving.
She lifted a radiant face for his kiss.
 "Of course I'll be all right, don't worry," she said.
When his kiss only brushed her cheekbone, she pulled herself away to stare into doubt.
 "Aren't you pleased?" "
"Oh well, of course I am.
In a funny sort of way."
"Funny?
What kind of funny?
It's not funny exactly."
"Can't you understand?
How do you think we can possibly afford this sort of thing?"
"Aunt Tossie would love it all.
She'd help."
"Oh, I expect so.
It's not just that, it's going to bitch up everything.
Do think, darling."
She remembered the years of forethought and carefulness (methods described by Lal, always her sage experienced friend), and she thought of them without regret.
They were part of her loving.
Now, in spite of all her regular care, this had to happen.
Before she told him there had been a kind of subdued glory, a triumphant secret warmth had been hers.
Now she must deny it.
The glory dwindled into a nuisance, a practical difficulty, since that was how he saw a child.
"How long?
Oh, that's not long,"he said hopefully.
"Don't you want it?
You mean, you don't want it?"
When had her secret become "it" ?
"Can't you see the muddle it's going to make?
Nannies, schools, God knows what…and you know the Balls Raggets are thinking about me, joint with old Billy Naylor.
We could have such fun,"he pleaded.
 "It's a rotten pack of hounds and a rotten little country." 
She spoke her mind for him.
Never for herself.
I'd be hunting hounds."
Despair for his pleasure was low in his voice.
 "Oh my darling, what must I do?" 
She came nearer, she would give her life to please him, and this other life was in her gift now.
 "Ask Lal," he suggested.
"Old Lal is bound to know, and you might see what Aunt Tossie could come up with.
Say it's to drain the West Bog."
It was a joke — he laughed.
He knew she was on his side now.
She saw the impossibility.
He kissed her.
Her pleasure was divided with an odd memory, insistent behind her yielding: a little broody hen, persuading stones to be eggs under her spread feathers; after that, a cold nest.
The memory left her entirely when she put her hands up to his shoulders, close into that bony warmth until, attentive to his abstracted silence, she dropped them.
He was right, of course, this was not a time for love.
She acquiesced with a full understanding of his reserve, and with no lessening in her dedication to his pleasure.
Nicandra was breathless as she neared the end of the Avenue.
Here, every autumn since her childhood, she had been moved and pleased by the sight of cyclamen growing low and lavish in the leafmould under the copper beech where the driveway forked, left and right.
One fork went to the stableyard, the other rounded the lawns and continued on to the gravel sweep and the hall door.
Nicandra waved and smiled at Dada, but did not try to speak above the enormous racket of his engine.
 "I don't know why I came, I can't possibly tell them," she thought as she watched the tiny man, perched up high as he circled meticulously round about on his chosen futureless employment, shouting: "Wor'-oss, Wor'-oss" to the dogs that followed him, as faithfully as seagulls follow a plough, when he made one of his grand and speedy turns.
She felt as distant from Dada as on that faraway teatime when he had turned down Dora's Dolls' House in favour of his photograph album though now she thought of him with a gentle benevolence, the distance between them was changeless.
With Aunt Tossie, it was an entirely different matter.
If she knew the truth today, her sympathy and her sense of drama would be equally engaged, and with her money, her right to know, to know everything.
not how Andrew had insisted, of course…but Aunt Tossie's loving and monumental generosity would be a lasting shroud for unhappiness.
Much as she dreaded the near embarrassment of asking for money, the West Bog and its drainage was the best and readiest solution to their problem.
Not really a Problem, she assured herself.
After all, six weeks, there could be only a shadow of "it baby" , "embryo" were words she didn't speak, even to herself.
The house was her object now: the house where, she told herself and believed, she had been so happy in a bright, unshadowed childhood.
She saw herself as such a jolly little girl.
She must have been quite a joker with that bantam on her head, pigeons fluttering noisily on her shoulders; it had all been wonderful outdoor fun.
Her love for Maman, with its consuming passion to please, belonged to the times before Maman had, as she now realized, so gallantly followed her love.
She no longer linked the flight with her own act of disobedience over the spinach, ably abetted by Aunt Tossie.
The happenings on that day belonged vaguely to the moment when she had seen, not a butchering, but the butcher's ugly pleasure in a sacrifice.
Pity for the lamb, its feet tied, its pale head held on the ground between Anderson's boots, had never been quite lost in an adult's sensible acceptance of such things being inevitable prior to Sunday's luncheon.
Both before, and for long after Maman had left them alone with each other, the useful and interesting occupations Aunt  Tossie found, or invented, for her, were always in unhappy contrast with both love and its cold aftermath.
And, again in contrast to being a useful, helpful sensible little girl, was her cosy friendship with the changing series of under-housemaids who laughed so readily at her jokes and gave her lumps of sugar from morning tea trays — sometimes it was a peppermint.
Mind and don't suck it near Nannie.
They were all in a delightful conspiracy of naughtiness.
Then there was Silly-Willie at the Gate Lodge.
Before Aunt Tossie had sent him away to that Special School, Nicandra had been such a good little Queen to him.
She had enjoyed bringing him goodies from the kitchen — ends of puddings in one of the dogs' dishes, the last remains of cakes, meat, bones — only chicken bones, because they were so bad for the dogs.
She ordered him to dance for her before she bestowed the treats.
Once, that was after Maman had gone, and when his own mother was distant, she had compelled him to eat a whole snail, slashing his legs with a nettle till he obeyed, and the stinging of the nettle really enlivened his dancing.
And there was another "it" in the relationship between Queen and subject — a little incident to leave strictly alone in the dark sludge of memory.
After Maman went away it excited her to hurt somebody.
There was nobody to love.
Today she was hungry only for the house.
She reminded herself that one day it would be hers and Andrew's.
Surely the Estate owed her something immediately.
They should not feel aggrieved at her asking for money; when she went into the cold hall she felt that it would not give her back much, if anything.
The hall had always seemed as unfriendly as an abandoned church — it belonged to the days of Lizzie's strict attention and Twomey's quiet, dignified footsteps.
The two tiny suits of armour still stood where they belonged since some remote knight had given them up (sent them to the attic of the day, like old hunting boots).
Here they remained: first in the Tower, now in the house that had  succeeded it.
The slots and slits in their visors were full of dust, their drooping gauntlets gripped on nothing at all.
The huge "club fender" of early Edwardian times should have held on to its proper suggestions of Christmas, when a group of laughing guests sat there, full glasses in their hands, while child actors performed in a glittering pantomime, entrances and exits from behind the Christmas tree.
Maman was a true victim to any sort of party.
Of course there had been many Christmas parties after Maman went away, Aunt Tossie saw to that — but they were not memorable.
Thoughts of that previous one only crept their way back with the forbidden thought of a child.
She went through the hall to the ante-room below the great upward-plunging staircase.
Again, without Lizzie's care for its brass rods and polished margins, it rather slunk upwards, its dignity lessened by the light to which it climbed.
Sunlight poured down from the window in the upper ante-room, to the twin flights of the stairs.
Some evening she and Andrew would separate on the halfway landing and go up by different flights to meet and kiss at the top.
Anything, Nicandra knew, was worth doing to keep this dream living.
She knew she could not fail him.
As a presage, she didn't go up to the top alone.
She turned her back on the light and opened the door on to the smaller staircase.
Dust everywhere here too.
It lay thick on the margins; a bat, alive or dead, clung on the corner of a picture frame.
There was a sweet horrible smell of bats in the lavatory.
The two nurseries were damp discarded places, their ceilings blistered and flaking like old orange peel where rain had forced its way backwards from blocked gutters.
Here, through the space of a breath or two, she could live for a moment in the rapturous evening when she and Lal had dressed for the Hunt Ball: the evening that had given her Andrew.
From that night their courtship had been her life.
Could he get leave for this dance?
For Punchestown?
For the Horse Show?
Since their marriage, tree years later, his will and wishes had been hers.
In their fulfilment, her won happiness was as complete as that of a warm purring cat.
A barren cat, she reminded herself quickly, is just as happy.
Happiness is vulnerable to its own destruction.
Nicandra was dimly aware of this possibility.
So a blind obstinate energy kept her constant in her refusal to allow any eventuality to mar her Love Affair.
Her exalted moment of remembrance expired, she sighed in her relief and in her certainty of purpose.
It was only from idle curiosity that she went into Nannie's room.
There the presence of the past startled her, not altogether pleasantly.
It differed from what she liked to think of as those warm closeted nursery days.
This nursery had been better preserved in its decay than her own bedroom.
It was still a nursery.
A chair, amputated to accommodate Nasty (and she had been nasty) Nannie, still sat near the fireplace; the cold grate was still guarded by its high wire fender.
A round table covered in cracked oilcloth stood bare of bowls, jugs, cups and saucers.
The brown teapot with a slightly broken spout sat like a cold little sentinel on the hob, jackdaws rustled above it in the chimney.
The awful sensation of a dead nursery comforted her; she did not want nurseries to seem cosy and beautiful.
Employing only a cool curiosity, she had defended herself from sentimental pretences.
Discarding pretence still further, she opened one of the drawers in the white chest of drawers, slamming it shut at once on the unfashionable baby clothes that Nannie had left in tidy small piles, washed and mended as though she had planned for them an after-life in which Nannie's memory should have a lasting importance.
She felt angry at the idea being thrust on her, and more determined in her purpose of obtaining money for the drainage of the West Bog.
She only dreaded that she might be asked to give some positive details of the scheme she and Andrew supposedly envisaged.
It was tea-time in the morning room.
Aunt Tossie lifted the top half off one of yesterday's scones and spooned blackcurrant jelly on to it.
Dada sat low, his knees well below the level of the table.
A nursery high chair would have been better suited to his bent and miniature height.
He gazed longingly at the sandwiches, Gentleman's Relish, but he did not take one — neither did Aunt Tossie eat her scone.
They were waiting for Nicandra to come in.
They had something rather awkward and difficult to tell her.
The western sun shone, drenching the morning room in an excess of light.
Dogs gasped and changed places; long ago cushions and covers had placidly yielded up their colours; Aunt Tossie's parrots fainted into their backgrounds, curtains dangled the edges of their rotten linings in the glare; the evening was brimmed with lassitude.
When Nicandra came into the morning room, the air was stilled for a moment.
The sudden sight of her, the extreme quality of her beauty, always moved Aunt Tossie into an ecstasy of appreciation: appreciation and regret for Nicandra's shocking waste of its potential.
Why must her blonde hair, bleached now by the long summer's light to a ravishing pallor, be chopped so harshly?
Why not use those enormous silly grey eyes that never had a wayward or mischievous look in them?
The very unattractive grey flannel trousers, who could guess at the legs they hid?
The charming breasts were lost in the folds of a faded Aertex shirt of Andrew's.
Revealing sweaters were in fashion now — after all it was 1939, not 1954 so why not wear one?
Aunt Tossie knew that a slavish contentment in marriage should never obliterate further effort.
That was the fatal way — sometimes she trembled for her dear one.
A trapped rat is safer than a prisoned lover.
 "Hullo my darlings," Nicandra stood in a blinding shaft of sun, one hand held her shirt up to her chin, "How are you?" 
The "are" was prolonged.
Dada felt foolish in her concern.
 "Darling one, you're looking wonderful." 
Aunt Tossie shuffled the cups and saucers,"Sit here, near me, and try one of my scones — made only yesterday.
Silly-Willie popped them back in the oven and buttered them up himself.
Isn't he getting clever?"
Nicandra shuddered.
 "I've left three for you," Dada suggested the sandwiches.
 "Please, a cup of tea," Nicandra proposed weakly.
 "No milk, oh, thank you." 
Very apologetically, she moved a dog from the corner of the sofa nearest to Aunt Tossie and reached for her cup and saucer.
 "Oh, Dada," she was conscious of some uneasiness — was he hurt by her refusal of one of his favourite sandwiches?
"Actually I think I'm rather hungry — I've been longing for a sandwich.
Can you spare one?
Gent's Relish, how perfect."
She ate a sandwich.
She looked rather queasy, and very anxious.
Aunt Tossie considered if this was the right evening to tell her the news.
 "How's the Crippen colt?" 
Nicandra asked.
Dada answered cheerfully;"All right— going to the November Sales — don't think he'll do a lot — very unattractive — small — back of his knees — beautifully bred.
Don't know what went wrong.
The mares are going too.
They might do something for us."
 "Dada!" 
It was a cry of consternation.
"You're giving up?
You can't think of it — no horses."
 "Oh, a time comes," Dada spoke the words as though he was quoting somebody else.
 "It's not just the horses," Aunt Tossie longed to get it all over with.
 "The place has to go too — and the house." 
She looked round the room in a tolerant way,"Giant liabilities.
Can't pay these iniquitous rates.
Can't mend the roof, and it's pouring water — we've made soul-searching  economies, and the Bank is still perfectly livid with us."
She spoke rather grandly.
Nicandra was silent, stunned in disbelief.
An agony of love overcame her.
This was why the house had turned its back on her approaches, showing her no return, no promise of refuge when she had come, hungry for its comfort, its assurance of the future.
 "Who do you think is going to buy Deer Forest?" 
"The Agents have some splendid tycoon smelling at it.
We don't know his name yet, but they're sure of him."
Aunt Tossie sounded confident.
 "We're to perch here till he decides to take over." 
Dada laughed merrily.
"That might be quite some time, we think he's English.
All this bother with Hitler and Poland.
Yesterday's Times had rather a worried headline."
Nicandra shrank into her corner of the sofa.
"No, thank you.
She refused Dada's offer of a second sandwich.
 "I feel rather sick," she said.
 "Oh my darling, not fro-up sick?" 
Aunt Tossie asked as she might say: "Do hope it's not something nasty settin" in?"
Nicandra shook her head.
"Its just — I can't believe it.
Is it all settled?"
"Almost.
We'll be all right— you mustn't worry,"Dada said.
 "I mean to buy a caravan — do they call them" Mobile Homes', what an awful name!— Gigi will love it."
 "This lawyer fellow says I can have a flat in the stableyard." 
"Think of all the fun doing it up.
Plumbing too,"Aunt Tossie put in.
"But why must you?
And what about old Fagan?
And all the other men?"
Nicandra was looking for difficulties.
 "They'll be taken on — I've insisted," Dada sounded like a great beneficiary.
 "And Fagan needn't move," Aunt Tossie reassured her.
 "Dada will be over the Pigeon Cote and the old dog kennels." 
Nicandra drew a deep breath.
It had to be said.
Only she could say it.
She must not fail him.
 "Have you thought — what about Andrew and me?" 
She choked back further words.
It was an accusation, and in the poorest of taste.
There was silence.
Aunt Tossie pushed her chair away from the tea table and reached for her latest square of needlework — a parrot clutching its way up the husky stem of a palm tree.
She said gently: "Don't be hard on us, darling.
The place is in ribbons.
And, oh, the Bank…
"
She shivered.
 "We don't talk about this sort of thing, do we?" 
Dada meant Wills and Successions.
"I don't know if you realize, but your Aunt made over most of her stuff to you when you married this fellow.
And I've been bleeding her white ever since.
Stop the rot.
Stop the rot.
Stop the rot."
He cried out three times in his pain.
Nicandra was angered by "marriage with this fellow" .
She knew what "this fellow" meant when Dada said it like that.
Her darling was belittled.
If they guessed why she was here, beset by care, unable to eat a sandwich, how would they react?
 "We have our problems too," she said sullenly.
 "I must go." 
She got up, "Oh, I must — I've left doggies in the car." 
That was an unanswerable reason.
They did not try to stop her.
Silly-Willie met her in the hall, he came from the farthest door; his step was as fast and light as his dancing.
Every step he took, Nicandra thought, he was dancing on a grave; not Aunt Tossie's death, nor Dada's, but the death of a house.
He was in power now, the only useful slave left to them.
Not surprising that he danced.
He would rule them out of necessity.
How well would he care for them?
She thought he gave her an intimate  probing look as though he was thinking "does she know?" 
Nicandra went down the steps and under the dark carriage portico that put its pillared bulk between evening light, or the light of the moon.
She was going home to Andrew.
She was shaken with her longing to see him again.
How long was it, three hours?
It felt much longer.
The smell of Dada's cut grass was in the air.
The thought of his busy mowing, so useless and so trivial as a defence against the disaster that encircled the house and their silly lives overcame her.
With the pitiless unknowing complacency and contempt of the young, Nicandra resented their trivial employments of time, so far distanced from the terrible hazards of loving.
Presently Dada would go to the yard for his evening duties: a light inspection of the yearlings and a long and absorbing confabulation on their prospects with Fagan.
Bloodstock was about as useful as Aunt Tossie's embroidered parrots, perched, or flying, or elaborately caged, on every cushion and stool in the house.
Soon there would be no more cushions or stools for her to decorate.
She could quite see Aunt Tossie unpicking the oldest and least favoured work and starting the canvas over again.
Soon it would be the time for her evening drink: "Just the one, Gigi, don't you think?" she would croon when the old bird, freed from her cage, crawled up to crouch against her cheek.
"Well, you're wrong, darling.
Granny's taking a tiny one along to the kitchen.
You want to come with me?
You shall."
In the hall she would put on her hat and, lulling all suspicions of decay and its mortifications to rest in the conviction of her own economical and resourceful genius, with Gigi on her shoulder, she would stand at the head of the basement staircase screaming (Gigi would scream too) for Silly-Willie and Brigid to come and take her instructions and give their assistance while she created some nauseating delicacy for Dada's dinner.
Luckily enough, as she often admitted, unashamed and amused, Dada would eat anything.
Once out of sight of the house with its menaces and disappointments Nicandra ran down the drive, jogging and shaking to set herself free from what was not a baby.
She ran desperately, soliciting a fall.
When at last she fell, she waited, lying expectant on the stones, before, in a small anguish of disappointment she picked herself up.
The reassuring love she had expected from the house she found in a different measure from the three little dogs, friendly, even worshipful, and proffering no accusations of her neglectful absence — their care and pleasures important to her, she leaned against the car and waited while they took to the woods and the wild.
She did not court disobedience or fuss them by calling.
She knew they would come back to her.
Beyond the gates and the Gate Lodge, derelict in its faded prettiness, her real world waited, and in it the life that contained all happiness.
"You're happy?
Are you happy?
You are happy?"she asked the dogs when they returned, relieved and refreshed, to hop bright-eyed and panting into the car.
She drove out through the gates and along the demesne wall; the grip of blackbeaded ivies was close in its stones.
Behind the wall, beeches and chestnuts were just faintly jubilant in their near escapes from the weights of summer.
The lift of autumn in the air went contrary to the trouble she could not make herself consider.
In the village, she stopped to buy groceries; first on her list came cheese, then butter, then two pounds of very thin rashers of smoked bacon — Andrew only liked it smoked, and cut very thin.
She waited, fatally near to the racks of wine, while an obliging boy shaved the slices from a fresh side.
Suddenly reckless, she chose a bottle of wine — a vintage they should not afford.
Its purchase lifted her heart so much that she bought another.
Replete in a small guilty elation, she was on her way back to the car when she met Robert.
She stopped.
 "Hullo, Robert, you do look green." 
Ponderously unattractive and sick, that was how he looked.
Pity rose in her, "What's the matter?" 
 "Touch of trouble on a lung — nothing much — everything under control." 
 "Everything under control" , what a phrase!
Of course, he was in Business now — a Business man.
Did they say "Executive" ?
 "You aren't looking so very well yourself." 
He sounded anxious, but warmed to have something in common with her.
She looked more untidy and uncertain than usual, he thought, and she was carrying far too many parcels.
 "Oh, I'm all right," she sounded impatient.
Then, remembering her manners: "What are you doing?
Just shopping?"
"Not exactly.
I've sent them a big consignment of wine, I'm in that as well as the grocery, and I'd love to know how it's selling."
He indicated the glass-enclosed office in the back of the big old shop,"He's the Fortnum of the South.
He gets his tea from us too."
 "Oh, you are clever," she said, "are you making lots of lovely money?" 
 "Yes," he said gently, "I've been pretty lucky — may I have your parcels?" 
He took the load from her and walked rather slowly to the car.
When she had opened the car door and quieted the protests of the dogs, he put her parcels in, packing them together as neatly as any shop assistant.
When he straightened up from his arrangements, his face was as pink as a very good ham, and his breathing sounded a trifle odd.
 "Thank you so much," she said.
"Don't overdo things, dear Robert.
Promise?"
She had to be giving something, he knew, if it was only a word.
He turned away from her and went back to his business.
As she drove home by all the familiar back roads that shortened the distance to Kileady, the shopping euphoria dropped down into black anxiety.
She would have to tell Andrew how little they could hope from Deer Forest, then  or in future times.
I'm a worry, I'm a nuisance, she thought, and took a hand off the wheel to scrape a tear from her cheek.
She wished so desperately that she was coming home with good news.
Money in her purse, their purse, was always good news for Andrew.
The sturdy drawing room (living-room was still an unborn word) of Kileady was devised to accommodate and celebrate the outdoor life: many dog baskets sat on its beige carpet, many pictures by Lionel Edwards and Snaffles hung on its ivory walls.
Low tables from the General Trading Company, their surfaces faced with glazed maps, somehow invited the pleasant idea of a drink.
In contrast, the curtains were velvet, heavy with gold braiding, a present from Aunt Tossie.
They were lined and inter-lined, excluding any breath of draught, giving an enclosed night-club feeling when the parchment-shaded lights were on.
Although they had cost a mint, Aunt Tossie felt they were well worth the money, a fitting background for her darling.
Her darling rather hated them, but — still more — hated to hurt feelings.
On this bright evening, they were looped back by twisted and tasselled cords; light came streaming in through the sashed plate-glass windows.
The house had been a rectory once, large enough and plain enough to contain a rector's brood.
Now, dogs, cherished like any other brood, took every advantage of Nicandra's tender indulgences.
Andrew and Lalage were sitting, on carefully opposite chairs, looking at each other.
He had just told her his bad news.
 "And after that," Lalage was saying, "I think a little drink, please." 
"All right.
Get it for yourself."
With resolute discourtesy Andrew reached towards the silver cigarette-box on the just-too-distant table.
 "Please," he said.
Lalage was taking a  cigarette out of her shagreen case.
She put it in her mouth and snapped the case shut.
"Lazy sod.
Get up and give me a light, and a drink too while you're at it."
Andrew laughed.
This was a kind of play-group affair affected between them.
There was a whisper of whips through it, a distant whisper.
For years she had waited, teasing him with abuse and flattery along with the frequent loan of valuable conveniences, such as her horsebox.
She knew his tough unconcern over her other love affairs put an edge on his interest, an edge sharpened by her money.
The irresponsibility of their odd relationship just suited him.
She was, after all, Nicandra's greatest friend.
 "That's why I'm telling you," he said, "because you're my darling Nico's greatest friend." 
The extra depth in his voice was an answer in the game.
Lalage knew why he had told her.
She guessed what he needed was information, then money.
She would play along, another intimacy in their relationship was always of value to her — one of the opportunities her looks alone would never yield to her.
Lalage had the style that goes beyond looks.
This evening she was wearing a little suit from a woman called Chanel, something that she had drabbled and subdued into an obscurity proper to its country background.
Its quality was, she knew, changeless.
She wore no jewellery, except a gold and platinum twisted ring that some friend had given her, and the heavy signet ring, perhaps it had been her father's, that weighted one hand.
Her hands were deeply sunburned and so was her throat; the collar-bones within the gaping shirt were dark as treacle.
Just back from the South of France, Andrew thought jealously — together with York or Doncaster, such jaunts were forbidden pleasures for him, especially now that this new incubus had been fathered on him, all three were beyond possibility.
While they sat there together, drinking and smoking, Lalage considered Andrew's looks  with discreet dissecting pleasure.
She approved the beautiful careful clothes of the"thirties that he wore with such distinction: the swinging tweed jacket, the striped shirt with its careful collar and gold safety-pin, the blue bird's-eye tie, all became him immensely.
The shoes, handmade to last a life-time, should have been symbols of polite security, but there was no security.
In this new emergency, Lalage looked behind the mask of prosperity and saw a valid reason to get closer to him, yet never to lean or serve.
Kick him, she thought with brutal accuracy, that's the way to his bed.
She knew the spark their play could generate, she was helpless in her own cruel naughtiness.
Grief was not her concern.
 "So?" she said, "You've had a long holiday from the kiddies." 
 "Nico's been happy as things are — were," he added mournfully.
 "Yes, she loves her animals," Lalage aimed an accurate kick towards the brown Lakeland terrier that was approaching her.
In the course of Nicandra's day, drinks time was biscuits time for dogs, "And what does she mean to do about it now?" 
 "She's worried, but she does see the point." 
 "The point is — you don't want children." 
 "I've nothing against the poor nips," he said crossly; "only, not now, we can't afford them now." 
 "Getting rid of them can be quite expensive too." 
 "How much?" he asked.
"About 100.
You might get it backdoor for £25.
Then, anything might set in after that job."
 "Can't take that on of course." 
He looked quite despairing.
 "The whole thing's impossible." 
 "Financially?" 
Lalage looked into her drink, swirling and looking as if she saw money in the bottom of her glass.
 "Where's Nico?" 
 "She's gone to see Aunt Tossie." 
 "Bad news there, I've heard." 
 "She'll part with one of those diamonds she's been clinging to." 
"Don't be silly, they must all have gone years ago, keeping Sir Dermot out of the Courts.
He's really let himself go since my old Dad died.
Too silly."
 "Criminal, actually," Andrew sighed deeply over the excesses and idiocies of the previous generation.
He got out of his chair slowly when Nicandra came in.
She was preceded by a cloud.of dogs.
Lalage noticed that she did not stop to praise or caress one of them.
 "Oh, Lal," she said.
 "Oh, good," her voice was lifeless.
 "Has Andrew looked after you?" 
"Yes.
He even made toast."
"Oh why?
Kate left sandwiches ready, darling."
 "And we found the sandwiches." 
They sounded like two naughty children raiding a larder in a nice book for girls.
Nicandra had no part in the adventure, no share in the fun.
She remembered the horrid phrase: "in her condition" — tears were close.
 "Must feed the doggies," she stooped over them.
"I wonder if Kate put the casserole in the oven?
I did tell her."
"Yes she must have.
It smells delicious."
 "Stay to dinner, why don't you?" 
Andrew said.
 "Yes Lal, why not?" 
Nicandra echoed sadly.
If ever she needed Andrew to herself, it was tonight.
 "Well, perhaps — no, I don't think so," somehow Lalage conveyed a feeling of being unwanted.
 "Oh, come on," Andrew insisted.
"No.
Really.
I have a runner at Naas tomorrow."
The contrast in their present lives could not be made more explicit.
The distant race-meeting was exactly the place where Andrew would most wish to be.
But Nicandra knew he would stay with her.
The guilt she felt in depriving him of any pleasure was like a stitch in her side, yet the thought of the long day and the long drive were beyond acceptance.
She was bound to be sick before the last  race, either then or on the road to the meeting, or on the road home.
 "You don't want to come do you?" 
Lalage asked"Oh I do.
But the bantam eggs are hatching tomorrow."
"You're quiet right.
Terrible drag to get there.
And, anyway, we aren't trying."
She looked at Andrew.
 "No I'm staying here." 
The self-sacrifice in his voice was poignant.
Sacrifice taken for her, Nicandra knew, accepting it as a certainty of his love and care.
She had to keep him.
He had to share all her bad news.
he would never leave her alone with it.
When Lalage had gone out to her car, she put down a dog and took Andrew into her long arms.
"Well?
What did they say?"
 "Not a chance darling, and I couldn't ask because — guess what — they've put Deer Forest on the market, and" — the thought of others always first — "I wonder if they always have quite enough to eat." 
 "Oh, talk sense," she was proving herself beyond reason, and unsuccessful as well.
"You don't know, you can't imagine, it was Indian tea today.
I could have cried.
All right, I am silly, I'll feed the doggies,"she drifted out of the room.
She was preposterous in every way, Andrew thought.
 "Dogs first" — that would take an immoderate time — perhaps long enough for a third drink.
He deserved it.
He could see no improvement in prospect anywhere.
The bottle was in his hand when Nicandra came back from the kitchen.
 "All right, I know," he said, "it's my second — don't scold." 
 "You need it, sweetheart," it was the lover's voice, yielding, as if they were in bed.
He put the bottle back on the tray.
Her indulgence left him without any need.
 "Open this," delightedly she held out a different bottle and a corkscrew.
‘You don't happen to realize how broke we are?’
He was looking at the label.
‘Yes, but we've had such an awful day.
We need something to keep us going.’
He put the bottle on the low table and laid the old horn-handled corkscrew down beside it, a patient sacrifice to the economies that her careless pregnancy necessitated.
The opportunity to retrieve herself by usefulness came to Nicandra almost immediately — Lalage was back with them, downcast, apologetic.
‘Too miserable,’ she said, ‘the car stopped with me, not a spark of life.
Could you, one of you,’ she looked from Nicandra to Andrew, ‘drive me home?’
‘Of course, darling.
Unless you'd stay the night?’
Nicandra was always ready to give succour in times of trouble.
Ready to confide her own difficulties too.
Andrew got between them almost shouldering Nicandra out of his way.
Tiny Lalage seemed to shrink to child-size below his near height.
‘I'll take her,’ he said, determination in his voice as though Nicandra had denied him the right to live.
‘Please let me, you haven't brought the horses in yet,’ she was concerned only for his convenience.
In a silence full of his broken intention, she caught the look, passing helplessly between him and Lalage — a look that joined her love and her friend as clearly as if she had found them in bed.
The whole truth, nothing but the unbelievable truth, was manifest in that short exchange.
Nicandra's big hands hung by her sides, her world shifted place, all certainty lost and gone in a salty fog of despair.
She had to believe.
She must behave.
She turned away from them.
‘All right,’ she said, ‘You go.’
‘You're sure?’
He sounded grateful — that was more frightening.
‘Yes.
Do go.’
She turned back towards the kitchen and the dogs' suppers.
As she went she picked up the expensive bottle of wine.
‘Don't pull corks, Nico,’ Lal spoke as if she knew something.
It sounded like a midwife's warning.
Nicandra couldn't watch them going out of the room together.
She couldn't look out to see them in the yard.
She could not discredit this terrible truth.
Its alloy changed and weakened all she knew, all that was hers.
She had never counted how much she gave with such ardent pleasure.
Now, in a full moment, everything she had spent was lost and gone.
Only this nightmare of unreality would continue.
Nicandra, whose living was loving and giving, felt a vindictive suspicion rising like scum to the surface of her acceptance.
Outside, on the mean sweep of gravel, she could see Lal's sleek expensive car overwhelming the place, expressing money in every line, expressing all that Nicandra could not give.
Alienated from her proper self, trust and faith extinguished, Nicandra walked out of the house, half blind from tears, and shaking.
She was going to prove something.
The door of the car was unlocked.
The ignition key was still in place — she could feel Lal's little body in the car; the driving-seat was moved so close to the steering that Nicandra found no room for her long legs.
She thought of that small compact body with absolute hatred.
There was a picture in her mind of short desirous legs and sunburnt heels.
She slammed back the driving seat and looked at the unfamiliar dashboard with all its foreign signals.
At her touch on the self-starter, the engine responded obediently.
What must I do? she asked, as Lady Jane Grey had asked when going to her execution.
What now?
What came first?
Two horses were leaning over the gate into the yard.
They came first.
They were real and living.
They must be stabled and fed.
Their needs were well known to her.
Their proper care was in her blood.
Automatically, she led them in and  gave them their feed.
When she shot the bolts of the loose boxes home, she thought inevitably of the saying about slamming the stable door after the horse is stolen.
When she walked back across the yard her precious little house stared at her malignly, its nest-like quality defaced.
The blinds pulled, by her domestic decree, halfway down the windows discouraged all hope.
They were part of another life, neat signals towards its ending.
Back in the house, she went from one ordinary object to the next, chairs, tables, bookcases, touching and leaning against them as if for help.
Their immobility had no reassurance.
Connection was gone between what had been and her present distress.
She thought of the baby only as her last blunder in loving, a mistake leading her nearer to this dreadful woe.
I'm not crying, she told herself proudly, her throat working against her sobs.
A dog came to her anxiously; at its concern, tears ran lavishly down her face, past her snivelling nose, into the corners of her mouth.
The thought that she had failed him so awkwardly added to the weight of her pain.
What to say?
Did he realize what she had seen and must acknowledge?
However deep the trouble, dinner, like brushing your teeth, had to happen.
I've lost Andrew, she thought, and I'm peeling potatoes.
It can't be true.
But Pommes Anna always went with Chicken Stew, it was a custom.
The meagre little peelings falling from her knife into water eased her, their ordinariness was a link with real life.
She felt grateful because it was Kate's day out so that she had this to do.
Kate's day out had always been Nicandra's day for experiments made to please, and sometimes to displease, Andrew.
Tonight there was a terrible neutrality between cooking and such love and service.
She remembered the wine that she had bought and decided, almost viciously, to defy his dismissal of her extravagance and open the bottle.
She drove the corkscrew in, twisting it like a knife in an enemy, stretching her shoulders back and pulling, with no  result.
Her will to pull the cork redeemed for the moment her grief.
She stooped, put the bottle between her knees, straining and tugging, her hands searing to blisters on the rough horn handle of the long corkscrew.
It was when the cork yielded that pain struck, paused, and struck again.
She knew exactly what was going to happen now — she would lose her baby and he would commend her.
Too late, she had found out a gift for her dear.
She was propped in bed, soaking bath towels between her legs, when Andrew came back.
She heard him calling for her quietly, then loudly.
He needed his dinner.
‘In bed?’ he sounded amazed when her answer reached him.
She heard him coming upstairs in quite an ordinary way as if nothing had changed, nothing had happened.
‘What's the matter?’
He was staring towards her, his hands on the rail at the foot of the bed.
‘Aren't you well?’
His voice was patently unbelieving.
Her answer waited.
What was this distance between them?
Only that now she knew.
‘Rather good news, darling, you're going to have top treatment.
Lal's given me — us — the money.’
‘You don't need it,’ the ‘you’was insulting, ‘I've lost the baby.’
‘Oh,’ the relief in his voice was tremendous.
‘Are you all right?’ he asked politely.
She wanted to touch something, to hold on to something before she spoke, but there was nothing stable, only the hem of the sheet, twisting and giving way in her grip.
She was mumbling words, the cool words she had rehearsed to herself were lost.
In her absolute despair she cried out, the cry came through her whole shaking body into her voice.
A child's voice was screaming in the darkness.
‘I know.
I saw you.
I saw you.’
‘Oh, come on!
Cool it, sweetie.’
He came round the bed and sat beside her.
Her great distress really worried him.
But it did not move him to pity her.
She was behaving pretty awkwardly, was what he was thinking.
He had to  accept the truth of her accusation — he remembered the unfortunate moment of betrayal — but he was sure of finding a way round the difficulty.
He needed them both.
It was a requirement, Andrew's requirement.
They were two sides of a coin and the coin was Andrew.
‘I thought you understood — that's what so great.
You know it's you.’
He took her by the shoulders —‘You and you, all the time you.’
He dropped his hands to his sides and stood like a little dog, found out, and admitting: ‘Yes, I know I have a silly sort of fancy for Lal.
Tell you the truth, I wouldn't mind a month in the sun with her.
After that…’ he shook his head to denigrate any idea of a lasting affair…‘she's not in the running.’
‘And she gave you all this money?’
‘Yes — for you — after all, she's an awfully old friend.’
Nicandra's arms were flung out, wide against the pillows.
In bed, where there was no witless, careless dressing to lessen her beauty, she was purely ravishing to look at.
He did wish that custom and her total generosity had not made everything so easy as to be negligible.
There was no game to play.
‘Oh, God, I do love you.
Have anything you want.
Have a divorce.’
His laugh was genuine.
‘You are a silly old toad.’
He looked at his watch, such a reasonable gesture.
‘Look, stay where you are — don't get up for dinner.
I'll bring you yours.’
Nicandra felt her way deeper under the bedclothes — she put aside what she had seen, that look, deeper than a kiss.
A merciful wave was closing over it, healing her despair.
Cry no more, ladies, where had she heard that?
Anyway, why more than one lady?
One was enough.
She put her cold arms to bed and lay warmed and breathing slowly in her relief.
Trust was back.
She felt no unhappiness about her lost baby, only gratitude because Andrew was free from  its inconvenience.
And now, this testimony of love, her dinner in bed, she accepted with a shudder of pleasure.
Andrew, always properly shielded from any domestic servitude, was muddling about in the kitchen now, a foreign place to him.
He would be setting her tray, looking for knives and forks, salt and pepper, plates to heat.
There were no Pommes Anna to puzzle him, but would he find the croûtons for the top of the chicken stew?
Would he see the open bottle of wine?…
Oh, poor love…her anxiety overcame her.
She was sitting on the side of her bed, trembling with worry for him, undecided whether or not it would be safe to discard her bath towel and go to his help, when she heard a footstep on the stairs and bundled back into bed, anxious to conceal the unattractive evidence of her nasty little experience.
It was Kate — Kate looking young and jaunty, and quite unseemly, out of her cook's uniform of blue dress and white, or checked, apron to preserve the white.
‘I only came in on the red, raw minute,’ she said, ‘so you'll excuse me, madam.’
She meant the pink jumper, short skirt and high-heeled shoes.
She settled the loaded tray on Nicandra's knees and shook out a white napkin.
Nicandra stared at the food and its arrangement — croûtons on the chicken, toast, butter, even a salad, no Pommes Anna, of course, but a glass of wine and a glass of water, and all the china matching.
She touched things gently, unbelieving: ‘Did Mr Bland do all this?’
‘Oh, God help him, poor gentleman,’ Kate laughed, pleased at male incompetence, ‘he was only looking for the oven when I got in.
And he's on the telephone since.
I'm keeping his dinner warm.’
‘Thank you,’ Nicandra said.
Her joy wilted.
It was only in her imagination that he had puzzled his way through kitchen labyrinths to bring a tray to her bedside.
Did it have to be on this evening that Kate, that notorious hedgerow flirt, should have come in early to steal his mission of mercy and love?
‘You're not sick, are you, madam?’
Kate's voice was full of warm concern as though some conspiracy held them near each other.
‘Will I bring you a hot bottle?’
It was her panacea for every ill.
Before she called the police she would bring a hot-water bottle, probably in its knitted jacket, to the victim of a murder.
‘No, I'm all right, Kate, thank you.’
‘I'll go so and see to his dinner.
And I'll bring up your bottle when I come for the tray.’
Left alone, suspicion cruelly linked with anxiety overcame any reason other than love, to account for Andrew's absence on the telephone.
Of course, it was obvious that any chance for contact would be stolen when she was out of hearing.
The shrivelling mistrust was back with her.
She saw that the need to be watchful and attentive, and at the same time, generous and understanding, was to be part of her life for every hour of every day.
For so long as she and Andrew were together, a pulse, a nerve, something integral to her loving would break free from her control to distort the nearest moment they might share.
Even tonight she must be wise and womanly.
She must not ask who was on the telephone.
At the idea of such restraint tears blinded her.
The tears were like another person's, crying for herself.
They were salt on a forkful of chicken.
He came back, looking pleased and well-fed.
His heavy radio was in his hand.
‘I thought we might hear the nine o'clock news — I've brought you a hot-water bottle.’
Her heart jumped in recognition of his thought.
‘Kate thought you looked cold.’
He contradicted her assumption.
‘I don't think I want it,’ her voice distanced any obligation.
‘All right.
I'm always cold.’
He lay back in his own bed, perfectly at ease, his feet just clear of the eiderdown.
His hands were on the hot-water bottle, the hot-water bottle was on his stomach.
‘I rang Lal,’ he said.
‘Why?’
‘To say I wouldn't cash her cheque.
Why did you think I rang her?’
‘Because you couldn't help it,’ she wanted to say.
Instead, she said, ‘Would you put my tray down somewhere, please, if you would.’
‘Yes, in a minute.
Lal says we're to keep the money.
She said you'd need a little break after all this bother.’
There was a knock on the door.
‘Oh, here's Kate coming for your tray.
Good.
I needn't move.’
Kate bent over Nicandra to pick up the tray: ‘And you didn't eat the half of it,’ she said reproachfully.
She felt a proprietary interest in these two beauties lying there in bed.
For her, whose man had failed her tonight, they made a picture of all happiness attainable.
She was glad to see such a love story come true before her eyes.
They're only stars, she thought.
She's beautiful, of course, himself too, isn't he — you'd have to pity him.
She waited at the door to say: Goodnight.
God Bless, and listen for their answers.
‘Did Lal say that?’
Nicandra asked when Kate had shut the door.
‘No, I think I said it.
Why don't we?
We could get a glimpse of the sun, I love the moon,’ he misquoted, coaxing.
‘Darling, you do want me?’
She was the captured bird again, wings folded in acceptance.
‘Of course.
Shall we get the nine o'clock news?’
He looked away from her to twist the knobs on the radio.
She understood the concentration necessary to attain any audible message from the BBC in the South of Ireland.
All the same the interruption was untimely.
Why bother with the news now?
He must have heard the racing results at six o'clock.
He was sitting up, holding the clumsy radio on his knee with one hand, searching through the muttering frequencies with the other.
There was no hand for her to touch.
‘Oh good,’ he was saying, ‘marvellous reception  tonight.’
He turned the volume higher as a restrained, gentlemanly voice announced: ‘England has declared War on Germany…’
‘How too really awful,’ Nicandra said with awed lack of interest.
‘It can't make much difference to us here though can it?’
‘Except that we won't get to the South of France now.’
‘No — how sad.’
‘And I'll be recalled.’
‘The regiment can't want you back after all these years.’
‘I expect so — even an old fogey like me,’ he laughed.
Was he laughing at the absurd idea of being an old fogey?
Or was there something else just evident in his cheerful voice?…
Recalled to the colours…
Rejoin the Regiment.
The unspoken words had a fanciful storybook-by-Henty quality, far away and distant as bugles blowing.
So why did that thread of excitement in his voice frighten her?
Once again tonight, uncertainty dithered at her heart.
What a goose she was, she the loved and wanted one, to be afflicted even for a moment by any threat or doubt.
She caught his hand away from the radio.
Even tonight, there could be some comforting pretence, an assurance of love.