

The Structure of the Ottoman Learned Hierarchy to 1600
Before turning to a detailed discussion of the lives of the Muftis, it will be useful to examine in some detail the development of the learned hierarchy in the Ottoman state, since it is only against this background that the development of the institution of the Muftilik can be properly appreciated.
The highly organized learned career which obtained in the empire from the late sixteenth century onward has been described by a number of authors, western and Turkish, most recently by Gibb and Bowen in their Islamic Society and the West and by Uzuncarsili in his .
Relatively little attention has been paid by any of the sources, however, to the early development of the hierarchy, that is, in the period to the death of Suleyman (974/1566), a fact which, coupled with the striking, not to say hypnotizing, effect of the later hierarchy, has tended in a variety of ways to mislead writers on subjects connected with the ulema.
On one level, for example, one might cite the case of Molla Husrev's appointment as kadi of Edirne.
It will be shown in a later chapter that there seems to be no evidence to indicate that he held that post before holding the kazaskerlik, while there is positive evidence that he held it after holding the kazaskerlik.
In the light of this fact it seems possible to suggest that those authors who subscribe to the former view do so because in later times it would have been only in the rarest of circumstances that one would have held the kadilik after the kazaskerlik.
It seems likely, in short, that they have erred through applying principles which are valid for a later period but were not yet operative in the time of Molla Husrev.
On a deeper level, it will be shown that the case for the traditional view of  the Muftilik-essentially that it rose from a position of relative unimportance to become, in the time of Suleyman, the principal office in the learned hierarchy-rests largely on premises conditioned by what one might call the "hierarchical" viewpoint.
Among the pieces of evidence advanced for the traditional view, for example, are the facts that until late in the reign of Suleyman the Muftis were considerably less well-paid than the kazaskers and that the Muftis did not sit in the divan whereas the kazaskers did.
These facts are indeed significant, but they are susceptible of a rather different Interpretation when it is accepted that importance and success amongst the ulema in the earlier period did not depend upon one's position in the hierarchy or concomitant matters like salary or membership of the divan — to anything like the same degree that they did in later times.
Not the least reason for this, of course, was simply the fact that the hierarchy was not nearly as fully developed.
As it did develop, it gradually changed the terms by which the ulema judged themselves and by which they were judged by others.
To put the case far too bluntly, one might argue that a fifteenth-century scholar's chief concern and the measure whereby he was judged was to achieve excellence in  that is, knowledge or learning, through teaching and writing; whereas a seventeenth-century scholar's chief interest and the measuring rod of his success was the attainment of the high learned offices and the power, salary and perquisites that went with them.
It need hardly be said, of course, that this is not a matter of absolutes: there were certainly fifteenth-century scholars ambitious for worldly power and possessions, as there were seventeenth-century scholars who aspired to excellence in .
But it is beyond question that by the seventeenth century a distinct change of emphasis had occurred both in the goals which the majority of the ulema sought and in the terms whereby their success was judged by themselves and by others.
This change of emphasis is reflected in the biographical sources and is undoubtedly largely responsible for the marked differences, alluded to in the previous chapter, between the biographies written by Taskopruzade and those by Ata'i.
Whereas Taskopruzade, writing toward the end of Suleyman's reign, is on the whole relatively vague about the facts of a scholar's career, he delights in anecdotes which illustrate the scholar's piety or learning and describes in some detail his writings and his  his pious foundations.
Though Ata'i's biographies, written seventy-odd years later, are not devoid of such anecdotes and descriptions, the striking feature in them is the minutely detailed factual data about his subjects' careers.
This contrast may, of course, reflect to some degree the personal inclinations of the authors: it has been suggested in the previous chapter, for example , that Taskopruzade's interests tended to the antiquarian, which would make him all the more likely to emphasize the old virtues of piety and learning.
But the contrast  would seem at least as much to reflect the differing circumstances and attitudes of the times about which each was writing and in which each lived.
Much of Taskopruzade's work is concerned with scholars of the period before there was what might properly be called a learned hierarchy; and though in his own lifetime a hierarchy of learned offices existed and certainly the basic principles of the hierarchy had been formulated it was by no means as thoroughly elaborated or rigid as it was to become even in the few decades after his death.
Certainly in the earlier period, but also in Taskopruzade's lifetime as well, great emphasis was placed by the ulema on the writing of learned works, for example , and this emphasis is reflected in Taskopruzade's approach to his biographies.
Practically the whole of Ata'i's work, on the other hand, is concerned with scholars who lived in a period of relatively rapid elaboration of the hierarchical structure; and well before Ata'i's own time the development was nearly complete.
By his time, as his biographies bear witness, the primary fact of the scholarly life had come to be the learned hierarchy and the most important data about a scholar to be that concerning his progress in the hierarchy.
In dealing with the ulema of the earlier period, then, one must first take care not to allow to influence one's thinking unduly the relatively rigid structure of the hierarchy of the later period and the values and attitudes which this helped to foster.
Though the basic broad principles of the hierarchy are observable from its inception, probably toward the end of the fifteenth century, it was only gradually that it became elaborated; and it was only with elaboration that the hierarchy tended gradually to become more rigid and to exert an increasing influence on the attitudes both of the ulema toward their own aspirations and of the people toward the ulema.
And second, perhaps even more subtle than the dangers of making misjudgements about the early ulema and hierarchy under the influence of the distinctive character of the later hierarchy, one must avoid the danger of being led by the nature of the biographies themselves to dehumanize the ulema, a danger present in all the sources hut perhaps particularly in Ata'i.
In a sense, from the point of view of the information given-birth, education, career, books written, pious foundations endowed many of the biographies are, mutatis mutandis, not unlike those in Who's Who.a If the English reader of Who's Who can flesh out the bare bones almost as a matter of instinct, however, to do the same for the Ottoman ulema is rendered almost impossible by time and cultural distance.
The Ottoman literary biographical sources are, of course, by no means as stark as Who's Who, as totally devoid of any hut purely factual information.
One often reads of jealousies, of quarrels, of friendships, of instances of patronage, of pique and of loyalty which  illuminate some aspect of a man's character, of the nature of the society in which he lived or of the system in which he worked.
One comes across a man who resigned his post because of the grief occasioned by the death of a son; or another who, from disappointed expectations, turned to drugs and thereby unfitted himself for the offices he coveted.
The authors also on occasion add judgements of their own, that, for example, such and such a scholar was honoured above his deserts, another below.
But one is almost totally dependent on the biographical sources for such humanizing detail; and if it is sometimes given amongst the flood of factual information, often it is not, and one is left to speculate.
Why, for example, did Molla Iwad (Molla Ivaz), who was eventually to rise to become Rumeli kazasker, stay on at the Sahn at one point in his career, twice refusing appointments to higher medreses (those of Murad II in Bursa and of Bayezid II in Edirne) before accepting an appointment to the Ayasofya medrese?
Was it simply that he wished to remain in Istanbul, and, if so, did he wish to do so for professional or for personal reasons?
Conditioned by both the sources and the system, one is inclined to suspect a professional motive, that Molla Ivaz saw the Ayasofya, for whatever reason, as a surer stepping-stone to higher offices; and it is only by conscious effort that one remembers to entertain the possibility that some personal consideration quite unconnected with his career led to his decision.
On balance, the nature of the biographies, particularly those of Ata'i, is such as positively to invite computerized prosopography which, though in a limited sense of great benefit, may tend in the end to obscure as much as it reveals.
One must, of course, be infinitely grateful for a source as detailed and informative as Ata'i; but one must also be careful not to allow simply the approach to the writing of biographies to mislead as well as inform, and not to ignore, in the flood of welcome facts, the more personal, anecdotal material which is given or to be unaware that there is much that is not given, much that is unexplained and perhaps by now unexplainable.
With these general points in mind, one may now turn to a sketch of the nature and growth of the learned hierarchy during the period under discussion.
Until the reign of Mehmed II (1451–81) it is difficult to speak of a learned hierarchy since the practice of reserving the individual offices of  state to men of a particular background and training whether to slaves of the Palace School system, to the ulema, or to men of the bureaucratic profession  — had not yet become developed to any very great degree.
During the first half of the fifteenth century, for example, though slaves had come to man a large part of the standing army and to hold the lesser vezirliks, it was only after the conquest of Istanbul and the consequent fall of the Grand Vezir Candarli Halil Pasa that it became more or less regular practice for the highest office of the central administration, that of Grand Vezir, to be held by men of slave origin.
Candarli Halil Pasa was one of a family of statesmen, four members of which had held the office of Grand Vezir for much of the century preceding the accession of Mehmed II; and these men had also held, prior to their appointments as vezir, the offices of kadi and kazasker.
The appointment of a slave to the office of Grand Vezir in 857/1453, however, set the seal on the tendency to man the highest offices of the central administration, the vezirliks, with slaves; and though it was by no means unheard of for a member of the ulema thereafter to hold a vezirlik, one begins to see the development of a separate hierarchy more or less confined to members of the ulema, the highest offices in which, known as  were an end in themselves and not mere stepping-stones to high office in other areas such as the central administration.
Symbolic, perhaps, of the acquiescence of the ulema in this new order is a remark attributed to Molla Gurani, at the time Mehmed II's Hoca.
When, shortly after Mehmed II came to the throne, he offered Molla Gurani a vezirlik, the latter is reported to have refused, saying: "Those servants and slaves who are in thy palace serve thee only that they may, in the end, obtain the office of vezir.
Were the vezir to come from other than their number, their hearts would turn from thee, and the business of thy government would become disordered."
The first clear-cut rules regarding the organization of the ulema would seem to be those found in the so-called  of Mehmed II.
The principal provisions pertaining to the structure of the learned profession lay down that a candidate for office, a mulazim (mulazim) shall first teach at a 20-akce medrese, that is, one at which the stipulated salary of the muderris is twenty akce daily, and shall then proceed to advance by 50-akce stages (e.g. to a 25-, then to a 30-akce medrese, and so on ) until he reaches the 50-akce medreses of which there are three classes: and the Sahn.
The last of these classes consists of the famous eight medreses which Mehmed II had built round his mosque in Istanbul: the mosque itself was finished in 875/1470–1, and the medreses were finished presumably at about the same date.
After reaching the Sahn, the highest of the 50-akce medreses, the scholar may become a 500-akce kadi and thence kazasker.
In a recent book, a German scholar, Konrad Dilger, mounts a sustained  attack on the Kanunname as a document of the period of Mehmed II; and, as the Kanunname is one of the few sources of information about the ulema in the early period, his remarks deserve serious attention in the present study.
Though not all his points are equally well taken, there can be no doubt that he is right in his basic assertion that the Kanunname is shot through with anachronisms suggesting sixteenth-century alterations and additions and that any provision of it must be treated with reserve and checked against other sources before being accepted as being genuinely of the time of Mehmed II.
In the passage just quoted, for example, it seems virtually certain that Dilger is right in regarding the term Sahn as an anachronism in respect of the fifteenth century.
Likewise the identification of the 500-akce kadiliks mentioned in the Kanunname presents a real difficulty.
The whole question of the salaries and allowances of the holders of the highest mevleviyets in the early days of the empire is a vexed one, but it seems likely that to speak of a 500-akce kadilik in the time of Mehmed II is anachronistic.
A list of the kadis in office in Anadolu in early Muharram 928/early December 1521, forty years after the death of Mehmed II, shows the kadi of Bursa to be receiving 300 akce, while according to Gokbilgin, the kadi of Edirne was likewise receiving an allowance of only 300 akce a day at the beginning of the tenth/sixteenth century.
Though there appears at present to be no early evidence in regard to the allowance of the kadi of Istanbul, a statement in a seventeenth-century source, the   by Husayn Hezarfenn (Hezarfen: d. 1103/1691–2), would seem to indicate that the kadilik of Istanbul was similarly a 300-akce kadilik.
In his section on the fees for the diplomas of investiture  Hezarfen says that when a kadi was appointed, one month's allowance was taken as a fee on the basis of his daily allowance as recorded in the defter, or register  half as the fee for the imperial cypher  and half for the kazasker and his staff.
Further on he writes: "Istanbul, Bursa and Edirne are recorded in the defter each as 300-akce  Damascus and Aleppo have been recorded each as 500-akce .
If the text is accurate, it would seem to indicate that the three kadiliks of Istanbul, Bursa and Edirne were all originally registered as 300-akce kadiliks and that their registration had not been changed by Hezarfen's time, although all three outranked Damascus and Aleppo at least until the eighteenth century.
Certainly in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries no other kadilik approached the status of those of Istanbul, Bursa and Edirne — none appears to have attained even the status achieved by Damascus and Aleppo in the sixteenth century — and it therefore seems fairly certain that the 300 akce a day given to the kadis of the three Ottoman capitals represented the highest allowances given to any kadi at that period.
If such is the case, it would follow that the 500-akce kadilik is a sixteenth-century invention and that in so far as 300- and 500-akce kadiliks have significance in hierarchical terms in the sense that the former ranked below  the latter-they do so only in regard to the kadiliks created in the sixteenth century and later.
The actual income of a kadi depended not only — or even principally — on his allowance, of course, but also on fees of various kinds; and it may well be that if indeed the kadis of Istanbul, Edirne and Bursa continued to receive allowances of only 300 akce a day down to Hezarfen's time, they did so because their allowances represented a relatively insignificant proportion of the monies they actually received, so that raising them to match the importance of the kadiliks was not a matter of particular moment.
Some doubt is in fact raised about interpreting Hezarfen's statement as meaning that these three kadis were still, toward the end of the seventeenth century, receiving only 300 akce a day both by Ali's statement that they were receiving "approximately" 500 akce (see Appendix I, A) and by the  attributed to Kocu Bey which was presented to Sultan Ibrahim (1640–8) in 1049–50/1640 in which the author, discussing aspects of the learned hierarchy, says: "Whatever great provinces  there are in the divinely-protected [i.e. Ottoman]dominions, such as Egypt, Aleppo, Diyarbakir, Damascus, Erzurum, Selanik (Salonica), Budin (Buda), Sofya (Sofiya), Bursa, Edirne, Istanbul [the kadis of]all such as these are 500-akce Mollas'.
On the assumption that neither Hezarfen on the one hand nor Ali and Kocu Bey on the other is simply in error, one can perhaps reconcile  these two apparently contradictory statements on the grounds either that it was only in the technical matter of the  that Istanbul, Edirne and Bursa continued to be regarded as 300-akce kadiliks, their holders actually being given 500 akce a day; or that, while still being paid only 300 akce a day, they had come to be regarded as 500-akce mevleviyets from the hierarchical point of view, for the obvious reason that they were in fact higher in rank than any of the other kadiliks.
A point not raised directly by Dilger but worthy of consideration is the precise meaning and antiquity of the terms  and    ( "interior" ).
Anyone who deals with Ottoman institutions will know how perilous is the task of trying to define terms, since a number are possessed of multiple significations, often changing over a period of time, and the particular sense intended in any given case is not always clear from the context: will serve as one example, another, and, in the learned profession, which has the limited sense of a student at the Sahn and the wider sense of any student in "higher" education, that is, at a 20-akce medrese or above.
Particularly in the early period, moreover, the number of usages one comes across is so low as to make definition a hazardous business.
Despite the dangers, however, there seems some point in setting out such information as can be given about the terms  and  even if the results are ultimately inconclusive, in order to help to define the problem.
Purely from the point of view of meaning there seems to be a possible connection between  and  on the one hand and  ( "edge, margin" ) and  ( "inner region" ) on the other, both these latter terms being reasonable Turkish equivalents for one sense of the Arabic  and .
Some substance is given to this connection by the comparison of a passage, in Arabic, in a biography by Mank Ali with Ata'i's version, in Ottoman, of the same facts.
In his biography of Molla"Abd al-Fattah (Abdulfettah: d. 984/1577), Mank Ali writes that after holding the medrese of Ata Bey in Kastamonu with a daily salary of 40 akce, he was appointed to the  in Ankara with 50 akce.
He was removed from that medrese and then became muderris there a second time"with the condition that it should be included among the  and that his  should become  in his [proper]time in accordance with the custom in similar medreses'.
Ata'i writes that Molla Abdulfettah, having been appointed to the Seyfeddin medrese in Ankara with 50 akce, was dismissed and then restored to that medrese "with  [an]judgement" (that is, that the medrese was to be judged to be in the  and treated accordingly) and continues: "His  became  and, by reason of the esteem [due to/shown to a][muderris], the mouth of his hope smiled." 
What is happening here is that a medrese, normally of the  grade, is being turned, into a  medrese.
It was indeed not uncommon for medreses to be raised or lowered a grade on occasion, but what is particularly interesting is the coincidence of the terms  and .
The latter term is defined by Ali as being applied to the "outstanding" medreses in Istanbul, Edirne, Bursa and the towns in the environs of these three cities.
A problem immediately arises, however, because it is clear from both Ali and Ata'i that the term  was not confined to a grade of medreses, as  probably was, or came to be, but retained a wider geographical significance, referring simply to the three cities and their environs.
Ali, for example, in the same passage, speaks of "40-akce  medreses' and  medreses of less than 50 akce" (whereas, of course , all  medreses were at the 50-akce level).
Ata'i, in his biography of Molla Shams al-Din (d. 982/1575), writes that"he traversed a few ranks in  medreses' before turning to medicine; in this case it is clear that these medreses are well below the  level.
Again, in his biography of Molla Mustafa Sarukhani (Ak Musli: d. 1016/1608), Ata'i says that the subject, while in retirement from a 40-akce medrese, was in 994/1585–6 given the muftilik of Agras "with [an]stipulation and  rank" is ambiguous, however, since it could conceivably mean not that the medrese was to be considered as  but that it was given with the stipulation that the muderris should receive an  medrese in due course).
It is equally clear that the antonym of  namely  was not confined to a class of medrese, as  in all likelihood was, or came to be, but had a much wider usage as an essentially geographical term.
Thus Ata'i writes that Molla Ali (d. 1000/1592), at the beginning of his career,"chose the  in  which to teach, this at no higher than the 30-akce level.
Hezarfen likewise classifies muftis as being of two types: either the Seyhulislam — who, from well before Hezarfen's time, had acted as Mufti for the whole of the  — or kenar muftileri.
Again, Ata'i writes that Molla Khurram (d. 970/1562–3) reached the 50-akce  level at the Mehmed Pasa medrese in Sofya: then, as often as he sought a medrese in the  he failed to obtain his desire; and, of necessity becoming resigned to going out to the  he became kadi in certain cities  with 150 akce."
It is clear from these examples that  and  on the one hand and  and  on the other were not, or came not to be, co-extensive, the former pair being, or becoming, confined to specific grades of medreses, the latter retaining, or developing, a wider geographical significance whose Importance is not altogether clear beyond the fact that it was impossible to get very far in the hierarchy without having taught in the .
The passages from Mank Ali and Ata'i concerning Abdulfettah do suggest, however, that there may well have been some connection between the pairs of concepts and that there is some basis for assuming that the "interior" referred to is the three cities of Istanbul, Edirne and Bursa (and environs) and the "exterior" the rest of the empire or at least that part of it in which the learned hierarchy operated.
One may therefore further suggest that the terms originated in a time when the distinction between the two classes lay essentially in the geographical location of the medreses.
Yet by the middle of the sixteenth century, if not earlier, the geographical distinction had become blurred in fact, since a number of medreses in the  were treated as of the  grade while certain medreses in the kenar were treated as of the  grade.
Indeed, in another passage in the  Ali differentiates the haric elli (and 40-akce) and dahil grades of medreses on the basis not of geographical location but of their builders — the 40-akce and   medreses being the foundations of the families of pre-Ottoman rulers and [Ottoman]vezirs and emirs, the  medreses the foundations of the families of Ottoman sultans — method of classification which accords rather better with the actualities of his time (late sixteenth century) but which provides no apparent explanation for the terms themselves.
Provided, therefore, that the basis of the distinction between  and  was originally geographical-and it must be emphasized that this is only one possible explanation, albeit perhaps the most tenable on-it seems likely that they had come into currency before the middle of the sixteenth century, before the distinction between the geographical locations of the medreses had begun to become blurred.
This admittedly circuitous line of reasoning is made necessary first by the undoubted presence of anachronisms in the Kanunname, as demonstrated by Dilger, and second by the fact that one does not meet the terms  and  in Taskopruzade, who is, of course, the principal, and indeed almost the only, source of information about the learned hierarchy before roughly 1550.
The earliest use of either of the terms so far located (aside, of course, from that in the Kanunname itself) is in a list of medreses and their incumbents in the archives of the Topkapi Sarayi, drawn up some time in the years 942–4/1536–7.
The document lists the muderrises of (certain) 40-, 50-and 60-akce medreses in Istanbul, Edirne and Bursa, this section then being followed by one entitled: "The muderrises in the  are these…
".
This latter section comprises the muderrises of medreses in Amasya, Iznik, Trabzon, Manisa and Gebze, all of which save the one in Gebze were built by sultans or members of their families and all of which are 50-akce medreses, with the possible exception of those in Amasya and Trabzon, the salaries of which are not given.
There is, however, a somewhat earlier use of the terms  and  in another document in the Topkapi Sarayi archives which may be dated with some certainty to 929–30/1523 and which lists, and in most cases gives short biographies of, the ulema then holding or in line for the various offices of the learned profession in "the  of eastern and western Anadolu as well as all the  of Syria and Egypt" .
Writing about a Molla Suleyman, muderris of the medrese of Sahib(-i) Baz (?) in Antakya, the compiler says: "Because he  worked in the  and was [never]in the  [in this case in the plural, no one has been found who knows the circumstances of his higher education .
But the aforementioned medrese was bestowed upon him as the result of the letter of Ferhad Pasa."
If one may accept the equivalence of at least the concepts underlying the terms  and  on the one hand and  and  on the other, there is thus some solid evidence, in addition to the line of reasoning advanced above, to suggest that the concept of a division between "the interior" and "the exterior" existed at least from fairly early on in the sixteenth century; and it is not unreasonable to suppose that the terms haric and dahil are not anachronistic in respect of the Kanunname.
Whether, however, their precise significance in the late fifteenth century is as described in the Kanunname — that is, whether at this early stage of the development of the medrese system they were already confined to two classes of 50-akce medreses — is perhaps more open to question, though the very real possibility that the geographical sense and the designation of rank were once conterminous should not be overlooked in this connection.
The biographical sources covering the period are, unfortunately, not sufficiently detailed to permit a definite answer.
In general, however, despite the fact that anachronisms do exist in the published text of the Kanunname, there seems to be good reason for supposing the provisions in it concerning the learned hierarchy to be basically genuine.
These provisions define the basis for the highly complex cursus honorum of the learned profession which finally became fully elaborated only in the early eighteenth century.
The principle is fixed that a scholar aspiring to high office must first teach at a graded series of medreses, one after the other, and that only when he reaches a certain grade does he become eligible for the great offices of the learned hierarchy, the mevleviyets, which are in their turn graded.
The biographical sources for this period are neither detailed nor accurate enough to allow a close analysis of the degree to which the system had become elaborated in the first half of the sixteenth century, but the broader outlines may certainly be perceived and seem to confirm that something like the provisions of the Kanunname were operating by the early years of that century.
It is, for example, rare, though not unknown, to find the holder of an important kadilik who has not taught at the Sahn; and it is  likewise extremely unusual, though again not unheard of, to find a kazasker who has not held an important kadilik.
It would thus seem that something very like the provisions of the Kanunname were in operation by at least the early sixteenth century; and if the sources are not sufficiently detailed to confirm the operation of the provisions of the Kanunname in every detail, at the same time they do not cast doubt upon any detail.
Though it is impossible to date the provisions with any confidence, in favour of dating them in the reign of Mehmed II is the fact that Sultan Murad III (982–1003/1574–95), in a firman sent to his Grand Vezir in 985/1577 in connection with reform of the learned profession, speaks of "the ancient law (kanun) of Sultan Mehmed Gazi" : it thus seems likely that Mehmed II promulgated some legislation concerning the learned profession, if not these actual provisions.
A further point which suggests that these provisions, if not actually written in his reign, were in any event written not long after his death is the fact that the medrese attached to the mosque of Bayezid II in Edirne, completed in 893/1488 and of higher rank than the Sahn, would almost certainly have received some mention in any such provisions written subsequent to that date.
Finally, two other points, admittedly only suggestive, might be mentioned: first, the fact that Mehmed II is noted for his activity in organizing, and centralizing control over, the various institutions of the state in a number of ways; and second, the fact that the Sahn was not only part of his most important pious endowment in his newly-conquered capital of Istanbul, but also far and away the most extensive medrese complex thus far created in the Ottoman state.
It seems possible to suggest that for a sultan already disposed toward examining and reorganizing the institutions of state, pride in his newly-built medreses, as well as simply the fact of their existence, might well have acted as a strong spur to him to impose some sort of order upon and, implicitly, control over-the learned institution.
The later development of the hierarchy, a development which continued  down to the eighteenth century, was essentially no more than an elaboration of the basic principles set out in the Kanunname.
As time went on, and the sultans who succeeded Mehmed II built their own medreses, the Sahn slipped from its position as the highest class of medreses, and, in the fully elaborated hierarchy, is only the sixth of twelve grades above the 40-akce level.
The first to supplant it as the final stepping-stone to the highest offices of the learned profession seems to have been the altmsli (60-akce) class.
According to Ali, the Ayasofya medrese was already a 60-akce medrese In Mehmed II's time; and it appears generally to have been the case that it and, from the time of Bayezid II, the medrese of Murad II in Bursa (the Muradiye) and, more particularly, that of Bayezid II himself in Edirne, completed in 893/1488, ranked higher in the first half of the sixteenth century than the Sahn in the sense that the muderrises appointed to them were normally promoted from the Sahn.
In one important sense, however, it is questionable whether they yet constituted a distinct class of medreses in this period, namely that teaching in one or another of them appears not to have been a prerequisite for the holding of the highest mevleviyets.
Only from roughly the middle of the tenth/sixteenth century-perhaps coincidentally with the building of two other medreses which were to form part of the altmisli class, namely that attached to the mosque built by Suleyman for his son, Sehzade Mehmed (the Sehzade medrese, completed in 954/1547), and that built by the same sultan for his father, Selim I, apparently around  955/1548 — can one discern in the biographical sources the existence of a class of medreses, comprising these and others, one rank higher than the Sahn and normally carrying a salary of 60 akce, teaching in one of which seems to have been a generally recognized prerequisite for the holding of the highest learned offices.
Suleyman's own medreses, built round his mosque in Istanbul and completed by 966/1559, were to form the top rungs in the fully elaborated hierarchy of medreses, though they seem not to have achieved exclusive claim to this pre-eminence immediately.
A glance at the careers of nine of the ten Muftis who held the office between 988/1580 and 1031/1622 and whose teaching careers fall in the latter half of the sixteenth century, after the building of the Suleymaniye medreses, will give an idea of the teaching background apparently considered essential to give one a chance of eventual appointment to what had by then become the highest learned office: all nine men taught at the Sahn and subsequently at one of the 60-akce medreses built prior to the building of the Suleymaniye medreses, for example, the Sehzade medrese; two of the nine then went directly to their first mevleviyet (early on in the period, in 1566 and 1573), while six taught at one of the Suleymaniye medreses and one at the medrese of the mother of Murad III in Uskudar (the Atik Valide medrese), newer than Suleyman's medreses, before being appointed to their first mevleviyet.
The careers of other scholars of the period who reached the highest mevleviyets likewise suggest that by this time teaching on at least two levels of medreses beyond the Sahn had become customary, the top level being composed of the Suleymaniye medreses and the later imperial medreses, such as those of Selim II and Murad III.
As the numbers and grades of medreses increased with the passage of time, so also did the numbers and grades of mevleviyets, the term used here in the sense which would appear to have been valid, with minor qualifications, at least from the latter half of the sixteenth century, namely as comprising principally the kazaskerliks and the important kadiliks-the mevleviyet kadiliks — to which one moved on from the higher medreses and through which one moved, if one were fortunate, eventually to reach the  kazaskerliks and, by the end of the sixteenth century, the Muftilik.
The office of kazasker was, as noted previously, divided into two near the end of Mehmed II's reign, with one kazasker for Rumeli and one for Anadolu, the former being the senior.
For a short period in the reign of Selim I (918–26/1512–20) there existed a third kazaskerlik, for the Arab and Persian lands, hut this was, after a few years, combined with the kazaskerlik of Anadolu.
As far as the kadiliks are concerned, the original mevleviyet kadiliks appear to have been the kadiliks of the three Ottoman capitals, Istanbul, Edirne and Bursa, this number being increased in the first Instance through the acquisition of other important cities by conquest or other means.
A note in a  dated 1 Sha'ban 963/10 June 1556 concerning the number of  to be appointed in the  of that year mentions that four new  each are to be accepted from the kadis of Istanbul, Edirne, Bursa and Egypt and two each from the kadis of Damascus, Aleppo and Baghdad.
From the evidence of the biographical  sources, this would appear to be a nearly complete list of the mevleviyet kadiliks of the time; the only surprising omission is the kadilik of Mecca, which seems to have been a mevleviyet for some years before 963.
The kadis of Mecca from, for example, 953/1546–7 to 971/1564 can be traced in Ata'i: all are Ottoman scholars who had previously held the kadilik of Damascus, Aleppo or Baghdad, the holder in 963/1556 being Molla Amir Hasan b.
Sinan (Emir Hasan), who appears to have served continuously from 959/1552 to Shawwal 964/August 1557 and who had previously been kadi of Aleppo: It is worth noting that the kadiliks in the list are divided into two distinct grades — though if Hezarfen is right, they do not seem to correspond, at least in the way one would expect, to "300- and 500-akce" kadiliks — and it is no$ impossible that the order as given above represents the order of precedence, with Istanbul at the top and Baghdad at the bottom.
Precisely when these four additional kadiliks — or five, including Mecca — became mevleviyets is not clear in every case, though it is certain in one case, and entirely possible in the others, that they were not made mevleviyets immediately on coming into Ottoman possession.
According to Ata'i, Baghdad became a mevleviyet only in 947/1540–1, some six years after the Ottomans had taken it: a marginal note adds that for those six years it had been administered by kasabat kadis.
Of the other four, the early history of the kadilik of Damascus is readily traceable in Ibn Tulun's  on the particular point of its status, the evidence is somewhat ambiguous.
When Selim entered the city on 29 Sha'ban 922/27 September 1516, he appointed as kadi Zayn al-Din Muhammad b.
Muhammad Shah al-Fenari (Fenarizade Zeyneddin), an Ottoman scholar of a distinguished family, though not himself of great distinction, whose previous post had been the (kasabat) kadilik of Tire.
He held the office until Safar 924/February 1518 when he was succeeded by two Damascene scholars in turn, who between them held the post until 927/1521; then by two Ottomans, in turn, until 930/1524; and then again by one of the Damascenes who had earlier held the post, this time holding it from 930/1524 to 936/1530 when he was removed, apparently for misconduct.
From 936/1530 to well beyond the limits of the present study the office was held continuously by Ottoman scholars, a survey of whose careers suggests that if the office was not a mevleviyet from 936/1530 it was so from a matter of a very few years thereafter.
The kadilik of Mecca, and that of Medina, constitute something of a special case with respect to their early history.
The famous  Jalal-zade Mustafa Celebi (Celalzade Mustafa: d. 975/1567) writes in his history of the reign of Selim I, the  or  that when the Holy Cities came under Ottoman protection with the conquest of Egypt, the Ottoman ulema approached Piri Pasa, mentioned here as the kazasker of the Arab lands, and suggested that kadis be sent from Rum (that is, in effect, from among the Ottoman ulema) to the two cities.
When Piri Pasa put the idea to Selim, however, the latter refused, taking the view that it would be wrong to interfere in the affairs of the two cities, which enjoyed a special standing in the Islamic world and the governing of which had always been in the hands of descendents of the Prophet.
Toward the end of the sixteenth century, dating from late in the reign of Suleyman, a number of ostensibly less important kadiliks such as Izmir (976/1569), Konya (977/1569 and again in 989/1581), Jerusalem (983/1575), Selanik (983/1575), and Bosnasarayi (Sarajevo)(986/1579) were turned into mevleviyets.
This transformation was usually accompanied by the enlargement of the area of jurisdiction of the kadilik through the addition of other districts in the vicinity: Konya, for example, was made a mevleviyet in 977/1569"with the addition of certain sub-districts'  and the appointee later moved on to Maras, the kadilik of which was made a mevleviyet with the addition of Elbistan; and Selanik, as mentioned above, was made a mevleviyet with the addition of Sidrekapsi.
Occasionally a mevleviyet was created by the combination of the kadilik with another post: Kutahya was made a mevleviyet in about 970/1562–3 by the joining of a muderrislik with the kadilik, while Kefe seems to have become a mevleviyet in 992/1584 by the joining of the offices of kadi and mufti.
Sometimes these were ad hominem arrangements-that in Kefe was dissolved after a year and that in Kutahya when the holder moved on to his next post, though Kutahya was recreated a mevleviyet in 989/1581 — but many of them had become permanent by the end of the century.
The motivation behind the creation of these mevleviyets is by no means clear in every instance.
It is probable that some were created to meet a genuine administrative need.
In the case of Bosnasarayi, for example, the first kadi to be appointed with a mevleviyet, Molla Bali Bosnawi, was given a brief to deal with a troublesome situation created by a group of Bayrami seyhs, followers of Shaykh Hamza Bali (Seyh Hamza Bali), a group who, despite stern measures by this kadi, appear to have continued to cause difficulties down to Ata'i's own day.
It seems entirely likely that the giving of a mevleviyet was intended as a means of making possible — both in hierarchical terms and in terms of offering an inducement — the appointment of a scholar more highly qualified, and therefore, perhaps, more to be respected, than the normal run of kasabat kadis.
It may even be that it was done to make possible the appointment of this particular scholar, a native of Bosnasarayi who had taught to the  level.
The unrest in Anatolia in the latter half of the sixteenth century may in similar fashion have prompted the elevation of some of the kasabat kadiliks there to mevleviyet status.
In the creation of some ad hominem mevleviyets it is possible to discern the hand of favouritism: for example, in the creation of a mevleviyet in 959/1552 for Molla"Abd Allah b.
"Abd al-Kadir (Molla Abdullah) by combining the kadiliks of Galata and Eyup, and of one for Molla Muhammad b.
"Abd Allah (Hubbi/Hubbi Mollasi) in about 970/1562–3 by combining the kadilik of Kutahya with the muderrislik of the Germiyanoglu medrese in the same city.
Neither scholar had, strictly, gone through the stages necessary to qualify him for a mevleviyet, but the former was closely connected with the Grand Vezir Rustem Pasa, the latter with Sehzade Selim, later Sultan Selim 11.
These mevleviyets were distinctly ad hominem(though bother strictly, all three — kadiliks were in later years re-created mevleviyets) and contrast with most subsequent creations, where the appointees were fully qualified to become holders of mevleviyets.
In the creation of some, and the perpetuation of most, of these mevleviyets where the reason for raising the status of the kadilik is not immediately apparent one can perhaps see the operation of a factor which greatly influenced the elaboration of the learned hierarchy, namely the sheer numbers of those seeking posts.
The need to provide suitable jobs for an ever-growing number of even qualified job-seekers, much less the unqualified ones described by writers such as Kocu Bey, is likewise almost certainly responsible for the considerable elaboration of the grades of medreses which occurred from the late sixteenth century onwards.
As discussed above, in Mehmed II's time there were, as far as one can tell, basically three grades of medreses above the 40-akce level: and the Sahn.
By the end of the reign of Suleyman (1566) the  class and possibly the Suleymaniye medreses as a class had come into existence.
By the eighteenth century these four or five classes had grown to twelve: the   and  classes had all been divided into two, for example, and other classes had been added.
There seems to have been very little, if any, educational advantage in this elaboration, but there certainly was an advantage, in a profession which had become vastly overcrowded, of lengthening the period of education and, when one had finally become a muderris, of providing at least the illusion of advancement by the introduction of a number of grades which were unnecessary except in bureaucratic terms.
The latter half of the sixteenth century does, arguably, represent a significant turning point in the development of the hierarchy: until that time one can argue that its evolution had been largely functional, that the nature of the hierarchy ensured that those who reached the highest learned offices would have received a thorough grounding in the necessary sciences through both their education and their teaching, and practical training in the application of the law through holding several important kadiliks; but that after that time, that is, from toward the end of the sixteenth century, the elaboration of the hierarchy was much more negative from the point of view both of learning and of good administration, being essentially an attempt to provide jobs and honours for an ever-increasing number of those seeking both.
To return to the earlier days of the state, however, one must remark upon several other provisions of the Kanunname of Mehmed II if only to avoid giving the impression that, at least in these early days, the establishment of a hierarchy for the ulema meant that a scholar, once enmeshed in its toils, had no option but the long grind to the top of that particular profession.
It is clear from the Kanunname that the movement of scholars into other fields  than the learned profession is envisaged: if a candidate for office in the learned profession, that is, a  wishes to take up a military career instead, he is to be given a fief yielding 20,000 akce; and Sahn muderrises and 300-akce kadis may hold the office of defterdar, and the first two may also become nisanci; and 500-akce kadis may become .
To give two examples of such crossing of career lines, one might cite first the career of Molla Sinan al-Din Yusuf b.
"Ali Yegani (Sinaneddin Yusuf: d. 945/1538–9) who taught in at least three medreses before reaching the Iznik medrese where, in about 921–2/1515–16, he was receiving 45 akce a day.
He then became kadi of Amasya, then defterdar, then kadi of Damascus in 927–8/1521, after which "posts diverse of rank" , as Mecdi writes, he returned to teaching, according to Taskopruzade at the Sultan Murad Khan medrese in Bursa, according to Mecdi at the Yildirimhan (Bayezid I) medrese in Bursa, and then, according to both, with 70 akce a day at the Sahn, from which he was subsequently removed, dying in retirement with a pension of 80 akce.
The second example is Ja'far Celebi b.
Taji Bey (Tacizade Cafer Celebi: d. 921/1515) who, as a muderris, having reached the Mahmud Pasa medrese in Istanbul, the status of which is uncertain but which was at least a 40-akce medrese, left teaching to become nisanci twice, from 903/1497–8 to 917/1511 and again early in the reign of Selim I, and then Anadolu kazasker In Sha'ban 920/October 1514, in which post he was executed on 8 Rajab 921/18 August 1515.
On a different level, though the possibility is not mentioned in the Kanunname, it was certainly still possible in these relatively early days for a member of the ulema to rise to the office of Grand Vezir: for example, Candarlizade Ibrahim Pasa, the son of Halil Pasa, who held the office from 903/1498 to 905/1499, and Piri Mehmed Pasa, Grand Vezir from 924/1518 to 929/1523.
If men trained in the learned profession did not, perhaps, scale such heights in the later sixteenth century, at the same time the crossing of career lines did not come to a halt.
Molla Mahmud Bey (d. 978/1570–1), for example, son of a defterdar and nephew of a Mufti, having taught to the 40-akce level, received the (kasabat) kadilik of Syrian Tripoli with 100 akce a day, and then became mutawalli (mutevelli)(administrator) of the evkaf of Selim I and of Suleyman.
Thereafter becoming involved in the provincial administration, he served successively as   of Rumeli; of Egypt; sancak bey of Aydin; and then in the same capacity in Rhodes, the last of his posts listed in Ata'i.
What then were the hurdles facing a young man aspiring to a scholarly career in the early sixteenth century?
Obviously he had first to complete his medrese education, though neither the Kanunname nor the biographical sources give much guidance as to precisely what stages he had to pass through.
While the biographical sources normally mention the professors from whom the student received lessons, they rarely mention the medrese at which the professor was teaching, so that it is extremely difficult to follow a student from medrese to medrese.
Taskopruzade, for example, names his teachers and the works he studied under them in his autobiography appended to the  but even he does not give the medreses in which he studied.
This would appear to reflect the fact that what was learned, and from whom it was learned, was considerably more important than where it was learned.
None the less, it seems likely that the course of studies was so arranged that the students would pass through the same grades of medreses as those in which they would later teach: such would in any case seem to have been the practice in later times.
Having completed his education, the young scholar then became a  that is, a candidate for office.
In the learned hierarchy the term  — literally"one who is assiduous, constant in attendance’ was used for a candidate for office at any stage in his career, for the muderris or kadi awaiting his next post as well as for the beginner, the term in Ottoman usage perhaps reflecting the fact that the candidates were in constant attendance theoretically upon the sultan but in fact more usually upon the kazaskers, in whose hands lay the responsibility for nominating men for most posts until near the end of the sixteenth century.
Candidates for their first post were generally distinguished, where necessary, as "new ; but as the present discussion is concerned almost entirely with these" new  the term mulazim by itself is to be understood in that sense unless otherwise noted.
The system for investing students as  or granting  was thoroughly reformed and reorganized in the mid-sixteenth century, as mentioned below, but it existed in some form, difficult to define precisely, from well before that time.
In essence, a student's attaining the status of  depended on his gaining the sponsorship, after completing or nearly completing his studies, of the holder of one of a number of high-ranking learned posts, the scholars who held these posts each having the privilege on certain occasions of investing a certain number of students, his own or others, with the right to become .
Usually, but perhaps not necessarily, this right was earned by the student through the performance of some service, far and away the commonest form of which was acting as  or repetiteur for a muderris, though one occasionally also finds students  becoming  through acting as  for a kazasker or  for the Mufti.
It also seems to have been customary at the death of a scholar for those of his students who were sufficiently advanced in their studies to become .
Once having obtained  status the student was eligible for appointment to a post.
Until near the middle of the sixteenth century the enrolment of a student who had completed, or nearly completed, his studies as a candidate for office and the subsequent appointment of him to a post seems to have been rather a disorganized process.
Ata'i writes that before Ebussu'ud Efendi became kazasker of Rumeli, an office he held from 944/1537 to 952/1545, no attention had been paid to the registration of  and that, consequently, it was possible for individuals to enter the ranks of office-holders each in a different manner.
As a result of complaints by a group of students that Ebussu'ud Efendi's colleague, Civizade, the Anadolu kazasker, was preventing them from becoming mulazims, Sultan Suleyman charged Ebussu'ud Efendi with looking into the matter.
In doing so, the latter established the basic rules that brought some order to the method by which students were enabled to become candidates for office.
First, it became the rule that the kazaskers should keep a separate register specifically for the purpose of enrolling .
Second, as noted above, the various high officers of the learned profession were entitled at intervals to invest a stipulated number of students, whether their own or those of others, with the right to become enrolled as .
Ebussu'ud Efendi fixed the interval at which this Investiture of students as mulazims, called a  might take place, namely once in seven years, though this interval was by no means always maintained in later times.
As seen above, for example, there appear to have been two "regular" as distinct from any possible "ceremonial" investitures, apparently called  and defined just below — while Abdurrahman Efendi was Rumeli kazasker (958–64/1551 7), namely in 959  and 963; and Ata'i states that in the time of his successor, Molla Hamid (Hamid), Rumeli kazasker from 964/1557 to 974/5566, were decreed in Dhu"l-Hijja 968/August-September 1561 and in Sha'ban 973/March 1566: thus the period 958 to 974 saw  in 959, 963, 968, and 973.
Finally, Ebussu'ud Efendi also stipulated the number of students to whom each entitled office-holder in the learned profession might grant  and though the numbers which he fixed are not reported, figures have been given above which comprise a partial list for the  of 959 and 963, while Ata'i gives another partial list for the  of 973, in which the kazaskers were each permitted to invest ten students as  "the kadis of the three cities'  i.e. those of Istanbul, Edirne and Bursa) five each, and" the other kadis of the throne"a term of uncertain application, but almost certainly comprising at least the other kadis mentioned in the decree of 963) three each: the figures for the kazaskers at least, and probably the others as well , applied down to Ata'i's own day.
In addition to this more or less regular sort of investiture, there seem to have been investitures on a number of special occasions, both state occasions such as the accession of a sultan, a victory or the birth of a prince, where the right of investiture extended to a number of scholars, and also more personal occasions such as a scholar's acceding to a high learned office, where the right of investiture was limited to the individual involved.
Regularly used in connection with such occasions-and very probably the term used to designate them is the word  "honouring" : for example, and  the honouring of accession and of campaign respectively; and for the more personal occasions, and  the honouring of one's becoming kazasker and Mufti respectively.
Much  honour was indeed involved in the investing of  and the matter was taken seriously.
Molla Khayr al-Din (Hayreddin), Hoca to Suleyman, and Molla Ata Allah (Ataullah), Hoca to Selim II, for example, themselves not having students other than the sultan, were at some pains to choose the best available  to invest as .
Similarly the right to grant mulazemets was sometimes used as a means of showing particular honour to individual scholars or of placating those who were for some reason aggrieved.
When Ebussu'ud Efendi, by this time Mufti, completed his great  in 973/1566, not only was he given a rise in salary and robes of honour to mark the occasion, but also all his students were accepted as .
At the same time a  was decreed, and as a sop to the kazaskers  who may well have been most jealous of the fact that the Mufti"s salary now surpassed their own — each was allowed to invest ten .
On another occasion, Civizade, while a muderris, contrived to bring down on his head the wrath of Kemalpasazade, then Mufti.
After the vezirs had interceded on Civizade's behalf, Kemalpasazade forgave him and was compensated  with gifts and the right to grant three .
The system of investing  thus developed would seem to have provided the state with a means of controlling both the quality and the quantity of the intake of students into the learned profession.
The need for the recommendation of a high-ranking scholar provided a control on the quality of the intake-as long, of course, as the scholar were reasonably honest-while the quantity could be controlled by altering a number of factors, for example , the period at which the regular investiture  took place, the number of ceremonial occasions on which special investitures might occur or the number of students the holder of any given office might invest as  Interesting, though extremely belated, attempts to control both the quality and the quantity of  are represented by two decrees of the year 1715, by which time the system had very nearly  completely broken down.
Indicative of the degenerate state into which the practice of investing  had fallen is the fact that it is considered a reform that it should be inquired of the intending  how old he is, under whom he has studied, and what he has studied.
In a second decree, aimed at reducing the swollen numbers of  it is stated, among other provisions, that the Mufti, who, as noted above, had formerly been allowed to invest sixteen students with the right to become  on taking up his post, will henceforward be allowed to invest only three.
To return again to the earlier period, however, one finds that once the  was enrolled he waited his turn until a post fell vacant.
After the reorganization this part of the process seems to have worked relatively smoothly, but injustices appear to have occurred in the comparative chaos of the earlier period.
One may cite not only the case of the group already mentioned which felt itself to have been ill-treated at the hands of Civizade, but also the experience of Kadiri Celebi, the Mufti in the time of Suleyman, who spent nine years in great hardship as a  before receiving an appointment, probably at the beginning of the second decade of the sixteenth century.
On the student's enrolling, the practice came to be — if it was not so right from the beginning of the sixteenth century-that he chose which area he preferred to work in, whether the European or Asiatic part of the empire, and signed on with the appropriate kazasker.
He also had to make the more crucial choice of whether he wished to become a muderris or a kadi: at this stage of his career he would, of course, become a kasabat kadi.
As a corollary to the fact noted above, that one had usually to teach through the various grades of medreses before becoming eligible for one of the mevleviyets, it follows that the grades of the kasabat kadiliks formed a career in themselves, and one did not normally ascend from one of them to a mevleviyet.
In choosing a kasabat kadilik, then, a student was in effect shutting himself off from the high offices of state and, provided that he intended to stay within the learned profession, dooming himself to a lifetime of service in the kasabat kadiliks unless he could somehow get back into the medrese stream.
References in three separate contexts in Ali suggest that the lowest kadiliks of which the hierarchy normally took cognizance were those at the  25 -akce level; and these would thus seem to be equivalent to the 20-akce medreses in being the level at which a fully-trained medrese student would expect to receive his first appointment.
If this reading of Ali is correct, it would seem that simply in terms of his daily allowance the kasabat kadi was better off financially at the beginning of his career than the new muderris; but in any case, given the fees the kadi could expect to receive, he must have had a considerably greater income.
In other words, the career of the kasabat kadi was more remunerative in the short term than that of the muderris but offered much more limited prospects in the long term.
If a low-ranking muderris wanted to change over to the career of kasabat kadi, moreover, he was immediately better paid: a provision of the Kanunname states that if a 20-akce muderris in the  were to become a kadi, he was to be given a 45-akce kadilik.
Illustrative of the workings of this process is the career of Molla Mustafa b.
Muhammad, known as Molla Bostan.
Having become  in 932/1525–6, he was appointed in 935/1528–9 to a medrese in Bursa with a salary of 25 akce.
Poverty, however, forced him to abandon teaching and become a kasabat kadi, in which capacity he served in several towns.
About the year 944/1537–8, the two kazaskers, Ebussu'ud Efendi and Civizade, the latter a teacher of Molla Bostan's, spoke well of him in the presence of Sultan Suleyman; and as a result of their intercession, and of the sultan's interest in a monograph that Molla Bostan had recently written, it was decreed that he should be appointed to a medrese.
In the event, he was given a 40-akce medrese, from which he rose by degrees through the medreses and the mevleviyets eventually to hold the office of kazasker of Rumeli from 954/1547 to 958/1551.
Of interest in this story is the fact not only that he was forced by poverty to abandon teaching and become a kasabat kadi but also that he was able to re-enter the medrese stream.
It would seem, however, that it was only by the intercession of the two kazaskers, and indeed by virtue of an imperial decree, that he was able to do so.
An insight into the workings of the learned profession of a kind all too rarely offered by the early sources is to be found in an anecdote concerning the appointment of Kemalpasazade to his first post.
In 908/1502–3, when he sought his first appointment, the kazasker of Rumeli was Hacihasanzade and the kazasker of Anadolu was Molla"Abd al-Rahman b.
"Ali (Mueyyedzade), an old friend of Kemalpasazade's family.
When Kemalpasazade presented himself to Hacihasanzade and requested that he be appointed to the Taslik (Ali Bey) medrese in Edirne which was then vacant, Hacihasanzade urged him to give up the thought of receiving a medrese and to accept an appointment to a kadilik instead.
Kemalpasazade sought the advice of Mueyyedzade who counselled him to feign acceptance of Hacihasanzade's proposal; and when, on the next day, the latter petitioned the sultan, Bayezid II, to appoint Kemalpasazade to a kadilik, Mueyyedzade intervened, speaking highly of Kemalpasazade's abilities and asking that he not be wasted in a kadilik but rather that he be given the vacant Taslik medrese so that he might busy himself with the pursuit of learning.
Bayezid II was won over by Mueyyedzade's arguments and not only appointed Kemalpasazade to  the Taslik medrese but also charged him with writing a history of the Ottoman dynasty in Turkish to serve as a companion piece to that being written in Persian by Idris Bitlisi
Ali sees in this attempt by Hacihasanzade to induce Kemalpasazade to accept a kadilik an example of a means whereby he was able to maintain himself in the office of kazasker (first in that of Anadolu and then in that of Rumeli) for twenty-five years.
He writes: Molla Hacihasanzade, who became kazasker for twenty-five years continuously through purposing the turning away and hindering of those capable of achieving renown by directing them to the path of kaza [kadilik]and of those who were spoken of as outstanding in excellence among their contemporaries by impeding their passage through the ranks; and who had by this stratagem, over so long a period, found safety from the crush of those ulema who, by right of learning and excellence, might have passed through the ranks and become rivals  to him…
In other words, controlling as he did the nominations to all learned appointments in whichever of the areas he was then kazasker, he would urge young scholars to enter the relative dead end of the career of kasabat kadi and thereby prevent them from passing up through the ranks of medreses to become candidates for mevleviyets and thus rivals to his own position.
Provided that Ali's analysis of Hacihasanzade's motives is correct-and one must remember that Ali is writing nearly a century after the event it would appear that already at the beginning of the sixteenth century the career of a kasabat kadi was regarded as a dead end.
This in turn implies that the two generalizations already hinted at-that it was not normal practice either for the kasabat kadi to return to the medrese stream or for him to make the jump to the mevleviyet kadiliks were by then established: both are, of course, in a sense implicit in the Kanunname in so far as neither eventuality is mentioned, though, equally, neither is specifically excluded.
Though the operation of the principles embodied in these generalizations is borne out by the vast majority of the careers of scholars listed in the biographical dictionaries who came to maturity after the beginning of the sixteenth century, both generalizations require some degree of qualification.
In regard to the first, for example— that kasabat kadis did not normally enter or re-enter the medrese stream-two caveats must be entered, the first of which is that one must explicitly exclude two areas in which movement between kadiliks and medreses was not uncommon: first, the kadiliks and medreses below the level at which the hierarchy began to operate, whose holders received perhaps five, ten or fifteen akce a day; and second, those at the top of the hierarchy, since it was not uncommon for holders of mevleviyet kadiliks to go back to medrese teaching as a form of either temporary or permanent retirement from service as a kadi or a kazasker.
The  second caveat is that this generalization, like most, while generally applicable, is not universally so.
Analysis of the exceptions in Taskopruzade/Mecdi is difficult on two grounds, first that one cannot, in the period covered by them, be absolutely sure of the status of either the medreses or the kadiliks involved, and second, that neither author is inclined to give the sort of detail that Ata'i gives in, for example, the biography of Molla Bostan, alluded to just above, from which it is at least arguable that Molla Bostan's re-entering the medrese stream was exceptional.
In any case, among scholars whose careers fall in the first half of the sixteenth century note should be made of Sinaneddin Yusuf, mentioned above; of Molla Pir Ahmad Celebi b.
Nur al-Din Hamza; of Molla "Abd al-Aziz; of Molla Ja'far al-Bursawi, known as Nihali; and of Molla Muhyi" I-Din Muhammad b.
"Abd al-Awwal, known as Sacli Emir or Emir Gisudar.
This last, for example, came from Persia in the early years of the sixteenth century, was given a medrese by Bayezid II, then turned to the career of a kadi, serving, according to Mecdi, in Serez and Filibe, among other places.
In Suleyman's time he returned to the medrese stream, teaching as far as the Sahn and then becoming kadi successively in Aleppo, Damascus and Istanbul, in retirement from which last post he died in 963/1555–6.
In Ata'i one might note the careers of six scholars as exceptions, in three of which the subjects changed careers under rather special circumstances, while in the other three Ata'i merely notes the change without comment.
As an instance of the former one might cite the case of Molla Ahmad b.
"Abd al-Latif, known as Bukhari-zade (Buharizade), who, having taught to the 40-akce level, took up the career of kasabat kadi and then, at the urging, and with the aid of his kinsman, the Rumeli kazasker Abdurrahman Efendi, returned to the medrese stream, reaching the Sahn in 982/1575.
In the case of Molla Sayyid Muhammad al-Nakib (Yavuz Celebi), on the other hand, Ata'i merely notes that he started off his career as a kasabat kadi, then turned to the medrese system in which he was given a 40-akce medrese and subsequently worked his way up to the Suleymaniye Darulhadis — probably by this time the premier medrese in the empire to which he was appointed in 1012/1604: he later became kadi of Eyup and then nakibulesraf.
Apart from these relatively rare exceptions in the biographical sources, moreover, one ought to mention a clause contained in the kanun of 1006/1598 whereby kadis without question kasabat kadis are forbidden to become muderrises in the  a provision which would effectively block their route to high office in the learned profession.
The presence of the provision, however, suggests that kadis had in practice been making their  way back into the medrese stream, though it may well never have been intended that they should do so.
The second generalization, that kasabat kadis did not normally, after the beginning of the sixteenth century, make the jump to the mevleviyets needs only the qualification that "normally" must be emphasized, since exceptions do occur, though rather less frequently than do exceptions from the first generalization.
Again, in the period covered by Taskopruzade/Mecdi, there is the problem of the status of the kadiliks involved: Mollas"Ubayd Allah b.
Ya'kub and Fenarizade Zeyneddin, for example, rose from kasabat kadiliks to the kadiliks of Aleppo, and Damascus and Aleppo, respectively not long after the Ottoman conquest of those two cities; but whether this means that these scholars' careers represent exceptions to the rule or, on the other hand, that Aleppo and Damascus were not yet regarded as mevleviyets is not entirely clear.
The only totally unambiguous examples so far located are, in Atâ "i∘, Molla Abdullah and Hubbi Mollasi, whose careers have been discussed above; and in Taskopruzade/Mecdi, Molla Muhyi" I-Din Muhammad Yusuf b.
Ya'kub, known as Ecezade, who taught as far as the Iznik medrese, then became a kasabat kadi, eventually serving in Trabzon, from which, after the accession of Selim I (918/1512), he became kadi in Selanik and then in Bursa, dying while in retirement from that post in 924/1518.
As already noted in the cases of Molla Abdullah and Hubbi Mollasi, however, so also in the case of Ecezade favouritism clearly played a part.
According to Mecdi, Ecezade won Selim's regard and affection while the latter was governor in Trabzon; and it is certainly implicit that it was as a result of this affection that Ecezade received the kadiliks of Selanik and Bursa.
That cases like this whether or not favouritism was involved — occurred more frequently than one might suppose from the evidence of the biographical sources, however, is suggested once again by the kanun of 1006/1598, in a passage immediately following the one quoted above: "Let the  of those of the kasabat kadis who have been given mevleviyet status in post [i.e., in the place and period of their tenure]not be accepted." 
The absence of all but a handful of examples in the biographical sources of this method of obtaining mevleviyets leads to the inference that someone obtaining a mevleviyet by this route could not expect to get much further in the hierarchy; and indeed the provision itself, while not prohibiting the practice, does remove one of the principal prerogatives of the holders of mevleviyets.
None the less it is clear that, whatever the theory, there was in practice no absolute bar to crossing the line between the kasabat kadiliks and the mevleviyets.
The options open to at least one student in the early sixteenth century are  mentioned and commented upon in a brief autobiographical note by Celalzade Mustafa near the beginning of his .
Mentioning his education only in the most general terms, he goes on to say that the offices suitable for the likes of him appeared to be  (tedris, teaching) and kada "here, the office of  of which" one [teaching]is the intimate companion of poverty and need and the other [kaza]is unmitigated misfortune".
Unenamoured of either, he rejected both in favour of the career of a scribe  here his own account goes on to other things becoming a clerk to the imperial divan in 922/1516, and rising thence through the office of private secretary to two Grand Vezirs and that of  to become nisanci in 941/1534.
So brief is the note, and couched in such general terms, that it is difficult to base much upon it, but worth noting are the facts that he clearly saw his choice as lying in the normal way between tedris and kaza, which he calls  two paths or careers; that a signal disadvantage of teaching was that it was unremunerative; and, not least, that, unable to contemplate either alternative, he was able to find a home for his talents and interests in the bureaucracy.
Much has already been said in the preceding pages about the subsequent progress through the learned hierarchy of the student who chose to become a muderris: with ability, luck, good connections or a combination of the three he would teach through a number of grades of medreses, eventually to turn to the mevleviyet kadiliks through which he might hope to rise ultimately to what had become by the end of the sixteenth century the principal office in the hierarchy, the Muftilik of Istanbul.
It has been shown above that, on the basis of the careers of a number of Muftis in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, one might tentatively conclude that by that time it was as a practical matter desirable, if not absolutely necessary, to have taught on at least two levels of medreses beyond the Sahn in order to have a chance to attain the highest office in the learned profession.
A survey of the careers of scholars generally in the latter half of the sixteenth century allows one to make explicit a generalization implicit in the evidence of the Muftis' careers, namely that, as a general rule, the higher the level the scholar reached in the medrese system, the higher he was likely to rise in the mevleviyet system.
Uzuncarsili has published a kanun containing a detailed listing of the mevleviyet kadiliks and the ranks of medreses and showing the possible  promotions within and between the two, facts which help to define this generalization to some degree.
The kanun, included in a late seventeenth-century anthology (1095/1684), purports to reflect the practice of the time of Suleyman, but that the kanun in the form published by Uzuncarsili dates from Suleyman's time must be rejected on the grounds both that many of the kadiliks mentioned did not attain mevleviyet status until the late sixteenth or seventeenth centuries and that two of them Kandiye (Candia) and Kamanice (Kamenets-Podolskiy)— did not come into Ottoman hands until 1080/ 1669 and 1083/1672 respectively.
Despite the fact that the kanun thus in all likelihood dates from the seventeenth century, the biographical sources indicate that the principles, if not the details, embodied in it were at work in the late sixteenth century and very possibly earlier-as well.
The passage of particular interest concerns the options open to the muderrises at various levels.
The highest ranking muderrises-those at the Suleymaniye medreses -go to certain named kadiliks such as Damascus and Aleppo, for example, while the muderrises of the next two lower classes — the  and the  — may choose either to take up kadiliks such as those of Jerusalem, Baghdad and Filibe, or to go to the next higher rank of medrese.
The next three classes beneath the  class — the Sahn, the  and the  — also may choose kadiliks or the next higher rank of medrese, but in these cases the option of choosing a kadilik is expressed in variants of the following phrase: "if [the muderrises]become poor and choose office [as kadi]…" , the implication of which is that they would not otherwise do so.
The reason they would not otherwise do so becomes apparent from the biographical sources, from which it is clear that though it was possible to obtain mevleviyets from these medreses, men who did so tended not to rise much higher but to spend the rest of their lives in relatively low-ranking mevleviyets.
Two points thus emerge from this kanun, with the aid of the information to be found in the biographical sources: first, in general, the higher one's rank in the medrese system the higher the rank of one's initial mevleviyet; and second, again in general , the higher one's rank in the medrese system before turning to the mevleviyets, the better one's chances of eventual promotion to the highest of them.
Besides muderrises and kadis, one other group within the learned profession deserves brief mention, namely the muftis.
Hezarfen, as noted above, writes that there were two sorts of muftis, on the one hand the Seyhulislam, on the other the  muftis.
A similar distinction lies at  the base of J. R. Walsh's treatment of the muftis: doubtless writing about a period later than that under consideration in the present study, he states, in regard to what Hezarfen would call the  that aside from the occasional retired kadi or "a member of one of the local learned families in the larger cities,…the  were not of the  class" .
From one point of view this clear distinction between the Mufti (the  and "the rest" serves a useful purpose, since in no sense was there ever a hierarchical connection between the two.
It is probable that one cannot properly speak of such a thing as a career as a mufti in the same sense that one can of a career as a muderris or a kadi; but to the degree that there does appear to have been some hierarchical gradation of muftiliks, it is worth emphasizing that these did not lead to the office of the Mufti, which rather, from the sixteenth  century on, was approached by the route of the medreses, mevleviyet kadiliks and kazaskerliks.
However applicable the distinction — and Walsh's characterization of the "provincial" muftis — may be in the period after the end of the sixteenth century, the position regarding the muftis in the earlier period is rather more complex, for here one must distinguish three classes: first, the Mufti; second, muftis of a number of cities and large towns, who certainly were of the ulema class; and third, though evidence regarding them is hard to come by, one may perhaps hypothesize a class of small-town, even village muftis, who may have been, but very possibly were not, of the ulema class.
Since an examination of the first of these is the purpose of the following chapters, and an examination of the third impossible because, as suggested, of lack of evidence, one need turn here only to an examination of the second class.
It is difficult to assess, in the period under review, whether the Ottomans made any systematic attempt to ensure the presence of muftis in the various cities and towns of the empire.
Apart from Bursa and Edirne, which constitute special cases and are dealt with in detail in the following chapters, the city for which there is the earliest reliable information concerning a continuous official muftilik of some importance appears to be Amasya, to the muftilik of which Ali Cemâlî, later Mufti of Istanbul, was appointed by Bayezid II in 888/1483–4 (?) with the not inconsiderable salary of 30 akce a day.
In 891/1486, when Bayezid II built his medrese in Amasya, he stipulated that the muftis of Amasya should act as muderris, a condition which is reported to have been observed without exception until 1033/1623–4, and with a few exceptions until 1084/1673–4 when the two offices were finally separated.
Ali Cemali, who had in the years between 888 and 891 moved on to other posts, was the first appointee to the new medrese and, though his salary is not specified, the course of his career to this point suggests that it cannot have been less than 50 akce a day.
Interestingly enough, Bayezid II made the same stipulation in regard to the medrese attached to his mosque in Istanbul (the medrese built probably in 912–13/1506–8), namely that the Mufti of Istanbul should be the muderris.
Again Ali Cemali was the first muderris, and the stipulation appears usually  to have been observed (though in later years by delegation) until the last days of the empire.
These arrangements of Bayezid II's seem to be among the earliest occurrences of, and may well have helped to set the pattern for, a number of joint muderrisliks and muftiliks which appear in the course of the sixteenth century, many of which were at a relatively high level in the hierarchy.
Often, but by no means invariably, the medreses involved were imperial foundations, such as the medrese of Suleyman's mother, Hafsa Sultan, in Manisa (929/1523); the medreses of Suleyman himself in Rhodes (956/1549) and Damascus (973/1566); and that of Selim II on the newly-conquered island of Cyprus (978–9/1570–1).
The muderrislik of the medrese founded In Bosnasarayi (943/1536) by a less august member of the imperial family, Husrev Bey, grandson through his mother of Bayezid II, appears to have been combined with the muftilik of that city; and non-imperial foundations of a similar type may be exemplified by those of Husrev Papa in Aleppo (952/1545–6) and of the beylerbeyi of Budin, Mustafa Pasa, in Budin (983/1575).
This list, of course, is by no means exhaustive: one finds mentioned in Ata'i "important" joint muderris/muftiliks in the sixteenth century also in Trabzon, Kefe, Ankara, Diyarbakir, Seyitgazi (near Eskisehir) and so on .
In general, these joint muderris/muftiliks seem to have been at the  or  levels, their holders receiving 50 akce; but there are instances on the  one hand of lower-ranking posts-in about 940/1533–4, for example , a muderris/mufti of Agras (Aghrus, also Aghras, now Atabey) received 30 akce a day, then moved on to become mufti in Ankara (and probably muderris, although Ata'i does not mention a medrese) with 40 akce and on the other hand cases, particularly in Amasya, Manisa and Damascus, where the holders received 60, 80 or even 100 akce a day.
For some the holding of one of these posts was just one stage in their careers, for others a succession of such posts appears to have become a career in itself, though one must be careful to emphasize that there is not enough evidence to suggest that there was in the case of the muderris/muftis anything like as clearly defined a career structure as in the case of the muderrises and the kadis, that there was, in effect, a  comparable to the  and the .
One may, however, note careers such as those of Molla Nasuh b.
Yusuf who, at the 50-akce level, served as muderris/mufti successively in Larende, Amid, Aleppo, Seyitgazi and again in Aleppo, in which last post he died in 1981/1573; of Molla Akmal al-Din (Ekmeleddin), muderris/mufti between 972/1565 and his death in 983/1575 successively in Kefe, Rhodes and Cyprus, where he was the first muderris/mufti after the conquest (978–9/1570–1) with 60 akce a day; and of Molla Yalaya al-Ajami who, after teaching at the haric level at the medrese of Sultan Orhan in Iznik, went on to the muderris/muftiliks of Seyitgazi, Aleppo and Damascus, dying in the last-named post in 986/1578.
Simply the position of these joint muderris/muftiliks in the hierarchy is an indication of their importance, but added testimony of a different kind is to be found in Ata'i's biography of Molla Muhammad b.
Abd al-Aziz (Muidzade), an Ottoman scholar who held the muderris/muftilik of Damascus from 980/1572 to 983/1575.
Having become engaged in a dispute over a point of law with the then kadi of Damascus, Molla Muhammad b.
Mustafa (Bostanzade), later to become Multi of Istanbul, Muidzade prevailed in the argument and, according to Ata'i, his fetvas on the subject were preserved in the court registers and were still referred to in Ata'i's own day."
Not all muftis, of course, were successful when at odds with the Kadi: the aforementioned Molla Nasuh, while muderris/mufti of Aleppo, appears to have been held in some contempt by the kadi of Aleppo, Molla Shams al-Din Ahmad b.
Badr al-Din Mahmud (Kadizade: kadi of Aleppo from 963/1555–6 to 967/1560), also later to become Mufti of Istanbul, and in one specific case, quoted by Ata'i, was overruled by him; while Molla Muslih al-Din Mustafa (Circinzade Mustafa), appointed muderris/mufti in Bosnasarayi in 965/1557–8, fought the kadi of Bosnasarayi to a standstill over certain  matters, both then making representations to Istanbul and both being removed from office for their pains."
The intention in discussing this second class of mufti, the"important provincial muftis or, more strictly, muderris/muftis, is essentially simply to point out their existence and to give a very rough idea of the nature of the class and of the sort of men who held these posts.
Much more evidence needs to be uncovered, if indeed it exists, much more work to be done even in available sources before the origins and development of this sort of muftilik can be said to have been fully studied.
It may be taken as fact that during the late fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries a number of joint muderris/muftiliks came into existence in the provinces.
Why they came into existence, whether those about which one has information represent the now-visible signs of a systematic attempt by the Ottomans to provide in the provinces muftis of a high standard, appointed by the central government, or whether, on the other hand, they came into existence in a more haphazard way, more by individual than by systematic "governmental" initiative, is difficult to say.
Uncertainties abound.
It appears, for example, that Bayezid II stipulated in the case of his medreses both in Amasya and in Istanbul that the respective muftis should be the muderrises, but it is not clear in other cases whether the founder of the  made such a stipulation or whether the practice of combining the muderrislik with the muftilik grew up later.
One of the most readily accessible  for example, is that for the evkaf of Suleyman's mother, Hafsa Sultan, in Manisa, dated Sha'ban 929/June July 1523.
The  contains no explicit stipulation that the muderris should also act as mufti of Manisa — or, alternatively, that the mufti of Manisa should act as muderris — but it would appear that by at least a few years before 944/1537–8, if not earlier, such had become the practice."
It is a tenable hypothesis that Bayezid II did indeed set a pattern and that many of the later foundations involving a joint muderris/muftilik were made simply in imitation of his precedent, though their effect might have been to create an official muftilik where none had existed before or to upgrade an existing muftilik (which latter may well have been Bayezid II's intention in Amasya and Istanbul).
Sahillioglu, for example, argues in the case of Cyprus that the presence of a spiritual leader of the non-Muslims on the island  required the appointment of a spiritual leader for the Muslims in other words, the mufti.
Such may possibly have been the motive behind the creation of the muftilik of Cyprus, but the case for the argument seems stronger in isolation than it does when set against the fact that by 979/1571 the creation of such joint muderris/muftiliks appears to have become quite a common practice.
One could perhaps likewise argue that the joining of the office of muderris of Suleyman's medrese in Damascus with the muftilik in this case the muftilik certainly predated the medrese was an attempt to strengthen the position of the Hanafi mufti, or, alternatively, an attempt to "Ottomanize" the muftilik, since with the foundation of the medrese the joint post passed at least temporarily from the hands of local scholars into those of Ottoman scholars; but it may equally well be that Suleyman was doing no more than following established custom in assigning the muderrislik to the mufti.
In short, then, while one is able to adduce specific reasons for the creation of certain of the joint muderris/muftiliks, it is important to recognize that these offices were a not uncommon feature of the Ottoman learned profession in the sixteenth century and that the sheer momentum of established practice may count for as much in assessing the reasons for their creation as what appear to be locally important considerations in each individual case.
In order to draw together the threads of the preceding discussion one might in conclusion dwell briefly on the careers of two famous scholars, one of the latter half of the fifteenth century, one of the latter half of the sixteenth century, namely Molla Muslih al-Din Mustafa b.
Khwaja Yusuf b.
Salih al-Bursawi, known as Khwaja-zade (Hocazade: d. 893/1488), and Molla Muhammad b.
Shaykh Muhammad b.
Ilyas, known as Ciwi-zade (Civizade: d. 995/1587), not to be confused with his father who bore the same name and who, as one of the Muftis in the period under review, is treated in some detail in a later chapter.
In a very real sense, of course, the biographies of the Muftis in the following chapters illustrate the development of the hierarchy, but it seems not without point to concentrate attention on this particular aspect by placing side by side the biographies of two scholars, one of whom lived in the period before the hierarchy had become developed to any very great degree — before, perhaps, it is even possible to speak of a hierarchy-he other in a period when the development was fairly well advanced, though not complete.
It cannot be pretended that either scholar's career is entirely  typical of its period-Hocazade's career is unusually chaotic even for the later fifteenth century, Civizade's in many respects unusually "regular" even for the later sixteenth century-but the degree to which they are atypic is not sufficient to give a misleading impression.
No systematic attempt is made at this point to resolve the many doubts about the details of Hocazade's career, particularly the dates of his various appointments, since his career impinges on those of a number of Muftis and the conflicts are more appropriately discussed in detail where they arise in these contexts.
The intent is rather merely to summarize the account of his life as given by Taskopruzade and Mecdi in order to convey the general course of his career.
Much play is given in the  to the rather romantic story of Hocazade's extreme poverty in his youth, a story which lays the basis for a rags-to-riches saga (in respect both of material wealth and of intellectual achievement) and which also has overtones of the story of Joseph.
He was the son of a rich merchant, with whom he fell out, however, because of his preoccupation with  and his lack of interest in his father's profession.
While his brothers lived in comfort with beautiful clothes and many slaves, Hocazade was kept on an allowance of a mere one akce a day.
A visiting seyh, seeing his sad plight, comforted him by saying that he would achieve high rank and that his brothers would stand in his presence among the servants and slaves.
After Hocazade's appointment to the kazaskerlik some years later, his father and brothers came to visit him in Edirne.
Hocazade was reconciled with his father, for whom he subsequently gave a great feast; so great was the press of notables, however, that his brothers were forced to stand among the servants.
Hocazade began his studies under Molla Muhammad b.
Kadi Ayatholugh, muderris in Aghras (Agras, now Atabey), then passed on to the service of Molla Khidr Bey (Hizir Bey: d. 863/1459) -later to become the first kadi of Istanbul but at this time muderris at the Sultan medrese (the medrese of Mehmed I) in Bursa — becoming his .
Hizir Bey was greatly impressed by him and sent him to Murad II, recommending that he be given a teaching post.
Murad II was about to go on campaign, however, and in his haste gave Hocazade only a provincial kadilik, that of Kestel near Bursa.
On his return he gave Hocazade the Esediye medrese in Bursa with a salary of 10 akce a day, a post in which Hocazade remained for six years.
When Mehmed II ascended the throne, his widely-known patronage of learning  caused Hocazade to seek him out.
So poor that he had to borrow money to buy a horse, he found Mehmed II on the road from Istanbul to Edirne and was introduced to the sultan by the vezir Mahmud Papa (Grand Vezir 858–72/1454–68 and 877–8/1472–3).
While riding along he fell into a lengthy dispute with Molla Muhammad, known as Zeyrek, at this time probably muderris at one of the medreses which Mehmed II created by the conversion of churches after the conquest of Constantinople, which were, in effect, precursors of the Sahn.
Hocazade confounded Molla Zeyrek, a feat which so impressed Mehmed II that he made Hocazade his Hoca.
Some time after, Mahmud Pasa grew jealous of the closeness which had grown up between Mehmed II and Hocazade.
He encompassed his object of breaking the bond between the two by telling Mehmed II that Hocazade wanted to become kazasker, while telling Hocazade that Mehmed II wanted him to become kazasker, as a result of which Hocazade unwillingly accepted the post which Mehmed II unwillingly offered him.
Mehmed II is reported to have been hurt by the fact that Hocazade appeared to prefer high rank to his company.
Hocazade was next appointed muderris at the Sultan medrese in Bursa with a salary of 50 akce a day.
There is no suggestion in the  that he was dismissed from the kazaskerlik; he seems simply to have moved on to another job, one which, according to Hocazade's own testimony, suited him very well.
Taskopruzade quotes from his father these words of Hocazade's: "At the time when I was at the Sultan medrese in Bursa I was thirty-three years old and loved nothing save  Taskopruzade goes on to say that Hocazade used to take more pride in having taught at the Sultan medrese than in having been kazasker or Mehmed II's Hoca.
The next step in Hocazade's career was that he was brought to Istanbul from Bursa by Mehmed II to dispute again with Molla Zeyrek, the latter having incurred the sultan's displeasure by claiming one day in his presence that he — Molla Zeyrek — was superior to the highly revered scholar al-Sayyid al-Sharif al-Jurjani (Seyyid Serif: d. 816/1413).
After an eight-day disputation, in which Molla Husrev was one of the judges, Hocazade was adjudged to have won and was given Molla Zeyrek's medrese as a reward.
From there he went on to become kadi of Edirne and then kadi of Istanbul.
A hostile Grand Vezir again brought about a change of post.
Karamani Mehmed Pasa (Grand Vezir 882–6/1477–81), pupil of another scholar vanquished by Hocazade and therefore ill-disposed toward him, told Mehmed II that Hocazade had complained of the climate in Istanbul, saying that because of it he had forgotten the learned works he had memorized, and that he had praised the climate in Iznik.
Mehmed II accordingly appointed him kadi and muderris in Iznik.
Hocazade soon gave up the kadilik in order to devote himself more fully to  but remained as muderris in Iznik until the death of  Mehmed II (886/1481).
On the accession of Bayezid II, Hocazade was appointed to the Sultan medrese in Bursa for a second time, with 100 akce a day, and was also appointed mufti of Bursa.
He died as such in 893/1485.
In contrast to Hocazade, Civizade came from a very favourable background from the point of view of the learned profession.
The son of another Civizade who was, in 945/1539, to become Mufti, the younger Civizade was born in 937/1530–1 and studied first under his father, with whom he went on the pilgrimage in 950/1544, his father having just previously been removed from the Muftilik.
When the elder Civizade, by now Rumeli kazasker for a second time, died in 954/1547, the younger was given a pension of 45 akce a day.
Having studied under several other scholars, including Taskopruzade, he completed his studies under the retired Anadolu kazasker Ma'lul Emir Efendi from whom he became  in the  of Abdurrahman Efendi in 959/1552.
He seems not to have received a post until 964/1557, but was then given the Kasim Pasa medrese in Istanbul at the  level, thus bypassing the 20-, 30- and 40-akce grades: he would not normally, of course, receive a medrese the salary of which was less than his pension had been.
Thereafter he was appointed successively to the Mihrimah Sultan medrese (966/1558), the Sahn (968/1561), the Ayasofya medrese (970/1563), and one of the Suleymaniye medreses (971/1564).
Turning then to the mevleviyet kadiliks, he served successively (and apparently uninterruptedly) as kadi of Damascus (977/1569), Egypt (978/1570), Bursa (979/1572), Edirne (981/1573), and Istanbul (Rajab 983/October 1575).
Later in the same month he became Anadolu kazasker and, in 985/1577, Rumeli kazasker.
Though his career had to this point suffered no check, according to Ata'i, he now fell into disfavour with the Grand Vezir Sokullu Mehmed Pasa (Grand Vezir 972 87/1565–79), who succeeded in accomplishing his removal, with a pension, in Safar 987/April 1579.
Two months later he was appointed to the recently built Selimiye (Selim II) medrese in Edirne, the newest and perhaps at least temporarily the most important of the imperial medreses, from which he nevertheless resigned after only two months, unwilling to accept, in Ata'i's words, by which he means, presumably, the transfer to Edirne.
In Safar 989/March 1581 he became Rumeli kazasker a second time, and, on 26 Dhu"l-Hijja of the same year (21  January 1582), he became Mufti, in which post he remained until his death on 28 Jumada I 995/6 May 1587.
The purpose in setting side by side the careers of Hocazade and Civizade is simply to compare in a very broad way the careers of two not unrepresentative scholars of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries respectively in order to show the degree to which the hierarchy had developed during this period; and what one may fairly infer from the comparison is limited.
There are, for example, points of difference between the two men themselves in terms of background and, very probably, of character and disposition which, could one know them fully and evaluate them properly, might allow a closer and more subtle comparison.
There are, equally, factors such as the differences in the approaches of the principal biographical sources in each case which affect one's sense of what is important in each man's life; and for these, due allowance must be made when measuring the growth of the hierarchy and assessing the effects of that growth.
One can safely say, however, that the learned world in which Civizade moved differed greatly from Hocazade's.
It is beyond question that by Civizade's time the learned hierarchy had become greatly elaborated relative to its state in Hocazade's time, and a scholar's progress through it is more or less predictable.
What one believes to have been the effects of the growth and elaboration of the hierarchy on the attitudes both of scholars towards their own role and of others towards scholars has been discussed at the beginning of the chapter, but one may, perhaps, in conclusion, briefly reinforce the point by quoting a remark attributed to the Grand Vezir Karamani Mehmed Pas a concerning Hocazade.
While Hocazade was at Iznik, where he had been sent after having been removed from the kadilik of Istanbul through the machinations of Karamani Mehmed Pasa, he had occasion to come once to Istanbul.
During his stay in Istanbul he was treated with the greatest respect by his former students, among whom are mentioned three important muderrises of the city, two from the Sahn and one from the Murad Pasa medrese.
On seeing the deference with which Hocazade was treated, Karamani Mehmed Pasa remarked: "We have not been able to destroy his good repute.
I did not know that his greatness lies in his learning and not in his office."
One would go too far in saying that by Civizade's time a scholar could achieve greatness solely through office; but at the least, such a distinction as that made by Karamani Mehmed Pasa had become almost impossible to make, since greatness' and "office" had grown so closely intertwined as to be inseparable.
The Origins of the Muftilik
As indicated in the first chapter, there has evolved during relatively recent times a "traditional" listing of Muftis, the tradition beginning essentially with Mustakimzade and reaching perhaps definitive expression in the widely-used  the equally widely-used chronological history by Danismend, and, more recently, Altunsu's  In respect at least of the origins of the institution this tradition has triumphed over another of some antiquity, advanced by Katib Celebi and followed by Hezarfen and the western authors d'Ohsson and Hammer, which names Hizir Bey (d. 863/1459), the first kadi of Istanbul, as the first Seyhulislam and which differs in several other respects from the now-accepted account of the succession of fifteenth-century Muftis.
One may anticipate the conclusions of the following discussion of the fifteenth-century Muftilik by saying that while both traditions are less than satisfactory and while, in the present state of knowledge, there are questions of considerable importance which remain unresolved, on the particular point of the origins of the institution there is some evidence to support at least the broad outlines of the Mustakimzade tradition, however vexed the details may be; whereas, on the other hand, not only is there a lack of positive evidence to support the Katib Celebi tradition, there is also a certain weight of evidence, largely of a negative nature, against it.
For this reason it seems best to concentrate upon the Mustakimzade tradition in order to be able to set the Katib Celebi tradition against the background of what is felt to be a more probable account of the origins of the Muftilik.
Turkish tradition, then, has settled on Molla Shams al-Din Muhammad b.
Hamza b.
Muhammad al-Fenari (751–834/1350–1431), known as Molla Fenari, as the first Mufti.
The first positive statement to this effect in the available sources is to be found in Mustakimzade, who not only places him first in his list but also states explicitly, on the authority of the historian"Aziz  Efendi (?), that Molla Fenari was the first to hold the office of Mufti in the Ottoman state.
Support for this statement, admittedly of a negative sort, may be found in Taskopruzade in that his mention of Molla Fenari as  seems to be the first mention in the Shaka'ik of any such title.
As noted above, most of the later Turkish sources have followed Mustakimzade, asserting either explicitly or implicitly, by placing his name first in the list of Muftis, that the Muftilik originated with Molla Fenari.
The earliest source for Molla Fenari's life is not Taskopruzade but the  of the Egyptian scholar Ibn Hajar al'Askalani (Ibn Hajar: d. 852/1449) who had met Molla Fenari in Egypt and received an ijaza (icazet) from him.
Indeed the biographical section in Taskopruzade is verbally very close to Ibn Hajar's account, although Taskopruzade adds some material, omits some very important details, and changes the order of the material in such a way as to render the account confusing on occasion.
Special mention might also be made of another much more recent source particularly concerned with Molla Fenari, namely the comprehensive biography by the historian of Amasya, Huseyin Husameddin.
His article is  particularly valuable for the evidence which he adduces from contemporary documents, some of which is of considerable importance in helping to determine the facts of Molla Fenari's life; but much of what he says is, as will be shown, based on so little genuine historical evidence (insofar as this can be judged from the sources he quotes) and appears so speculative that it must be treated with some caution.
According to Ibn Hajar, Molla Fenari was born in Safar 751/April-May 1350 and studied "in his own lands' under certain scholars of whom Ibn Hajar names three: Ala" al-Din, known as al-Aswad (Kara Hoca); al-Kamal Muhammad b.
Muhammad al-Ma'ari (?); and al-Jamal Muhammad [b.]
Muhammad al-Aksarayi.
The second of these receives no mention in Taskopruzade or Mecdi, either in the article on Molla Fenari or in a separate article, but is mentioned by Ismail Belig and, in more detail, by Husameddin.
The latter writes that he was a muderris in Bursa who then became a kadi, at which point Molla Fenari went to study under Kara Hoca in Iznik.
His source for this information is not given, but he does mention the existence of documents signed by a man of this name which show him to have been kadi of Cirmen and of Edirne.
In Taskopruzade and Mecdi's account, the first of Molla Fenari's teachers mentioned is Kara Hoca (d. 800/1397), under whom Molla Fenari studied probably at the Iznik medrese, of which Kara Hoca was the third muderris, having followed after the first, Dawud al-Kaysari al-Karamani, and his successor, Taj al- Din al- Kurdi (Taceddin Kurdi).
As the result of a quarrel with Kara Hoca, Molla Fenari is said to have left him and gone to study under Shaykh Jamal al-Din Muhammad b.
Muhammad al-Aksarayi (Cemaleddin Aksarayi).
From their article on the latter it is clear that Taskopruzade and Mecdi suppose him to have been located at the Zincirli medrese  at Aksaray in Karaman at the time of Molla Fenari's period of study with him.
They relate that while at that medrese  Cemaleddin Aksarayi followed the ancient Greek practice and divided his students into three classes: those whom he taught on the way from his dwelling to the medrese  peripatetics); those whom he taught under the pillars of the medrese  stoics); and those whom he taught in the interior of the medrese.
Molla Fenari was, apparently, in the second class because of his youth.
Husameddin, however, writes that it was in Amasya, not Aksaray, that Molla Fenari studied with Cemaleddin Aksarayi, saying that it is known from several documents that Cemaleddin Aksarayi was, between 751 and 782 [sic](1350–1 to 1380–1), muderris in Amasya and kazasker under the emir of Amasya, Hajji Shadgeldi.
Cemaleddin Aksarayi's connection with Amasya is more fully developed in Husameddin's earlier  where he is said to have been a fellow student of Hajji Shadgeldi's; to have become kadi in Amasya in 763/1361 when Hajji Shadgeldi took power; to have been raised from the kadilik and the muderrislik of the Dar al-"ilm medrese to the kazaskerlik in/about 768/1366–7; and to have remained such until after Hajji Shadgeldi's defeat and death in battle with Kadi Burhan al-Din in 783/1381, whereupon Cemaleddin Aksarayi fled to Konya.
Since, as will be seen, Molla Fenari had almost certainly gone to Egypt for further study by that date, it follows that if Husameddin is right, it must have been in Amasya that Molla Fenari studied under Cemaleddin Aksarayi.
Melikoff warns that "this tradition [i. e. that advanced by Husameddin]derives from an unreliable source and must be treated with reserve" ; and it is certainly true that much of what Husameddin writes is unsupported by any quoted source.
Even in the case of the  itself, for example, the earlier, lengthy section on the medreses of the city contains no mention either of a Dar al-"ilm medrese or of Cemaleddin Aksarayi, though a number of medreses and muderrises are named.
The circumstantial nature of the account of Cemaleddin Aksarayi's teaching method and Molla Fenari's place in it is also a point in favour of the Taskopruzade/Mecdi tradition.
Yet one, possibly two, bits of evidence do remain to be explained: a  on a  written in early Shawwal 770/May 1369 containing the signature of Mehmed b.
Mehmed al-Aksarayi, hakim (kadi) of the lands of Rum and of the armies of Shadgeldi Pasha; and the dedication to Shadgeldi Pasha of a monograph in Persian allegedly written by Mehmed b.
Mehmed al-Aksarayi and entitled  .
So little of a reliable nature is known of Cemaleddin Aksarayi's life, so prominent is the association of him with Aksaray that it is tempting to think that he passed his whole life there: such certainly is the thrust of the Ottoman sources as well as Melikoff's article.
There is sound evidence, however, that he did not.
According to Katib Celebi, he finished the  a commentary on  in Shiraz in 740/1339–40, when he was twenty-six years of age.
There is clearly — indeed there would have to be — more to Cemaleddin Aksarayi's life than the sources record, and while in a general way it is unquestionably right to urge caution in adopting Husameddin's material, in this particular case there appears to be evidence which at the least requires an alternative explanation before being dismissed.
In what follows, the traditional view — that Molla Fenari studied under Cemaleddin Aksarayi in Aksaray in Karamanis accepted, but it may well be that "Amasya" ought to be substituted for "Karaman" in the appropriate contexts.
From Karaman Molla Fenari seems to have gone to Egypt for further study, especially under Shaykh Akmal al-Din (d. 786/1384–5).
At precisely what date he went is difficult to determine, for although Ibn Hajar states that he went to Egypt in 778/1376–7, he follows this immediately with the statement  whereas in fact Molla Fenari should have been twenty-seven years of age at that date according to the birthdate given by Ibn Hajar himself.
Having noticed this discrepancy, Husameddin suggests that the text of Ibn Hajar ought to read  thus suggesting that a  (seven) has dropped out of the text.
The evidence of the available texts and manuscripts is against such an emendation, however, since none of them has such a reading; and it seems more likely that Ibn Hajar means no more than that Molla Fenari was in his twenties when he made the journey to Egypt.
Ismail Belig has, however, taken Ibn Hajar to mean that Molla Fenari was literally twenty when he went to Egypt, an assumption which would place his journey in 770/1368–9.
There is perhaps some support for something like  this earlier date in the story related by Taskopruzade that Molla Fenari went to Egypt in company with Seyyid Serif.
The latter is said to have come to Karaman in order to study under Cemaleddin Aksarayi, although he almost abandoned the journey on reading that scholar's  in which he was very much disappointed.
He arrived in Karaman only to hear of Cemaleddin Aksarayi's death; but, having met Molla Fenari, he went off with him to Egypt to study under Shaykh Akmal al-Din.
Seyyid Serif is said to have left Herat for Karaman in 770/1368–9.
In 776/1374–5, having returned from Egypt after a four-year stay, he visited Constantinople; and in 779/1377–8 he was appointed as a teacher in Shiraz by Shah Shuja.
If there is any truth, then, in the tradition of the connection between Seyyid Serif and Molla Fenari and one must beware here of the very common tendency of writers to associate great figures of the past with each other, sometimes in flagrant defiance of the facts and if the facts about the former are reasonably accurate, Molla Fenari would have arrived in Egypt about 772/1370.
Perhaps nothing better illustrates the difficulties of trying to establish the truth of such a tradition and of achieving accuracy in the dating of events in the lives of scholars of the early Ottoman period than the problem presented by the death date of Cemaleddin Aksarayi.
Tritton, citing Ibn Hajar's al-Durar, gives 773/1371 as the date of his death.
While this date fits in reasonably well with the tradition about Seyyid Serif and Molla Fenari, Tritton's identification of the scholar mentioned by Ibn Hajar with Cemaleddin Aksarayi is open to question.
The name of the subject of the biography in Ibn Hajar is Muhammad b.
Muhammad b.
"Isa al-Aksarayi al-Hanafi Badr al-Din.
In Turkish sources, however, Cemaleddin's grandfather's name is given as Mehmed, not Isa; he certainly was called Cemaleddin, not Bedreddin, one of his most famous works being called  and he was of the  (mezheb), not the Hanafi.
Furthermore, the biographical material given by Ibn Hajar, only that the subject studied and preached in Damascus, is not mentioned in the Turkish sources, though, as has been seen, the latter do not concern themselves with Cemaleddin's early life.
In addition to the doubtfulness of the identification of the scholar in   there is some positive evidence that Cemaleddin lived beyond 773.
Bursali Mehmed Tahir records the existence of a manuscript of the  written in the author's own hand and dated 776/1374–5.
Two of Cemaleddin"s works, moreover, are dedicated to Sultan Bayezid I (1389–1402).
While it seems fairly certain that Cemaleddin did not live into Bayezid's reign, it also seems not impossible that the works were written for Bayezid after about 783/1381, when it became more nearly connected with Anatolian affairs by taking over the province given him by — or, more correctly, taken from — the Germiyanids as a dowry.
If, of course, the identification of the scholar in Amasya by Husameddin is correct, and the facts about him accurate, it would also follow that Cemaleddin Aksarayi lived beyond 783/1381.
To return to Molla Fenari, one cannot then determine with any certainty the date of his journey to Egypt since it is impossible to assert confidently which of the seemingly contradictory facts or sets of facts-Ibn Hajar's statement that he made the journey in 778, Taskopruzade's statement that he went in company with Seyyid Serif, Taskopruzade's association of Seyyid Serif's arrival in Karaman with Cemaleddin Aksarayi's death, and so on-deserves most weight, though perhaps the specific nature of Ibn Hajar's date argues in its favour while, equally, the slight suspicion which always attaches to attempts to associate great figures of the past argues against the association of Molla Fenari and Seyyid Serif.
Equally uncertain is the length of his stay in Egypt: Ibn Hajar, followed by Taskopruzade, says only that "he returned to Rum and was appointed kadi of Bursa" , which post, as will be shown below, he held for the first time probably from about 795/1392–3 to about 805/1402–3.
As previously noted, Taskopruzade states — and it has been generally accepted — that Molla Fenari held three important positions in the Ottoman state in the course of his life: the muderrislik at the Manastir (Sultan Orhan) medrese in Bursa; the kadilik of Bursa; and the Muftilik in the Ottoman lands.
As will be shown below, there is some reason, though not perhaps positive evidence, for supposing that his appointment to the Muftilik occurred relatively late in his life; and there seems also to be good reason to suppose that his appointment to the muderrislik of the Manastir medrese occurred before his appointment to the kadilik since it was usual even in the early days of the Ottoman state for a man to have done some teaching before being appointed to as important a kadilik as that of the capital city.
Husameddin, apparently basing his statements on no more than reasonable assumptions, states that"a few years alter his return from Egypt he was appointed muderris at the Manastir medrese; and he at least implies that the appointment resulted from Molla  Fenari's having won the favour of the Grand Vezir Candarli Hayreddin Halil Pasa, who died in 789/1387.
The only author actually to attempt to date this medrese appointment is Ismail Belig, who states that Molla Fenari went to Egypt when he was just twenty, then returned to Rum, and, having won the regard of Murad I, was appointed muderris at the Manastir medrese in 770/1368–9.
In 771/1369–70 he replaced Koca Mahmud as kadi of Bursa.
Ismail Belig's dating of the former appointment, though remotely possible, is certainly questionable.
By Ottoman reckoning Molla Fenari would have been twenty in Safar 770, and it is perhaps possible to suppose that he could have returned from Egypt in time to be appointed at the end of the year.
Such a dating, however, runs contrary to the other accounts of Molla Fenari's trip to Egypt and has little or nothing to support it.
Ismail Belig's dating of the latter appointment is likewise almost certainly wrong in the light both of the evidence which follows about the dating of Molla Fenari's kadilik and of the fact that Molla Mahmud b.
Muhammad, known as Koca Efendi, seems to have held the office of kadi of Bursa from at least 759/1358 to at least approximately 783/1381–2, the latter date being fixed by the fact that Koca Efendi, as kadi of Bursa, headed the delegation sent by Murad I to Germiyan to bring back the bride for Sehzade Bayezid.
Nevertheless, though the dates may fairly safely be disregarded, Ismail Belig seems right in suggesting that Molla Fenari received first the muderrislik on his return from Egypt and then, later, the kadilik of Bursa.
One other problem raised by Ismail Belig's account deserves attention, namely the question of whether Molla Fenari held these posts and the Muftilik when he was appointed to it, almost certainly at a later data consecutively or simultaneously (or, perhaps better, cumulatively).
Taskopruzade's  statement about the three posts is ambiguous in this respect, although his assertion that Molla Fenari was unable to make fair copies of a number of his works because of his duties as kadi, muderris and Mufti might be taken to imply that he held the posts simultaneously.
In speaking of Molla Fenari's going off to Karaman (probably in 805/1402–3), moreover, he says that"he abandoned his posts .
Mecdi has certainly taken Taskopruzade to mean that Molla Fenari held the posts simultaneously, for he adds to Taskopruzade's statement about his holding the offices the sentence: "He united the aforementioned posts at one time." 
No later Turkish author really deals with the problem except Ismail Belig, who, in his article on Molla Yegan, states that the latter succeeded Molla Fenari as muderris at the Manastir medrese in 771/1369–70 and as kadi of Bursa in 822/1419 when Molla Fenari went on the pilgrimage and spent some time in Egypt on his return.
While Ismail Belig may have some evidence for this view, evidence which in any case he does not mention, it is worth pointing out that by the time he was writing, the combination of such important posts would have been highly unusual, if not unknown, whereas in the early days of the Ottoman state it was not uncommon.
Molla Husrev, for example, was, in 863/1459, appointed not only to the kadilik of Istanbul but also to those of  Galata and Uskudar as well as the muderrislik of the Ayasofya medrese.
As has already been shown, moreover, and as will be referred to again, the combination of a muderrislik and a muftilik was very common in later times, particularly in the case of the Mufti; and it is entirely possible that the muderrislik of the Manastir medrese carried with it, perhaps even from the start, official or semi-official recognition as mufti of Bursa.
If such was indeed the case, the assertion of later authors that the Muftilik was created in the time of Murad II, if it has any validity at all, would have to be interpreted as the elevation of an already existing semi-official or official post of no particular consequence, as, in effect, the  transformation of the muftilik of Bursa into the Muftilik of the Ottoman lands.
Something more definite can, fortunately, be said about Molla Fenari's first period of office as kadi of Bursa.
Husameddin, without citing a relevant source, confidently associates Molla Fenari's appointment to the kadilik with Bayezid I's purge of the kadis of Anadolu and dates the latter event in 795/1392–3.
Though the evidence for so precise a statement is not at all clear, he does also present two pieces of documentary evidence which appear to provide at least a probable terminus post and ante quem respectively for the appointment.
The first is a  of Gulcicek Hatun's (the mother of Bayezid I), dated 791/1389, which, according to Husameddin, bears the signature of Ali b.
Ahmed, kadi of Bursa; the second is a  of [Candarli]Ali Pasa b.
Hayreddin Pasa's which is dated Dhu "l-Hijja 796 September-October 1394 and bears, among others, the signature of" Mehmed b.
Hamza b.
Mehmed al-Geredi (?), of the capital   Bursa,…and of [the]other lands…
".
Provided always that the signatures are contemporaneous with the documents, it would thus seem that Molla Fenari was appointed to the kadilik between those two dates.
It is virtually certain that he was kadi of Bursa in 802/1400, for there exist three documents of Bayezid I's dated in that year which bear the signature of Molla Fenari as kadi of Bursa; and that he was still kadi at least well into 804 is indicated by yet another document cited by Husameddin, the  of the  Inebeg b.
Felekeddin which is dated Sha'ban 804/March 1402.
The next event in Molla Fenari's life was his leaving Bursa and going to Karaman.
Ibn Hajar merely says that alter having served as kadi of Bursa for a while, "he went to Konya and settled there" .
Taskopruzade and Mecdi assign this event to the reign of Bayezid I (1389–1402), saying that as a result of a quarrel between Molla Fenari and that sultan, the former abandoned his posts and went off to Karaman where the emir gave him a salary of 1,000 akce a day and each of his pupils 500 akce a day.
Bayezid I later repented of what he had done and sent to the ruler of Karaman requesting the return of Molla Fenari, whereupon Molla Fenari returned to his former positions.
Husam eddin rejects the story of the quarrel and the dating of Molla Fenari's departure in the reign of Bayezid I, asserting that Karaman had been wholly taken over by the Ottomans in 793/1391 while the documents (dated 796,802 and 804) show Molla Fenari's period of office as kadi to have fallen after that date; and he says rather that Molla Fenari returned to Karaman with Karamanoglu Mehmed Bey in early 805/summer 1402, following the battle of Ankara (Dhu"l-Hijja 804/July 1402), when the latter was freed and reinstated by Timur and Karaman reconstituted as an independent state.
Uzuncarsili follows much the same line, though perhaps in an attempt to salvage something of the Taskopruzade/Mecdi story he suggests in effect that in that story Mehmed I (1413–21) should be read for Bayezid I: he thus concludes that Molla Fenari left for Karaman either in the confused period following Ankara or in the time of Mehmed I, in the  manner described by Taskopruzade.
The dismissal of the Taskopruzade version of events by Husameddin and Uzuncarsili is perhaps too abrupt, since Karaman seems to have been incorporated into the empire only after the battle of Akcay in 800/1397, some eight years into Bayezid I's reign and some four years after Molla Fenari appears to have become kadi.
It is, however, certain that Molla Fenari was in Karaman at a date much later than Bayezid I's reign, as will be shown; and as there is no evidence to suggest a journey before 800/1397 or to support the possibility that he made two journeys to Karaman, it seems justifiable to treat the Taskopruzade story with some caution.
That Molla Fenari was not unaffected by the upheaval caused by Timur is indicated by Asik Celebi who, in the biography of his own father, Sayyid Ali writes as follows: "In the interregnum [caused by]Timur  Buhari]Efendi, Molla Fenari and Sayyid Natta" [Asik Celebi's great-grandfather]fell prisoner to Timur's men; and though at first they were afflicted with chains and fetters, they were later freed out of respect for the distinction of [their]status as seyyids and the distinction of [their]learning."
Asik Celebi says no more about Molla Fenari's fate, but it may well be that it was alter this experience that Molla Fenari went to Karaman.
Though there appears to be no evidence to support Husameddin"s assertion that Molla Fenari actually went in company with Karamanoglu Mehmed Bey, the fact that the former dedicated his commentary on the  to the latter and praises him fulsomely in the preface suggests a close connection between the two and is a further indication that it was during Karamanoglu Mehmed Bey's rule (1402–19, 1421–3) that Molla Fenari's sojourn in Karaman occurred.
That his departure can be dated as late as the reign of Mehmed I Uzuncarsili's alternative suggestion is, however, rendered unlikely by the fact that there exists a  dated Rajab 808/December 1405-January 1406 which carries the signature of Ibrahim b.
Khalil (Candarlizade) as  (kadi) of Bursa.
Provided again that the signature is contemporaneous with the document, it would thus seem virtually certain that Molla Fenari had left the kadilik of Bursa, and very possibly departed for Karaman, by that date.
Yet another document published by Uzuncarsili is useful for  establishing a terminus post quem for Molla Fenari's return, namely the  for Karamanoglu Ali Bey's Ak medrese in Nigde, written and registered  by the hakim of Nigde, Muhammad b.
Musa, in mid-Rabi"I 818/May 1415 and bearing a confirmatory  by Muhammad b.
Hamza b.
Muhammad written in the latter part of Jumada II 819/August 1416.
It thus appears certain that Molla Fenari was still in Karaman at that date.
Precisely when and in what circumstances Molla Fenari returned to the Ottoman lands is not entirely clear, though both Ibn Hajar and Taskopruzade assert that he had returned by the time he went on the pilgrimage in 822/1419.
Taskopruzade's statement that he came back at the request of a repentant sultan is, of course, highly doubtful in view of the fact that his departure and return seem certain to have occurred in the reigns of different sultans.
Ibn Hajar gives a different account of the manner of his return, writing that when war broke out between the Ottoman and Karamanid rulers and the latter was defeated, the former took Molla Fenari to Bursa.
The only major Ottoman initiatives against the Karamanids in the years immediately before 822/1419 that are reported by the Turkish sources are two campaigns, apparently in successive years, in each of which the Ottomans defeated Karamanoglu Mehmed Bey and attacked Konya.
The generally accepted dates for these campaigns are 817/1414 and 818/1415; and it is likewise generally accepted that the second resulted in a much more decisive Ottoman success than the first.
With respect to the question of the dating of the campaigns, however, the principal Arabic source, Ibn Hajar, writes in a different context that in Sha'ban 820/September-October 1417, the Ottoman ruler (Mehmed I), alter having besieged Konya, seized Karamanoglu Mehmed Bey and his son Mustafa and took possession of Konya, Kayseri, and most of the Karamanid lands.
The earliest Ottoman sources, the chronological lists, moreover, give some support for this statement.
Though not consistent among themselves, they date the first, less conclusive campaign in 818 or 819, the second, more decisive one which, they say, resulted in Konya's being taken and plundered, in 819, 820 or 821; and the statements in the earliest extant  list, itself dated 824/1421, lead to dates of 818 and 820 for the two campaigns.
The need for further study of this confused period is clearly indicated, but the statements of Ibn Hajar (and al-Makrizi) and of the earliest chronological list  and the document indicating Molla Fenari's presence in Karaman in Jumada II 819/August 1416 provide at the least a consistent basis for explaining the reason for, and establishing the date of, Molla Fenari's return; and it may therefore be tentatively concluded that Molla Fenari returned to the Ottoman lands some time in, or shortly alter, Sha'ban 820/September-October 1417.
Taskopruzade, as has been noted before, says that Molla Fenari, on his return, took up his former positions, these being, presumably, the kadilik of Bursa and the muderrislik of the Manastir medrese.
Ibn Hajar states that alter "Ibn" Uthman "brought Molla Fenari back from Karaman," he entrusted him with the kadilik of his land.
And [Molla Fenari "s]standing rose in [the sultan" s]estimation and he occupied the highest place therein and consulted with the sultan in all affairs [of state]and became as the vezir…
"
Husameddin is even more specific, writing that Molla Fenari was, on his return, given his old professorship and [then (?)]made kadi of Bursa a second time when Molla Yegan Mehmed Celebi (Molla Yegan) retired from the post in 818/1415–16.
Husameddin offers nothing in the way of specific evidence to support his statement either about Molla Yegan's resignation or about Molla Fenari's appointment, however, and is indeed at pains to say that in spite of much research he has been unable to find any signatures of Molla Fenari's dating from this second kadilik.
On the basis of the Karamanid document mentioned above, one would necessarily question Husameddin's dating of the appointment, but there seems to be no reason to doubt the consensus of the early sources on the fact of it.
After the passage quoted just above concerning the esteem in which Molla Fenari was held and his place in the state, and before passing on to the next event in his life, namely his going on the pilgrimage in 822 (8 Dhu "l-Hijja = 26 December 1419), Ibn Hajar writes that Molla Fenari became widely known for his erudition and that he was both pious and abundant in culture and merit" except that he was censured for [espousing]the sect of Ibn al- "Arabi and for the fact that he taught the  and affirmed it" : he goes on  to say that Molla Fenari, on the advice of friends, abjured mention of the subject in Egypt.
Husameddin uses this statement to link Molla Fenari with the turbulent political scene toward the end of Mehmed I's reign, writing that because of his predilection for mysticism (with particular mention of the  "[Molla Fenari]attracted the attention of the ulema and men of state, since there were those [of them]who saw the statements of Molla Fenari as influencing the actions and feelings of the Melamis and Hurufis who were making their appearance in the regions of Rumeli and Anadolu." 
Husameddin goes on to make clear that he means the revolts associated with Shaykh Badr al-Din Mahmud b.
Kadi Samawna (Seyh Bedreddin) and specifies four men who, he says, led the criticism of Molla Fenari: Molla Burhan al-Din Haydar Herewi (Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi), the mufti in Edirne ", who was to give the fetva sanctioning Seyh Bedreddin's execution; Molla Yegan; Kutb al-Din Izniki-zade Baha" al-Din "Umar Celebi (Bahaeddin Omer); and the vezir Hajji" Iwad Pasha (Haci Ivaz Pasa).
As is the case with much of Husameddin's material, reasonable hypothesis is here buttressed with very little in the way of evidence.
Molla Fenari and Seyh Bedreddin shared a devotion to the thought of Ibn al-Arabi, and it may well be that even if Molla Fenari thoroughly disapproved of the rebels' activities he was compromised in the eyes of many by those shared beliefs.
Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi may, from his actions, be presumed to have disapproved of Seyh Bedreddin, which is not necessarily to say that he disapproved of Molla Fenari.
The enmity between Haci Ivaz Pasa and Molla Fenari is the subject of an anecdote in the biographies of the latter, but the cause of the enmity is not given.
There was likewise, apparently, bad blood between Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan, but the stated cause is personal, not political.
It is certainly not impossible that these apparently isolated strands come together in some actual or supposed connection between Molla Fenari and Seyh Bedreddin and that Husameddin's extended and ingenious gloss on Ibn Hajar's brief statement-the placement of which must indeed be taken into account-has some, possibly much, truth in it.
It is, unfortunately, impossible in the absence of any real evidence to judge how much.
In 822/1459, Molla Fenari performed the pilgrimage; and, on his return, having been sought out by Sultan al-Mu'ayyad Sayf al-Din Shaykh (815–24/1412–21), he entered Egypt.
His visit to Egypt occasions notices in al-Makrizi, Ibn Hajar and al-Sayrafi which agree in most respects and of which that of Ibn Hajar is the most detailed.
All three write that he went on the pilgrimage in 822, al-Makrizi saying that he had gone by way of Damascus, Ibn Hajar and al-Sayrafi possibly implying that he went from Jerusalem since they write that he "returned" there after the pilgrimage: the two versions are not, of course, mutually exclusive in any case, and the latter two authors may well mean no more than that he returned [from the pilgrimage]to Jerusalem.
After his return he was sent for by the Mamluk sultan who wished to learn from him the state of affairs in Rum; and he entered Cairo on either 4 Safar 823/19 February 1420 (Ibn Hajar and al-Sayrafi) or Tuesday 4 Rabi'I 823/Tuesday 19 March 1420 (al-Makrizi.
The sultan lodged him with al-Kadi Zayn al-Din"Abd al-Basit, the overseer of the treasury  al-khazana), and honoured him greatly, ordering the notables to do likewise.
According to Ibn Hajar, Molla Fenari seems to have ignored a number of invitations to audiences with the sultan, but was finally present at an audience to celebrate the Prophet's birthday, held, according to al-Makrizi, on Friday 7 Rabi"I. Molla Fenari, who was seated below the shaykh of the Mu'ayyadiyya, Ibn al-Dayri, took no part in the learned debate which occurred at that audience but was later present at a private audience with the sultan, when the two conversed.
On 22 Rabi I 823/6 April 1420, Molla Fenari departed from Cairo for the Ottoman lands, accompanied by his son-in-law (?— sihr), Shaykh Ahmad b.
Shams al-Din al-Jazari, and an ambassador bearing a letter from the Mamluk sultan to Mehmed I. al-Makrizi adds that during his stay, Molla Fenari had given a number of lessons in  and  in the Basiti mosque.
Husameddin devotes a good deal of space to Molla Fenari's pilgrimage, making full use of the Arabic sources and adding a certain amount of material of his own.
With respect to the reason for Molla Fenari's going on the pilgrimage, he writes that an invasion of Edirne and its environs by the combined forces of Seyh Bedreddin and Duzme Mustafa led Molla Fenari to seek permission to go on the pilgrimage, though it is not clear whether Husameddin means that simply the fact of the invasion or that Molla Fenari's supposed complicity with Seyh Bedreddin led him to decide to"remove himself from the scene: in any case both the circumstances and the  chronology of events in the period are too uncertain to allow one to evaluate the argument properly.
Husameddin adds that an"ostensible reason  zahirde bir sebeb) for his going may be found in his desire to meet with Shaykh Zayn al-Din Muhammad Khawafi (Seyh Zeyneddin), who was then making his way toward the Hijaz from Khorasan.
He then writes that in the early part of 821/early 1418, Molla Fenari appointed his younger son, Sinan al-Din Yusuf Bali Celebi (Yusuf Bali), as naib for the kadilik of Bursa and with his elder son, Muhyi"l-Din Muhammad Shah Celebi (Mehmed Sah Fenari), went directly to Egypt where he spent Ramadan at the Zayniyya medrese and awaited the arrival of Seyh Zeyneddin, with whom he subsequently made the pilgrimage in 822, departing from, and returning to, Jerusalem.
Only for the statement that Molla Fenari turned over the kadilik of Bursa to his son, Yusuf Bali, as naib, does Husameddin offer any source, this being a signature of Molla Husrev's on a copy of a  originally drawn up in late Jumada II 821/late May-early June 1418 attesting that "it" had been written by "Mawlana Sinan al-Din Yusuf Bali b. al-Mawla al-Fenari" .
Though something in the provenance or context of the document may justify Husameddin's assertion, it must be noted that the signature itself does not do so.
The Arabic, for example, is ambiguous in respect of whether it is the copy or the  itself that Yusuf Bali — who held the kadilik of Bursa for a time in the 840s-wrote; and, on the evidence of the signature alone, it seems entirely possible that at some point, perhaps during his kadilik, he made a copy of the  which Molla Husrev subsequently attested to be a true copy.
Even on the assumption that Yusuf Bali did draw up the original  and not just the copy, it does not by any means necessarily follow  that he was acting as  in so doing; nor, further, does it necessarily follow that if he were acting as  he was doing so in his father's absence from Bursa, much less his absence on the pilgrimage.
The evidence of the signature is thus open to so many alternative interpretations that it cannot by itself be taken to indicate, let alone prove, that Molla Fenari had left Bursa for the pilgrimage by that date.
Husameddin's circumstantial statement that Molla Fenari passed Ramadan 821 in the Zayniyya medrese in Cairo presumably derives from some source and, if true, would to some degree strengthen the case for Husameddin's interpretation of the signature in so far as it would show that Molla Fenari did leave unusually early for the pilgrimage which he did not in fact make until 822.
The only one of the sources to provide any sort of basis for Husameddin's statement, however, appears to be Ibn Taghribirdi, who seems to say that when he [Molla Fenari]stayed in Cairo, his son prayed the tarawih (a Ramadan prayer) in the medrese of al-Zayni"Abd al-Basit b.
Khalil al-Kafuri of (?)
Cairo, a curious sentence in that it is wholly out of context.
No other mention is made of the fact that Molla Fenari's son (presumably Mehmed Sah) was with him; and, though the sentence is in the context of the visit of 823, it presumably must refer to an earlier Ramadan.
None of the other Arabic sources cited refers either to a visit earlier than the one in 823 or to the presence of Mehmed Sah on this pilgrimage; and, on the latter point, it may be significant that in the account in the Arabic sources of Molla Fenari's departure from Egypt (22 Rabi"I 823/6 April 1420) the presence of his son-in-law, but not of his son, is mentioned.
Again, none of the obvious sources mentions any direct link between Molla Fenari and Seyh Zeyneddin, whether in connection with the pilgrimage or otherwise, but in this case there are several suggestive facts.
It is known, for example, that Seyh Zeyneddin was in Egypt in 822, and there also exists an exchange of mutually adulatory  between Molla Fenari and Seyh Zeyneddin's disciple and close friend, Shaykh"Abd al-Latif b.
"Abd al-Rahman al-Makdisi (sometimes al-Kudsi), known as Ibn Ghanim, in which Molla Fenari declares his intention to go to Jerusalem and meet with Seyh Abdullatif.
These facts do no more, however, than suggest that one  ought not to rule out the possibility that Molla Fenari may have made the pilgrimage in company with Seyh Zeyneddin.
Husameddin's account of the pilgrimage closes with the statement that after a two-year absence from Turkey, during which time the Seyh Bedreddin affair had been dealt with, Duzme Mustafa had escaped, Edirne and its environs had been recovered, and "nothing remained to be feared" , Molla Fenari, with his son Mehmed Sah, returned to Bursa and his court and students in Jumada I 823/May-June 1420.
Whether this statement rests on a factual basis or is simply a reasonable hypothesis it is once again impossible to tell.
Because, according to the tradition, the next event in Molla Fenari's life is his appointment to the Muftilik, it is necessary here to mention the evidence behind the tradition, while leaving till later the discussion of the validity of the tradition, since such a discussion involves evidence to be found in the careers of the two succeeding Muftis as well.
While the earliest sources give no clue to the date of Molla Fenari's appointment to the Muftilik but simply state that he was Mufti, later Turkish tradition has asserted that the Muftilik was created in the time of Murad II; and as it is almost universally held that Molla Fenari was the first Mufti, his appointment, if the tradition is to be believed, must have occurred after 824/1421, the year of Murad II's accession.
Some historians go no further than saying that the Muftilik was created in the time of Murad II; but others have stated that Molla Fenari was appointed Mufti in the year 828/1424–5.
Perhaps the earliest reference to this date is in a marginal note in a relatively early manuscript of Mustakimzade (the note apparently in the same hand as the text) which gives the date 828 and a chronogram:.
This date has been accepted without discussion by Danismend.
Rifat Efendi gives Rajab 828/May-June 1425 for Molla Fenari's appointment not to the Muftilik but to the kadilik of Bursa, but it seems likely that this is a slip of the pen and that he means the Muftilik inasmuch as he says that Molla Fenari went on the pilgrimage in 822/1419 before he became Mufti, an appointment he has not otherwise mentioned.
It is, moreover, difficult to see how Rifat Efendi could so badly misread Mecdi, whom he virtually copies.
Ahmet Refik, in the Ilmiye salnamesi, has, however, followed and added to Rifat Efendi, saying that in 828 Molla Fenari was appointed to the kadilik of Bursa and the  muderrislik at the Manastir medrese.
He later states that in the reign of Murad II, Molla Fenari began to perform "a consultative function" for the sultan.
Later Turkish historians are thus almost universally in accord in naming Molla Fenari as the first Mufti and — on the assumption that Rifat Efendi's version simply results from a slip which Ahmed Refik has not noticed in placing his appointment in the time of Murad II, with some historians giving the date 828/1424–5 for the appointment.
It is worth emphasising again, however, that these traditions are, apparently, of relatively recent origin and that there is early authority only for the fact that Molla Fenari was Mufti (except, perhaps, in so far as it may be argued from Taskopruzade that he was the first Mufti, as noted at the beginning of the chapter).
Though the thrust of the biographical sources is certainly to the effect that Molla Fenari was during these years a figure of immense importance in the state, there is very little in the way of evidence about him or his activities.
Three bits of documentary evidence exist: his signature is found confirming one of the  of Haci Ivaz Pasa, dated 22 Dhu "l-Hijja 827/15 November 1424; according to Husameddin, his signature likewise appears at the top of a  dated late Rabi" I 828/mid-February 1425; and he is also reported to have registered the  of the Ulu Cami in Bursa (built by Bayezid I), dated late Shawwal 828/mid-September 1425.
Neither in the first case nor, apparently, in either of the other two does he give his office.
Noting this fact in respect of the document which he cites, Husameddin concludes that his not troubling to mention the fact that he was kadi of Bursa points to the grandeur and importance of his position.
The formal nature of the signature does indeed suggest that Molla Fenari was signing the document in an official capacity (cf. the informal nature of the problematical signature, cited on p. 155 of Husameddin's article and discussed below, where Molla Fenari has clearly been asked simply to lend his name to the proceedings); and while he was most probably acting as kadi of Bursa, as the biographical sources would suggest, it should be noted that the signature is not in itself conclusive proof of this.
The biographical sources mention a few facts and anecdotes attributable to this period, among them the fact that toward the end of his life he was afflicted with ophthalmia and became nearly or totally blind.
He seems also to have become the object of the enmity of Haci Ivaz Pasa, the vezir, who had, among other things, led the successful defence of Bursa against the attack of Karamanoglu Mehmed Bey (c. 816/1413) and had been the architect of the Yesil Cami.
On Molla Fenari's going blind, Haci Ivaz  expressed the hope that he might be able to pray over Molla Fenari's corpse.
When Molla Fenari heard of this he, in his turn, expressed the hope that he might be cured, that Haci Ivan might be blinded, and that he, Molla Fenari, might pray over Haci Ivaz's corpse.
In the event all three of Molla Fenari's wishes came true: he himself was cured, Haci Ivaz Papa was blinded by the sultan (apparently in 828/1424–5) and died several years before Molla Fenari, and the latter performed his funeral prayers.
How much reliance can be placed on the details of the story is perhaps open to question, but it seems safe to conclude that Molla Fenari and Haci Ivaz were indeed enemies, for whatever reason.
Nearly all the biographical sources, beginning with Ibn Hajar, are agreed that in 833/August-September 1430, Molla Fenari, out of gratitude for the recovery of his sight, went on the pilgrimage again, this time by way of Antakya, and that, having returned to Rum, he died in Rajab 834/March-April 1431.
Only two of the standard biographical sources suggest any alternative to this date: the  gives both 832/1428–9 and 834 as possibilities, while Ali gives Rajab 833/March-April 1430.
While either variant may derive from the chronological lists, discussed just below, or from Nesri, it is just possible that Ali's 833 results from a careless reading of Taskopruzade's account.
The latter writes: "Then he went on the  in the year 833…and returned and died in the month of Rajab." 
Since 833 is the last-mentioned date, Ali may well simply have connected the Rajab and the 833.
In apparent conflict with the account of the biographical sources is the evidence of the chronological lists, followed by Nesri.
The first of the lists published by Turan (base date 849) records that sixteen years have passed since the death of, among others "Mevlana Shams al-Din [-i?]" ulema-i sultan Fenari-oglu "; the two lists reproduced in part by Menage (base dates 856 and 858) likewise show the death of" Mevlana Shams al-Din sultan al- "ulema Fenari-oglu" to have occurred in 833; and Nesri records the death of "Shams al-" ulema Shams al-Din ibn Fenari"as having occurred in 832: in each case his death is at least implicitly associated with a great plague occurring in Bursa in that year.
The chronology of the lists would in this  case, at any rate, appear to be somewhat elastic, however, since it can be shown that Haci Ivaz and Ibrahim Pasa (presumably Candarli Ibrahim Pasa), also mentioned as having died, actually did so in Dhu "l-Ka'da 831/August 1428 and Dhu" l-Ka'da 832/August 1429 respectively.
Particularly if the year intended in the lists is indeed 833 — these actual death dates may be an indication that this entry should, however, be dated a year earlier, i.e. 832 -but in any case in view of the general chronological uncertainty, Rajab 834 appears to fall within an allowable margin of error; and one would therefore be reluctant to dismiss the circumstantial account of a contemporary biographical source in favour of a too-strict adherence to what seems to be the slightly uncertain evidence of the chronological lists.
A certain amount of further confusion about Molla Fenari's death date is created by Nesri, the earliest extant version of whose work (a draft text, possibly an autograph) contains a marginal note, in the same hand as the text, stating that"Mevlana Shams al-Din Fenari died in 838/1434–5, despite the fact that his death has previously been noted as having occurred in 832: the statement is incorporated in the text of an early manuscript of the later recension of Nesri but is omitted in the Ankara edition.
One's first thought is that this apparent contradiction arises from the confusion of Molla Fenari with his elder son, Mehmed Sah, whose death is assigned in several of the extant chronological lists to the years 840/1436–7 or 839/1435–6.
Thus the first of Turan's lists notes that it is nine years since the death of "sultan al-" ulema Muhammad Shah Pasha, Mevlana Shams al-Din Fenari-oglu "(which therefore would have occurred in 840), while the lists given by Menage record the death of" sultan al- "ulema Muhammad Shah Pasha" in 839.
The problem is not susceptible of so simple a solution, however, since  Mehmed Sah's death is duly recorded under the events of the year 839 in the two early texts of Nesri (838 in the Ankara edition, p. 618), at only some fifteen lines' remove from the troublesome entry for 838.
As there are thus three entries for what are fairly certainly the deaths of only two men, there is clearly something amiss in these two early texts of Nesri.
It is not at all clear, however, whether the addition of the marginal note in the one, and its incorporation in the other, was prompted by new, and supposedly better, information or rather arose simply through a temporary confusion between father and son (occasioned, perhaps, by something like the confusing apposition of "Mevlana Shams al-Din Fenari-oglu" in the Turan entry corresponding to 840) which was then, possibly, perpetuated through inadvertence.
Still more confusion is introduced by the typically idiosyncratic account by Husameddin of Molla Fenari's last years.
According to that author, early in Murad II's reign Molla Fenari's position was shaken by the second revolt of the pretender known as Duzme Mustafa, associated by Husameddin with Seyh Bedreddin in the earlier "Melami" revolts.
With Candarli Ibrahim Pasa's succeeding Bayezid Pasa as Grand Vezir in late 825/late 1422 (?— more likely 824/1421), however, Molla Fenari enjoyed four years of enormous influence in the state.
A third revolt by Duzme Mustafa in 829/1425–6 led to the replacement of Ibrahim Pasa as Grand Vezir by Molla Fenari's enemy, Haci Ivaz Pasa, as a result of which Molla Fenari and his elder son, Mehmed Sah, were forced to retire from public life.
As the result of lengthy investigations into the Duzme Mustafa revolt, Mehmed Sah was implicated in that affair; and, Husameddin relates, "Molla Fenari grieved greatly that at the end of the investigations, in the year 832, Mehmed Sah Efendi passed over the bridge of death  together with Candarlizade Ibrahim Pasa and the Grand Vezir Haci Ivaz Pasa." 
His authority for the date is the chronological list in Nuruosmaniye 3080, one of the two reproduced by Menage, the base date of which Husameddin takes to be 857 rather than 858.
Having thus concluded that it is Mehmed Sah, not his father, to whom the list entry corresponding to the year 832 (833?) refers, Husameddin mentions the pilgrimage in 833 and then proceeds to try to invalidate the evidence of the biographical sources about Molla Fenari's death date by saying that Ibn Hajar dates his return to Rum, not his death, in Rajab 834 and that Ibn  Taghribirdi gives that date for his departure on the pilgrimage.
The only manuscript of the latter author available for this present study says simply that Molla Fenari went on the pilgrimage by way of Damascus in 833 and mentions neither his return nor his death.
Presuming Husameddin to have read his manuscript accurately, therefore, one would have to consult further manuscripts to discover what Ibn Taghribirdi actually says.
That Husameddin, perhaps unluckily, has wholly misrepresented Ibn Hajar is incontrovertible, however.
Not only is the passage which Husameddin quotes taken from the obituary section for the year 834, but where Husameddin's text apparently has  ( "and he returned to his own land in Rajab of the year 834" ), every other one of the numerous manuscripts available, whether directly or indirectly through published texts or secondary sources, has  ( "and he returned and died in his own land in the month of Rajab" ).
There can be no doubt, therefore, that whether they are correct or not, Ibn Hajar and the sources which follow him believe that Molla Fenari died in Rajab 834.
Husameddin continues that on Molla Fenari's return from the pilgrimage his son, Yusuf Bali, was given the kadilik of Bursa in 834, essentially as a compliment to Molla Fenari, while the latter retired to a life devoted to worship.
He was nevertheless much sought after by the people, his signature on documents, for example, being regarded as a good-luck charm.
Husameddin quotes one such signature, from a  for which he gives the date mid-Rabi"II 838/mid-November 1434, the signature being in the form Mehmed b.
Hamza b.
Mehmed el-Fenari; and he not unnaturally concludes that Molla Fenari must still have been alive at that date.
He then quotes the entry corresponding to the year 839 (838 according to Husameddin) from the chronological list in Nuruosmaniye 3080 concerning the death of "sultan al-" ulema Muhammad Shah Pasha"and concludes that the person concerned is in fact Molla Fenari himself and not his son, thus arriving at 838/1434–5 as the correct death date for Molla Fenari.
Both in a general way and on the specific matter of Molla Fenari's death there is much that is questionable in Husameddin's account.
It is generally accepted, for example, that the Duzme Mustafa who opposed both Mehmed I and Murad II was executed in 825/1422, though there is, admittedly, a story that he made good his escape to Kefe; and it is likewise generally held that Ibrahim Pasa held the office of Grand Vezir uninterruptedly from  his appointment in 824/1421 (?) until his death in 832/1429.
There appears, moreover, to be nothing to support Husameddin's account of the circumstances of the death of "Mehmed Sah" , together with Haci Ivaz and Ibrahim Pasa, in 832 beyond the purported letter from Molla Fenari to Murad II which Husameddin mentions but neither quotes nor identifies in such a manner as to make it accessible.
On the question of Molla Fenari's death date, it has already been shown that Husameddin's reading of the Arabic sources is untenable and that it is beyond doubt that Molla Fenari's death is recorded in the earliest biographical source, Ibn Hajar, as having occurred in Rajab 834.
Husameddin likewise largely ignores the difficulties posed to his argument by the actual names given in the chronological list he uses, namely "Shams al-Din sultan al-" ulema Fenari-oglu "in the entry corresponding to 833 and" sultan al- "ulema Muhammad Shah Pasha" in that corresponding to 839.
The only even superficially attractive argument from the names in favour of his view is the implicit one that "Fenari-oglu" is used in the former case but not in the latter.
It is clear, however, that Molla Fenari was widely known as "Fenari-oglu" , at least in its Arabic form, since not only does Ibn Hajar refer to him as "Ibn al-Fenari" but Molla Fenari himself does, in the  addressed to Seyh Abdullatif.
Husameddin's argument, moreover, ignores the facts that Shams al-Din is known to have been part of Molla Fenari's name but not, so far as can be discovered, of that of his son and that the son was regularly referred to as Mehmed Sah whereas it is not known that Molla Fenari ever was.
It is difficult, therefore, to avoid the conclusion that the compilers of the chronological lists believed, rightly or wrongly, that the father died in 833, the son in 839.
Much of Husameddin's argument on the question of Molla Fenari's death date thus falls down on close examination, but there does remain one compelling piece of evidence for his conclusion, namely the document apparently bearing Molla Fenari "s signature and dated Rabi" II 838/ November 1434: in a real sense all else depends on this.
The possibilities of error at every stage in the handling of this sort of document have already been alluded to a number of times, and one would therefore need to subject  the document to the most rigorous examination.
Should such an examination show beyond doubt that the signature and the date are correctly reported, genuine and unquestionably related, one could obviously reach no other conclusion than that Molla Fenari was indeed still alive in 838/1434.
It needs to be emphasized, however, that such a conclusion would be in despite of the earliest biographical sources, the author of one of which was contemporary in time, if distant in space, and also, as far as one can judge, of the chronological lists and would therefore constitute important evidence of the limitations of these source materials.
Concerning the successor, as Mufti, to Molla Fenari, there is disagreement among Turkish scholars.
Despite explicit statements in the earliest authorities that Molla Shams al-Din Muhammad b.
Armaghan, known as Molla Yegan, followed Molla Fenari, Mustakimzade, the formulator of the prevailing Turkish tradition, rejects these statements and names Molla Fakhr al-Din al-"Ajami (Fahreddin Acemi) as Molla Fenari's successor.
The two main sources of later times, Rifat Efendi and the  have simply ignored Molla Yegan altogether.
Only Danismend, among modern authors, has given weight to the statements of the early sources and has inserted Molla Yegan's name in his list of Muftis.
Molla Yegan
Mustakimzade's argument against the Muftilik of Molla Yegan occurs at the end of his article on Molla Fenari.
He points out first that those who are aware of the finer points of history will know that in former days (or"the earliest days': the meticulous ulema  were authorized to give fetvas individually according to the requirement of a particular time.
He says that it is recorded in the  that on the death of Molla Fenari, Molla Yegan was authorized to give fetvas in the time of Murad II; but that since he did not actually rise to the office of Mufti — the actual words used are "the rank of the glorious office of fetva" , fetva being used here, a — often, to indicate the Muftilik-he will not be singled out and accorded special mention.
The burden of Mustakimzade's argument, then, is that Molla Yegan was a mufti but not the Mufti, that he, like any other  had the power of  and might give fetvas when the need arose, but that he did not attain the office of Mufti.
The fact that the power of  was not confined to the Mufti  alone is of some importance in assessing the nature of the Muftilik in general and will therefore be dealt with in greater detail further on; suffice it to say for the moment that Mustakimzade's argument is disappointing in its lack of development and of positive evidence in support of it and that, in the terms in which it is stated and in view of the material he seems to have used in compiling his book, his argument might equally well apply to Molla Fenari.
He is, then, perhaps less guilty of apparent error than of apparent inconsistency.
The sole justification for Mustakimzade's argument as it stands appears to be that Taskopruzade does not in fact use either the term  as in the case of Molla Fenari, or simply the term mufti, as in the case of Fahreddin Acemi, saying rather that "the headship of teaching and of fetva and the office of the kadilik fell ultimately to [Molla Yegan]alter Molla Shams al-Din al-Fenari" .
While the use of the term  is admittedly unusual, its meaning seems clear enough; and the statement that Molla Yegan succeeded Molla Fenari in this function would seem to indicate that Taskopruzade intends the same function by the terms  and .
In comparison with the amount of information given about Molla Fenari, little is given in the  article about Molla Yegan.
Only the barest biographical outline is sketched, only one anecdote is related about him, and no information is recorded about any  he may have endowed or any works he may have written.
He studied first under a scholar of Aydin, whose name Taskopruzade confesses to have been told by his father but to have forgotten, then under Molla Fenari.
Having taught in certain of the medreses of Bursa, he succeeded Molla Fenari in the three positions which that scholar had held, presumably on Molla Fenari's death in Rajab 834/March-April 3433.
At some later date he abandoned all his offices and journeyed to the Hijaz (which journey both Mecdi and el-Kefevi have taken to be for the purpose of going on the pilgrimage); alter his return he did not again hold any office.
Such is the information given by Taskopruzade in his article on Molla Yegan, to which Mecdi adds nothing.
el-Kefevi does, however, add a few facts worthy of note.
He makes explicit what is perhaps implicit in Taskopruzade, namely that Molla Yegan was from the province of Aydin, and adds to the sentence about his becoming muderris at certain medreses in Bursa the fact that this was through the agency  of Molla Fenari.
On the evidence of the one anecdote related by Taskopruzade, and repeated by el-Kefevi, the closeness thus implied between Molla Yegan and Molla Fenari seems not to have lasted, however.
The latter wished to marry Molla Yegan to his daughter, but Molla Yegan refused on the grounds that he was already betrothed to the daughter of his teacher in Aydin.
The Fenari clan seem's not to have forgiven or forgotten this slight, for Molla Fenari's sons later challenged a decision given by Molla Yegan as kadi of Bursa and caused him to be examined by a  of the ulema.
In the examination, however, Molla Yegan confounded his critics and made his judgment stick.
el- Kefevi also gives some information about Molla Yegan's death, a vexed subject on which Taskopruzade and Mecdi have nothing to say, namely that he died in Iznik and was buried there in the early part  of the reign of Mehmed II.
There is some doubt about the circumstances of Molla Yegan's death, to which reference will be made in due course, but it may be remarked here that while el-Kefevi is possibly right at least about the rough date of Molla Yegan's death, the slightest suspicion attaches to the basis for his statement by reason of the fact that his words (if not their order) are practically identical with Taskopruzade's statement about the death of Molla Taj al Din Ibrahim, known as Khatib-zade (Hatibzade): Hatibzade and Molla Yegan are associated in an anecdote related by Taskopruzade in the biography of the former but included by el-Kefevi in the biography of Molla Yegan.
The doubts arise not from any ambiguity about whom el-Kefevi intends the statement to apply to, since it clearly relates to Molla Yegan, but simply from the suspiciously close coincidence of the circumstances of, and the wording of the statements about, the deaths of the two men.
It may be added, moreover, that this suspicion is deepened by the fact that the historians of Bursa, Baldirzade and Ismail Belig, locate Molla Yegan's burial place quite precisely in Bursa, not Iznik; and their evidence, if not, perhaps, of such a nature as to be decisive, is yet very telling.
Scattered statements in the biographies of other scholars in Taskopruzade show Molla Yegan to have been active in teaching in the years following 1430, although, interestingly enough, the medrese at which he taught is never named.
Taskopruzade's grandfather, for example, studied under Molla Yegan, probably at some time alter 839/1435–6, and it was Molla Yegan who recommended him for the post at Taskopru.
By far the most useful evidence from the standpoint of fixing the events in Molla Yegan's life, however, comes from his involvement with Molla Gurani.
According to Taskopruzade, Molla Yegan, while on his journey to the Hijaz, met Molla Gurani in Cairo and, observing his excellence, induced him to return with him to Rum.
Molla Yegan then presented Molla Gurani to Sultan Murad II as a "gilt" on his return.
Ahmed Ates, in his article "Molla Gurani" in IA, uses the account of the Egyptian scholar al-Sakhawi (d. 902/1497) to show that Molla Gurani was, in fact, banished from Cairo to Damascus in the year 844/1440–1 because he insulted a descendant of Abu Hanifa, a certain Hamid al-Din al-Nu'mani, and that later, while attempting to go on the pilgrimage, he was caught and sent beyond the Euphrates.
Ates suggests that Molla Yegan thus met Molla Gurani not in Egypt but perhaps in Aleppo while returning from the pilgrimage and that the story about their meeting in Cairo was concocted in order to make Molla Yegan's  more desirable.
al-Sakhawi, quoting al-Makrizi, dates both Molla Gurani's banishment and his abortive pilgrimage in the year 844/1440–1 (8 Dhu"l-Hijja 844 = 30 April 1441).
Ibn Taghribirdi gives an even more specific date for the quarrel between Hamid al-Din and Molla Gurani, namely Saturday 2 Jumada II 844/Saturday 29 October 1440: the banishment of Molla Gurani doubtless followed hard on the quarrel.
If one accepts the story of Molla Yegan's  bringing Molla Gurani to the Ottoman court-and there seems no reason not to-then on the basis of what appears to be the fairly firm evidence for this part of Molla Gurani's career, Molla Yegan's return from his journey cannot be dated earlier than 845/1441–2; and on the reasonable assumption that the purpose of Molla Yegan's journey was to make the pilgrimage, it seems entirely likely that it was in the year 844/1440–1, the same year that Molla Gurani made his abortive pilgrimage, that Molla Yegan also performed the hajj and that the two met somewhere after that pilgrimage, though clear information about the actual time and place of their meeting is entirely lacking.
Whether Molla Yegan's abandonment of his offices — apparently linked in Taskopruzade's account to the journey — can also be dated to 844 is perhaps more doubtful.
That his resignation and pilgrimage cannot have occurred much later than 844 is indicated by information given by Taskopruzade concerning Molla Fenari's son, Yusuf Bali, namely that he became kadi of Bursa — no date is given for his appointment — and died as kadi in 846/1442–3.
There is no evidence, however, to show that it was not until 844 that Molla Yegan gave up his offices, that he did not, for example, do so some years earlier and either live in retirement in Bursa or go on an extended visit to the Hijaz lasting some years.
Though Ismail Belig's evidence is not perhaps the most reliable, the facts which he gives about the holders of the kadilik of Bursa in the period, facts which are at least consistent, if not necessarily accurate, indicate that Molla Yegan may indeed have left office a few years earlier than 844: according to Ismail Belig, Yusuf Bali succeeded Molla Yegan in the kadilik in 842/1438–9, himself being succeeded at the Sultan medrese by Molla Yegan's son, Sah Mehmed (or Mehmed Sah), who later also succeeded him as kadi in 846/1442–3.
While there seems to be no reason to doubt the  account to this point in Molla Yegan's career, a question is raised about Taskopruzade's statement that he did not again hold office by a note of Molla Yegan's (the only example I have found of his signature) appearing on a page of the  dated 839/1435–6, of Isa Bey, the son of Bayezid Pasa, containing the signatures of a number of notable scholars of the fifteenth century: the page, which has been reproduced in facsimile by Unver, seems indeed almost to have become an autograph book for leading scholars of the period.
These notations, or  are themselves of interest, of course, but their usefulness for present purposes is vitiated by two factors.
The first, having to do with the very nature of the notations, is that some of them have certainly been added at a later date.
Molla Gurani's  as kazasker (an enlargement is given on p. 50 of the plates in Unver), for example, cannot have been added before 845, when he first came to the Ottoman lands, and was almost certainly added after 855, when he held the kazaskerlik probably for the first and only time (cf. below, pp. 169–71), so that one cannot be certain of the date when, or the circumstances in which, any of them was added.
The second, having to do only with the reproduction of the page in Unver's book, is that it is necessarily small-scale, so that a number of the  including several of the potentially most interesting ones, have proved to be unreadable.
The enlargement of Molla Gurani's  (p. 50) includes the last two lines — the signature, in fact — of a seven-line serh by Molla Yegan, who signs himself"Muhammad [bin?]
Armaghan bin Khalil al-Hanafi,.
The five lines above the signature, which appear on the facsimile of the whole page (p. 58), have defied attempts to decipher them, but Unver, beneath the facsimile on p. 50, adds what is apparently a summary of these lines: that is, "Above is a note of Molla Yegan's recommending this person [presumably Molla Gurani]as Fatih's Hoca." 
Why such a note should appear on this sort of document is not altogether clear, but if the above interpretation of Unver's note is correct, and if his reading of Molla Yegan's  is accurate, it would appear that the note could not have been written before 845.
It would therefore follow that unless Molla Yegan were using the title though in fact an ex-kadi, he must have become kadi again in the years alter returning with Molla Gurani.
Before making more of this, however, one would need to see the original page to ascertain exactly what Molla Yegan says in his note.
Uncertainty extends also to the question of Molla Yegan's death date, about which a wide divergence of opinion has grown up amongst the various sources, who give dates ranging from 840/1436–7 to 878/1473–4.
It may be said at once that the earlier date, adopted by the  the editor of the Istanbul edition of Asikpasazade and Danismend, may safely be ruled out, not only through the evidence of Molla Yegan's involvement with Molla Gurani but also on the basis of an anecdote about him related in the tenth volume of the history by Kemalpasazade (d. 940/1534).
The part of the volume in question is principally concerned with Suleyman's Mohacs campaign of 1526, but the anecdote occurs in the midst of a digression concerning Mehmed II's siege of Belgrade (1456) and refers to the still earlier siege of Constantinople (1453).
When the latter siege had ended successfully, Molla Yegan came to Mehmed II to congratulate him and remarked that his prayers had continually been with him.
Mehmed II, however, angered because Molla Yegan had been an active and very vocal opponent of the siege, retorted that it was his sword, not Molla Yegan's prayers, which had achieved the victory.
There is no reason to doubt the authenticity of the anecdote, which Kemalpasazade relates from an earlier, unidentified historian who had heard it from Mehmed II himself; and it would seem to establish conclusively that Molla Yegan was still alive in 857/1453.
The contemporary historians Asikpasazade and Nesri place him firmly amongst the ulema of Mehmed II, both saying that "he came to the fore" in his sultanate.
Nesri qualifies this with "in the beginning of [Mehmed II" s]sultanate"but joins Molla Yegan with Molla Husrev (d. 885/1480–1), Molla Zeyrek (d. 879/1474–5?) and Hocazade (d. 893/1488) in the sentence so that the possible inference that he died earlier rather than later in Mehmed II's reign is rendered doubtful at best.
el-Kefevi, as has been noted, writes that Molla Yegan died early in the reign of Mehmed II; but, as has also been noted, some doubt attaches to his basis for making this statement: it is therefore difficult to know how much weight to give to his evidence.
Baldirzade and Ismail Belig, in addition to giving information about Molla Yegan's burial place, say that he died in 878/1473–4, for which date there appears to be no firm evidence, though equally there is nothing to show it to be improbable.
In sum, then, one can say little more on the basis of the scanty information available than that Molla Yegan appears to have abandoned his official posts by at least 844/1440–1; to have returned from his journey to the Hijaz, in company with Molla Gurani, whom he presented at the Ottoman court, not earlier than alter the pilgrimage of 844/1441 but very possibly not much later; if not to have continued to be a figure of some importance in the state until at least 857/1453, to have re-emerged as such then, though without, apparently, holding any official post; and to have died at some time alter that date, perhaps in 878/1473–4.
As noted above, Turkish tradition has rejected the Muftilik of Molla Yegan and has named Molla Fakhr al-Din al-"Ajami (Fahreddin Acemi) as Molla Fenari's successor as Mufti.
It has been suggested above that, in view of the clear statement in the  and the unsatisfactory nature of Mustakimzade's argument, Turkish tradition has been guilty at least of inconsistency, if not of error, in doing so.
Little help for either view may be found in the accounts of the life of Fahreddin Acemi in the early sources, however, for particularly in regard to the critical period after the death of Molla Fenari they give little information.
The later authors duly record 834/1431 as the date of Fahreddin Acemi's becoming Mufti, but they are forced to do so by the logic of their position and seem not to depend on any statement in the early sources.
Fahreddin Acemi
Very little information is given in the  about the life of Fahreddin Acemi, and very little more is to be found in the other biographical sources.
He studied in his own land "under the ulema of his time" and is said to have studied under Seyyid Serif (d. 816/1413–14).
He then came to the Ottoman domains, an event which Asikpasazade and Nesri assign to the reign of Mehmed I (816–24/1413–21).
el-Kefevi likewise says that he came in the reign of Mehmed I and adds"during the decade of the 820s', which would mean that Fahreddin Acemi arrived in the early 820s.
That he was in Bursa by this time would seem to be borne out by his association with Molla Fenari's son, Mehmed Sah, whose  he became at the medrese of Mehmed I (the Sultan medrese) in Bursa.
According to the Shaka'ik biography of Mehmed Sah, the latter was appointed to that medrese at the age of eighteen (Mecdi gives seventeen); and it is clear from that account that Fahreddin Acemi was his muid at the time of his first lesson.
el-Kefevi (followed by Ismail Belig) adds the statement that Mehmed Sah was the first muderris at the Sultan medrese, which fact, if correct, would allow one to place Mehmed Sah's appointment, and Fahreddin Acemi's association with him, in the early 820s, since the available information indicates that it was then that the medrese was built.
From another statement in Taskopruzade's article on Fahreddin Acemi it appears that he also studied under, and was licensed in  by, Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi.
Taskopruzade writes that his own father was licensed in  by Hocazade, Hocazade by Fahreddin Acemi, Fahreddin Acemi by Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi and Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi by Sa'd al-Din al-Taftazani: as Taskopruzade was himself licensed by his father, this list provides an academic genealogy for him as well.
Though Mustakimzade asserts that Fahreddin Acemi studied under al-Taftazani, this seems unlikely as the latter died in 792/1389–90, and one suspects that his statement derives either from a misreading of the genealogy or from a faulty genealogy.
Where and when Fahreddin Acemi studied under Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi is not at all clear.
The latter, a somewhat shadowy figure in the biographical sources, is chiefly noted in the history of the time for having authorized with a fetva the execution of Seyh Bedreddin Simavi in 823/1420 (?).
In their discussion of this incident Asikpasazade and Nesri refer to "Mevlana Haydar" as  danismend "newly come from Persia" , so that he may well have arrived in the Ottoman lands at about the same time as Fahreddin Acemi.
Next, according to Taskopruzade and Mecdi, Fahreddin Acemi taught in certain medreses and then became Mufti in the time of Murad II with a salary of 30 akce a day.
Murad II, in fact, desired to increase this amount, but Fahreddin Acemi refused, saying that it was lawful to take from the treasury only what was sufficient to meet his needs.
Mustakimzade alone of the biographers tries to identify the medreses at which Fahreddin Acemi taught, naming two: the Darulhadis of Mehmed Sah Fenari, presumably a  (though none of the standard biographical sources mentions that he made such a benefaction nor is any such medrese or darulhadis mentioned in Baltaci's  and the Darulhadis of Murad II in Edirne.
While Mustakimzade is probably right that  Fahreddin Acemi taught at Murad II's Darulhadis, as will be shown, his construction of events-that Fahreddin Acemi taught there and then became Mufti on the death of Molla Fenari-is most unlikely since the Darulhadis of Murad II seems not to have been completed until 23 Sha'ban 838/24 March 1435.
It seems likely that Fahreddin Acemi was indeed muderris at Murad II's Darulhadis, but the evidence on this point, which comes from the  biography of Molla Ala "al-Din Ali al-" Arabi (Molla Arab), is not altogether firm since Taskopruzade and Mecdi appear to be at odds on the matter.
The printed text of Taskopruzade says that Molla Arab, having studied under Khidr Bey (Hizir Bey) at the Sultan medrese in Bursa, became his  at the Darulhadis medrese in Edirne.
The manuscript of Taskopruzade omits the  as, in effect, does Sa'deddin, who generally follows Taskopruzade very closely, the result of which omission is to say simply that he became  at the Darulhadis. el-Kefevi's text of Taskopruzade clearly included the  however, since he states unequivocally that Molla Arab became Hizir Bey's muid at the Darulhadis; and there is thus a good case that, despite the doubts introduced by the manuscript of Taskopruzade and Sa'deddin, Taskopruzade intended the lahu.
Mecdi, however, states just as unequivocally that Molla Arab became Fahreddin Acemi's muid at the Darulhadis.
If it has proved impossible to find positive evidence in favour of Mecdi's claim, one can, perhaps, question what appears to be Taskopruzade's on the grounds that no source for the life of Hizir Bey records that he ever taught at the Darulhadis, and, indeed, only.
el-Kefevi of the early sources even places him in Edirne, writing that he was appointed by Murad II to one of the Uc Serefeli medreses  there in 855/1451 It is only right to emphasize, however, that negative evidence of this sort the fact that an appointment is not mentioned-is not a wholly dependable guide when dealing with the  since it can by no means be relied upon to provide a complete account of a scholar's career.
The question of whether Fahreddin Acemi was teaching at the Darulhadis is not without importance, since if Mecdi's statement is correct, it would provide evidence of a certain continuity in one of the distinctive functions of the later Muftilik, from the time of Ali Cemali on, namely that the Mufti taught in an important imperial medrese (in the case of Ali Cemali and his successors, that of Bayezid II in Istanbul): it ought, of course, to be recalled In this connection that Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan may well, while Mufti, have been teaching at the Manastir (Sultan Orhan) medrese in Bursa.
Assuming Mecdi to be right, that Molla Arab was Fahreddin Acemi's  at the Darulhadis, one would need to show further, of course, that Fahreddin Acemi was Mufti at the time of the association.
At least a terminus post quem for Molla Arab's service as  can be established from several scattered statements in the  that before becoming a  Molla Arab studied under Hizir Bey while the latter was at the Sultan medrese in Bursa; that Hizir Bey was appointed to that medrese by Mehmed II; and that Hizir Bey recommended Hocazade to Murad II after Hocazade had served as his muid at the Sultan medrese.
From these statements it is possible to deduce that Hizir Bey must have been appointed to the Sultan medrese during the first sultanate of Mehmed II (848–50/1444–6) and that Molla Arab cannot therefore have begun his study with him, much less become anyone's  before the summer of 848/1444.
In that same summer, however, occurred the incident involving the Hurufis, to be described shortly, in which Fahreddin Acemi is clearly shown to be acting as Mufti; and he must therefore have been Mufti at the time of Molla Arab's putative association with him.
Also of interest in the wider context of the Mufti's holding a teaching post, apart simply from the fact that Fahreddin Acemi may well have done so, is the identity of the medrese.
At the time of Fahreddin Acemi's becoming Mufti-perhaps in 844/1440–1 on Molla Yegan's resigning his posts, but in any case not later than 848/1444 the Darulhadis would probably have been the one important medrese in Edirne founded by the reigning sultan, Murad II, since his other complex including a medrese, the Uc Serefeli, though begun in 841/1438, was not completed until 851/1447.
The Darulhadis would thus, arguably, have been the ranking medrese in Edirne at the time.
Two events in Fahreddin Acemi's long Muftilik have been recorded.
The first, mentioned in the  concerns a certain member of the sect of Hurufis who insinuated himself into Mehmed II's confidence.
Concerned about his influence, and afraid to beard the sultan himself, "the vezir Mahmud Pasa" consulted Fahreddin Acemi who, having heard for himself the Hurufi's heretical words, denounced him in Mehmed II's presence.
Going then to the Uc Serefeli mosque, Fahreddin Acemi had the people summoned, ascended the  and "exposed [the Hurufis']vain beliefs, adjudged them guilty of unbelief and heresy, and gave judgment that the killing of them was incumbent and that such as aided in the slaying of them would be greatly rewarded" .
The execution of the Hurufi was duly carried out, Fahreddin Acemi himself taking an active part, and this was followed by the execution of all his companions.
Though Taskopruzade's mention of "the vezir Mahmud Pasa" has been taken by Mustakimzade and others to refer to the Grand Vezir Mahmud Pasa (Grand Vezir 858–72/1454–68, 877–8/1472–3) and the the event therefore associated with Mehmed II's second sultanate (after 855/1451), Inalcik, following Babinger, places this event in the troubled summer of 1444 (848), just after Murad II abdicated in favour of his son.
The Mahmud Pasa concerned, he suggests, is thus not the Grand Vezir Mahmud Pasa, but rather Kassabzade Mahmud Bey, who had been Mehmed II's tutor when he went to Manisa in 1443 and who was a leading figure in the events of 1444.
The other recorded event in which Fahreddin Acemi took part is the circumcision feast for Bayezid and Mustafa Celebi, two of the sons of Mehmed II, which took place in Edirne in 861/1457.
Part of the celebration of the feast consisted of a learned discussion in which passages were read from the Koran on which the assembled scholars gave .
Those named of the scholars present are: Fahreddin Acemi, on the sultan's right; Molla Ala"al-Din Ali Tusi (Ali Tusi), on the sultan's left; and Molla Shukr Allah (Sukrullah) and Molla Hizir Bey, facing the sultan.
About the death date of Fahreddin Acemi there is again disagreement amongst the sources.
Though neither Taskopruzade nor Mecdi gives a death date in the article on Fahreddin Acemi, Mecdi mentions in his article on Molla"Abd al-Karim (Abdulkerim) that the latter was appointed Mufti in Constantinople in 870/1465–6 after Fahreddin Acemi.
It seems natural to assume that Mecdi means that Fahreddin Acemi died in 870, and some relatively early evidence for this date is found in two of the manuscripts of the Anonymous Chronicle (Uruc).
Mustakimzade, Rifat Efendi and the  however-all of which reject Mecdi's statement that Abdulkerim followed Fahreddin Acemi and place Molla Husrev next in the list of Muftis-give 865/1460–1 for Fahreddin Acemi's death.
Finally, a remarkably precise date is given by Babinger for his death, namely 20 December 1468 (4 Jumada II 873).
Unfortunately he gives no source for this statement, and it is not immediately apparent on what it is based.
As the  question of his death date, and indeed the circumstances of his death, are intimately bound up with the vexed problem of the identity of his successor, further discussion of it may suitably be left to the following chapter.
It may be noted here, however, that all the sources are agreed that he was buried in Edirne, Mecdi, in his  being the first to give the precise location of his grave, namely "outside  the  of the Darulhadis mosque in Edirne" .
Having set forth the accepted Turkish tradition concerning the early Muftilik and having reviewed in some detail the lives of the first three Muftis, one may now pass on to a consideration in more general terms of the validity of the tradition and of such important problems as the reasons for the creation of the institution and the nature of the early Muftilik, problems which are either not dealt with at all by Turkish writers or are dealt with only in the vaguest terms.
The paucity of available evidence concerning the foundation of the institution and the activities of the early Muftis means that one can hope to do no more than to draw reasonable inferences from the little evidence that does exist; and some of what can be said about these problems involves a projection backward from the activities of later Muftis and will therefore be considered in greater detail in later sections.
Sufficient material has now been given, however, to justify making some comments about the nature of the early Muftilik and the possible reasons for its creation.
In doing so, one must reiterate that, as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, one is anticipating a conclusion that will be reached in the following chapter, namely that the "Mustakimzade tradition" , for all its faults, is perhaps marginally less unsatisfactory than other accounts of the origins of the Muftilik, though as has been, and will be, seen, there is very little in the way of solid evidence even for it.
It has been shown above that the accepted Turkish tradition dates the beginning of the Muftilik in the time of Murad II (1421–51) and names Molla Fenari as the first Mufti.
There is, however, a tradition of an older Muftilik, advanced with some consistency, though no very great accuracy, by d'Ohsson and, among Turkish authors, by Ali Emiri Efendi in the short history of the Muftilik in the .
This tradition goes back to the earliest days of the Ottoman state, to Molla Edebali (d. 726/1326), Osman's father-in-law, and is based on statements in both the  and the .
According to the former, Molla Edebali, a native of Karaman, came to the Ottoman lands and there won the complete confidence of Osman so that the latter "used to refer to him problems in the Seriat and to consult with him in matters of government" .
el-Kefevi is even more explicit: "[Molla Edebali], at the end of his life, entered the service of Sultan Osman Gazi, and he [Osman]appointed him mufti .
And he was the first mufti in the Ottoman state."
el-Kefevi's statement that Molla Edebali was mufti is implicitly justified by a passage in Taskopruzade concerning Edebali's student and son-in-law, Molla Tursun Fakih, who, "after his [Edebali" s]death, took his place in the giving of fetvas  and the planning  of the affairs of government and the teaching of the sciences of the seriat".
Conclusion
In so far as the functions performed by Molla Edebali and Tursun Fakih, apparently successively, may be characterized as an "office" from an Institutional point of view, as it were it seems not to have been continuous, however, at least on the evidence of the biographical sources.
Taskopruzade does not mention any successor to Tursun Fakih, nor does he seem to describe the activities of any other scholar of the relevant period in such a way as to suggest that he held the office of Mufti.
Only d'Ohsson attempts to show it as continuous, saying that after the death of Tursun Fakih,"Murad I gave his place [as Mufti of the capital]to Fahreddin Acemi, the kadi of Bursa, which was then the usual residence of the sultans.
These first three Muftis of the capital, as well as their immediate successors, never had more than a priority of rank over those of the provinces."
As has been shown above, however, Fahreddin Acemi was of the period of Murad II and Mehmed II, not of Murad I; and there is no record that he was ever kadi of Bursa.
It is just possible that d'Ohsson means Molla Fenari, whom he does not otherwise mention; but even the earliest possible date for Molla  Fenari's becoming Multi, roughly 1380, is too late to allow for any possibility of his having succeeded Tursun Fakih.
If attempts to establish the continuity of an office of Mufti in this early period appear to break down, however, there can be no doubt either on the one hand of the existence both of muftis and of scholars who acted as muftis in individual instances or, on the other, of the importance of  as an instrument of government.
In addition to Molla Edebali and Tursun Fakih one may mention the reference in an imperial decree sent from Murad I to Haci Evrenos Bey — unfortunately the document is of questionable authenticity-to one Elvan Fakih "who has been appointed seyhulislam for Rumeli generally" , to whom Evrenos Bey is adjured to show particular respect.
The  moreover, includes mention of a certain number of scholars of the fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries who were known chiefly as muftis: for example, Molla Bahaeddin omer and the three following scholars, all listed under the ulema of the time of Bayezid I, about none of whom, however, is much more information given than that "he was consulted in matters [involving]fetvas  in his time" (Taskopruzade) or "he became mufti" and, indeed, in the case of these scholars it is simply not deducible in what way they were recognized as muftis, whether simply by popular acclaim or rather by some sort of official recognition.
Husameddin claims that one Shuja al-Din Ilyas Celebi, Hoca to the sultan, had become (was?) a highly-regarded mufti in Edirne in 831/1427–8,"historical proofs' which Husameddin has chanced upon describing him as   One finds also both in the biographical dictionaries and in the chronicles instances of the use of  this early period.
Sultan Orhan, for example, is reported to have asked Taceddin Kurdi for a fetva on the legality of breaking an agreement over booty made with one of his commanders, while Murad I is shown just alter his accession consulting the ulema on the question of whether, in the face of threats from the Anatolian rulers, troops collected for the purpose of the  against the unbelievers in Rumeli might be used to meet the threat in Anadolu first and the  consequently delayed.
Reference has, of course, already been made to the fetva given by Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi sanctioning the execution of Seyh Bedreddin In Mehmed I's reign: with respect to the general question of the nature of  in the early state, it is worth remarking that no clue is given as to why Burhaneddin was selected beyond the fact that "he was at the side of Sultan Mehmed" in Serez when Seyh Bedreddin was brought.
That Burhaneddin Herevi may have had, or gained through this event, some official standing, however, is suggested by the reference to him in the  biography of Molla Husrev as "multi in the lands of Rum" , a more precise title than is otherwise encountered except in the case of Molla Fenari.
Too little is known about Burhaneddin Haydar Herevi to enable one to decide what is meant by the title, however, and there is no other evidence to indicate either that he held an official post or, if so, that it was anything other than an ad hominem appointment.
Finally, that  was in a general way an instrument of state policy, in this case one felt to have been used for ill, is indicated by one of the several criticisms made of Bayezid I's Grand Vezir Candarli Ali Pasa in the early histories.
Asikpasazade, having noted the marked increase in the number of  in Ali Pasa's time, writes: "Those who came made the fetva [an instrument of]trickery and did away with piety 
It is thus clear that the practice of  was not without importance from the earliest days of the state and that in Molla Edebali and Tursun Fakih — perhaps also in the elusive Elvan Fakih and others there were men who performed much the same function as later Muftis; but so scanty and uncertain is the available information about this early period that one cannot confidently assert the existence, still less the continuity, of an officially designated post of Mufti.
As we have seen, Turkish tradition has in any case  chosen to ignore this earlier tradition and to select the appointment of Molla Fenari in the time of Murad II as the starting point of the official Muftilik.
The evidence for this assumption seems in the end to be the fact that Taskopruzade uses for the first time in relation to Molla Fenari a distinctly official-sounding title which appears to encompass the entire Ottoman state, namely ; but it must be reiterated that there is no evidence in Taskopruzade's account to suggest that this appointment occurred in the time of Murad II rather than earlier, perhaps in the time of Mehmed I or even of Bayezid I.
A strong indication that the Muftilik was in existence by at least the middle of Murad II's reign, however, is given in the words of the fifteenth-century Burgundian courtier Bertrandon de la Broquière.
Sent by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, to spy out routes for a possible overland crusade, de la Broquière started on his mission from Jaffa and worked his way slowly northward, arriving eventually at Bursa where he stayed some ten days.
He then passed on to Constantinople, where again he stopped for a while; and on 23 January 1433 (I Jumada II 836) he set out for Edirne.
As Murad II happened to be in Serez at the time, de la Broquière and his companions, one of whom was Benedetto Folco da Forli, the ambassador of the Duke of Milan, set out to meet him.
On the way they met the sultan's harem who informed him that Murad II was on his way back to Edirne.
They awaited him first at Yenipazar, but when Murad refused to see them there, they returned to Edirne to await him.
Finally, having received an audience in Edirne, the company left that city for the west on 12 March 1433 (20 Rajab 836).
De la Broquière's book contains much of interest in relation to the appearance, personality and habits of Murad II and to his military forces, but the passage of particular interest for a study of the Muftilik occurs in his description of Murad "s entry into Edirne: " Et alerent au devant de luy [le Grant Turc]le grant caliphe qui est entre eulx ainsi que le pape est entre nous, et aussi toutes les notables gens de la ville qui furent en grant nombre.
Et trouverent ledit seigneur aux champs…
"
The editor of the work notes that "the grand caliph" is certainly not the Abbasid caliph but is rather the Seyhulislam Fahreddin Acemi.
The identification of the particular Mufti involved is a subject more suitably dealt with later, but there seems little doubt that the editor is right in his assumption that the grand caliph is, in fact, the Mufti.
There is no personage in the Ottoman state of any period whom the comparison with the Pope fits as aptly as the Mufti, and the same comparison was drawn frequently enough by travellers of the next  century.
It would seem, then, that de la Broquière's statement not only provides good evidence of the existence of the office of Mufti in 836/1433 but also suggests that the Mufti was by then recognizably the chief representative of the spiritual authority of the Seriat, the chief representative of the religious aspect of the state.
The impression given by de la Broquière of the Mufti as a chiefly religious figure is strengthened by the only two known incidents in which one of the first three "traditional" Muftis was actively involved in his capacity as Mufti, namely Fahreddin Acemi's rout of the Hurufis and his taking the chief seat in the debate on  both of which incidents find parallels in the careers of later Muftis.
The problems presented by the Hurufi heresy, which seems to have attracted the sultan himself, were more of a religious and social nature than a political one, and to deal with them the Mufti was called in.
Similarly the  debate at the circumcision feast was an affair particularly religious in nature, and at it the Mufti took the chief seat, even over such a distinguished, but more "temporal" , colleague as the kadi of the newly conquered city of Istanbul, Hizir Bey.
The association with Fahreddin Acemi of the only information in the Turkish sources about the activities of the early Muftis may well not be entirely coincidental, for in one very important respect he seems to have differed from his two predecessors in the traditional list, Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan, in that he appears not to have held a kadilik simultaneously with the Muftilik, whereas Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan apparently both held the kadilik of Bursa at the same time as the Muftilik.
Not only is there no suggestion in the biographical sources or in documents that Fahreddin Acemi ever held a kadilik, but there is also positive evidence that for long periods in his Muftilik he could not have been kadi of Edirne, at least, since someone else was.
Extant documents, or references to documents, bearing the signatures of kadis of Edirne show that Ibrahim b.
Muhammad held the post in Shawwal 837/June 1434, Muharram 840/July 1436 and Safar 844/July 1440; that Hajji Ahmad b.
Khidr was kadi of Edirne in Muharram-Rabi"I 846/May-July 1442; and that Molla Husrev held the post at least from Muharram 852/March 1448 to Ramadan 854/October 1450.
There is evidence that Molla Ahmad b.
Wah al-Din b.
Ilyas (Bursal, Ahmed Pasa) succeeded Molla Husrev as kadi of Edirne in 855/1451, while a run of documents signed by Candarli Ibrahim Pasa b.
Halil Pasa as kadi of Edirne and dated from Jumada I 857/June 1453 to Jumada II 869/February 1465 suggests that he was kadi for much, if not all, of that period.
It thus appears most unlikely that Fahreddin Acemi could have held the kadilik of Edirne for a significant period and much more likely that he never held it at all; and in this respect, in his not holding a kadilik simultaneously with the Muftilik, Fahreddin Acemi seems not only to differ from his predecessors but also to resemble all his successors in the office of Mufti.
It is also, perhaps, not without significance that Fahreddin Acemi is the first to be mentioned as receiving a salary specifically in respect of his  function as Mufti, though it cannot be shown beyond doubt that he was actually the first to have done so.
The separation of the Muftilik from the kadilik is an important step in the development of the institution and helps to confirm what has been said previously about the essentially religious nature of the Muftilik.
It is generally true that the kadi was a more "secular" figure than the mufti if only because he was much more closely tied to the state organization than was the mufti.
While all kadis were appointed by the state and received allowances, for example, certainly in the period under review only the most important of the muftis received official appointments or salaries; and indeed, even the salary of the Mufti of Istanbul, until the very end of the period, was considerably smaller than the allowances (to say nothing of the income) of a number of kadis over whom he clearly took precedence, the pattern possibly having been established by the perhaps consciously modest demands made by Fahreddin Acemi.
The fact that the kadilik was thus closely tied to the secular government was unquestionably a source of some prejudice against it on the part of the more pious elements in the state.
This prejudice against close involvement with"the secular government may be illustrated by an anecdote related in the  about Molla Gurani.
When one of Molla Gurani's companions remarked one day on the fact that Shaykh Muslih al-Din Mustafa b.
Ahmad, known as Ibn al-Wafa "(Ibn Vefa: d. 896/1491), visited Molla Husrev every day but did not visit Molla Gurani the latter said: " He does right in that, for Molla Husrev is a scholar noted for knowledge and works  the visiting of whom is necessary.
Though I too am a scholar, I mix with sultans, wherefore the visiting of me is not fitting."
In a similar vein one may recall the refusal of Taskopruzade's grandfather to return to Istanbul to take up an appointment at the newly built Sahn for fear of becoming involved in distracting ambitions for personal glory.
The particular object of his fear  becomes clear from advice given to his son, Taskopruzade's father, who was appointed kadi of Aleppo by Selim I. Although Taskopruzade's father actually went to Aleppo, he resigned before taking up his duties as kadi, remembering an injunction of his father's: "Don't become a kadi." 
From the standpoint of the scholar interested in learning there was, of course, the practical objection that the duties of the kadilik distracted one from the pursuit of .
Molla "Idhari (Molla Izari), on hearing that Hocazade had become a kadi, is reported to have said: " What a disaster, his acceptance of the kadilik.
Had he persevered in that with which he was occupied, he would have produced great works in ilm at which the learned would have stood in awe "; while Hocazade himself, in a comment on his own career overheard by Taskopruzade's father, acknowledges Seyyid Serif to be his master but goes on to say: " He had a true zeal [for  with which neither ill-health nor offices alien [to  interfered.
I too have this true zeal, but both ill-health and alien offices-kadiliks and the like — have vitiated it.
Had this not been the case, I should have had renown in 
The dissociation of the Muftilik from a kadilik is thus important in that it seems to represent the further definition of a chiefly"religious' authority, the representative of the more spiritual aspect of the Seriat as opposed to its practical application which was to some degree tainted, in the eyes of the pious, by its close association with secular government.
This significant alteration in the nature of the Muftilik suggests the need for a reconsideration of the Turkish historical tradition regarding the establishment of the institution, to explore the possibility that Fahreddin Acemi was in a very real sense the first of the long line of Muftis.
The office of Mufti held by Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan was, as far as can be judged from the sources, merely an adjunct to their other offices.
No material is given about their activities as Mufti, and no anecdotes are related about them in their capacity as Mufti, though something is related about each in his capacity as kadi.
One would not suggest that they did not hold the Muftilik, but one can suggest that they held a very different kind of Muftilik from that held by Fahreddin Acemi.
The idea that Molla Yegan and Fahreddin Acemi held different sorts of posts goes some way toward a possible explanation of the obvious confusion concerning the facts of the Muftiliks of these two men.
It has been noted above that while the accepted Turkish tradition has rejected the Muftilik of Molla Yegan and has passed straight from the Muftilik of Molla Fenari to that of Fahreddin Acemi, there is evidence, part of which is the source  chiefly used in formulating the Turkish tradition, to show that Molla Yegan did succeed Molla Fenari in his office of Mufti.
But what is not stated or even suggested by the early Turkish sources is that Fahreddin Acemi succeeded Molla Yegan; there is, in fact, nothing to connect the two except the fact that Molla Yegan succeeded to the  and that Fahreddin Acemi became Mufti.
They were located in different places, Molla Yegan in the old capital, Bursa, and Fahreddin Acemi in the new capital, Edirne.
In view of the differences in the natures of their jobs and in their locations, and in view of the lack of any mention of a connection between the two men, it is not impossible to suppose that they held their offices contemporaneously, that while Molla Yegan held the office of Mufti In conjunction with his other offices in Bursa, perhaps even retaining some official precedence over Fahreddin Acemi, the latter was appointed to an entirely new office, the Mufti of the capital, which was then Edirne.
It should be noted that the title "Mufti of the capital" is a possible description of all the later Muftis, since alter Fahreddin Acemi's death — which occurred alter the conquest of Constantinople — all the Muftis were in fact Mufti of Istanbul.
The fact that it is at least possible that Molla Yegan and Fahreddin Acemi held office contemporaneously for part of their respective appointments is of some help in trying to establish the identity of de la Broquière's "grand caliph" ; for although Molla Yegan should have been Mufti in 1433 if his Muftilik and that of Fahreddin Acemi are viewed as successive rather than contemporaneous, de la Broquière's statement applies rather better to Fahreddin Acemi than to Molla Yegan for several reasons.
In the first place, as has been shown above, de la Broquière's comparison of the Mufti with the Pope suggests a personage whose main characteristic was his spiritual rather than his temporal authority, a description which fits Fahreddin Acemi more closely than it does Molla Yegan.
Secondly, it was from Edirne that "the grand caliph…and also all the notables of the city…" go out to meet the returning sultan.
It is perhaps possible that were Murad II returning from a great victory, Molla Yegan might have come from Bursa to greet him, but such seems not to have been the case.
There is in any event nothing in de la Broquière's description to suggest that the grand caliph was not resident in Edirne.
If it is the case that the grand caliph in de la Broquière's account is indeed Fahreddin Acemi, it would mean that all the admittedly meagre information relative to the nature of the early Muftilik and the activities of the early Muftis is connected with Fahreddin Acemi.
This fact, together with the facts mentioned above, that Fahreddin Acemi appears to have been the first to hold the office of Mufti without an accompanying kadilik and to have been the first to receive a salary specifically in respect of the Muftilik, makes it a  reasonable assumption that he was the first Mufti in the sense commonly understood in later times.
If such be the case, what may be said about the Muftiliks of Molla Yegan and Molla Fenari?
Although a reasonable amount of material is available about the lives of these two men, nothing is known about their Muftiliks beyond the bare statement that they did hold the office; and it is consequently impossible to make assumptions with any assurance about the nature of their Muftiliks.
It seems perfectly possible that the creation — or re-creation, if one accepts that Molla Edebali and Tursun Fakih were in some sense Muftis — of the office of Mufti to which Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan were appointed represents the first step in the creation of the office to which Fahreddin Acemi was appointed, a groping towards the concept which was fully realized in the office held by the latter.
It is, perhaps, possible that the office was created in an attempt to impose some organization on the traditionally unorganized function of  that the Mufti was one whose opinion was in some way considered superior to that of other muftis and who, perhaps, was responsible for the appointment of lesser muftis.
It may even have been envisaged that the holder of the office would act as, in some sense, chief adviser to the sultan on matters pertaining to the sacred law, although a point to be noted in this connection is that both Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan lived in Bursa while the sultan resided for the most part in Edirne.
There is no more evidence for these suggestions, however, than for the possible suggestion that the office was largely honorary and created ad hominem for Molla Fenari, perhaps as an inducement to return from Karaman or as an additional honour when he did return.
Speculation in regard to the relationship of the Muftiliks of Molla Fenari and Molla Yegan to that of Fahreddin Acemi founders because of the total lack of information concerning the Muftiliks of the first two; and speculation regarding the reasons for the foundation of the institution is likewise extremely difficult as there is little enough information regarding the actual duties even of Fahreddin Acemi.
But from the very fact that a religious authority who was comparable with the Pope, and for whose position no precedent seems to have existed in the Ottoman state except, perhaps, in its earliest, almost legendary days, appears on the scene relatively suddenly in the time of Murad II, it seems possible to deduce at least part of the reason for the foundation of the institution.
There seems to be a good bit of evidence to suggest that the reign of Bayezid I (1389–1402) was, in the eyes of the pious, a dangerously irreligious  one.
Wittek writes that among the basic causes of concern were Bayezid's policy of using Christian soldiers against the Muslim gazi emirates in Anatolia and the "latinization" of the Ottoman court, the introduction into it of the practices of the Christian Balkan princes, this criticism being reflected in anecdotes relating that Bayezid's Serbian wife Despina instructed him in the delights of wine.
The suggestion that Bayezid was lax in the observance of his religious obligations is found in an anecdote, related in the  concerning Molla Fenari.
The latter, as kadi of Bursa, refused Bayezid's evidence in a case, saying that he abandoned the congregation in prayer.
Bayezid subsequently made amends by building a mosque in front of his palace and appointed a place for himself therein.
Nor was Bayezid alone held up to reproach.
A few of the ulema, highly placed in the government, encouraged him in his attacks on the gazi emirates, ulema "whose ideas and sentiments had remained attached to the ancient centres of Islam from which they had come as poor adventurers and to which they intended to return as wealthy ministers of the new master" .
A number of anecdotes relate the corruption, greed and ignorance of the ulema and the discontent felt at the introduction of the administrative practices of high Islam and especially its fiscal policy.
The assertion that Bayezid's reign was felt to be essentially a godless one finds confirmation in the view taken by the earliest Ottoman historians of the crushing defeat suffered by Bayezid at the hands of Timur in 1402 near Ankara and the subsequent chaos in the Ottoman state.
Writing about the earliest Ottoman historical text, Inalcik states: It is to be observed that the first compilation originated in the period of struggle for the existence of the Ottoman state alter the fateful defeat in 1402.
One can easily see in this historical account the effort to explain the disaster as God's punishment for the sins committed under Bayezid I. He and his  Ali Pasha are accused of encroaching upon the  and introducing innovations in the government.
When the chronicle describes"Osman Ghazi as having no gold and silver in his possession at his death and as rejecting new taxation on dealings in the bazaar as a violation of the  our source appears to intend to criticize his own period by setting the first Ottoman ruler as an ideal example.
The emphasis put on the respect shown by the first Ottoman rulers for the dervishes by granting them generous plots of land can also be interpreted as a  denunciation of Bayezid's policy of abolishing the rights on the  and  lands.
Thus this work on the first century of Ottoman history bears the marks of the great disappointment at the collapse of Bayezid's empire.
In view of the deeply felt resentment at the reign of Bayezid I on the part of at least the more pious elements of the state, it seems not impossible that Murad II (1421–51) who, alter Mehmed I (1413–21), set about re-establishing the integrity and order of the Ottoman state, decided to provide an answer to the critics of the secular state by the creation of an office to represent the spiritual authority of the seriat, an office, moreover, free from the taint that had come to affect the members of the ulema associated with the state service.
Wittek suggests that Bayezid I was aware of the criticisms of himself on religious grounds and that he sought investiture as Sultan of Rum, a title he already possessed in fact, from the Abbasid caliph in Cairo because he felt the need for a religious sanction for his regime.
It may well be that Murad II, instead of turning outside the Ottoman world, created within it a figure to parallel the Abbasid caliph in respect of the religious authority and sanction he represented.
Modern western authors have compared the position of the Mufti with that of the"Abbasid caliph and the Oecumenical Patriarch.
It would be wrong to say that the Muftilik was created simply in imitation of either; but either and, in view of the period, more likely the former-may have been imitated to answer the need for a similar office in the Ottoman state.
Again, it has been suggested that the Muftilik was "a survival of the ancient mystical religious tradition in the Ottoman state, a tradition which demanded alongside of the secular power, a religious authority having no judicial powers but representing, so to speak, the religious conscience of the people" .
In few periods in early Ottoman history can that need have been felt more strongly than in the years following Ankara.
It seems possible to suggest, then, that in Fahreddin Acemi one finds the full realization of a conscious policy (perhaps partly realized in Molla Fenari  and Molla Yegan) on the part of Murad II to create within the state "…alongside of the secular power, a religious authority…representing, so to speak, the religious conscience of the people" .
The relation of this authority to the other officials of the state, indeed to the sultan himself, must, however, wait upon a discussion of the further historical development of the Muftilik, a subject to which it is now necessary to turn.
The Muftilik in the Later Fifteenth Century
Introduction
The succession of Muftis in the latter half of the fifteenth century, after the conquest of Constantinople (857/1453), represents one of the most complicated problems to be met with in tracing the history of the early Muftilik, the difficulties largely arising, as one would expect, from a lack of sufficient evidence at certain crucial points in the careers of several of the Muftis.
There are, broadly speaking, three main sources of confusion.
The first is that the traditional account of the Muftilik is in an important respect at odds with the facts since the dating of the Muftilik of Molla Abdulkerim in the traditional list can be shown not to accord either with the earliest biographical information or with such little documentary evidence as exists, this fact, in turn, having implications for the dating of the periods of office of several other Muftis.
The second is that it is in relation to this period that one finds a quite separate account of the origins of the Muftilik advanced, namely Katib Celebi's view that the office originated not with Molla Fenari in Bursa or Fahreddin Acemi in Edirne but rather with Hizir Bey in Istanbul, the Muftilik being for his tenure, and for some time alter, a  to the post of kadi of Istanbul, of which he was the first holder.
The third is the possibility, suggested also by Katib Celebi's account of the office and supported to some degree by several contemporary documents, that there may have been a separate official muftilik of Edirne during the period: unfortunately, so shadowy is the evidence for its existence that as matters now stand it merely adds to the confusion, though could the facts about it be discovered, they might go some way toward resolving some of the problems in this vexed period.
To take first the question of the traditional list, one finds that the neatly-dovetailed listing of Muftis developed by the authors of the later Turkish tradition conceals serious confusion amongst earlier authors in respect of the true facts.
One need go no further back than Mustakimzade to become aware of this confusion, which, as has been remarked above, centres mainly on the placement of the Muftilik of Molla Abdulkerim.
Mustakimzade places his article on Abdulkerim after that on Molla Gurani, and it will be seen from the traditional list that the later authors have accepted this placement, dating Abdulkerim's Muftilik from 893/1488 to Rajab 900/March-April 1495.
There is no justification in Mustakimzade's article for such a dating, however, and Mustakimzade's every word indicates his uncertainty about Abdulkerim's career.
He begins his article with the vague statement: "The late [Molla Abdulkerim]was also licensed to give fetvas   during this period." 
Having given a sketchy account of his early career, he notes that he became kazasker in 863/1458–9 and was then removed from that post in 871/1466–7.
He then proceeds: "After a while he was reinstated in favour by being authorized to give fetvas .
He reports that he died in the early days of the reign of Bayezid II (886–918/1481–1512), in the year 907/1501–2 according to one report, and concludes: "Because, according to the account in the  he was an adornment of the chain of Seyhulislams, he has been recorded in this place." 
So vague, indeed, is Mustakimzade that one is led to suspect that he doubts the validity of Abdulkerim's claim to the Muftilik.
His last sentence is tantamount to saying that he includes Abdulkerim, perhaps rather against his own better judgement, only because the  mentions the fact that he became Mufti.
Strengthening the impression of Mustakimzade's uncertainty is his use of the term  (or the variant  in regard to Abdulkerim's Muftilik.
Aside from using it twice in relation to Abdulkerim, he uses it on only three other occasions, at least in his articles concerned with the Muftis under consideration: first, in the general statement which forms the basis for his rejection of the Muftilik of Molla Yegan to the effect that all the ulema are empowered to give fetvas; second, in connection with Molla Yegan himself; and third, twice in regard to Molla Shaykh"Abd al-Karim al-Kadiri (Seyh Abdulkerim), who seems to have held an ad hominem muftilik, not connected with the Muftilik of Istanbul, in the time of Suleyman.
The fact that Mustakimzade is clearly at a loss about Abdulkerim is further pointed up in his article about the following Mufti, Molla Arab.
There he reports without comment the statement of the  that Molla Arab became Mufti on the death of Molla Gurani, that is, in 893/1488, and goes on to say that he died in 901/1495–6.
Whatever Mustakimzade does think about the dating of Abdulkerim's Muftilik, then, it is clear that he does not believe that he followed Molla Gurani.
As will be noted from the list, however, later tradition has set aside Mustakimzade's doubts, accepting his placement of Abdulkerim's Muftilik and ignoring his dating of Molla Arab's Muftilik.
Reference to the  both Taskopruzade's original and Mecdi's translation, makes it difficult to understand how such confusion has arisen; for although relatively few facts are given there about Abdulkerim, and although it is impossible to specify with any assurance the precise dates of his Muftilik, one thing at least is clearly stated: that Abdulkerim was Mufti not in the time of Bayezid II (886–918/1481–1512) but in the time of Mehmed II (855–86/1451–81).
Taskopruzade writes: "Then [Sultan Mehmed]made him  kazasker, then he removed him and made him Mufti.
Then he [Abdulkerim]died in the days of the reign of Sultan Bayazid Khan."
Mecdi is even more specific: "[While teaching at the Sahn]he became kazasker in place of Hocazade…
[Then]he was removed and was appointed Mufti in the city of Constantinople in 870/1465–6 after Molla Fahreddin Acemi.
The aforementioned [Abdulkerim]died in the time of the reign of Sultan Bayezid."
One is faced, then, with two conflicting views about the dating of the Muftilik of Abdulkerim: first, the view of the  that he was Mufti in the time of Mehmed II, perhaps from 870/1465–6 onwards; and second, the view of the writers connected with the later tradition, Mustakimzade half-excepted, that he was Mufti in the time of Bayezid II, more precisely, following Molla Gurani, from 893/1488 to Rajab 900/March-April 1495.
Mustakimzade's account lies neatly between these two views: on the one hand he places his article on Abdulkerim after that on Molla Gurani, on the other he refutes this placement by his dating of Molla Arab's Muftilik.
He refuses to commit himself at all on the dating of Abdulkerim's Muftilik, not even naming the sultan in whose reign it occurred.
It is difficult in this case not to accept the view of the .
There is first the point that it is the earliest source.
The period under review is well within the lifetime of Taskopruzade's father and his contemporaries.
While one cannot always rely on Taskopruzade for precision in regard to dates, nor for that matter even in regard to the reigns in which various events occurred, as has been seen, it is hard to accept that he is in error by some twenty or twenty-five years, especially in a period close enough to his own to allow him access to people who had lived in that period.
Another point worth noting, though perhaps less decisive, is the close association of Abdulkerim with the Grand Vezir Mahmud Pasa.
The only anecdote related in the article in the  about Abdulkerim concerns a  of Mahmud Pasa's in which Molla Vildan complains to Mahmud Pasa that he shows greater love to Abdulkerim than to him.
Mahmud Pasa confesses that such is the case, explaining that Abdulkerim saved him from an addiction to wine which, he implies, would have seriously impaired his chances not only for a successful career but for salvation as well.
The fact that aside from the information  relative to his appointments and dismissals the only memorable thing about Abdulkerim seems to have been his close association with Mahmud Pasa is not, perhaps, without significance.
There are, moreover, serious complications in the view taken by the later tradition, complications which clearly arise from an attempt to fit Abdulkerim in where he does not belong.
It has already been noted that in order to put Abdulkerim's Muftilik into the reign of Bayezid II the writers connected with the later tradition have had to ignore Mustakimzade's dating of Molla Arab's Muftilik, namely 893/1488 to 901/1496 (based, as mentioned above, on the  and have substituted instead 893/1488 to Rajab 900/March- April 1495 for Abdulkerim's period of office and the latter date to Rajab 901/March-April 1496 for that of Molla Arab.
Neither Taskopruzade nor Mecdi gives any clue concerning the date of Molla Arab's appointment to the Muftilik (beyond the fact that it is implicit that it occurred in the reign of Bayezid II), although both state that he died as Mufti of Istanbul in 901/1495–6.
Documentary evidence comes to the rescue at this point, however.
Gokbilgin reproduces a  for Mehmed II's  complex based on the Fatih mosque in Istanbul for the year 1 Dhu "l-Ka'da 894 to the last day of Shawwal 895 (26 September 1489 to 15 September 1490) from which it is clear that Molla Arab was both muderris at the Sahn and Multi during that year; while in a document published by Barkan, a conflation of two statements of income and expenditure for the  of Murad II in Edirne, written in Rajab 896/May-June 1491 and covering the years mid-893 to mid-895, one finds a reference to one" Mevlana Isa Halife,[the]Sufi, one of the disciples of Mevlana Arab, mufti".
To this documentary evidence may be added the fact that Sa'deddin states that Molla Arab was intimately involved as Mufti in the peace negotiations in 895–6/1490–1 which brought an end to the war between the Ottomans and the Mamluks over control of Cilicia.
These pieces of evidence would seem to establish beyond doubt the correctness of Mustakimzade's dating of Molla Arab's Muftilik, a dating which, in turn, leaves no room for the possibility that Abdulkerim held the Muftilik — or the Muftilik of Istanbul, at any rate during the period stated by the later tradition.
As the later authors have adjusted the dating of the Muftilik of Molla  Arab in order to make room for that of Abdulkerim, so they have stretched the facts considerably in extending the Muftilik of Molla Husrev to cover the whole vexed period from the date which they give for the death of Fahreddin Acemi, namely 865/1460–1, to that which they give for the accession of Molla Gurani (885/1480; but cf. below, pp. 144 et sqq., especially p. 150).
The facts about Molla Husrev's Muftilik are by no means certain, but the  does give a fairly clear picture of the circumstances leading up to his becoming Mufti.
According to Taskopruzade and Mecdi, Molla Husrev was given the office of kadi of Istanbul on the death of Hizir Bey in 863/1459, together with the kadiliks of Khawass (Eyup), Galata and Uskudar and the professorship of the Ayasofya medrese.
At some point during his tenure as kadi of Istanbul, Mehmed II planned a great feast.
He asked Molla Gurani about the protocol of the seating arrangements, whereupon Molla Gurani replied: "The most fitting thing for Gurani is that he should serve at this feast and not sit." 
So pleased was Mehmed II with this answer that he planned to seat Molla Gurani on his right and Molla Husrev on his left.
Word of this apparently reached the latter, who, offended, refused to attend the feast, boarded a ship for Bursa, and there built a medrese where he taught.
Some time later Mehmed II repented of his action, invited Molla Husrev back to Istanbul and gave him the office of Mufti.
A number of different dates are given for these events in Molla Husrev's career by various authors, both early and late.
Ismail Belig, followed by the  Babinger and Uzuncarsili, gives 867/1462–3 for his departure; the  followed by Babinger, gives 874/1469–70 for his return.
A marginal note in Mecdi's article on Hocazade states that the latter succeeded Molla Husrev as kadi of Istanbul in 872/1467–8.
E. J. W. Gibb says that Molla Husrev departed for Bursa in 875/1470, while d'Ohsson gives 1472 (876–7).
Mecdi, in his article on Molla Husrev, says that he went in 877/1472–3 but gives no indication of the date of his return.
The later Turkish tradition has, of course, settled upon 865/1460–1 as the date of his return from Bursa and his assumption of the office of Mufti.
It may be said at once that of these dates the most inherently improbable  is the last, that given by the later Turkish tradition.
It is, of course, rendered suspect simply because the writers connected with the tradition appear to be guilty of having ignored the best evidence concerning Abdulkerim and Molla Arab and because, in order to remain consistent, they must therefore necessarily extend the Muftilik of Molla Husrev to cover the period in the reign of Mehmed II from which the Muftilik of Abdulkerim appears to have been removed.
But more, were one to accept the date given in the traditional account, one would also have to accept that in the space of something less than three years Molla Husrev was appointed to and then abandoned the posts to which he was appointed at the death of Hizir Bey, went to Bursa, built a medrese and taught there, and returned to Istanbul to accept the office of Mufti.
Taskopruzade includes in his account, however, between Molla Husrev's appointments on the death of Hizir Bey and his departure for Bursa, a considerable amount of material more or less related to Molla Husrev's activities in these capacities, enough to make it improbable in the extreme that he held the offices for so short a period.
It is recorded, for example, that in spite of his duties as kadi and muderris, he yet managed to copy every day two leaves  from the books of the ancients  and Mecdi adds in regard to this point that Molla Husrev thus left a number of books in his own hand at his death.
Recently published documentary evidence enables one to support these possibly tenuous impressions with fact, however.
A run of some eighteen documents, found in various sources but principally in Barkan/Ayverdi, the earliest of which is dated mid-Muharram 864/early November 1459, the latest late Rajab 876/early January 1472, suggests that Molla Husrev held the kadilik of Istanbul at least between these dates.
Taking the biographical  information in conjunction with the documents, one can see no reason whatever to doubt that he succeeded Hizir Bey on the latter's death in 863/1459, but the date of his leaving the office cannot be so certainly fixed.
A series of eight documents signed by Mustafa b.
Yusuf (Hocazade) and dating from mid-Shawwal 877/mid-March 1473 to early Rabi"1881/late June 1476 indicates that Hocazade may indeed have succeeded Molla Husrev, as the marginal note in Mecdi states (while apparently giving an incorrect date, namely 872/1467–8): only the signature of Molla Hamid b.
Afdal (Efdalzade) on a document dated late Jumada I 877/early November 1472 intervenes, and this (and another of his, dated early Safar 874/mid-August 1469, interrupting Molla Husrev's putative tenure) is possibly explicable as actually dating from his seven-year period in the post in the 890s.
Interestingly, the date of the earliest document signed by Hocazade — mid-Shawwal 877 — more or less coincides with that of a  recording that on 23 Shawwal 877/23 March 1473 Efdalzade had been appointed to the Sahn in place of Ali Kuscu who, Uzuncarsili says, had been transferred to the muderrislik of the Ayasofya medrese, one of the posts which Molla Husrev  had held in conjunction with the kadilik of Istanbul.
There is, however, no evidence that Ali Kuscu succeeded Molla Husrev, and Uzuncarsili's statement that he had been transferred to the Ayasofya medrese (which is not mentioned in the  needs to be set against the  report that Ali Kuscu accompanied Mehmed II on the campaign against Uzun Hasan (began Shawwal 877/March 1473) and was appointed to the Ayasofya medrese only on their return (mid-878/autumn 1473).
On the basis of the documentary evidence, then, it would appear that Molla Husrev still held the kadilik of Istanbul in Rajab 876 but had almost certainly left that office by Shawwal 877.
Scattered statements in the biographical sources which bear on the problem are of mixed value.
It would appear, for example, that either the statement in the  that Molla Kestelli was kadi of Istanbul at the time of the death of Molla Ala'al-Din Ali b.
Majd al-Din Muhammad (Molla Musannifek), or the latter's death date, which is given as 875/1470–1, must be treated with caution.
On the other hand, the statement that Hocazade, as kadi of Istanbul, was amongst the group of ulema who met Ali Kuscu at the time of his arrival to settle permanently in the Ottoman lands, which event Babinger plausibly dates in the beginning of the spring of 1472 (Shawwal 876), may, if the facts stated are correct, permit a refinement of the dating of Molla Husrev's departure from the kadilik, which would thus appear to have occurred between Rajab and Shawwal 876.
Of more interest from the point of view of the Muftilik than the date of Molla Husrev's departure for Bursa-except in so far as the two are related, of course-is the date of his return, since it was then, if the  account is correct, that he became Mufti.
Like the date 865/1460–1 advanced for his return by the later tradition, the date 874/1469–70 given by the  and Babinger would seem to be invalidated by the documentary evidence concerning Molla Husrev's tenure as kadi.
The only clue so far discovered of any value to a possible dating of his return is the fact that, according to Bursali Mehmed Tahir, there exists a copy of one of his most famous works, the  written in his own hand, presented to Mehmed II, and dated 878/1473–4 it would not  thus be unreasonable to suppose that Molla Husrev wrote the copy especially for Mehmed II, this in turn suggesting that by 878 Molla Husrev had made up his quarrel with the sultan and had perhaps returned to Istanbul.
Doubt is cast upon Bursali Mehmed Tahir's statement, however, by the fact that in the concluding lines of what appears to be another autograph manuscript of the same work, Molla Husrev remarks that he finished the composition of it  certainly refers to the work, not the manuscript) on Saturday 2 Jumada I 883/Saturday 1 August 1478, having begun it on Saturday 12 Dhu"l-Ka'da 877/Saturday 10 April 1473.
If it is nevertheless the case that Molla Husrev presented this work, a part of it, or another work to Mehmed II in 878, the point made above would hold good.
One might mention in connection with the  that el-Kefevi explicitly associates its composition with Molla Husrev's stay in Bursa.
It will be noted that the date of the commencement of the composition of the work fits nicely with the conclusion reached above about the probable date of Molla Husrev's departure for Bursa, but it would perhaps be dangerous to draw from el-Kefevi's assertion the conclusion that Molla Husrev was still in Bursa in 883/1478.
Before leaving the question of Molla Husrev's Muftilik it must be pointed out that further documentary evidence calls in question one element of the  account, namely the assertion that Molla Husrev built his medrese on going to Bursa after his falling-out with Mehmed II.
One finds in Barkan/Ayverdi a summary of Molla Husrev's  for several  in Istanbul, dated Rabi"I 870/October-November 1465, amongst the expenditures from which are several in connection with a medrese: 20 akce a day for teaching (tedris), 16 akce a day for the students and so on.
The editors are in no doubt that this is in respect of Molla Husrev's medrese in Bursa (the involvement of the kadi of Bursa in the function of  is worth noting), which is in any case the only medrese he is known to have endowed.
While the figures given presumably refer to the state of play in 953/1546–7, the note in the summary that the original salary for teaching was 15 akce  and the reference to teaching in the section concerned with the stipulation(s) laid down by the founder sart-i vakif) suggest that the medrese figured in the original .
Baltaci, noting the conflict between the fact that the medrese had apparently already been founded by 870 and the fact that Mecdi says that Molla Husrev did not go off to Bursa to found the medrese until 877, suggests that the  was written in anticipation of the actual building of the medrese.
While this is  perhaps possible, it seems rather more likely that the  account needs to be modified in respect of this detail, that Molla Husrev went to Bursa to teach in his already existing medrese rather than to build, and then teach in, the medrese.
On the assumption that the  account of this event in Molla Husrev's life is at least broadly correct, however, and in the light of the documentary and such other evidence as exists, it would appear that he left for Bursa not earlier than Rajab 876 nor later than Shawwal 877 and returned to become Mufti perhaps as early as 878/1473–4.
One may now reconsider the evidence about the death of Fahreddin Acemi since it is common ground amongst the writers connected with the later tradition that Molla Husrev succeeded Fahreddin Acemi as Mufti.
The various dates given for Fahreddin Acemi's death have been noted in the previous chapter, namely: 865/ 1460–1 (the writers connected with the traditional view); 870 (Mecdi, two manuscripts of the Anonymous Chronicle); and 20 December 1468 (4 Jumada II 873)(Babinger).
Unfortunately, there appears to be no way of choosing with any confidence amongst these dates: if 870 recommends itself on the grounds that there is relatively early authority for it, for example, the remarkable preciseness of Babinger's unsupported date in 873 cannot be ignored.
The only clues in the biographical sources which may give some positive result relative to the death date of Fahreddin Acemi arise from the statement in Taskopruzade's article on him that Molla Ali Tins, visited him on his death-bed and heard his last wishes.
It is known from the account of Ali Tusi's life in the  that while muderris at the Uc Serefeli medrese in Edirne with a salary of 100 akce a day, he was ordered by Mehmed II to compete with Hocazade, then muderris at the Zeyrek medrese in Istanbul, in writing a  between al-Ghazali's Tuhafut al-falasifa and the philosophers.
Having lost out to Hocazade in the competition, Ali Tusi left the Ottoman lands, apparently permanently, going first to Tabriz, then on to Transoxania and dying in Samarkand on 7 Ramadan 887/20 October 1482.
On Ali Tusi's departure for Persia, Mehmed II built another medrese beside the Uc Serefeli medrese and divided the 100 akce salary Ali Tusi had received equally between the muderrises of the old and new medreses.
Should the date of Ali Tusi's leaving for Persia be shown to have fallen before 870/1465–6, it would, of course, dispose of Mecdi's dating (and 873) and be an argument in favour of the earlier date, on the assumption that the story about Ali Tusi's visiting Fahreddin Acemi on his deathbed is true.
Despite the relatively large amount of specific and varied information given In the article on Ali Tusi, however, it is impossible on present evidence to date precisely his departure for Persia.
The dates of composition of both Hocazade's and Ali Tusi's works on the  seem to be unknown, and there does not appear to be any evidence which would enable one to date the foundation of Mehmed II's addition to the Uc Serefeli medrese.
On only one point is there evidence which would seem to give some basis for dating the competition, namely a marginal note in Mecdi's article on Hocazade which states that the latter was kadi of Edirne the position to which he went alter holding the professorship of the Zeyrek medrese — in 871/1466–7, "a few documents  written by him" having been seen.
It may therefore be that 871/1466–7 represents a terminus ante quem for the death of Fahreddin Acemi, provided that the various facts given in the  are correct and that Ali Tusi's departure for Persia followed reasonably closely upon his defeat by Hocazade in the competition, which seems to be the implication in the Shaka'ik.
One must emphasize, however, that this chain of evidence is forged from a number of very uncertain links and that one cannot lightly dismiss in its favour, for example, Babinger's precise and circumstantial dating of Fahreddin Acemi's death.
Whatever the truth of the matter, however, it is enough for present purposes to note that the latest date given in any of the sources is 873/1468 and that there thus appears to be a gap of at least five years between the death  of Fahreddin Acemi and the accession of Molla Husrev to the Muftilik.
It seems entirely possible that it is to this period — roughly from 873/1468 (or perhaps earlier) to 878/1473–4 — that the Muftilik of Abdulkerim belongs, that he succeeded Fahreddin Acemi on the latter's death and must then later have resigned or been removed from the Muftilik, perhaps to make way for Molla Husrev when he returned from Bursa.
Such a construction fits the few facts given in the early biographical sources and such facts as have emerged from the recently published documentary material in a way that the traditional account does not.
It thus appears that the formulators of the received tradition, with the exception of Mustakimzade (who nevertheless provides the basis for the view taken by the later authors), have, by ignoring clear statements in the sources which they themselves use in regard to Abdulkerim, placed themselves in an untenable position also in regard to the dating of the Muftiliks of both Molla Husrev and Molla Arab.
It may be noted in passing that one of the results of their synthesis, here as in the case of Molla Yegan, is a certain idealizing of the early Muftilik in an important respect.
One of the most significant and suggestive points about the early history of the office is that until late in the period under consideration nearly all the Muftis held the office until their deaths, that there were very few resignations or removals.
The significance of this fact will be dealt with later; suffice it to say here that the effect of the listing arrived at by the formulators of the received tradition is to raise this perfectly acceptable and important generalization to the status of an unbroken rule, to smooth away all complications and to present a perfectly articulated chain of Muftis, all of whom remained in office until their deaths.
There seem in fact, however, to be two exceptions to this general rule, namely Molla Yegan, who almost certainly resigned the office, and Abdulkerim, who must either have resigned or been removed from it if the facts given in the  he was appointed Mufti in the time of Mehmed II and died in the time of Bayezid II — are correct.
As noted in the previous chapter, Mustakimzade positively rejects the Muftilik of Molla Yegan, and the later authors for the most part simply ignore him.
In the case of Abdulkerim, Mustakimzade takes refuge in vagueness, seemingly even questioning Abdulkerim's claim to the Muftilik, while the other authors ignore one set of facts in the early sources, those concerning the period of his Muftilik, and choose rather to link his Muftilik with another fact also mentioned in the early sources, that concerning his death.
In doing so they  appear to have been guilty of idealizing the origins and early development of an institution which was in later times vastly important but which was, at least in this particular respect, rather less than ideal.
One may summarize the conclusions reached with respect to, and within the terms of, the traditional account of the Muftilik as follows:(a) that Fahreddin Acemi remained as Mufti, whether in Edirne or Istanbul, until his death, which occurred probably not later than 873/1468;(b) that he was succeeded by Abdulkerim, who seems likely to have resigned or been removed about 878/1473–4;(c) that Molla Husrev succeeded to the office about 878/1473–4 and held it until his death in 885/1480–1;(d) that he was succeeded by Molla Gurani in 885/1480–1 (but cf. below, pp. 144–6, 150), who retained the office until his death in 893/1488; and (e) that Molla Arab succeeded Molla Gurani in that year and remained Mufti until his death in 901/1495–6.
It is important to emphasize that the discussion thus far has been developed, and the above conclusions have been reached, within the framework of the traditional account, which rests upon certain crucial assumptions common not only to the writers connected with the traditional account but to certain others not connected with the tradition as well.
These assumptions may be summarized as follows:(a) that the  account of how Molla Husrev came to the Muftilik is at least broadly correct;(b) that the Muftilik passed in an uncomplicated manner from Fahreddin Acemi to the Mufti of Istanbul (though, as has been seen, there is a division of opinion over whether the latter was Abdulkerim or Molla Husrev);(c) that Abdulkerim did hold the office of Mufti, that is, the Muftilik of Istanbul (though again there is disagreement about when he held it).
The basis of a very different view of the history of the Muftilik, however, from its origins to the end of the reign of Mehmed II, is laid by Katib Celebi in the form of a cryptic list of Seyhulislams  in his  tawarikh.
Though his list and its implications have been largely ignored by writers on the Muftilik, apart from a passing nod from Mustakimzade, his view was adopted directly, indirectly or independently by  Hezarfen, d'Ohsson and Hammer, and echoes of it are occasionally found in other authors.
The list, as given in the  extends well beyond the period under discussion, indeed well beyond Katib Celebi's own death, to the 1140s/1730s, but the only controversial part of immediate concern is the very beginning, which runs as follows:
Hizir Bey ibn Celal.
On the conquest of Istanbul, the office of Multi was made an adjunct to the kadilik  He died in 863.
Molla Husrev, Mehmed ibn Feramez [sic].
He united [the Muftilik]with the kadilik until 877.
Then the Muftilik  was made an adjunct to the teaching of Molla Arab.
The chronogram for the death of Molla Husrev is .
[885].
Molla Abdulkerim.
He became Mufti in Edirne and died in [8]79.
Molla Ali el-Arabi.
While muderris at the Sahn, the Muftilik (fetva) was made an adjunct, and he taught and gave fetvas.
Molla Husrev became solely [Mufti](mustakil olup) for a second time and continued until he died in [8]85.
Molla Gurani Ahmed ibn Ismail continued until his death in 893.
Molla Ali el-Arabi became solely [Mufti]for the second time and died in 901.
Hezarfen, in his listing of the Seyhulislams, as distinct from his discussion of the history of the office where he takes a slightly different view, departs significantly in only one respect from Katib Celebi (at least in so far as can be judged from the one manuscript), namely in his treatment of Abdulkerim and Molla Arab.
He writes:
[Molla Husrev]united [the Muftilik]with the kadilik until 8–1  the text is clearly corrupt].
Then the Muftilik  was made an adjunct to Molla Arab, muderris.
Molla Abdulkerim.
He became Mufti in Edirne and died in 879.
In his place [came]Molla Ali el-Arabi.
While muderris at the Sahn, the Muftilik (fetva) was made an adjunct, and he gave fetvas together with his teaching.
Molla Husrev became solely [Mufti]for a second time…
The most developed exposition of what might be called the Katib Celebi view is to be found in d'Ohsson, who writes:
Ces trois premiers Mouphtys de la Capitale [i.e. Molla Edebali, Tursun Fakih and Fahreddin Acemi], ainsi que leurs successeurs immédiats, n'eurent jamais qu'une priorité de rang sur ceux des provinces.
Mais à l'époque de la conquête de Constantinople en 1453, Mohammed II…créa dans la même année Mouphty et Cady de cette nouvelle Capitale le célèbre **48;38570;gap: il le  décora même du titre pompeux de  qui veut dire l'ancien ou le Sénieur de l'Islamisme, et lui donna, entr'autres prérogatives, une juridiction assez étendue sur tous les Mouphtys des provinces.
Ce fut là l'origine de cette grandeur à laquelle s'élevèrent insensiblement les .
mort en 1459, eut pour successeur  qui réunit à la dignité de Mouphty la magistrature de Constantinople, celle de Ghalata et de Scutari, et l'office de Muderriss de sainte Sophie…
Des raisons particulières l'obligèrent à donner sa démission en 1472; et alors Mohammed II, séparant les deux charges de Mouphty et de Cady, déféra la première à Abd'ul-Kerim Efendy.
Taking a basically similar view, Hammer writes:
La dignité de premier moufti fut conférée, après la prise de Constantinople, au juge de la nouvelle capitale, Djelalzade Kizrbeg Tschelebi; par la suite elle tomba en partage au juge d'Andrinople, Abdoulkerim, et enfin à un mouderris ou recteur d'une haute école, Ali-al-Arabi.
The view for which Katib Celebi's list forms the basis thus differs, broadly, in two important respects from the traditional account based on Mustakimzade: first, on the question of the origins of the office, by naming Hizir Bey, in Istanbul, as the first Mufti and by implication denying the Muftiliks of Molla Fenari, Molla Yegan and Fahreddin Acemi (though d'Ohsson does make some attempt, if an inaccurate and and unpersuasive one, to take account of the tradition of an earlier Muftilik); and second, on the question of how and when Molla Husrev became Mufti, this question involving also the circumstances of the Muftiliks of Abdulkerim and Molla Arab.
On this latter point it may be noted that the Katib Celebi view runs counter to all three basic assumptions lying behind the "traditional" Mustakimzade view, as summarized above.
Taking the question of the origins of the office first, one may adduce one important piece of negative evidence against the claim that Hizir Bey became Mufti of Istanbul, namely the fact that, with one possible exception, none of the important Turkish sources relative to the ulema in general-including Katib Celebi himself, in his  — or to the Muftilik in particular mentions that Hizir Bey became Mufti of Istanbul, although such as deal with his career are agreed that he became kadi of Istanbul at the conquest.
There is nothing in any of the standard sources to suggest that the undoubted eminence Hizir Bey enjoyed in the last years of his life derived from anything other than his excellence in  and his position as kadi of the newly conquered city.
The one important possible exception to the general silence of the Turkish biographical sources on the Muftilik of Hizir Bey is the account of Mustakimzade.
One can say only a possible exception since Mustakimzade is extremely guarded in his treatment of Hizir Bey.
He appends to his article on Molla Husrev a brief notice of the life of Hizir Bey, introduced by the phrase  ( "one thing calls to mind another" ), a phrase with which he later introduces his account of Seyh Abdulkerim, the holder of an ad hominem muftilik in the reign of Suleyman.
Unlike the passages on Seyh Abdulkerim, Molla Abdulkerim or Molla Yegan, however, about all of whom Mustakimzade has some sort of reservation, this passage on Hizir Bey contains no reference to  or any derivation of it; and it would seem from his particular vagueness in relation to Hizir Bey and his failure to accord him a separate article that while he is aware of the claim that Hizir Bey became Mufti, he is unsure of his relationship to the main stream of Muftis and probably regards him as not having been part of it.
Telling though the silence of the majority of the Turkish sources is, however, it is neither possible nor necessary to reject outright the assertion of Katib Celebi and those who follow him that Hizir Bey was in some sense mufti of Istanbul.
It is not at all unlikely that at the conquest, Mehmed II  appointed someone mufti in the newly conquered city; and since the sources seem not to mention the appointment of anyone else to the post, it may possibly be that it was made an  for Hizir Bey.
Such an interpretation is not inconsistent with Katib Celebi's brief account, particularly if it is remembered that by his time the Seyhulislam had long since been the Mufti of Istanbul and that he may therefore have concerned himself with trying to sketch the history of the office only in so far as it related to that city.
If it is the case that Hizir Bey did indeed hold a muftilik that, in effect, Fahreddin Acemi was Mufti in Edirne while Hizir Bey was mufti in Istanbul the situation might constitute a parallel to the earlier one of the possibly overlapping tenures of Molla Yegan in Bursa and Fahreddin Acemi in Edirne.
One must, however, question d'Ohsson's and Hammer's statements that Hizir Bey became the premier Mufti, and, as is explicit in d'Ohsson and implicit in Hammer, that it is in his time that the office of Mufti originated or at least first gained importance.
If the muftilik of Hizir Bey is to be understood in this sense, that he became in fact the Mufti, the silence of the great majority of Turkish sources is surely extraordinary.
It is perhaps possible that they might fail to mention that a purely functional muftilik had been made an  for Hizir Bey; but it seems unlikely in the extreme that they should fail to mention his having held a post which, as has been suggested in the previous chapter, was already one of great prestige and which, by Taskopruzade's time less than a century later, was certainly one of considerable power.
There is, moreover, one piece of evidence which appears to put beyond question the pre-eminence of Fahreddin Acemi in the period following the conquest, namely the circumcision celebration for Mehmed II's two sons, held in Edirne in 861/1457, to which reference has already been made in the previous chapter.
It was suggested there that the fact that Fahreddin Acemi was seated in the place of honour, at the sultan's right hand, indicated the pre-eminence of the Mufti at least in matters related to .
More important in the present connection, however, is the fact that one of those sitting in a seat of lesser importance, facing the sultan, was Hizir Bey.
If Hizir Bey held a muftilik in Istanbul at all, then-and this is by no means certain-the reasonable conclusion both from the silence of the great majority of Turkish sources on the subject of Hizir Bey's muftilik and from the evidence indicating Fahreddin Acemi's preeminence vis-a-vis Hizir Bey is that the claims made by d'Ohsson and Hammer for Hizir Bey's importance in his capacity as mufti are at the least exaggerated.
Much the same line of argument applies to the further assertion by Katib Celebi and those who follow him that Molla Husrev succeeded Hizir Bey as  Mufti.
If one accepts the statement that Hizir Bey was mufti in Istanbul, then it is natural to suppose that Molla Husrev succeeded him; but as with Hizir Bey, so with Molla Husrev, there is no positive evidence, nor even any suggestive indication, that Molla Husrev was in any sense Mufti before his return from Bursa: there is nothing, in short, to suggest that he became Mufti in any way other than that reported by the .
As noted above, there is a measure of agreement between the  account (particularly Mecdi) and Katib Celebi that the year 877 marks a break in Molla Husrev's career.
According to the considerably modified traditional"account outlined above, Abdulkerim would, of course, have been Mufti both before and alter this break, from Fahreddin Acemi's death until Molla Husrev's return from Bursa to assume the office.
The treatment of Abdulkerim by Katib Celebi and his followers is consistent (and interesting) in so far as they rightly, one believes, place his Muftilik in the time of Mehmed II, in accordance with the  and as opposed to the view of the unmodified traditional account; but on the assumption that the available texts of Katib Celebi and Hezarfen are accurate, the writers connected with the Katib Celebi view appear to differ amongst themselves about the nature and timing of his Muftilik, possibly because Katib Celebi"s list is particularly cryptic and, at first sight, confused at this point.
Having noted that Molla Husrev held the combined posts until 877, Katib Celebi then asserts first that the office of Mufti was made an adjunct to Molla Arab's teaching at the Sahn; second, he unaccountably inserts a chronogram for Molla Husrev's death; third, he makes the unadorned and apparently irrelevant statement that Abdulkerim was Multi in Edirne and died in 879; and fourth, he returns to Molla Arab, essentially repeating what he has already said.
In what appears to be an attempt to make sense of this, Hezarfen adds  ( "in his place" ) between steps three and four so that it appears in his account that Molla Arab succeeded Abdulkerim.
This interpretation — in essence, that Abdulkerim succeeded Molla Husrev and Molla Arab succeeded Abdulkerim in fact conflicts with Katib Celebi's first assertion (which Hezarfen also includes) but appears none the less to have been adopted, directly or not, by both d'Ohsson and Hammer.
A more obvious interpretation, however, is that Katib Celebi's apparently irrelevant statement about Abdulkerim is very much to the point, that he is aware of Mecdi's assertion that Abdulkerim was  Mufti in Istanbul and is contradicting it, saying rather that Molla Arab succeeded Molla Husrev in Istanbul and that Abdulkerim was Mufti in Edirne, not Istanbul, and has nothing to do with the matter.
One may deal briefly with Molla Arab's supposed first period of office as Mufti, simply saying that there appears to be no more evidence for it than for the rest of Katib Celebi's construction of the facts concerning the history of the office in the early years, which is not, however, to say that the statement (or the construction, for that matter) may be dismissed entirely (cf. below, n. 166, for example).
It is not impossible, for example, that Abdulkerim and Molla Arab served successively as Mufti in the years between Fahreddin Acemi's death and Molla Husrev's return from Bursa.
Katib Celebi's assertion that Abdulkerim was Mufti in Edirne, however, adds yet another unknown to an already difficult set of equations since it suggests the possibility that there may have been a separate official muftilik in Edirne (and perhaps by extension in Bursa) concurrently with the Muftilik of Istanbul — this would run contrary to the underlying assumption of the traditional view that the Mufti was the Mufti of the capital, successively Bursa, Edirne and Istanbul some of the holders of which may have become, with the passage of time, confused with the holders of the Muftilik of Istanbul.
Hezarfen, in a later passage than his list of Muftis, where he essentially simply follows Katib Celebi, is explicit on the point of separate muftiliks, though perhaps vague on the point of how official they were, saying: Until the end of the reign of Mehmed II there was not all that much glory and renown in the office of Mufti  dignity and regard were for the most part dependent upon the person [who held it].
It is even related that Molla Tusi combined the Muftilik with teaching at the Sahn.
In that time the ulema of the three cities gave fetvas on an equal basis .
In Bursa, Seyh Mehmed-i Cezeri and Semseddin Fenari and Molla Yegane [sic]and his son Yusuf Bali and Bahaeddin Omer and Yar-Ali-i Sirazi and Hoca-zade and Husam-zade and Ali Celebi and Mufti Ahmed Pasa gave fetvas as far as the year 929 [1552–3]; in Edirne, Molla Haydar-i Acemi and the aforementioned Molla Fahreddin and Molla Abdulkerim and Umm Veled [gave fetvas]; and Molla Gurani and Molla Ali-i Arab, and [Ali]Cemali became independent muftis in Istanbul…
It is difficult to be certain from the passage whether Hezarfen believes there to have been official muftiliks at all in the fifteenth century, but he is clear on the point that the arrangements for  whether formal or informal, were similar in the three cities.