

CONSIDERATION AND PRIVITY OF CONTRACT
CONSIDERATION
Introductory
Corbin, ‘Does a Pre-existing Duty Defeat Consideration? —Recent Noteworthy Decisions,’ 27 Yale L.J.
362, 376
In all contract law our problem is to determine what facts will operate to create legal duties and other legal relations.
We find at the outset that bare words of promise do not so operate.
Our problem then becomes one of determining what facts must accompany promissory words in order to create a legal duty (and other legal relations).
We must know what these facts are in order that we can properly predict the enforcement of reparation, either specific or compensatory, in case of non-performance.
We are looking for a sufficient cause or reason for the legal enforcement of a promise.
This problem was also before the Roman lawyers and it must exist in all systems of law.
With us it is called the problem of consideration.
C. J. Hamson, The Reform of Consideration (1938) 54 L.Q.R. 233, 234, 242
What is today the significance of consideration in the law of simple contract?
So far from being an additional and unnecessary mystery, an accidental tom-tit in an otherwise rational theory of contract, consideration in its essential nature is an aspect merely of the fundamental notion of bargain, other aspects of which, no less but no more important, are offer and acceptance.
Consideration, offer and acceptance are an indivisible trinity, facets of one identical notion which is that of bargain.
Indeed, consideration may conveniently be explained as merely the acceptance viewed from the offeror's side.
Acceptance is defined to be the doing of that act (which may be the giving of a promise or the rendering of a performance) which is requested by the offeror in exchange for his promise; it is the response to the offer.
An act done at the request of the offeror in response to his promise is consideration; and consideration in its essence is nothing else but response to such a request.
To a gratuitous promise the common law notion of offer and acceptance does not apply.
We can no doubt separate offer, acceptance and consideration for our convenience in treating of them: but they are logical and interdependent entities abstracted from the one entire reality which is bargain.
We can no more abolish one without destroying the others than we can think of a circle without a circumference…
If it were clear when a party has formed an intention to incur legal obligation, if a person did commonly define the obligation he desired to assume in terms which left little doubt as to its nature, it would be unnecessary, and indeed merely foolish, to require an additional test of  that intention.
It is because persons commonly do not so define their intention, and because the common law recognises that fact, that the common law requires a test.
To dismiss the doctrine of consideration as not worth serious attention because
‘it came into being not as an essential part of a theory of the law of contract but more or less fortuitously as an expedient adopted in order to determine when persons injured by the breach of a promise ought to be allowed to bring an action’(paragraph 18 of the 6th interim report of the Law Revision Committee, 1937 Cmd. 5449)
is, to my mind, to misunderstand what is an essential part of a practical law of contract.
P. S. Atiyah, Consideration in Contracts (1971)
…to talk of abolition of the doctrine of consideration is nonsensical.
Consideration means a reason for the enforcement of a promise.
Nobody can seriously propose that all promises should become enforceable; to abolish the doctrine of consideration, therefore, is simply to require the Courts to begin all over again the task of deciding what promises are to be enforceable.
They will, of course, have to set new technical justifications for this task, and the obvious one that lies to hand is the ‘intent to create legal relations.’
No doubt there is something to be said for beginning this task all over again, and for using a new technique for the purpose.
Changes in social and commercial conditions, and changes in the moral values of the community, mean that the Courts will not always find the same reasons for the enforcement of promises to be good today as their forbears did; equally it is likely that they will often find good reasons for the enforcement of promises where their predecessors did not.
Moreover, I think there is less likelihood of the ‘intent to create legal relations’ formula ossifying into a ‘doctrine’; though there is the converse danger that its application may create uncertainty as to what promises will be enforceable.
But I question whether the ‘intent to create legal relations’ formula will in the long run work any better than the rules of consideration.
Pollock, Principles of Contract (13th ed.) p. 133
The following description of Consideration was given by the Exchequer Chamber in 1875: ‘A valuable consideration, in the sense of the law, may consist either in some right, interest, profit, or benefit accruing to the one party, or some forbearance, detriment, loss, or responsibility, given, suffered, or undertaken by the other’: Currie v. Misa (1875) L.R. 10 Ex. at 162.
The second branch of this judicial description is really the more important one.
Consideration means not so much that one party is profited as that the other abandons some legal right in the present, or limits his legal freedom of action in the future, as an inducement for the promise of the first.
It does not matter whether the party accepting the consideration has any apparent benefit thereby or not: it is enough that he accepts it, and that the party giving it does thereby undertake some burden, or lose something which in contemplation of law may be of value.
An act or forbearance of the one party, or the promise thereof, is the price for which the promise of the other is bought, and the promise thus  given for value is enforceable.
(Words adopted by Lord Dunedin in Dunlop v. Selfridge, below, p. 280.)
J. C. Smith, The Law of Contract—Alive or Dead? 13, The Law Teacher (1979), 73, 77
The language of benefit and detriment is, and I believe long has been, out of date.
So is the idea that consideration must be an economic benefit of some kind.
All that is necessary is that the defendant should, expressly or impliedly, ask for something in return for his promise, an act or a promise by the offeree.
If he gets what he has asked for, then the promise is given for consideration unless there is some vitiating factor.
Though lip-service has been paid to the notions of benefit and detriment, they have no substantial meaning, in the light of the principle that the court will not inquire into the adequacy of the consideration.
If I make a promise to you in return for your supplying me with three, quite useless, chocolate wrappers, which I will instantly throw away, there is a perfectly good contract provided that the promise was seriously intended (below, p. 205).
I have got what I asked for and that is a sufficient ‘benefit.’
You have parted with something that you might have kept and that is a sufficient ‘detriment.’
But the wrappers are of no value to me, and you are perhaps glad to be rid of them.
As for economic value, the judges have recognised, for over a century, the validity of the contract to pay £100 if the promisee will walk to York (a famous example given by Brett J. in Great Northern Rly. v. Witham (1873) L.R.9C.P 16); and no one has ever demonstrated what economic value there is in walking to York.
Similarly with promises of reward for not smoking;(Hamer v. Sidway 27 N.E. 256; 124 N.Y.
538, 1891) or by the father of an illegitimate child to pay the mother an allowance if she proves to him that the child is well looked after and happy (below, p. 224).
Gratuitous Promises and Conditional Gifts
Hamson above, p. 195 stresses the need for a request.
See also Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co., above p. 30, Shadwell v. Shadwell, below, p. 225 and Combe v. Combe below, p. 255.
These authorities suggest that a promise to pay money, or to do any other act, in a certain event but without any express or implied request to the promisee to bring about, or to promise to bring about, that event, is made without consideration.
In Dickinson v. Abel [1969]1 W.L.R. 295;[1969]1 All E.R.
484, W told A that he was willing to pay £100,000 for a certain farm.
A had no proprietary interest in the farm but had transmitted earlier offers for it to the bank who were trustees of it.
A asked ‘What's in it for me?’ and was told that he would receive £10,000 if W bought it for £100,000 or less.
W did not specify any service to be rendered by A and A did not know what was in W's mind.
The sale took place and A received £10,000.
Held that it was not taxable because it was not paid under an enforceable contract.
Pennycuick J. found that there was no implied request for any service or promise of service [for example, to use his best endeavours to persuade the bank to sell at £100,000 or to act as a go-between—cf. the putting in touch with X in British Bank for Foreign Trade v. Novinex (above, p. 94)].
The judge obviously thought that A had told a tall story, but he had to accept the facts in the Case Stated by the Crown.
A similar problem provoked a difference of judicial opinion in Wyatt v. Kreglinger and Fernau [1933]1 K.B.
793.
The defendant firm lawfully terminated the employment of the plaintiff who had worked for them for many years.
The plaintiff had no right to any pension.
The defendants wrote to him and told him that they had decided to pay him a pension of £200 a year and that he was at liberty to enter into any other employment or enter any business, ‘except in the wool trade.’
The plaintiff did not enter the wool trade but after nine years the defendants stopped the pension.
The plaintiff claimed that they were bound by contract to continue the pension.
All the judges in the Court of Appeal were agreed that, if   there was a contract, it was illegal as being in restraint of trade.
Scrutton L.J., agreeing with the trial judge, Macnaghten J., thought there was no contract.
The pension was a voluntary gratuitous payment ant the words’ except in the wool trade’were merely an intimation to Mr Wyatt that if he did enter the wool trade he must not expect them to continue the pension.
Slesser and Greer L.JJ. thought there was a contract but that it was illegal as being in restraint of trade.
If a gratuitous unconditional promise is revocable should it become irrevocable because a condition is added?
Suppose that D promises to pay his widowed or divorced daughter-in-law, P, to pay her £5000 a year.
Could he not withdraw the promise on finding himself in straitened circumstances, or on falling out with P, or because she had married a wealthy man? suppose then that D's promise is to pay the money’ so long as you remain unmarried.’
Is this merely a definition of the limits of a gratuitous promise (as in Thomas v Thomas, infra) or is it an offer to contract, the consideration being P's forbearance from marriage?
Might it be different if D, on hearing of P's intention to remarry, were to say, ‘Please do not remarry.
I will pay you £5000 a year so long as you remain unmarried.’
In this case D is clearly asking a price for his promise but is he in the former case?
Is there a difference between requesting an act and specifying an act to be done in return for the promise?
Or are these two ways of describing the same thing?
See  Consideration in Contracts, pp. 33–34
Problems
1.
William is very worried as to whether he will pass his solicitor's final examination which he has already failed twice.
In order to allay his anxiety his father says, 2 If you fail again I will take you into my book-binding business as a partner.’
William fails again.
His father now refuses to give him the partnership.
Advise William
Would your answer be different if William's father had said, ‘If you pass the examination I will take you, etc.?’
2. (a)
A who has a new Rolls-Royce car, says to B, I will give you my car if you fetch it from the garage.’
(b)
A who has an ancient and dilapidated Rolls-Royce immobilised in his garage says to B,’ I will give you my car if you fetch it from the garage.’
In what circumstances, if any, would a contract result in either of the above situations?
Consideration —Executed, Executory, and Past: and Motive
THOMAS v. THOMAS
The plaintiff, the widow of John Thomas, sued the defendants, his executors, for breach of a written agreement to convey her a cottage.
The agreement recited that John had left all his estate to his executors by his will but that, shortly before his death, he had declared in the presence of several witnesses that he wished his widow to have the cottage for her life or so long as she continued a widow; and that, though this wish was never put into writing, the executors were convinced that it was his desire and were willing and desirous that it should be put into effect.
The agreement stated that ‘in consideration of such dfesire’ the executors would convey the cottage to the widow for her life or so long as she  should continue a widow.
It was provided and further agreed that the widow would pay to the executors ‘the sum of £1 yearly, towards the ground-rent, payable in respect of the said dwelling house,’ and would keep it in good repair.
The executors refused to convey the cottage.
A jury awarded the widow £100 damages and the Queen's Bench discharged a rule to enter a non-suit.
PATTESON J.: The cause for the gift was unquestionably respect for the memory of the testator.
But we must not confound motive with consideration.
A consideration, such as is recognised and known to our law, means a consideration of some value, moving from the plaintiff.
Mere respect for the memory and wishes of a testator cannot be in any way construed as such.
It is then argued, that, this being so, there is no consideration for the agreement at all, and that it is an agreement for a voluntary gift on certain conditions; but, looking at the agreement, we find, not a mere proviso, but an express agreement by the plaintiff to pay £1 towards a certain ground-rent, which apparently has been for the first time apportioned, and to pay it to the defendant, who is, I presume, liable to the whole ground-rent.
It is not, therefore, a burden incident to the taking of the lease; if it were, it would be to pay to the superior landlord.
Then again, as to the repairs: it may be that the original lease from the ground landlord contained covenants compelling repairs to be made by the lessee; but we know nothing of such a lease or such covenants.
For anything we know, it is an agreement entered into for the first time, in consequence of this instrument….
Questions
1.
What was the consideration to support the defendant's promise:
(a)
expressed in the agreement?
(b)
found by the court?
2.
What promise, express or implied, was made by the plaintiff?
3.
Both Lord Denman C.J. and Patteson J. emphasise the need to distinguish between consideration and the motive which induces entry into a contract.
Is not the price which one party is to receive for his undertaking a motive for his entry into the contract with the other party?
Note
The court assumes that, if the ground-rent was ‘a burden incident to the taking of the lease’ or (Lord Denman C.J.)‘a necessary burden on the premises,’the plaintiff's promise to pay it would not have been a sufficient consideration: a promise to make a gift of onerous property is still a mere promise to make a gift, though the promisee agrees to assume the burden.
This is questionable.
In Price v.Jenkins(1877)5Ch.D. 619, C.A. (followed in Johnsey Estates Ltd. v. Lewis & Manley (Engineering) Ltd. (1987) 54 P. & C.R. 296, it was held that a settlement of leasehold property was a conveyance for valuable consideration because the donee would have to undertake payment of the rent and performance of the covenants.
James L.J.
asked, ‘Can an assignment of leasehold property ever be strictly speaking voluntary?’ in Cheale v. Kenward (1858) 27 L.J.
Ch. 784 it was held that a promise to transfer shares in a company on which no deposit or other sum had been paid was made for consideration when the transferee agreed to do all acts necessary to relieve the transferor of liability in respect of the shares.
And cf.
Merritt v. Merritt, above, p. 185, and Bojtar v. Parker (1979) 99 D.L.R. 3d, 147, Ont.
H.C.J.
Question
Uncle says to nephew: ‘I intend to give you my shares in the Super Company on your twenty-first birthday.
They are worth about a million.
You will have to pay calls of about £500.
Will you accept them?’
Nephew replies with alacrity that he will.
Has Uncle contracted to transfer the shares?
If he does transfer them, has he made a gift or a contract?
LAMPLEIGH v. BRATHWAIT
Common Bench (1615) Hob.
105; Moore K.B.
866; 1 Sm.
L.C. (13th ed.) 148; 80 E.R.
255
In assumpsit in the Common Bench, it was alleged that Brathwait, having killed a man, asked the plaintiff to use his endeavours to obtain him a pardon, wherefore the plaintiff did go to Royston to the King to get the pardon and, in consideration of this service, the defendant promised the plaintiff £100.
To this declaration, it was demurred that the consideration was executed before the promise was made…….
Nicols, Winch and Hobart held that the action was well laid because it was alleged that there was a request before the endeavour was made and where there is such a precedent request, a subsequent assumpsit after the execution of the consideration is binding.
First it was agreed, that a mere voluntary curtesy will not have a consideration to uphold an assumpsit.
But if that curtesy were moved by a suit or request of the party that gives the assumpsit, it will bind, for the promise, though it follows, yet it is not naked, but couples itself with the suit before, and the merits of the party procured by that suit, which is the difference.
(A second point, upon which Warburton J. based a dissenting judgment is omitted.)
Note
In Kennedy v. Broun (1863) 13 C.B. 677 (Common Pleas) Erle C.J. said that in Lampleigh v. Brathwait, ‘it was assumed that the journeys which the plaintiff performed at the request of the defendant, and the other services he rendered, would have been sufficient to make any promise binding if it had been connected therewith in one contract; the peculiarity of the decision lies in connecting a subsequent promise with a prior consideration after it had been executed.
Probably, at the present day, such service on such request would have raised a promise by implication to pay what it was worth, and the subsequent promise of a sum certain would have been evidence for the jury to fix the amount.’
Re CASEY'S PATENTS, STEWART v. CASEY
Court of Appeal [1892]1 Ch. 104; 61 L.J.Ch. 61; 66 L.T. 93; 40 W.R. 180
J. Stewart and T. Charlton wrote to the defendant, Casey, the following letter:
‘Stewart and Charlton's Patents
Dear Sir,
We now have pleasure in stating that in consideration of your services as the practical manager in working both our patents as above for transit by steamer or for any land purposes, we hereby agree to give you one third share of the patents above-mentioned, the same to take effect from this date.
This is in addition to and in combination with our agreement of the 29th November last.’
They later transferred the letters patent to Casey during some negotiations which eventually came to nothing.
After the death of Stewart, the present plaintiffs—his executor and Charlton—asked Casey to return the letters patent: Casey refused, claiming to be entitled to possession as owner of a third share, and registered the letter set out above.
In the present action, the plaintiffs claimed delivery up of the letters patent and damages for their detention.
Romer J. dismissed the action  and his judgment was affirmed by the Court of Appeal (Lindley, Bowen and Fry L.JJ.).
Inter alia, it was argued before the Court of Appeal that there was no assignment of a share to Casey because there was no consideration for the agreement contained in the letter.
BOWEN L.J.:…
But then it was said by Mr. Daniel, ‘But there is no consideration, and this document is not under seal.’
We will see if there is consideration.
The consideration is stated, such as it is.
It is, ‘in consideration of your services as the practical manager in working our patents as above for transit by steamer.’
Then says Mr. Daniel, ‘Yes, but that is a future consideration and a future consideration, if nothing were done under it or nothing was proved to be done, would fail.’
The answer to that is that the consideration is not the rendering of the services, as is plain from the fact that the document is to take effect in Equity from the date.
The consideration must be something other than rendering services in the future.
It is the promise to render them which those words imply, that constitutes the consideration; and the promise to render future services, if an effectual promise, is certainly good consideration.
Then, driven from that, Mr. Daniel said, ‘Oh! but it is past services that it means, and past services are not a consideration for anything.’
Well, that raises the old question—or might raise it, if there was not an answer to it-of Lampleigh v. Brathwait (above, p. 200), a subject of great interest to every scientific lawyer, as to whether a past service will support a promise.
I do not propose to discuss that question, or, perhaps, I should not have finished this week.
I should have to examine the whole state of the law as to, and the history of the subject of, consideration, which, I need hardly say, I do not propose to do.
But the answer to Mr. Daniel's point is dear.
Even if it were true, as some scientific students of law believe, that a past service cannot support a future promise, you must look at the document and see if the promise cannot receive a proper effect in some other way.
Now, the fact of a past service raises an implication that at the time it was rendered it was to be paid for, and, if it was a service which was to be paid for, when you get in the subsequent document a promise to pay, that promise may be treated either as an admission which evidences or as a positive bargain which fixes the amount of that reasonable remuneration on the faith of which the service was originally rendered.
So that here for past services there is ample justification for the promise to give the third share.
Therefore, this is an equitable assignment which cannot be impeached.
Questions
1.
Would every ‘past service’ raise an implication that it was to be paid for, so as to allow action on a subsequent promise of payment?
2. (a)
What is the difference between (i) a promise which evidences the amount of payment and (ii) a positive bargain which fixes the amount of reasonable remuneration?(b) A does services for B for which a reasonable remuneration would be £100. (i) Without discussion, B promises to give A £500 for his services;(ii) A demands £500, B offers £100.
A says he will accept £250.
B agrees to pay £250
Consider the consequences in each case, if B should subsequently refuse to give A the money.
Note
The principles of Lampleigh v. Brathwait as interpreted in Re Casey's Patents were applied by the Privy Council in Pao On v. Lau Yiu Long,[19801 A.C. 614, below, pp. 229 and 650.
Lord Scarman said:
‘An act done before the giving of a promise to make a payment or to confer some other benefit can sometimes be consideration for the promise.
The act must have been done at the promisors’ request: the parties must have understood that the act was to be remunerated either by a payment or the conferment of some other benefit: and payment, or the conferment of a benefit, must have been legally enforceable had it been promised in advance.
All three features are present in this case…….
Their Lordships agree that the mere existence or recital of a prior request is not sufficient in itself to convert what is prima facie past consideration into sufficient consideration in law to support a promise, as they have indicated, it is only the first of three necessary preconditions.
As for the second of those preconditions, whether the act done at the request of the promisor raises an implication of promised remuneration or other return is simply one of the construction of the words of the contract in the circumstances of its making.’
The Board held that, on the somewhat complex facts of the particular case, it mattered not whether the subsequent promise was regarded as the best evidence of the benefit intended to be conferred or as the positive bargain, the benefit on the faith of which the promise was given.
Question
Is it strictly true to say that ‘An act done before the giving of a promise to make a payment or to confer some benefit can sometimes be consideration for the promise’?
Where the promise is the ‘best evidence’ it only expresses an implied promise (implied in the request).
Where it is ‘a positive bargain,’ the consideration is to be found in that bargain.
Cf. question 2(b) above, p. 201.
ROSCORLA v. THOMAS
Queen's Bench (1842) 3 Q.B.
234; 2 G. & D. 508; 11 L.J.Q.B. 214; 6 Jur. 929; 61 R.R. 216; 114 E.R.
496
The relevant facts appear in the judgment of the court delivered by LORD DENMAN C.J.:
This was an action of assumpsit for breach of warranty of the soundness of a horse.
The first count of the declaration, upon which alone the question arises, stated that, in consideration that the plaintiff, at the request of the defendant, had bought of the defendant a horse for the sum of £30, the defendant promised that it was sound and free from vice.
And it was objected, in arrest of judgment, that the precedent executed consideration was insufficient to support the subsequent promise.
And we are of opinion that the objection must prevail.
It may be taken as a general rule, subject to exceptions, not applicable to this case, that the promise must be co-extensive with the consideration.
In the present case, the only promise that would result from the consideration, as stated, and be co-extensive with it, would be to deliver the horse upon request.
The precedent sale, without a warranty, though at the request of the defendant, imposes no other duty or obligation upon him.
It is clear, therefore, that the consideration stated would not raise an implied promise by the defendant that the horse was sound or free from vice.
But the promise in the present case must be taken to be, as in fact it was, express: and the question is, whether that fact will warrant the extension of the promise beyond that which would be implied by law; and whether the consideration, though insufficient to raise an implied promise, will nevertheless support an express one.
And we think that it will not.
The cases in which it has been held that, under certain circumstances, a consideration insufficient to raise an implied promise will nevertheless support an express one, will be found collected and reviewed in the note (a) to Wennall v. Adney (3 Bos. & Pul.
249), and in the case of Eastwood v. Kenyon ((1840) 11 Ad. & E. 438).
There are cases of voidable contracts subsequently ratified, of debts barred by operation of law, subsequently revived, and of equitable and moral obligations, which, but for some rule of law, would of themselves have been sufficient to raise an implied promise.
All these cases are distinguishable from, and indeed, inapplicable to, the present, which appears to us to fall within the general rule, that a consideration past and executed will support no other promise than such as would be implied by law.
The rule for arresting the judgment upon the first count must therefore be made absolute.
Rule absolute.
Question
If the precedent sale was at the request of the defendant, who later made the express promise of the guarantee, why should not the guarantee have been enforceable under Lampleigh v. Brathwait?
Law Reform Committee, 6th Interim Report, para. 32
The inconvenience of this rule (sic.
that past consideration is no consideration) is frequently evaded by means of the fiction that the promise made subsequent to the consideration merely fixes the amount due under an earlier promise deemed to exist contemporaneously with the consideration.
In a very important class of case, namely, actions upon cheques and other bills of exchange, the rule does not apply and we can see no reason why it should apply at all.
The fact that the promisor has already received consideration for his promise before he makes it, so far from enabling him to break his promise seems to us to form an additional reason for making him keep it.
We therefore recommend the abolition of this rule.
Question
What is meant here by ‘past consideration’?
(See Hamson, 54 L.Q.R. 233, 251–253.)
Bills of Exchange Act 1882
Section 27(1).
Valuable consideration for a bill may be constituted by:
(a)
Any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract;
(b)
An antecedent debt or liability.
Such a debt or liability is deemed valuable consideration whether the bill is payable on demand or at a future time.
(2)
Where value has at any time been given for a bill the holder is deemed to be a holder for value as regards the acceptor and all parties to the bill who became parties prior to such time.
(3)
Where the holder of a bill has a lien on it arising either from contract or by implication of law, he is deemed to be a holder for value to the extent of the sum for which he has a lien.
Section 30(1).
Every party whose signature appears on a bill is prima facie deemed to have become a party thereto for value.
Note
Atiyah, op. cit.(pp. 34–38), referring to the bills of exchange position before the 1882 Act, to ‘golden handshake’ transactions and forbearance to sue, and the one-time ability to enforce a promise to pay a statute-barred debt (abolished by the Limitation Acts) and to enforce a promise to carry out a promise given for consideration during infancy (abolished by the Infants Relief Act 1874) argues that ‘…the rule about past consideration is too broadly stated.
The true position seems to be that something done or promised before the promise sued on is not by itself treated as a sufficient reason for the enforcement of the promise.’
Note the limited nature of the exception created by section 27(1) (b), above.
In Thoni Gesellschaft v. RTP Eqpt. [1979]2 Lloyd's Rep. 282, C.A., a bill for one million Austrian schillings was given by a debtor to his creditor.
Only 400,000 schillings were actually due.
It was held that the creditor could recover only 400,000.
Sufficiency of Consideration
BAINBRIDGE v. FIRMSTONE
Queen's Bench (1838) 1 P. & D. 2; 8 Ad. & El.
743; 1 W.W. & H. 600; 53 R.R. 234; 112 E.R.
1019
Assumpsit.
The declaration stated that, whereas heretofore, to wit, etc., in consideration that the plaintiff, at the request of the defendant, had then consented to allow the defendant to weigh divers, to wit two, boilers of the plaintiff, of great value, etc., defendant promised that he would, within a reasonable time after the said weighing was effected, leave and give up the boilers in as perfect and complete a condition, and as fit for use by plaintiff, as the same were in at the time of the consent so given by plaintiff; and that, although in pursuance of the consent so given, defendant to wit, on, etc., did weigh the same boilers, yet defendant did not nor would, within a reasonable time after the said weighing was effected leave and give up boilers in as perfect, etc., but wholly neglected and refused so to do, although a reasonable time for that purpose had elapsed before the commencement of this suit; and, on the contrary thereof, defendant afterwards, to wit on, etc., took the said boilers to pieces and did not put the same together again but left the same in a detached and divided condition, and in many different pieces, whereby plaintiff hath been put to great trouble, etc.
Plea, non assumpsit.:
On the trial before Lord Denman C.J. at the London sittings after last Trinity term, a verdict was found for the plaintiff.
John Bayley now moved in arrest of judgment.
The declaration shows no consideration.
There should have been either detriment to the plaintiff, or benefit to the defendant: 1 Selwyn's N.P. 45 (9th ed.).
It does not appear that the defendant was to receive any remuneration.
Besides, the word ‘weigh’ is ambiguous.
LORD DENMAN C.J.: It seems to me that the declaration is well enough.
The defendant had some reason for wishing to weigh the boilers; and he  could do so only by obtaining permission from the plaintiff, which he did obtain by promising to return them in good condition.
We need not inquire what benefit he expected to derive.
The plaintiff might have given or refused leave.
PATTERSON J.: The consideration is, that the plaintiff, at the defendant's request, had consented to allow the defendant to weigh the boilers.
I suppose the defendant thought he had some benefit; at any rate, there is a detriment to the plaintiff from his parting with the possession for even so short a time.
WILLIAMS and COLERIDGE n. concurred.
Rule refused.
Consideration Need not be Adequate but must be Sufficient
If the promisor gets what he asks for in return for his promise, he has received sufficient consideration and is bound.
It is immaterial that his promise is far more valuable than the price he has asked for it.
The courts are generally concerned only with the question whether the promisor has made a bargain, not with whether he has made a good bargain.
They will not inquire into the adequacy of the consideration he has asked for and received.
See Mountford v. Scott, above, P.79, Centrovincial Estates plc v. Merchant Investors, above, p. 115, Thomas v. Thomas above, p. 198.
There are, however, certain promises and acts which, for various reasons of policy, are deemed to be of no value in law and which are therefore an insufficient consideration.
Hence the curious but traditional terminology of the law—the consideration need not be adequate but must be sufficient (or real).
If the law deems a promise to be void, it is not sufficient consideration.
A wife's promise not to go to court to seek maintenance from her estranged husband was deemed to be void as being contrary to public policy and, consequently, the husband's promise to pay her money in consideration of her agreeing not to go to court was made without consideration and also void: Gaisberg v. Storr [1950]1 K.B.107, but see now, Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, S.34, below, p. 220.
The doing of an act which there is a public duty to do—for example, attendance as a witness in response to a subpoena (below, p. 217) has similarly been held to have no value in the law and to be insufficient consideration for a promise made in return for the doing of it.
A New Zealand court held that an undertaking by the government not to introduce legislation regarding the advertising of cigarettes was incapable of being consideration for a promise by a tobacco company because the government's promise was of no value: it cannot fetter the legislature: Rothmans of Pall Mall (NZ) Ltd. v. Attorney General [1991]N.Z.L.R. 323.
There are exceptions to the rule that the court will not inquire into the adequacy of the consideration.
These apply in some contracts made by minors and generally where because of a special relationship, one party is able to take unfair advantage of another.
Cf.
Thorne v. Motor Trade Association, below, p. 211.
CHAPPELL & CO.
LTD. v. NESTLE CO.
LTD.
House of Lords [1960]A.C. 87;[1959]3 W.L.R. 168;[1959]2 All E.R.
701; 103 S.J. 561
Nestle Co. entered into a contract with the Hardy Co., manufacturers of  gramophone records, to purchase a number of recordings of a piece of music, ‘Rockin' Shoes,’ the copyright of which was vested in Chappell & Co.
The Hardy Co. supplied the records to Nestle Co. for 4d. each.
Nestle Co. advertised to the public that the records could be obtained from Nestle Co. for 1s. 6d. each together with three wrappers from Nestle's 6d. milk chocolate bars.
The wrappers when received were thrown away.
Section 8(1) of the Copyright Act 1956, permits a person to make a record of a musical work for the purpose of its being sold retail, if he gives notice to the owner of the copyright and pays him a royalty of 6¼ per cent.
of ‘the ordinary retail selling price.
’ The Hardy Co. gave notice of their intention to manufacture stating 1s. 6d. to be the ordinary retail selling price and offered to pay Chappell & Co. royalties thereon, which Chappell and Co. refused.
Chappell & Co. sought an injunction restraining Nestle & Co. and the Hardy Co. from manufacturing the records on the ground that the transaction involved breaches of copyright.
Upjohn J. granted an order restraining the defendants from infringing Chappell & Co. 's copyright.
This decision was reversed by the Court of Appeal (Jenkins and Ormerod L.JJ., Romer L.J.
dissenting).
Chappell & Co. now appealed to the House of Lords.
VISCOUNT SIMONDS (dissenting): It appears to me that, in order to comply with the provisions of section 8 and thus obtain its protection, there are three relevant conditions to be satisfied by the manufacturer of an article which would otherwise be an infringement of copyright.
By ‘relevant conditions’ I mean those conditions about which an issue arises in this case.
First, there must be a ‘sale’ of the article in question: secondly, the sale must be a ‘retail sale’: thirdly, it must be possible to predicate of it that there is an ‘ordinary retailing selling price’of it, for if there is not, an essential part of the prescribed notice cannot be given.
Upon the first point I cannot feel any doubt.
It had not been contended in the course of the case that there was not a sale, until during the debate in your Lordships' House that suggestion was made, and I think that, beyond doubt, anyone, who in answer to the advertisement acquired a record, would say that he had bought it and would be surprised that any doubt should be cast upon what he regarded as an obvious fact.
Whether the consideration or the price that he paid was 1s. 6d. only or 1s. 6d. and three wrappers is a matter not for him but for your Lordships to determine…….
[His Lordship held that the sale was a ‘retail’ sale.]
In my opinion, my Lords, the wrappers are not part of the selling price.
They are admittedly themselves valueless and are thrown away and it was for that reason, no doubt, that Upjohn J. was constrained to say that their value lay in the evidence they afforded of success in an advertising campaign.
That is what they are.
But what, after all, does that mean?
Nothing more than that someone, by no means necessarily the purchaser of the record, has in the past bought not from Nestle's but from a retail shop three bars of chocolate and that the purchaser has thus directly or indirectly acquired the wrappers.
How often he acquires them for himself, how often through another, is pure speculation.
The only thing that is certain is that, if he buys bars of chocolate from a retail shop or acquires the wrappers from another who has bought them, that purchase is not, or at the lowest is not necessarily, part of the same transaction as his subsequent purchase of a record from the manufacturers.…
What can be  easier than for a manufacturer to limit his sales to those members of the public who fulfil the qualification of being this or doing that?
It may be assumed that the manufacturer's motive is his own advantage.
It is possible that he achieves his object.
But that does not mean that the sale is not a retail sale to which the section applies or that the ordinary retail selling price is not the price at which the record is ordinarily sold, in this case 1s. 6d.
I would dismiss the appeal.
LORD KEITH OF AVONHOLME delivered a speech to similar effect.
LORD REID: The manufacturer pays royalty on records which he intends to be sold by retail.
Apart from the last purpose set out in condition (c) he is not entitled to make them for any other purpose.
And if later someone disposes of a record in some other way no part of the royalty can be recovered.
I can now turn to what appears to me to be the crucial question in this case: was the 1s. 6d. an ‘ordinary retail selling price’ within the meaning of section 8?
That involves two questions, what was the nature of the contract between the Nestle Co. and a person who sent 1s. 6d. plus three wrappers in acceptance of their offer, and what is meant by ‘ordinary retail selling price’ in this context.
To determine the nature of the contract one must find the intention of the parties as shown by what they said and did.
The Nestle Co. 's intention can hardly be in doubt.
They were not setting out to trade in gramophone records.
They were using these records to increase their sales of chocolate.
Their offer was addressed to everyone.
It seems to me clear that the main intention of the offer was to induce people interested in this kind of music to buy (or perhaps get others to buy), chocolate which otherwise would not have been bought.
It is, of course, true that some wrappers might come from the chocolate which had already been bought or from chocolate which would have been bought without the offer, but that does not seem to me to alter the case.
Where there is a large number of transactions—the notice mentions 30,000 records—I do not think we should simply consider an isolated case where it would be impossible to say whether there had been a direct benefit from the acquisition of the wrappers or not.
The requirement that wrappers should be sent was of great importance to the Nestle Co.; there would have been no point in their simply offering records for 1s. 6d. each.
It seems to me quite unrealistic to divorce the buying of the chocolate from the supplying of the records.
It is a perfectly good contract if a person accepts an offer to supply goods if he (a) does something of value to the supplier and (b) pays money: the consideration is both (a) and (b).
There may have been cases where the acquisition of the wrappers conferred no direct benefit on the Nestle Co., but there must have been many cases where it did.
I do not see why the possibility that in some cases the acquisition of the wrappers did not directly benefit the Nestle Co. should require us to exclude from consideration the cases where it did.
And even where there was no direct benefit from the acquisition of the wrappers there may have been an indirect benefit by way of advertisement.
I do not think that it matters greatly whether this kind of contract is called a sale or not.
The appellants did not take the point that this  transaction was not a sale.
But I am bound to say that I have some doubts.
If a contract under which a person is bound to do something as well as pay money is a sale, then either the price includes the obligation as well as the money, or the consideration is the price plus the obligation.
And I do not see why it should be different if he has to show that he has done something of value to the seller.
It is to my mind illegitimate to argue — this is a sale, the consideration for a sale is the price, price can only include money or something which can be readily converted into an ascertainable sum of money, therefore anything like wrappers which have no money value when delivered cannot be part of the consideration.
The respondents avoid this difficulty by submitting that requiring and delivering the wrappers was merely a condition which gave a qualification to buy and was not part of the consideration for sale.
Of course, a person may limit his offer to persons qualified in a particular way, for example , members of a dub.
But where the qualification is the doing of something of value to the seller, and where the qualification only suffices for one sale and must be reacquired before another sale, I find it hard to regard the repeated acquisitions of the qualification as anything other than parts of the consideration for the sales.
The purchaser of records had to send three wrappers for each record, so he had first to acquire them.
The acquisition of wrappers by him was, at least in many cases, of direct benefit to the Nestle Co., and required expenditure by the acquirer which he might not otherwise have incurred.
To my mind the acquiring and delivering of the wrappers was certainly part of the consideration in these cases, and I see no good reason for drawing a distinction between these and other cases.
LORD SOMERVELL OF HARROW: My Lords, section 8 of the Copyright Act 1956, provides for a royalty of an amount, subject to a minimum, equal to 6¼ per cent.
of the ordinary retail selling price of the record.
This necessarily implies, in my opinion, that a sale to be within the section must not only be retail, but one in which there is no other consideration for the transfer of property in the record but the money price…
The question, then, is whether the three wrappers were part of the consideration or, as Jenkins L.J.
held, a condition of making the purchase, like a ticket entitling a member to buy at a co-operative store.
I think they are part of the consideration.
They are so described in the offer.
‘They,’ the wrappers, ‘will help you to get smash hit recordings.’
They are so described in the record itself-all you have to do to get such new record is to send three wrappers from Nestle's 6d. milk chocolate bars, together with postal order for 1s. 6d.’
This is not conclusive but, however described, they are, in my view, in law part of the consideration.
It is said that when received the wrappers are of no value to Nestle's.
This I would have thought irrelevant.
A contracting party can stipulate for what consideration he chooses.
A peppercorn does not cease to be good consideration if it is established that the promisee does not like pepper and will throw away the corn.
As the whole object of selling the record, if it was a sale, was to increase the sales of chocolate, it seems to me wrong not to treat the stipulated evidence of such sales as part of the consideration.
For these reasons I would allow the appeal.
LORD TUCKER delivered a speech allowing the appeal.
Appeal allowed.
Questions
1.
Suppose that the advertisement had run, ‘Yours for 1s. 6d. —‘Rockin' Shoes.’
Offer open only to ‘members,’ that is, people who have bought three Nestle bars.
To prove you qualify, send three wrappers with your money.’
Would this be a condition or would the wrappers still constitute part of the consideration?
(Cf.
Wedderburn, 1959 C.L.J. 160.)
2.
Would there have been a contract to supply a record if the advertisement had asked only for three wrappers and no money?
In De La Bere v. Pearson, Ltd. [1908]1 K.B.
280, the defendants, owners of a newspaper, carried an advertisement in each issue informing readers who wanted financial advice to write to a given address.
The plaintiff wrote for such advice and also for the name of a ‘good stockbroker.’
The editor passed the letter to a person whom he knew to be an ‘outside broker’(one who does Stock Exchange business but is not a member of the Exchange) but whose honesty he had no reason to suspect.
This person was in fact an undischarged bankrupt who wrote to the plaintiff as being recommended by the editor and who misappropriated the funds sent to him by the plaintiff for investment.
The plaintiff sued the defendants for breach of contract to exercise due care in giving him financial advice.
The Court of Appeal (Vaughan Williams L.J., Gorell Barnes P. and Bigham J.) affirmed the decision of Lord Alverstone C.J. in favour of the plaintiff.
In Hedley Byrne & Co. v. Heller & Partners (below, p. 338) Lord Devlin said of this case: ‘…
I think that today the result can and should be achieved by the application of the law of negligence…
I agree with Sir Frederick Pollock's note on the case of De La Bere v. Pearson, Ltd. when he wrote in Pollock on Contracts (13th ed.), 140 (n. 31) that ‘the cause of action is better regarded as arising from default in the performance of a voluntary undertaking independent of contract.’
’ See further below, pp. 338–340.
Problem
Suppose that a newspaper advertises: ‘We want letters (which we may publish) from readers seeking advice; and we undertake that, if we give advice, we will exercise all proper care.a Is it in any way artificial or unrealistic to regard that as an offer of a contract?
But should such an undertaking be implied from a mere invitation to the reader to seek advice?
(b) FORBEARANCE AS CONSIDERATION
WHITE V. BLUETT
Exchequer (1853) 23 L.J.Ex. 36; 2 C.L.R. 301; 2 W.R. 75
John Bluett had received a promissory note from his son, William, the present defendant, in respect of money lent by him to William.
The present action was brought by John's executor, the declaration containing a count on the promissory note and a count for money lent.
Plea that the note was given to secure the loan; that, subsequent to the loan and the giving of the note, the defendant had complained to John Bluett that he had not received equal favourable treatment with John Bluett's other children; that John Bluett had conceded the truth of these complaints and agreed with the defendant that, in consideration that the defendant should cease his complaints and also out of his natural love and affection for the defendant, he would discharge the defendant from all liability in respect of the loan and the note.
The plaintiff demurred that there was no consideration for the agreement between the deceased and the defendant.
T. J. Clark for the defendant argued that the adequacy of consideration is not to be investigated; that the defendant had a right to complain and that promising to forgo that right constituted good consideration.
POLLOCK C.B.: The plea is clearly bad.
By the argument a principle is pressed to an absurdity, as a bubble is blown until it bursts.
Looking at the words merely, there is some foundation for the argument, and, following the words only, the conclusion may be arrived at.
It is said, the son had a right to an equal distribution of his father's property, and did complain to his father because he had not had an equal share, and said to him, I will cease to complain if you will not sue upon this note.
Whereupon the father said, if you will promise me not to complain I will give up the note.
If such a plea as this could be supported, the following would be a binding promise: A man might complain that another person used the public highway more than he ought to do, and that other might say, do not complain, and I will give you five pounds.
It is ridiculous to suppose that such promises could be binding.
So, if the holder of a bill of exchange were suing the acceptor, and the acceptor were to complain that the holder had treated him hardly, or that the bill ought never to have been circulated, and the holder were to say, Now, if you will not make any more complaints, I will not sue you.
Such a promise would be like that now set up.
In reality, there was no consideration whatever.
The son had no right to complain for the father might make what distribution of his property he liked; and the son's abstaining from doing what he had no right to do can be no consideration.
ALDERSON B.: If this agreement were good, there could be no such thing as a nudum pactum.
There is a consideration on one side, and it is said the consideration on the other is the agreement itself: if that were so there could never be a nudum pactum.
Judgment for plaintiff.
(The judgment of PARKE B. is omitted; PLATT B. concurred.)
Questions
1.
Was it true to say that the son ‘had no right to complain’?
Did he commit any legal wrong by complaining?
Why should not his giving up his liberty to complain be consideration?
Is it any different from giving up a liberty to smoke?
Cf.
Hamer v. Sidway, above, p. 197.
But could refraining, or a promise to refrain, from smoking cannabis be sufficient consideration?
(It is an offence under section 5 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 to be in possession of cannabis.)
Cf.
Hohfeld, Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions; Salmond, Jurisprudence (12th ed.), p. 217.
2.
Is an agreement by a father, made in consideration that his son will not bore him, a binding contract?
(Parke B. in the course of argument.)
3.
Is an agreement by a husband separately to maintain his wife, if she will not ‘molest’ him, a binding contract?
In Dunton v. Dunton (1892) 18 V.L.R. 114 (Supreme Court of Victoria), the Court (Higinbotham and Williams JJ., Hood J. dissenting) held that an agreement between ex-spouses whereby the former husband undertook to pay the former wife £6 per month, ‘so long as she…shall conduct herself with sobriety, and in a  respectable, orderly, and virtuous manner’ was a valid contract made for a consideration.
Williams J. said, ‘In effect,(the former husband) says to (the former wife): ‘If you, who now owe me no duty as a wife, will agree to my stipulation, I will, so long as you observe that stipulation, pay you £6 per month.’
Thereupon she signifies her agreement and her assent to the stipulation by signing the agreement…there is sufficient consideration to support the agreement sued upon.’
Williston, Selections from Williston on Contracts, 133
…courts have not been so strict in denying the validity of consideration where a moral duty was performed, as they have in holding agreements invalid as against public policy where they contemplated a violation of the same duty.
In other words, there are differences of degree in immoral conduct; some acts within this category may be classed as immoral liberties, since not specifically punishable by law.
Thus, an agreement to get drunk would doubtless be against public policy, but an agreement to refrain from doing so would be sufficient consideration for a return promise.
And the same may be said of most other merely moral duties.
THORNE v. MOTOR TRADE ASSOCIATION
[1937]A.C. 797; 106 L.J.K.B. 495; 157 L.T. 399; 53 T.L.R. 810;[1937]3 All E.R.
157
The M.T.A. by its constitution had a power to put on a stop list the name of a member or person who infringed its rule forbidding the sale of articles at other than the list prices relevant thereto unless such person should pay to the Association a fine within limits to be laid down by the Council of the Association.
This was an action by Thorne, a member of the M.T.A., against the Association to determine whether a demand of a sum of money in lieu of placing a person's name on the stop list would constitute a demand of money with menaces and without reasonable or probable cause within section 29 (1)(i) of the Larceny Act 1916.
MacKinnon J. found for the defendant and his decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeal (Greer and Greene L.JJ., Talbot J.).
On appeal by the plaintiff to the House of Lords.
LORD ATKIN: The ordinary blackmailer normally threatens to do what he has a perfect right to do-namely, communicate some compromising conduct to a person whose knowledge is likely to affect the person threatened.
Often, indeed, he has not only the right but also the duty to make the disclosure, as of a felony, to the competent authorities.
What he has to justify is not the threat, but the demand of money.
The gravamen of the charge is the demand without reasonable or probable cause: and I cannot think that the mere fact that the threat is to do something a person is entitled to do either causes the threat not to be a ‘menace’ within the Act or in itself provides a reasonable or probable cause for the demand…
It appears to me that if a man may lawfully, in the furtherance of business interests, do acts which will seriously injure another in his business he may also lawfully, if he is still acting in the furtherance of his business interests, offer that other to accept a sum of money as an  alternative to doing the injurious acts.
He must no doubt be acting not for the mere purpose of putting money in his pocket, but for some legitimate purpose other than the mere acquisition of money…….
I think that the absence of reasonable or probable cause is in a criminal charge under this subsection a question of fact for the jury.
But if the cause is reasonably capable of being associated with the promotion of lawful business interests the judge should not allow the case to go to the jury if there is no evidence of the accused's intention going beyond such lawful business interests…
I think this appeal should be dismissed with costs.
LORD WRIGHT: I think the jury should be directed by the judge that the respondent Association had a legal right to put the person's name on the stop list, so long as they did so in order to promote the trade interests of the Association and its members and not with intent to injure, and so long as the money, fine or penalty demanded was reasonable and not extortionate.
(T) here are many cases where a man who has a ‘right,’ in the sense of a liberty or capacity of doing an act which is not unlawful, but which is calculated seriously to injure another, will be liable to a charge of blackmail if he demands money from that other as the price of abstaining.…
Thus a man may be possessed of knowledge of discreditable incidents in the victim's life and may seek to extort money by threatening, if he is not paid, to disclose the knowledge to a wife or husband or employer, though the disclosure may not be libellous.
Such is a common type of blackmail.
Cases where the non-disclosure to the proper authority is illegal, as amounting to compounding a felony or a misdemeanour of public import, or where the publication would constitute a public libel, are a fortiori.
Again a legal liberty (that is something that a man may do with legal justification) may form the basis of blackmail.
Thus a husband who has proof of his wife's adultery, may threaten the paramour that he will petition in the Divorce Court unless he is bought off.
Though it is possible that the facts of such a case might show merely the legitimate compromise of a claim to damages, on the other hand, the facts might be such as to constitute extortion and blackmail of a serious type.
LORDS THANKERTON, RUSSELL OF KILLOWEN and ROCHE also made speeches dismissing the appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
Note:
This decision followed a conflict of authority between the Court of Appeal and the Court of Criminal Appeal.
In the civil case of Hardie & Lane v. Chilton [1928]2 K.B.
306, the Court of Appeal had held that a trade association which by its constitution had power to put the name of a person infringing its rules on a stop list, could instead lawfully ask the person concerned to make a money payment by way of compromise.
In the Court of Criminal Appeal in R. v. Denyer [1926]2 K.B.
258 it had been held that a request for money in such circumstances did constitute an offence under the Larceny Act 1916, s.29(1) (i).
In the present case the House of Lords found that Hardie & lane v. Chilton was correctly decided but not that a demand for money in lieu of placing on the stop list would be lawful in all circumstances.
The practice, in issue in this case, ‘collective resale price maintenance,’ was invalidated by the Resale Prices Act 1964.
See now Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976.
Questions
1
Where A demands money from B in retum for not disclosing B's wrongdoing, A will usually be guilty of blackmail contrary to section 21 of the Theft Act 1968 and, if ‘the offer’ constitutes a crime, it dearly cannot lead to a contract; but what if B, without any demand, express or implied by A, offers A money not to disclose B's wrongdoing, and A accepts?
That is not blackmail, or any offence.
Is it a contract?
See, generally, Goodhart, ‘Blackmail and Consideration in Contracts’ 44 L.Q.R. 436.
2.
A, a notoriously loose-living man, offers to refrain from publishing his memoirs in a Sunday newspaper, if B will give him £1,000 in recompense for the loss of the fee of £1,000 that he would receive from the newspaper.
Consider the validity of the agreement between A and B. Would your answer be different if A asked for £3,000 instead of £1,000?
(Cf.
Lord Denning's Report, Cmnd. 2152 of 1963, p. 35.)
3.
D. Co., who own a chain of multiple stores, agree with E, a private trader, that they will not open a branch in his locality if E will give them £2,500.
Consider the validity of the agreement.
4.
Does not the court indicate that it is necessary to inquire into the adequacy of the consideration in cases of this type?
What principle determines whether a case falls within the category where adequacy of consideration is relevant?
WADE v. SIMEON
Common Pleas (1846) 2 C.B. 548; 135 E.R.
1061
Assumpsit.
The first count of the declaration stated that the plaintiff had commenced action against the defendant in the Court of Exchequer to recover two sums of £700 and £1,300, respectively, issue had been joined and the hearing was to take place on December 7, 1844; that the defendant, on December 6, 1844, promised the plaintiff that, if he (plaintiff) would forbear prosecuting the proceedings until December 14, the defendant would on that day pay the money with interest and costs; that the plaintiff, relying on this promise, forbore prosecuting the action until the day named but that the defendant did not pay the money or costs.
By his fourth plea, the defendant pleaded that the plaintiff never had any cause of action against the defendant in respect of the £2,000, the subject of the Exchequer proceedings, which the plaintiff, at the commencement of that action and thence until and at the time of the making of the alleged promise, well knew.
The plaintiff demurred.
TINDAL C.J.: The only question now remaining is upon the demurrer to the fourth plea.
The fourth plea states that the plaintiff never had any cause of action against the defendant in respect of the subject-matter of the action in the Court of Exchequer, which he, the plaintiff, at the time of the commencement of the said action, and thence until the time of the making the promise in the first count mentioned, well knew.
By demurring to that plea, the plaintiff admits that he had no cause of action against the defendant in the action therein mentioned, and that he knew it.
It appears to me, therefore, that he is estopped from saying that there was any valid consideration for the defendant's promise.
It is almost contra bonos mores, and certainly contrary to all the principles of natural justice, that a man should institute proceedings against another, when he is conscious that he has no good cause of action.
In order to constitute a binding promise, the plaintiff must show a good consideration, something beneficial to the defendant, or detrimental to the plaintiff.
Detrimental to the plaintiff it cannot be, if he has no cause of action; and beneficial to the defendant it cannot be; for, in contemplation of law, the defence upon such an admitted state of facts must be successful, and the  defendant will recover costs, which must be assumed to be a full compensation for all the legal damage he may sustain.
The consideration, therefore, altogether fails.
On the part of the plaintiff, it has been urged that the cases cited for the defendant were not cases where actions had already been brought, but only cases of promises to forbear commencing proceedings.
I must, however, confess, that, if that were so, I do not see that it would make any substantial difference.
The older cases, and some of — the modern ones, too, do not afford any countenance to that distinction…
…the defendant asserts, and the plaintiff admits, that there never was any cause of action in the original suit, and that the plaintiff knew it.
I therefore think the fourth plea affords a very good answer, and that the defendant is entitled to judgment thereon.
CRESSWELL J.: It has been surmised, in the course of the argument, that there is a distinction between abstaining from commencing an action, and forbearing to prosecute one already commenced.
In the older cases I find no such distinction.
Lord Coke lays it down broadly that the staying of an action that has been unjustly brought is no consideration for a promise to pay money.
I cannot help thinking, on broad principles, that the staying proceedings in an action brought without any cause is no good consideration for a promise such as is relied on here.
The plea, in plain terms, avers that the plaintiff never had any cause of action, and he well knew it.
Are we to assume that the defendant might by some slip in pleading, have failed in his defence to that action, if it had proceeded?
I think not.
(The judgments of MAULE and ERLE JJ. are omitted.)
Judgment for the defendant on the fourth plea.
COOK v. WRIGHT
Queen's Bench(1861) 1 B.&S. 559; 30L.J.Q.B.321; 4L.T.704; 7Jur.1121; 124R.R. 649; 121 E.R.
822
Before the Queen's Bench, after a verdict for the defendant, on a motion that the evidence did not prove want of consideration and that, upon the evidence, the plaintiffs were entitled to a verdict.
The relevant facts are stated in the judgment of the court (Cockburn C.J., Wightman and Blackburn JJ.), delivered by BLACKBURN J.: In this case it appeared on the trial that the defendant was agent for a Mrs. Bennett, who was non-resident owner of houses in a district subject to a local Act.
Works had been done in the adjoining street by the Commissioners for executing the Act, the expenses of which, under the provisions of their Act, they charged on the owners of the adjoining houses.
Notice had been given to the defendant, as if he had himself been the owner of the houses, calling on him to pay the proportion chargeable in respect of them.
He attended at a board meeting of the Commissioners, and objected both to the amount and nature of the charge, and also stated that he was not the owner of the houses, and that Mrs. Bennett was.
He was told that, if he did not pay, he would be treated as one Goble had been.
It appeared that Goble had refused to pay a sum charged against him as owner of some houses, and the Commissioners had taken legal proceedings against him, and he had then submitted and paid, with costs.
In the result, it was agreed between the Commissioners and the defendant that the amount charged upon him should be reduced, and that time should be given to pay it in three instalments; he gave three promissory notes for the three instalments; the first was duly honoured; the others were not, and were the subject of the present action.
At the trial it appeared that the defendant was not in fact owner of the houses.
As agent for the owner he was not personally liable under the Act.
In point of law, therefore, the Commissioners were not entitled to claim the money from him; but no case of deceit was alleged against them.
It must be taken that the Commissioners honestly believed that the defendant was personally liable, and really intended to take legal proceedings against him, as they had done against Goble.
The defendant, according to his own evidence, never believed that he was liable in law, but signed the notes in order to avoid being sued as Goble was.
Under these circumstances the substantial question reserved (irrespective of the form of the plea) was whether there was any consideration for the notes.
We are of the opinion that there was.
There is no doubt that a bill or note given in consideration of what is supposed to be a debt is without consideration if it appears that there was a mistake in fact as to the existence of the debt; Bell v. Gardiner (4 M. & Gr. 11); and, according to the cases of Southall v. Rigg and Forman v. Wright (11 C.B. 481), the law is the same if the bill or note is given in consequence of a mistake of law as to the existence of a debt.
But here there was no mistake on the part of the defendant either of law or fact.
What he did was not merely the making an erroneous account stated, or promising to pay a debt for which he mistakenly believed himself liable.
It appeared on the evidence that he believed himself not to be liable; but he knew that the plaintiffs thought him liable, and would sue him if he did not pay, and in order to avoid the expense and trouble of legal proceedings against himself he agreed to a compromise; and the question is, whether a person who has given a note as a compromise of a claim honestly made on him, and which but for that compromise would have been at once brought to a legal decision, can resist the payment of the note on the ground that the original claim thus compromised might have been successfully resisted….
In the present case we think that there was sufficient consideration for the notes in the compromise made as it was.
The rule to enter a verdict for the plaintiff must be made absolute.
Notes
1.
The court suggests that if the defendant (D) had (wrongly) believed himself to be liable to pay the charges, he would not have been liable on the notes; but, because he (rightly) believed himself not to be liable to pay the charges, he is liable on the notes.
Cf.
Bills of Exchange Act 1882, s.27(1), above, p. 203 (which applies to promissory notes).
In neither case is there an ‘antecedent debt or liability’ because D is not in fact liable to pay the charges.
In the latter case, however, the commissioners give consideration because they refrain from pursuing the threatened proceedings.
In the former case there is no express threat of proceedings to be withdrawn if the defendant pays up promptly because he believes himself to be liable.
But suppose that, though believing himself to be liable, he gives a note or cheque only in response to a demand threatening legal proceedings?
Is he liable on the note or cheque?
If he is, does it really make a difference that he gives the note or cheque promptly on receiving the first demand for payment?
Is there not an implicit threat of legal proceedings in even the first demand for payment of a debt?
Cf. 
Alliance Bank v. Broom , below.
It seems very unjust that D should have been required to pay Mrs. Bennett's debt; but note that he could probably have recovered the money from her as money paid to her use.
See generally,Cheshire, Fifoot and Furmston (12th ed.), pp. 667–669.
2.
In Alliance Bank v. Broom (1864) 2 Dr. & Sm. 289; 62 E.R.
631, a firm of Liverpool merchants owed their bank some £22,000 on an overdraft.
The bank asked for some security for this amount and the defendant promised by letter to charge certain goods and to pay the proceeds thereof to the bank against the overdraft.
On the failure to honour this promise, the bank claimed that they were entitled to a lien on the goods by virtue of the agreement in the letter.
The defendant demurred on the ground that there was no consideration for the promise.
Overruling the demurrer, Kindersley V.C.
said: ‘It appears to me that, when the plaintiffs demanded payment of their debt, and in consequence of that application the  defendant agreed to give certain security, although there was no promise on the part of the plaintiffs to abstain for any certain time from suing for the debt, the effect was, that the plaintiffs did in effect give, and the defendant received, the benefit of some degree of forbearance; not indeed, for any definite time but, at all events, some extent of forbearance.’
3.
In Callisher v. Bischoffsheim (1870) L.R. 5 Q.B.
449 at 451, Cockburn C.J. said: The authorities clearly establish that if an agreement is made to compromise a disputed claim, forbearance to sue in respect of that claim is good consideration; and whether proceedings to enforce the disputed claim have or have not been instituted makes no difference.
If the defendant's contention were adopted, it would result that in no case of a doubtful claim could a compromise be enforced.
Every day a compromise is effected on the ground that the party making it has a fair chance of succeeding in it, and if he bona fide believes he has a fair chance of success he has a reasonable ground for suing, and his forbearance to sue will constitute a good consideration.
See also Miles v. New Zealand Alford Estate Co. (1886) 32 Ch.D. 266, C.A., and compare the views of Demling L.J.
in Williams v. Williams (below, p. 218).
4.
In Horton v. Horton (No. 2)[1961]1 Q.B.
215;[1960]3 All E.R.
649, the parties, a husband and wife, had entered into a separation agreement under seal whereby the husband covenanted to pay the wife £30 per month.
It had been the intention of the parties that the payments should be without deduction of income tax but, on the true construction of the deed, the husband should have deducted income tax: subsequently, the parties entered into an agreement, not under seal but endorsed on the deed, that the husband should pay such monthly sum as ‘after deduction of income tax should amount to the clear sum of £30.
’ He paid for some years and then ceased payment.
The wife brought an action to enforce the revised agreement and the husband argued that the agreement was unsupported by consideration.
The Court of Appeal (Upjohn, Ormerod and Willmer L.JJ.) affirmed the decision in favour of the wife, holding the wife's abstention from proceedings for rectification of the original deed sufficient consideration for the husband's promise.
(C) COMPLIANCE WITH LEGAL OBLIGATIONS
Law Revision Committee, 6th Interim Report, paragraph 36, P. 21
Three cases must be discussed:
(a)
Where A makes a promise to B in consideration of B doing or promising to do something which he is already bound to do by reason of a duty imposed upon him by law, whether by a Statute or otherwise: for instance, the duty of a local police authority to afford adequate protection to A and his property;
(b)
Where A makes a promise to B in consideration of B doing or promising to do something which he is already bound to do under a contract with A;
(c)
Where A makes a promise to B in consideration of B doing or promising to do something which he is already bound to do under a contract with C.
In cases (a) and (b) where the thing promised or performed is precisely the thing which the promisor is already bound to do and no more, and there is no dispute that he is bound to do it, there is said to be no consideration or only illusory consideration for the new promise, and it is not enforceable.
In case(c) the law is not so clear and frequently other factors are present out of which a consideration for the promise can be manufactured.
In our opinion, in all three cases, a promise made by A to B in consideration of B doing or promising to do something which he is already bound to do should be enforced by the law, provided that in other respects such as legality and  compatibility with public policy it is free from objection; thus a promise in return for an agreement by a police authority to give precisely the amount of protection it was by law bound to give and no more should be unenforceable as being against public policy.
The dominant factor is that A thought it worth his while to make the promise to B in order that he should feel more certain that B would do the thing bargained for, and we can see no reason in general why A, having got what he wanted, should be allowed to evade his promise.
Moreover, why did the promisor make the promise if it was to have no legal effect?
Notes:
1.
See also Hamson, ‘The Reform of Consideration’ 54 L.Q.R. 233 at 237–240; and Shatwell, ‘The Doctrine of Consideration in the Modern Law’1 Sydney L.R. 289.
2.
The situations are treated in an order different from that above.
(i) Imposed by LAW
COLLINS v. GODEFROY
King's Bench (1831) 1 B. & Ad. 950; 109 E.R.
1040; 1 Dowl. 326; 9 L.J.
(o.s.)
K.B.
158
Assumpsit to recover a remuneration for the plaintiff's loss of time during his attendance upon subpoena as a witness in an action.
At the trial before Lord Tenterden C.J. it appeared that Godefroy brought an action against one Dalton, and caused Collins to be subpoenaed to attend.
Collins, who attended for six days but was not called, on November 2, 1829, demanded of Godefroy six guineas as his fee for attendance and commenced his action on the following day.
Lord Tenterden was of opinion that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover because, in point of law, he was bound to give evidence pursuant upon a subpoena.
The plaintiff was nonsuited but with leave reserved to enter a verdict for six guineas.
A rule nisi having been obtained.
LORD TENTERDEN C.J.: Assuming that the offer to pay the six guineas without costs was evidence of an express promise by the defendant to pay that sum to the plaintiff as a compensation to him for his loss of time, still, if the defendant was not bound by law to pay that sum, the offer to do so not having been accepted will not avail the plaintiff.
If it be a duty imposed by law upon a party regularly subpoenaed to attend from time to time to give his evidence then a promise to give him any remuneration for loss of time incurred in such attendance is a promise without consideration.
We think that such a duty is imposed by law; and on consideration of the Statute of Elizabeth, l and of the cases which have been decided on this subject, we are all of the opinion that a party cannot maintain an action for compensation for loss of time in attending a trial as a witness.
We are aware of the practice which has prevailed in certain cases, of allowing, as costs between party and party, so much per day for the attendance of professional men, but that practice cannot alter the law.
What the effect of our decision may be, is not for our consideration.
We think, on principle, that an action does not lie for a compensation to a witness for loss of time in attendance under a subpoena.
The rule, therefore, must be discharged.
Rule discharged.
Note
In Arrale v. Costain [1976]1 Lloyds Rep. 98 the plaintiff who had been injured in the course of his employment in Dubai was paid by his employer, the defendants, the amount of compensation required by the law of Dubai.
He signed a document stating that he received the money in full satisfaction of all claims in respect of personal injury.
Subsequently he brought an action for negligence in England.
The Court of Appeal held that the action was not barred by the agreement.
Lord Denning, applying D.& C. Builders v. Rees, below, held that there was no true accord and satisfaction—there was inequality of bargaining   power and the plaintiff was unaware of his rights at common law.
Geoffrey Lane L.J.
said that if the defendants were doing no more than perform an obligation already cast upon them by law there was no consideration for the plaintiffs agreement not to sue.
He rejected the argument that the defendants had done something more by refraining from setting up certain answers to the claim permitted by the Dubai law; as a matter of policy it was never their intention to do so and ‘It is no consideration to refrain from a course of action which it was never intended to pursue; see Cook v. Wright (1861) 1 B. & ss. 559, 589,(above, p. 214).’
Stephenson L.J.
agreed that there was no consideration.
WILLIAMS v. WILLIAMS
Court of Appeal [1957]1 W.L.R. 148; 121 I.P. 93;[1957]1 All E.R.
305; 101 S.J. 108
The relevant facts appear in the judgment of Denning L.J.
DENNING L.J.: In this case a wife claims sums due to her under a maintenance agreement.
No evidence was called in the court below because the facts are agreed.
The parties were married on April 25, 1945; they have no children.
On January 24, 1952, the wife deserted the husband.
On March 26, 1952, they signed the agreement now sued upon which has three clauses: ‘(1) the husband will pay to the wife for her support and maintenance a weekly sum of One Pound Ten Shillings to be paid every four weeks during the joint lives of the parties so long as the wife shall lead a chaste life the first payment hereunder to be made on the Fifteenth day of April 1952. (2) The wife will out of the said weekly sum or otherwise support and maintain herself and will indemnify the husband against all debts to be incurred by her and will not in any way at any time hereafter pledge the husband's credit.
(3) The wife shall not so long as the husband shall punctually make the payments hereby agreed to be made commence or prosecute against the husband any matrimonial proceedings other than proceedings for dissolution of marriage but upon failure of the husband to make the said weekly payments as and when the same become due the wife shall be at full liberty on her election to pursue all and every remedy in this regard either by enforcement of the provisions hereof or as if this agreement had not been made.n So far as we know, the parties have remained apart ever since.
On June 1, 1955, the husband petitioned for divorce, on the grounds of his wife's desertion, and on October 12, 1955, a decree nisi was made against her.
On December 2, 1955, the decree was made absolute.
In this action the wife claims maintenance at the rate of £1 10s. a week under the agreement for a period from October 1954 to October 1955.
The sum claimed is £30 5s. 9d., which is the appropriate sum after deduction of tax.
The husband disputes the claim, on the ground that there was no consideration for his promise.
Let me first deal with clause 3.
It is settled law that a wife, despite such a clause as clause 3, can make application to the magistrates or to the High Court for maintenance.
If this wife made such an application the husband could set up the fact of desertion as an answer to the claim, but he could not set up clause 3 as a bar to the proceedings.
The clause is void and as such no consideration to support  the agreement: see Bennett v. Bennett (below, p. 697) .1 Now let me deal with clause 2.
Now I agree that in promising to maintain herself whilst she was in desertion, the wife was only promising to do that which she was already bound to do.
Nevertheless, a promise to perform an existing duty is, I think, sufficient consideration to support a promise, so long as there is nothing in the transaction which is contrary to the public interest.
Suppose that this agreement had never been made, and the wife had made no promise to maintain herself and did not do so.
She might then have sought and received public assistance or have pledged her husband's credit with tradesmen: in which case the National Assistance Board might have summoned him before the magistrates, or the tradesmen might have sued him in the county court.
It is true that he would have an answer to those claims because she was in desertion, but nevertheless he would be put to all the trouble, worry and expense of defending himself against them.
By paying her 30s. a week and taking this promise from her that she will maintain herself and will not pledge his credit, he has an added safeguard to protect himself from all this worry, trouble and expense.
That is a benefit to him which is good consideration for his promise to pay maintenance.
That was the view which appealed to the county court judge: and I must say it appeals to me also.
There is another ground on which good consideration can be found.
Although the wife was in desertion, nevertheless it must be remembered that desertion is never irrevocable.
It was open to her to come back at any time.
Her right to maintenance was not lost by desertion.
It was only suspended.
If she made a genuine offer to return which he rejected, she would have been entitled to maintenance from him.
She could apply to the magistrates or the High Court for an order in her favour.
If she did so, however, whilst this agreement was in force the 30s. would be regarded as prima facie the correct figure.
It is a benefit to the husband for it to be so regarded, and that is sufficient consideration to support his promise.
I construe this agreement as a promise by the husband to pay his wife 30s. a week in consideration of her promise to maintain herself during the time she is living separate from him, whether due to her own fault or not.
I would dismiss the appeal accordingly.
HODSON L.J.: Mr. Priestley has argued that [as the wife was in desertion when the agreement was made]she had forfeited all right to be maintained by her husband and so she was giving no consideration at all when she said she would maintain herself, because that is what she would have to do anyway.
The short answer to that is I think that she had not forfeited her right to be maintained by her husband by being in desertion: she had only suspended her right and not destroyed it.
Authority for that proposition is contained in the judgment of Lord Reading C.J. in Jones v. Newtown and Llanidloes Guardians [1920]3 K.B.
381, 384 ‘There is no doubt that at common law if a wife chooses wilfully and without justification to live away from her husband she cannot, so long as she continues absent, render him liable for the necessaries supplied to her, or for her maintenance by the union, for the reason that she has of her own free will deprived herself of the opportunity which the husband was affording her of being maintained in the home.
But the relief of the husband from the obligation of maintenance continues only so long as she voluntarily remains absent.
Her absence, although wrongful, does not affect the relationship of husband and wife.’
That passage applies to this case, looking at it, as we must do, as at the time when the agreement was entered into.
The wife had then deserted the husband and was temporarily wrongfully away from home; but she might at any time return.
In those circumstances, if she returned or offered to return, her husband's liability to maintain her would revive.
So that there was good consideration there to meet that contingency, which was a real contingency and not a fanciful one at that time.…
MORRIS L.J.…
I consider that we must proceed on the basis that at the date this agreement was entered into, March 26, 1952, the wife was then in desertion.
But it seems to me that the wife might thereafter have offered to return and might have ceased to be in desertion, and that clause 2 would at that stage and in that event have been in operation: therefore it does not seem to me that it can be said that clause 2 was not of value to the husband.
The probability of the happening of such events need not be measured, for the court does not inquire as to the adequacy of consideration.
I think that for that reason the county court judge came to a correct conclusion.
Like my Lord, Hodson L.J., I prefer to base my judgment on that ground rather than on the alternative ground—that apart from any question of an offer by the wife to return, while she was still in desertion, there might have been trouble, expense or embarrassment if the wife had incurred debts.
I, therefore, agree that the appeal fails.
Appeal dismissed.
Questions
1.
If the wife were to pledge her husband's credit in these circumstances, she would be guilty of obtaining by false pretences or obtaining credit by fraud under the then law (now obtaining by deception—Theft Act 1968).
Should her promise to refrain from so doing constitute good consideration?
2.
Is the wife's duty to support herself when in desertion (Cf.
Denning L.J.) a legal duty?
Is not the wife while in desertion, bound in law to refrain from pledging her husband's credit?
Is her promise not to do so good consideration for the husband's agreement to pay the 30s. per week?
Does the case, from this standpoint, require reconciling with Collins v. Godefroy (above, p. 217) and Stilk v. Myrick (below, p. 231)?
3.
If the wife were to return to her husband, would the contract, as found by the court, still be binding upon the parties?
4.
Consider the case in relation to Dunton v. Dunton, above, p. 210 Ward v. Byham (below, p. 224).
Note:
The Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, s.34, provides:
(1).
If a maintenance agreement includes a provision purporting to restrict any right to apply to a court for an order containing financial arrangements, then—
(a)
that provision shall be void; but 
(b)
any other financial arrangements contained in the agreement shall not thereby be rendered void or unenforceable and shall, unless they are void or unenforceable for any other reason (and subject to sections 35 and 36, below) be binding on the parties to the agreement.
(2)
In this and in section 35 below—‘maintenance agreement’ means any agreement in writing made, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, between the parties to a marriage, being—
(a)
an agreement containing financial arrangements, whether made during the continuance or after the dissolution or annulment of the marriage; or
(b)
a separation agreement which contains no financial arrangements in a case where no other agreement in writing between the same parties contains such arrangements.
The scope of a similar provision of the Maintenance Agreements Act 1957, has been the object of controversy.
It has been suggested (78 Law Notes 177) that it validates agreements for maintenance even if there is no other consideration for such agreement than the abstention from application to the court; the words,
‘unless void or unenforceable for any other reason,’
are intended to cover extraneous invalidating causes such as mistake, misrepresentation or duress; consequently, it is said, the subsection makes enforceable an agreement for which there is no consideration.
On the other hand, it is argued (E. R. Dew, 56 Lqw Society's Gazette 365) that the most likely ‘other reason’ for which an agreement might be void or unenforceable, apart from containing a provision against application to the court, would be precisely the want of consideration if the agreement be not under seal; the legislature, it is urged on this view, would not have made inroads on the fundamental requirement of valuable consideration in a contract not under seal, by a provision purporting to deal with the maintenance rights of a wife.
Cf. below, pp. 255 258, 695–98.
GLASBROOK BROS.
LTD. v. GLAMORGAN COUNTY COUNCIL
House of Lords [1925]A.C. 270; 94 L.J.K.B. 272; 132 L.T. 611; 89 J.P.
29; 41 T.L.R. 213; 69 S.J. 212; 23 L.G.R. 61
Appeal from an order of the Court of Appeal affirming a judgment of Bailhache J
The action was brought by the respondents against the appellants to recover the sum of £2,200 11s. 10d. for the services of police specially supplied by the respondents at the request of and by agreement with the appellants.
The appellants owned a colliery near Swansea, employing about 1,000 men.
A general colliery strike in South Wales ended early in July 1921, but work was not resumed at their colliery.
After a hostile demonstration by some 500 or 600 of the men, the appellants' colliery manager, James, was informed by the men's committee that the strikers were going to get the ‘safety men’ out.
Without the safety men, the mine would have become flooded.
James went to the local police superintendent, one Smith, and asked for 100 police to be billeted on the colliery premises, as, otherwise, the safety men, who were frightened, would not come to work.
Smith was of opinion that adequate protection could be given by keeping a mobile force ready, who, on warning of danger, could be swiftly moved to the danger area; but, if police were to be billeted in the colliery, 70 would be sufficient.
James finally agreed to 70, and signed a requisition form, agreeing on behalf of the appellants to pay for the services of the men provided at certain specified rates per diem and also for their travelling expenses and to provide them with food and sleeping accommodation.
When the police were billeted in the colliery, the safety men came to work, which they would not have done but for the presence of the police.
The police remained on the premises until the end of the strike.
The defence to the action was that there was no consideration for the promise of payment, it being the duty of the county council to supply police protection; there was also a counterclaim for £1,330 4s., the cost of feeding and housing the police  supplied.
Bailhache J. gave judgment for the respondents on the claim and dismissed the counterclaim.
The Court of Appeal by a majority (Bankes and Scrutton L.JJ., Atkin L.J.
dissenting) affirmed the judgment.
VISCOUNT CAVE L.C.: No doubt there is an absolute unconditional obligation binding the police authorities to take all steps which appear to them to be necessary for keeping the peace, for preventing crime, or for protecting property from criminal injury; and the public, who pay for this protection through the rates and taxes, cannot lawfully be called upon to make a further payment for that which is their right…
But it has always been recognised that, where individuals desire that services of a special kind which, though not within the obligations of a police authority, can most effectively be rendered by them, should be performed by members of the police force, the police authorities may (to use an expression which is found in the Police Pensions Act 1890)‘lend’ the services of constables for that purpose in consideration of payment.
Instances are the lending of constables on the occasion of large gatherings in and outside private premises, as on the occasions of weddings, athletic or boxing contests or race meetings, and the provision of constables at large railway stations.
Of course no such lending could possibly take place if the constables were required elsewhere for the preservation of order; but (as Bankes L.J.
pointed out) an effective police force requires a margin of reserve strength in order to deal with emergencies, and to employ that margin of reserve, when not otherwise required, on special police service for payment is to the advantage both of the persons utilising their services and of the public who are thereby relieved from some part of the police charges.
Atkin L.J.
put the contrary view in the form of a dilemma when he said: ‘Either they were performing this public duty in giving the protection asked for, in which case I think they cannot charge, or, which no one suggests, they were at the request of an individual doing something which it was not their duty to do, in which case it seems to me both public policy and section 10 of the County Police Act 1839, make the contract illegal and void.’
With great respect to the learned Lord Justice I am disposed to think that this reasoning rests on an ambiguous use of the word ‘duty.’
There may be services rendered by the police which, although not within the scope of their absolute obligations to the public may yet fall within their powers, and in such cases public policy does not forbid their performance.
I do not understand the reference in the above passage to section 10 of the Act of 1839.
(His Lordship then proceeded to consider whether in this case the billeting of the police was a special duty for which a charge might be made.)
…
In this connection I think it important to bear in mind exactly what it was that the learned trial judge had to decide.
It was no part of his duty to say—nor did he purport to say—whether in his judgment the billeting of the 70 men at the colliery was necessary for the prevention of violence or the protection of the mines from criminal injury.
The duty of determining such questions is cast by law, not upon the courts after the event, but upon the police authorities at the time when the decision has to be taken; and a court which attempted to review such a decision from the point of view of its wisdom or prudence would (I think) be exceeding its proper  functions.
The question for the court was whether on July 9, 1921, the police authorities acting, reasonably and in good faith, considered a police garrison at the colliery necessary for the protection of life and property from violence, or, in other words, whether the decision of the chief constable in refusing special protection unless paid for was such a decision as a man in his position and with his duties could reasonably take.
If in the judgment of the police authorities, formed reasonably and in good faith, the garrison was necessary for the protection of life and property, then they were not entitled to make a charge for it, for that would be to exact a payment for the performance of a duty which they clearly owed to the appellants and their servants; but if they thought the garrison a superfluity and only acceded to Mr. James's request with a view to meeting his wishes, then in my opinion they were entitled to treat the garrison duty as special duty and to charge for it…….
…
In my opinion, therefore, this appeal fails and should be dismissed with costs.
VISCOUNT FINLAY and LORD SHAW OF DUNFERMLINE made speeches to similar effect.
LORD CARSON and LORD BLANESBURGH dissented, holding that, in the circumstances of the case, the billeting of the police was not a special service.
Note
In Harris v. Sheffield United Football Club [1987]2 All E.R.
838 the police authority claimed from the dub £51,699 for providing special police services at the club's ground between August 1982 and November 1983.
The club contended that in attending the matches the police were merely fulfilling their duty to enforce the law and their attendance did not constitute the provision of ‘special police services’ within section 15(1) of the Police Act 1964.
That section provided statutory authority for the long established practice of charging a person who requested ‘special police services.’
The judge upheld the authority's claim and the Court of Appeal, considering Glasbrook v. Glamorgan, dismissed the appeal.
In deciding whether police services are ‘special’ the court will take into account:(1) whether the officers are required to attend on private premises or in a public place;(2) whether violence has already occurred or is imminent—if so, the services cannot be ‘special’;(3) the nature of the event—public events like elections lie at one end of the spectrum, private events like weddings at the other, and events like football matches somewhere in the middle;(4) whether protection can be provided without using officers who would otherwise be on other duties or off duty.
Questions
1.
The Rovers' F.C.
secretary telephones the Chief Constable—’ The crowd is fighting—police are overwhelmed—send help.’
The Chief Constable replies, ‘Only if you agree to pay.’
The secretary agrees.
Does the Club have to pay the bill?
If not, why not.7—is it a question of consideration?
What if, a month before the game, the Chief Constable had advised that 50 officers would be required in the ground but the Club was willing to pay for only 25?
2.
In Sykes v. D.P.P.
[1962]A.C. 528;[1961]3 All E.R.
33, it was held that the crime of misprision of felony consisted in concealment of or failure to reveal a felony known to have been committed, regardless whether the accused kept silent for profit.
Citizens thus had a legal duty to reveal felonies known to them.
Does that mean that, in the ‘reward cases’(above, pp.35–39), a promise was enforceable, the consideration for which was the performance of an existing legal duty?
(Misprision of felony has ceased to be a crime since the Criminal Law Act 1967.)
WARD V. BYHAM
Court of Appeal [1956]1 W.L.R. 496; 100 S.J. 341;[1956]2 All E.R.
318
When the parents of an illegitimate child separated, the father paid a neighbour £1 per week to look after the child.
Later the mother, having taken a housekeeping job where she could have the child with her, wrote to the father to let her have the child and the £1 per week.
The father replied, ‘I am prepared to let you have (the child) and pay you up to £1 a week allowance for her providing you can prove that she will be well looked after and happy and also that she is allowed to decide for herself whether or not she wishes to come and live with you.’
It was agreed that the child should go to the mother and the father paid the £1 per week until the mother married her employer, when the father stopped payments.
The county court judge gave judgment for the mother in an action brought by her for the £1 per week based upon the father's undertaking.
The father appealed.
DENNING L.J.: I look on the father's letter as dealing with two things.
One is the handing over of the child to the mother.
The father agrees to let the mother have the child, provided the child herself wishes to come and provided also that the mother satisfies the father that she will be well looked after and happy.
The other thing is the future maintenance of the child.
The father promises to pay the mother up to £1 per week so long as the mother looks after the child.
(His Lordship then referred to the fact that the mother of an illegitimate child was bound to maintain it, whereas the father was not under such obligation.
(See section 42 of the National Assistance Act 1948.))
I approach the case, therefore, on the footing that, in looking after the child, the mother is only doing what she is legally bound to do.
Even so, I think there was sufficient consideration to support the promise.
I have always thought that a promise to perform an existing duty, or the performance of it, should be regarded as good consideration, because it is a benefit to the person to whom it is given.
Take this very case.
It is as much a benefit for the father to have the child looked after by the mother as by a neighbour.
If he gets the benefit for which he stipulated, he ought to honour his promise, and he ought not to avoid it by saying that the mother was herself under a duty to maintain the child.
I regard the father's promise in this case as what is sometimes called a unilateral contract, a promise in return for an act, a promise by the father to pay £1 per week in return for the mother's looking after the child.
Once the mother embarked on the task of looking after the child, there was a binding contract.
So long as she looked after the child, she would be entitled to £1 a week.
The case seems to me to be within the decision of Hicks v. Gregory ((1849) 8 C.B. 378) on which the judge relied.
I would dismiss the appeal.
Hicks v. Gregory, together with other decisions, is discussed by the Court of Common Pleas in Smith v. Roche (1859) 6 C.B. (N.s.) 223; 141 E.R.
440, where an agreement by the father of illegitimate children to pay the mother for maintaining them was held enforceable by Cockburn C.J. and Byles J. on the ground that the liability imposed upon the mother of illegitimate children under the then relevant statute (4 & 5 Will.
4, c. 76, ss. 71, 72) was operative in circumstances not applicable to the instant case, and by Crowder I. on the ground that the mother undertook, in the agreement sued upon, greater liabilities than arose under the statute.
MORRIS L.J.: It seems to me, therefore, that the father was saying, in effect: Irrespective of what may be the strict legal position, what I am asking is that you shall prove that the child will be well looked after and happy, and also that you must agree that the child is to be allowed to decide for herself whether or not she wishes to come and live with you.
If those conditions were fulfilled, the father was agreeable to pay.
On those terms, which in fact became operative, the father agreed to pay £1 a week.
In my judgment, there was ample consideration there to be bound for his promise, which I think was binding.
PARKER L.J.
concurred.
Appeal dismissed.
Questions
1.
What was the consideration for the father's promise as found by:
(a)
Denning L.J?
(b)
Morris L.J.?
2.
Though not under a legal liability to maintain his illegitimate child, the father is under a moral duty to do so.
Would the promise of a complete stranger to pay a mother to maintain her illegitimate child be binding on the promisor?
Cf.
Williams v. Williams (above, p. 218).
Note:
Treitel (8th ed.), p. 87 says of Ward v. Byham: ‘One basis of the decision is that the mother had provided consideration by showing that she had made the child happy, etc.: in this way she can be said to have conferred a factual benefit on the father, even though she may not have suffered any detriment.’
Why is it not a detriment to the mother to have to prove a fact to the father—something she has no prior obligation to do?
Treitel adds’ But if a son's promise not to bore his father is not good consideration (White v. Bluett above, p. 000), it is hard to see why a mother's promise to make her child happy should stand on a different footing…
’ Can the two cases be reconciled?
(ii) By Contract with a Third Party
SHADWELL V. SHADWELL
Common Bench (1860) 9 C.B. (N.s.) 159; 30 L.J.C.P. 145; 7 Jur. 311; 3 L.T. 628; 9 W.R. 163; 127 R.R. 604; 142 E.R.
62
The declaration stated that the testator in his lifetime (in consideration that the plaintiff would marry Ellen Nicholl) agreed with and promised the plaintiff, then unmarried, in the terms of and contained in the following letter: August 11, 1838, Gray's Inn
My Dear Lancey,
I am glad to hear of your intended marriage with Ellen Nicholl, and, as I promised to assist you at starting, I am happy to tell you that I will pay to you one hundred and fifty pounds yearly during my life, and until your annual income derived from your profession of a Chancery barrister shall amount to six hundred guineas, of which your own admission will be the only evidence that I shall receive or require.
Your ever affectionate uncle, Charles Shadwell.:
Averment that everything necessary happened to entitle the plaintiff to have the said testator pay to him eighteen of the yearly sums of £150 and that the time therefore elapsed after he had married Ellen Nicholl and during the testator's lifetime and that plaintiffs annual income from his profession as a Chancery barrister never amounted to 600 guineas; that the testator paid 12 of the 18 annual sums and part of the thirteenth but that the residue of that and the 5 subsequent instalments were due and unpaid.
Fourth plea, that the plaintiff's marriage with Ellen Nicholl had been arranged before the alleged agreement without any request from the testator and that there was no consideration for the alleged agreement.
Second replication to the fourth plea, that the agreement was in the terms of and contained in the letter set out above.
Averment that the plaintiff married Ellen Nicholl, relying on the said promise and so married while his income as a Chancery barrister did not amount to 600 guineas per annum.
Demurrer to the replication to the fourth plea.
Joinder in demurrer.
ERLE C.J.: The question raised by the demurrer to the replication to the fourth plea is, whether there was a consideration to support the action on the promise to pay an annuity of £150 per annum…….
The circumstances are, that the plaintiff had made an engagement to marry Ellen Nicholl, his uncle promising him to assist him at starting, by which, as I understand the words, he meant on commencing his married life.
Then the letter containing the promise declared on is said to specify what the assistance would be, namely, £150 per annum during the uncle's life, and until the plaintiffs professional income should be acknowledged by him to exceed 600 guineas; and a further averment, that the plaintiff, relying upon his promise, without any revocation on the part of the uncle, did marry Ellen Nicholl.
Then, do these facts show that the promise was in consideration, either of the loss to be sustained by the plaintiff, or the benefit to be derived from the plaintiff to the uncle, at his, the uncle's request?
My answer is in the affirmative.
First, do these facts show a loss sustained by the plaintiff at the uncle's request?
When I answer this in the affirmative, I am aware that a man's marriage with the woman of his choice is in one sense a boon, and in that sense the reverse of a loss; yet, as between the plaintiff and the party promising an income to support the marriage, it may be a loss.
The plaintiff may have made the most material changes in his position, and have induced the object of his affections to do the same, and have incurred pecuniary liabilities resulting in embarrassments, which would be in every sense a loss, if the income which had been promised should be withheld; and if the promise was made in order to induce the parties to marry, the promise so made would be, in legal effect, a request to marry.
Secondly, do these facts show a benefit derived from the plaintiff to the uncle at his request?
In answering again in the affirmative, I am at liberty to consider the relation in which the parties stood, and the interest in the status of the nephew which the uncle declares.
The marriage primarily affects the parties thereto; but in the second degree it may be an object of interest with a near relative, and in that sense a benefit to him.
This benefit is also derived from the plaintiff at the uncle's request, if the promise of the annuity was intended as an inducement to the marriage; and the averment that the plaintiff, relying on the promise, married, is an averment that the promise was one inducement to the marriage.
This is a consideration averred in the declaration, and it  appears to me to be expressed in the letter, construed with the surrounding circumstances.
No case bearing a strong analogy to the present was cited; but the importance of enforcing promises which have been made to induce parties to marry has been often recognised, and the cases of Montefiori v. Montefiori ((1762) 1 W.Bl. 363) and Bold v. Hutchinson ((1855) 20 Beavan 250) are examples.
I do not feel it necessary to add anything about the numerous authorities referred to in the learned arguments addressed to us, because the decision turns on a question of fact, whether the consideration for the promise is proved as pleaded.
I think it is, and therefore my judgment on the first demurrer is for the plaintiff.
KEATING J. concurred.
BYLES J. (dissenting): I am of opinion that the defendant is entitled to the judgment of the court on the demurrer to the second replication to the fourth plea.
It is alleged by the fourth plea, that the defendant's testator never requested the plaintiff to enter into the engagement to marry, or to marry, and that there never was any consideration for the testator's promise, except what may be collected from the letter itself set out in the declaration.
The inquiry, therefore, narrows itself to this question: Does the letter itself disclose any consideration for the promise?
The consideration relied on by the plaintiff's counsel being the subsequent marriage of the plaintiff, I think the letter discloses no consideration.
It is in these words:[his Lordship read it].
It is by no means clear that the words ‘at starting’ mean ‘on marriage with Ellen Nicholl,’or with anyone else.
The more natural meaning seems to me to be, ‘at starting in the profession,’ for it will be observed that these words are used by the testator in reciting a prior promise made when the testator had not heard of the proposed marriage with Ellen Nicholl, or, so far as appears, heard of any proposed marriage.
This construction is fortified by the consideration that the annuity is not, in terms, made to begin from the marriage, but, as it should seem, from the date of the letter.
Neither is it in terms made defeasible if Ellen Nicholl should die before marriage.
But even on the assumption that the words ‘at starting’ mean ‘on marriage,’I still think that no consideration appears sufficient to sustain the promise.
The promise is one which, by law, must be in writing; and the fourth plea shows that no consideration or request, dehors the letter, existed, and, therefore, that no such consideration, or request, can be alluded to by the letter.
Marriage of the plaintiff at the testator's express request would be, no doubt, an ample consideration; but marriage of the plaintiff without the testator's request is no consideration to the testator.
It is true that marriage is, or may be, a detriment to the plaintiff; but detriment to the plaintiff is not enough, unless it either be a benefit to the testator, or be treated by the testator as such, by having been suffered at his request.
Suppose a defendant to promise a plaintiff, ‘I will give you £500 if you break your leg,’ would that detriment to the plaintiff, should it happen, be any consideration?
If it be said that such an accident is an involuntary mischief, would it have been a binding promise if the testator had said, ‘I will give you £100 a year while you continue in your present chambers’?
I conceive that the promise would not be binding for want of a previous request by the testator.
Now, the testator in the case before the court  derived, so far as appears, no personal benefit from the marriage.
The question, therefore, is still further narrowed to this point: Was the marriage at the testator's request?
Express request there was none.
Can any request be implied?
The only words from which it can be contended that it is to be implied are the words, ‘I am glad to hear of your intended marriage with Ellen Nicholl.
’ But it appears from the fourth plea that that marriage had already been agreed on, and that the testator knew it.
These words, therefore, seem to me to import no more than the satisfaction of the testator at the engagement as an accomplished fact.
No request can, as it seems to me, be inferred from them.
And, further, how does it appear that the testator's implied request, if it could be implied, or his promise, if that promise alone would suffice, or both together, were intended to cause the marriage, or did cause it, so that the marriage can be said to have taken place at the testator's request, or, in other words, in consequence of that request?
It seems to me, not only that this does not appear, but that the contrary appears; for the plaintiff before the letter had already bound himself to marry, by placing himself not only under a moral, but under a legal, obligation to marry, and the testator knew it.
The well-known cases which have been cited at the Bar in support of the position, that a promise, based on the consideration of doing that which a man is already bound to do, is invalid, apply to this case; and it is not necessary, in order to invalidate the consideration, that the plaintiff's prior obligation to afford that consideration should have been an obligation to the defendant.
It may have been an obligation to a third person: see Herring v. Dorell ((1840) 8 Dowl.
P.C. 604); Atkinson V. Settree ((1744) Willes 482).
The reason why the doing what a man is already bound to do is no consideration, is not only because such a consideration is in judgment of law of no value, but because a man can hardly be allowed to say that the prior legal obligation was not his determining motive.
But, whether he can be allowed to say so or not, the plaintiff does not say so here.
He does, indeed, make an attempt to meet this difficulty, by alleging, in the replication to the fourth plea, that he married relying on the testator's promise; but he shrinks from alleging, that though he had promised to marry before the testator's promise to him, nevertheless, he would have broken his engagement, and would not have married without the testator's promise.
A man may rely on encouragements to the performance of his duty, who yet is prepared to do his duty without those encouragements.
At the utmost, the allegation that he relied on the testator's promise seems to me to import no more than that he believed the testator would be as good as his word.
It appears to me, for these reasons, that this letter is no more than a letter of kindness, creating no legal obligation.
Judgment for the plaintiff.
(A second point arising on the fifth plea and replication thereto is omitted.)
Note:
Though this case is always cited on the issue of whether the performance of a contractual obligation owed to a third party can be good consideration, the principal point at issue was whether the testator made an offer of contract at all.
Erle C.J. thought he had because he had requested the plaintiff to marry Ellen.
Byles J. thought that he had not because he had made  no such request.
He had no doubt that ‘Marriage of the plaintiff at the testator's express request would be…an ample consideration.’
In Jones v. Padavatton [1969]1 W.L.R. 328 at 333, above, p. 186, Salmon L.l. said of Shadwell v. Shadwell: ‘I confess that I should have decided it without hesitation in accordance with the views of Byles l., but this is of no consequence.
n Who was right?
Was there a request (express or implied) in the letter or not?
(Because writing was required by the Statute of Frauds (above, p. 4), it had to be found there, or not at all.)
Suppose that nephew had told uncle that he intended to break off the engagement and uncle had written: ‘I am disappointed to hear you are thinking of breaking off your engagement.
Ellen is a splendid girl.
If you marry her, I will pay you…
’ How would Byles J. (and, presumably, Salmon L.J.) then have decided the case?
Cf.
Note on Gratuitous Promises and Conditional Gifts, above, p. 197.
Is a promise to give a wedding present binding when the marriage takes place?
Does it matter that the present is so substantial that it is a powerful inducement to marry?
PAO ON v. LAU YIU LONG
Privy Council [1980]A.C. 614;[1979]3 W.L.R. 435;[1979]3 All E.R.
65
One of the questions raised (see also above, p. 202 and below p. 650) was whether the plaintiffs had given consideration to the defendants by promising to perform an existing contract between the plaintiffs and a third party, Fu Chip, in the performance of which the defendants had an interest.
The plaintiffs had said that they were not going to perform that contract unless the defendants entered into the contract with them which was in issue.
LORD SCARMAN: Their Lordships do not doubt that a promise to perform, or the performance of, a pre-existing contractual obligation to a third party can be valid consideration.
In New Zealand Shipping Co.
Ltd. v. A. M. Satterthwaite & Co.
Ltd.
(The Eurymedon), below, p. 291 the rule and the reason for the rule were stated:
‘An agreement to do an act which the promisor is under an existing obligation to a third party to do, may quite well amount to valid consideration…the promisee obtains the benefit of a direct obligation…
This proposition is illustrated and supported by Scotson v. Pegg (supra) which their Lordships consider to be good law.’
Unless, therefore the guarantee was void as having been made for an illegal consideration or voidable on the ground of economic duress, the extrinsic evidence establishes that it was supported by valid consideration.
(Having referred to Harris v. Watson and Stilk v. Myrick, below, p. 231, his Lordship proceeded:)
When one turns to consider cases where a pre-existing duty imposed by law is alleged to be valid consideration for a promise, one finds cases in which public policy has been held to invalidate the consideration.
A promise to pay a sheriff in consideration of his performing his legal duty, a promise to pay for discharge from illegal arrest, are to be found in the books as promises which the law will not enforce: see the cases cited in paragraph 326, footnote 2 of Halsbury's Laws of England (4th ed., 1974), Vol. 9.
Yet such cases are also explicable upon the ground that a person i–rho promises to perform, or performs, a duty imposed by law provides no consideration.
In cases where the discharge of a duty imposed by law has been treated as valid consideration, the courts have usually (but not  invariably) found an act over and above, but consistent with, the duty imposed by law: see Williams v. Williams,(above, p. 218).
It must be conceded that different judges have adopted differing approaches to such cases: contrast, for example, Denning L.J.
with the view of the majority in Williams' case.
But where the pre-existing obligation is a contractual duty owed to a third party, some other ground of public policy must be relied on to invalidate the consideration (if otherwise legal)…
[The Board went on to hold that the contract was not voidable for economic duress—see below, pp. 237, 64 (652 and Atiyah (1982) 98 L.Q.R. 197 and (1983) 99 L.Q.R. 353 and Tiplady (1983) 99 L.Q.R. 188.]
Note:
In Scotson v. Pegg (1861) 30 L.J.Ex. 225 the plaintiffs had contracted with a third party, A, to deliver a cargo of coal to A or to the order of A. A sold the cargo to the defendant and directed the plaintiffs to deliver it to the defendant as per contract.
The defendant then made an agreement with the plaintiffs in which ‘in consideration that the plaintiffs, at the request of the defendant, would deliver to the defendant’ the cargo of coal, the defendant promised to unload it at a stated rate.
The plaintiffs sued for the defendant's failure to honour this promise and the defendant pleaded lack of consideration, the plaintiffs being already under a duty of delivery by the contract with A. The Court of Exchequer (Martin and Wilde BB.) found for the plaintiffs: Wilde B. thought that the plaintiffs might have found it advantageous not to comply with their contract with A so that their agreement with the defendant was a detriment to them; in any event, they agreed to part with the cargo to the defendant which was a benefit to him.
Cheshire, Fifoot and Furmston (12th ed.) pp. 107–108 (Discussing Shadwell v. Shadwell, above, p. 225, and Scotson v. Pegg)
If A and B have made a contract under which an obligation remains to be performed by A and A now makes this obligation the basis of a new agreement with C, there are two possibilities.
C's promise may have been induced either by A's promise to perform his outstanding obligation under the contract with B, or by A's actual performance of it.
In other words, A may seek to support the validity of his agreement with C by reliance either on executory or on executed consideration.
There is, as has already been remarked, divergence of juristic opinion as to the identity of the test applicable to determine the sufficiency of the one type of consideration and of the other.
How far is this distinction between executory and executed consideration to be regarded as relevant?
Sir Frederick Pollock thought that, in principle at least, it should be decisive.
In his opinion the promise might be good consideration, for it involved the promisor in two possible actions for breach of contract instead of one, and thus was a detriment within the meaning of the law.
The performance should not be accepted as good consideration, since, as it discharged the previous contract, it was not a detriment at all.
This theory, however, is not altogether convincing.
The validity of the promise may be accepted: the insufficiency of the performance is open to criticism.
In the first place, it assumes that the only test of consideration is a detriment to the promisee.
The assumption may be historically sound: the idea of detriment at least recalls the early association of assumpsit and case.
But the complementary idea of benefit was soon introduced into the language of the courts, and has been constantly emphasised by the judges.
While, therefore, the performance may not be a detriment to the promisee, it is certainly a benefit to the promisor.
In the  second place, the distinction involves a practical absurdity.
If the mere promise of an act is sufficient consideration to induce a counter-promise, surely the complete performance of that act should be accepted.
To hold the contrary, it has been well said, seems to assert ‘that a bird in the hand is worth less than the same bird in the bush.’
Once more, the conflict between principle and technicality comes to the surface, and once more the difficulties inherent in the use of the terms ‘detriment’ and ‘benefit’would be avoided if the element of bargain were stressed and the language of sale adopted.
Promise and performance may equally be regarded as the price of a counter-promise.
Notes:
1.
It will be noted that in the passage cited from The Eurymedon, above, p. 229, the Privy Council regarded the promise to perform the existing agreement as consideration and that Lord Scarman made no distinction between the performance of, and the promise to perform, the existing obligation.
2.
In Jones v. Waite (1839) 5 Bing.
N.C. 341; 132 E.R.
1136 (affirmed on a different ground, 9 Cl. & Fin. 101; 8 E.R.
353) the Court of Exchequer Chamber held that a promise by A to pay existing debts that he owed B was no consideration for a promise by C. Lord Abinger C.B. said: ‘Now a consideration to support a promise must either operate to the advantage of the party making the promise, or to the detriment of the party who is to perform the consideration.
But a man is under a moral and legal obligation to pay his just debts.
It cannot therefore be stated, as an abstract proposition, that he suffers any detriment from the discharge of that duty; and the declaration does not show in what way the defendant could have derived any advantage from the plaintiff paying his own debts.
The plea therefore shows the insufficiency of that part of the consideration.’
Questions
1.
Does the duty to pay a debt differ from other legal duties in nature?
2.
Might not a debtor legitimately seek release from his creditor?
Could not a promise in effect to forgo this liberty constitute consideration?
3.
Do you think that the decision in Jones v. Waite would be the same today?
(iii) By Contract with the Promisor
STILK v. MYRICK
King's Bench (1809) 2 Camp.
317; 11 R.R. 717; 6 Esp.
129, 170 E.R.
1168
This was an action for seaman's wages, on a voyage from London to the Baltic and back.
By the ship's articles, executed before the commencement of the voyage, the plaintiff was to be paid at the rate of £5 a month; and the principal question in the cause was, whether he was entitled to a higher rate of wages.
In the course of the voyage two of the seamen deserted; and the captain, having in vain attempted to supply their places at Cronstadt, there entered into an agreement with the rest of the crew, that they should have the wages of the two who had deserted equally divided among them, if he could not procure two other hands at Gottenborg.
This was found impossible, and the ship was worked back to London by the plaintiff and eight more of the original crew, with whom the agreement had been made at Cronstadt.
LORD ELLENBOROUGH: I think Harris v. Watson was rightly decided; but I doubt whether the ground of public policy, upon which Lord Kenyon is stated to have proceeded, be the true principle on which the decision is to  be supported.
Here, I say, the agreement is void for want of consideration.
There was no consideration for the ulterior pay promised to the mariners who remained with the ship.
Before they sailed from London they had undertaken to do all that they could under all the emergencies of the voyage.
They had sold all their services till the voyage should be completed.
If they had been at liberty to quit the vessel at Cronstadt, the case would have been quite different; or if the captain had capriciously discharged the two men who were wanting, the others might not have been compellable to take the whole duty upon themselves, and their agreeing to do so might have been a sufficient consideration for the promise of an advance of wages.
But the desertion of a part of the crew is to be considered an emergency of the voyage as much as their death; and those who remain are bound by the terms of their original contract to exert themselves to the utmost to bring the ship in safety to her destined port.
Therefore, without looking to the policy of this agreement, I think it is void for want of consideration, and that the plaintiff can only recover at the rate of £5 a month.
Verdict accordingly.
Note:
1
.
In Harris v. Watson (1791) Peake 102; 170 E.R.
94, the plaintiff, a seaman, claimed that the defendant, the captain of his ship, had promised him five guineas over and above his ordinary wages if he would perform some extra work in navigating the ship, the promise having been made, when the ship was in danger, to induce the seamen to exert themselves.
Nonsuiting the plaintiff, Lord Kenyon C.J. said, ‘If this action was to be supported, it would materially affect the navigation of this kingdom.
It has been long since determined, that when the freight is lost, the wages are also lost.
This rule was founded on a principle of policy, for if sailors were in all events to have their wages, and in times of danger entitled to insist on an extra charge on such a promise as this, they would in many cases suffer a ship to sink, unless the captain would pay an extravagant demand they might think proper to make.’
According to the report of Stilk v. Myrick in Espinasse, Lord Ellenborough said that ‘he recognised the principle of the case of Harris v. Watson as founded on just and proper policy.’
See Gilmore, The Death of Contract, pp. 22–28.
Note that there is no evidence of a demand by the seamen in either Harris v. Watson or Stilk v. Myrick.
Of course, a demand may be implied as well as express; but, if there was no demand, could either case be explained on the ground of duress?
Should there be a difference between the case where the demand comes from the seamen and that where the master takes the initiative with a generous offer?
2.
In Hartley v. Ponsonby (1857) 7 El.
& Bl.
872 an able seaman successfully sued the master of the Mobile on a promise to pay him £40 if he would assist in taking the ship from Port Philip to Bombay with a crew of 19 hands.
The defence was that there was no consideration for the promise because the plaintiff was bound by his existing contract to assist in sailing the ship.
The ship had left England with a crew of 36 but, as a result of desertions, only 19 remained and only 4 or 5 of them were able seamen.
The Queen's Bench held that the crew was so reduced that it was dangerous to life to sail and unreasonable for the master to require his crew to do so.
Their contract had come to an end (see Chapter 14, Frustration, below) and they were in the same position as any other free seamen in Port Philip: ‘they might stipulate for any amount of remuneration; and, considering the circumstances, £40 might not have been an exorbitant sum’ —per Erle J.
Suppose £40 had been an ‘exorbitant’ sum.
Should it have made any difference?
Could not a free seaman in Port Philip properly have taken full advantage of a seller's market?
Would it now be regarded as economic duress?
WILLIAMS v. ROFFEY BROS. & NICHOLLS (CONTRACTORS) LTD.
Court of Appeal [1990]2 W.L.R. 1153;[1990]1 All E.R.
512
The defendants who had contracted to refurbish a block of flats sub-contracted the carpentry work to the plaintiff for a price of £20,000 to be paid in instalments related to the work completed.
The plaintiff got into financial difficulties because the price was too low and he did not supervise the work properly.
He had received over 80 per cent.
of the price but still had far more than 20 per cent.
of the work to do.
The defendants were liable to a penalty clause in the main contract if the work was not completed on time.
They were aware of the plaintiff's difficulties and that the price was too low.
They met him and agreed to pay him an extra £10,300 at £575 per flat to ensure that he continued with the work and completed on time.
The plaintiff completed eight further flats and received a payment of £1,500.
He stopped work and sued for the money he alleged to be owing.
The defendants denied liability and, in particular, that they were liable to pay any part of the additional £10,300 because their agreement to pay it was not supported by any consideration.
The judge held that the plaintiff was entitled to eight payments of £575, less certain deductions.
The defendants appealed.
GLIDEWELL L.J., having reviewed the authorities, concluding with Pao On v. Lau Yiu, continued: It is true that Pao On v. Lau Yiu is a case of a tripartite relationship, that is, a promise by A to perform a pre-existing contractual obligation owed to B, in retum for a promise of payment by C. But Lord Scarman's words seem to me to be of general application, equally applicable to a promise made by one of the original two parties to a contract.
Accordingly, following the view of the majority in Ward v. Byham and of the whole court in Williams v. Williams and that of the Privy Council in Pao On v. Lau Yiu the present state of the law on this subject can be expressed in the following proposition:
(i)
if A has entered into a contract with B to do work for, or to supply goods or services to, B in return for payment by B and
(ii)
at some stage before A has completely performed his obligations under the contract B has reason to doubt whether A will, or will be able to, complete his side of the bargain and
(iii)
B thereupon promises A an additional payment in return for A's promise to perform his contractual obligations on time and (iv) as a result of giving his promise B obtains in practice a benefit, or obviates a disbenefit, and
(v)
B's promise is not given as a result of economic duress or fraud on the part of A, then
(vi)
the benefit to B is capable of being consideration for B's promise, so that the promise will be legally binding.
As I have said, counsel for the defendants accepts that in the present case by promising to pay the extra £10,300 the defendants secured benefits.
There is no finding, and no suggestion, that in this case the promise was given as a result of fraud or duress.
If it be objected that the propositions above contravene the principle in Stilk v. Myrick, I answer that in my view they do not: they refine and limit the application of that principle, but they leave the principle unscathed, for example, where B secures no benefit by his promise.
It is not in my view surprising that a principle enunciated in relation to the rigours of seafaring life during the Napoleonic wars should be subjected during the succeeding 180 years to a process of refinement and limitation in its application in the present day.
It is therefore my opinion that on his findings of fact in the present case, the judge was entitled to hold, as he did, that the defendants' promise to pay the extra £10,300 was supported by valuable consideration, and thus constituted an enforceable agreement.
As a subsidiary argument, counsel for the defendants submits that on the facts of the present case the consideration, even if otherwise good, did not ‘move from the promisee.’
This submission is based on the principle illustrated in the decision in Tweddle v. Atkinson (below, p. 279).
My understanding of the meaning of the requirement that ‘consideration must move from the promisee’ is that such consideration must be provided by the promisee, or arise out of his contractual relationship with the promisor.
It is consideration provided by somebody else, not a party to the contract, which does not ‘move from the promisee.’
This was the situation in Tweddle v. Atkinson, but it is, of course, not the situation in the present case.
Here the benefits to the defendants arose out of their agreement of April 9, 1986 with the plaintiff, the promisee.
In this respect I would adopt the following passage from Chitty on Contracts (25th ed., 1983), para. 173, and refer to the authorities there cited:
‘The requirement that consideration must move from the promisee is most generally satisfied where some detriment is suffered by him: for example, where he parts with money or goods, or renders services, in exchange for the promise.
But the requirement may equally well be satisfied where the promisee confers a benefit on the promisor without in fact suffering any detriment.’
(Chitty's emphasis.)
That is the situation in this case.
I repeat, therefore, my opinion that the judge was, as a matter of law, entitled to hold that there was valid consideration to support the agreement under which the defendants promised to pay an additional £10,300 at the rate of £575 per flat.
For these reasons I would dismiss this appeal.
RUSSELL L.J., having cited the judgments in Amalgamated Investment and Property Co.
Ltd. v. Texas Commerce International Bank Ltd. (below, p. 262), continued: These citations demonstrate that while consideration remains a fundamental requirement before a contract not under seal can be enforced, the policy of the law in its search to do justice between the parties has developed considerably since the early nineteenth century when Stilk v. Myrick was decided by Lord Ellenborough C.J. In the late twentieth century I do not believe that the rigid approach to the concept of consideration to be found in Stilk v. Myrick is either necessary or desirable.
Consideration there must still be but in my judgment the courts nowadays should be more ready to find its existence so as to reflect the intention of the parties to the contract where the bargaining powers are not unequal and where the finding of consideration reflects the true intention of the parties.
What was the true intention of the parties when they arrived at the agreement pleaded by the defendants in para. 5 of the amended defence?
The plaintiff had got into financial difficulties.
The defendants, through their employee Mr. Cottrell, recognised that the price that had been  agreed originally with the plaintiff was less than what Mr. Cottrell himself regarded as a reasonable price.
There was a desire on Mr. Cottrell's part to retain the services of the plaintiff so that the work could be completed without the need to employ another sub-contractor.
There was further a need to replace what had hitherto been a haphazard method of payment by a more formalised scheme involving the payment of a specified sum on the completion of each flat.
These were all advantages accruing to the defendants which can fairly be said to have been in consideration of their undertaking to pay the additional £10,300.
True it was that the plaintiff did not undertake to do any work additional to that which he had originally undertaken to do but the terms on which he was to carry out the work were varied and, in my judgment, that variation was supported by consideration which a pragmatic approach to the true relationship between the parties readily demonstrates.
For my part I wish to make it plain that I do not base my judgment on any reservation as to the correctness of the law long ago enunciated in Stilk v. Myrick.
A gratuitous promise, pure and simple, remains unenforceable unless given under seal.
But where, as in this case, a party undertakes to make a payment because by so doing it will gain an advantage arising out of the continuing relationship with the promisee the new bargain will not fail for want of consideration.
As I read the judgment of the assistant recorder this was his true ratio on that part of the case wherein the absence of consideration was raised in argument.
For the reasons that I have endeavoured to outline, I think that the assistant recorder came to a correct conclusion and I too would dismiss this appeal.
PURCHAS L.J.: The question must be posed: what consideration has moved from the plaintiff to support the promise to pay the extra £10,300 added to the lump sum provision?
In the particular circumstances which I have outlined above, there was clearly a commercial advantage to both sides from a pragmatic point of view in reaching the agreement of April 9.
The defendants were on risk that as a result of the bargain they had struck the plaintiff would not or indeed possibly could not comply with his existing obligations without further finance.
As a result of the agreement the defendants secured their position commercially.
There was, however, no obligation added to the contractual duties imposed on the plaintiff under the original contract.
Prima facie this would appear to be a classic Stilk v. Myrick case.
It was, however, open to the plaintiff to be in deliberate breach of the contract in order to ‘cut his losses’ commercially.
In normal circumstances the suggestion that a contracting party can rely on his own breach to establish consideration is distinctly unattractive.
In many cases it obviously would be and if there was any element of duress brought on the other contracting party under the modern development of this branch of the law the proposed breaker of the contract would not benefit.
With some hesitation and comforted by the passage from the speech of Lord Hailsham L.C. [in [1972]A.C. 741 at 757–758], to which I have referred, I consider that the modern approach to the question of consideration would be that where there were benefits derived by each party to a contract of variation even though one party did not suffer a detriment this would not be fatal to the establishing of  sufficient consideration to support the agreement.
If both parties benefit from an agreement it is not necessary that each also suffers a detriment.
In my judgment, on the facts as found by the judge, he was entitled to reach the conclusion that consideration existed and in those circumstances I would not disturb that finding.
This is sufficient to determine the appeal.
The judge found as a fact that the flats were ‘substantially completed’ and that payment was due to the plaintiff in respect of the number of flats substantially completed, which left an outstanding amount due from the defendants to the plaintiff in the absence of the payment of which the plaintiff was entitled to remove from the site.
For these reasons and for the reasons which have already been given by Glidewell L.J., I would dismiss this appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
(Leave to appeal to the House of Lords was granted but not pursued.)
Questions
1.
Do the cases cited by Glidewell L.J.
support the conclusion (vi) in his proposition?
2.
Was Stilk v. Myrick distinguishable as a case where the master secured no benefit by his promise.
Was it not a benefit to him to have the crew sail the ship home rather than abandon him and it in a foreign port?
Did not the master ‘gain an advantage out of the continuing relationship’ with the sailors?
And Cf.
Atlas Express Ltd. v. Kafko Ltd., below, p. 649.
3.
Is it not always a ‘benefit’ to a contracting party to have the other party perform rather than default?
Did the defendants receive any benefit other than(i) the performance of the contract by the plaintiff and (ii) avoidance of the penalty?
How if at all did the existence of the penalty clause affect the consideration given by the plaintiff?
Did the plaintiff give anything other than the performance of his contract?
Is this what counsel had in mind when he argued that consideration (for example, relief from the penalty) did not ‘move from the promisee?’
See Note, infra.
4.
Does the case suggest that the worse the plight of the promisor (for example, the bigger the penalty clause) the greater the benefit to him and the more likely it is that performance of the contract will be held to be consideration?
5.
Would the result have been the same if the original agreed price for the carpentry had been a fair price?
Or a generous price?
6.
Is the decision reconcilable with Foakes v. Beer, below, p. 246?
Note that Lord Blackburn was convinced that prompt part payment of a debt is in fact a benefit to the creditor but he abandoned the opinion that it is for that reason consideration for the creditor's promise not to claim the balance.
Note
In Anangel Atlas Compania Naviera SA v. Ishikawajima Harima Heavy Industries Co.
Ltd.
(No. 2)[1990]2 Lloyds Rep. 526 Hirst l-held that it was a dear benefit or an avoidance of a disbenefit to the defendants that the plaintiffs agreed to take delivery of a ship on the contract date since—
‘Their own evidence conclusively demonstrated that their main object was to make sure that the plaintiffs, whom they described as their ‘core’ customers, did indeed take delivery on July 25, in order to encourage their other reluctant customers to follow suit.‘
It was the ‘very substantial practical avoidance of disbenefit’ arising from the anticipated behaviour of the other customers which supplied the consideration.
This was apparently the distinction discerned by Hirst J. between the case before him and Stilk v. Myrick which, he said, still applies where ‘there is a wholly gratuitous promise.’
A promise is gratuitous unless the promisee is paying a price for it by giving something in retum.
Was the existence of the penalty clause in Williams v. Roffey or the potential default of the other buyers in Anangel an element in the price paid by the respective promisees?
Suppose there had been no other likely defaulters in Anangel.
Would the promise have then been gratuitous?
Was the promise in Atlas Express Ltd. v. Kafko Ltd., below, p. 651, rightly held to be gratuitous?
NORTH OCEAN SHIPPING CO. v. HYUNDAI CONSTRUCTION CO.
Queen's Bench Division [1979]Q.B.
705,[1979]3 W.L.R. 419,[1978]3 All E.R.
1170; sub nom.
The Atlantic Baron,[1979]1 Lloyd's Rep. 89
Shipbuilders (‘the yard’) on April 10, 1972, entered into a contract to build a tanker for shipowners (‘the owners’) for the fixed price of US $30,950,000, payable in five instalments as the work progressed.
The contract required the yard to open a letter of credit to provide security for repayment of instalments in the event of their default in performance of the contract.
The owners paid the first instalment on April 28, 1972.
On February 12, 1973, the US dollar was devalued by 10 per cent.
The yard claimed an increase of 10 per cent.
on the four remaining instalments.
The owners did not agree and offered to submit the dispute to arbitration.
The yard declined and by telex on June 26, 1973, said that, if the owners did not agree to pay the extra 10 per cent.
they would terminate the contract and refund the first instalment.
The owners in May, 1973, had entered into a very advantageous agreement to charter the tanker on completion to Shell for three years, and they would have lost this advantage if the yard carried out its threat.
Accordingly, the owners replied by telex on June 28,:
‘We are in receipt of your telex dated 26th June, 1973.
Although we are convinced we are under no ob]igation to make additional payments which you ask, we are prepared as you demand in your telex of the 26th June, 1973, and in order to maintain an amicable relationship and without prejudice to our rights, to make an increase of 10 per cent.
in instalments payable subsequent to the 12th February, 1973.
No doubt you will arrange for corresponding increases in the letter of credit provided for in article Xl(2) (iii).’
The yard replied acknowledging that the difference of opinion had been settled and promising to increase the letter of credit.
The yard did not appreciate the significance of the words, ‘without prejudice to our rights,’ the owners realised that this was so and deliberately did not draw the yard's attention to the significance of the reservation.
The letter of credit was increased, the instalments were paid with the additional 10 per cent.
without protest, the final instalment being expressed to be ‘in full and final settlement’— and the tanker was delivered on November 27, 1974.
On July 30, 1975 the owners claimed the return of the excess 10 per cent.
They refrained from claiming until that date because they had a contract with the yard for another tanker and it was suggested that they feared that, if they initiated the claim before the tanker was delivered, the yard might have refused to deliver.
The arbitrators found that there was no ground for such an inference.
The arbitrators held that the owners' claim failed and, at the request of the parties, stated their award in the form of a special case.
MOCATTA J., having stated the facts:
Counsel's argument for the owners that the agreement to pay the extra 10 per cent.
was void for lack of consideration was based on the well-known principle that a promise by one party to fulfil his existing contractual duty towards his other contracting party is not good consideration: he relied on the well-known case of Stilk v. Myrick for this submission.
Accordingly there was no consideration for the owner's agreement to pay the further 10 per cent., since the yard were already contractually bound to build the ship and it is common ground that the devaluation of the dollar had in no way lessened the yard's legal obligation to do this.
There has of course been some criticism in the books of the decision in Stilk v.  Myrick which is somewhat differently reported in the two sets of reports, but Campbell's reports have the better reputation and what I have referred to as being the law on this point is referred to as ‘the present’ rule in Chitty on Contracts: see, also, Cheshire and Fifoot.
The law seems still to be the same in Australia: see T. A. Sundell & Sons Pty Ltd. v. Emm Yannoulatos (Overseas) Pty Ltd. [1956]S.R. (N.S.W.) 323.
Counsel for the yard relied on what Denning L.J.
said in two cases dealing with very different subject matters.
[His Lordship discussed Ward v. Byham (above, p. 224) and Williams v. Williams (above, p.218), and pointed out that the other judges in those cases found that there was ample consideration.]
I do not therefore think either of these cases successfully enables counsel for the yard to avoid the rule in Stilk v. Myrick…
[His Lordship then considered whether the increase of 10 per cent.
in the letter of credit amounted to consideration.]
I remain unconvinced, however, that by merely securing an increase in the instalments to be paid of 10 per cent.
the yard automatically became obliged to increase the return letter of credit pro tanto and were therefore doing no more than undertaking in this respect to fulfil their existing contractual duty.
I think that here they were undertaking an additional obligation or rendering themselves liable to an increased detriment.
I therefore conclude, though not without some doubt, that there was consideration for the new agreement….
Having reached the conclusion that there was consideration for the agreement made on June 28 and June 29, 1973, I must next consider whether even if that agreement, varying the terms of the original ship-building contract of April 10, 1972, was made under a threat to break that original contract and that the various increased instalments were made consequentially under the varied agreement, the increased sums can be recovered as money had and received.
Counsel for the owners submitted that they could be, provided they were involuntary payments and not made, albeit perhaps with some grumbling, to close the transaction.
Certainly this is the well-established position if payments are made, for example, to avoid the wrongful seizure of goods where there is no prior agreement to make such payments.
[His Lordship considered the authorities, including Smith v. William Charlick Ltd. [1924]34 C.L.R. 38 at 56 where Isaacs J. said: ‘It is conceded that the only ground on which the promise to repay could be implied is ‘compulsion.’
The payment is said by the respondent not to have been ‘voluntary’ but ‘forced’from it within the contemplation of the law…‘compulsion’in relation to a payment of which refund is sort, and whether it is also variously called ‘coercion,’‘extortion,’‘exaction’or ‘force,’includes every species of duress or conduct analogous to duress actual or threatened, exacted by or on behalf of the payee and applied to the person or the property or any right of the person who pays….
Such compulsion is a legal wrong, and the law provides a remedy by raising a fictional promise to repay.’]
Before proceeding further it may be useful to summarise the conclusions I have so far reached.
First, I do not take the view that the recovery of money paid under duress other than to the person is necessarily limited to duress to goods falling within one of the categories hitherto  established by the English cases.
I would respectfully follow and adopt the broad statement of principle laid down by Isaacs J. cited earlier and frequently quoted and applied in the Australian cases.
Secondly, from this it follows that the compulsion may take the form of ‘economic duress’ if the necessary facts are proved.
A threat to break a contract may amount to such ‘economic duress.’
Thirdly, if there has been such a form of duress leading to a contract for consideration, I think that contract is a voidable one which can be avoided and the excess money paid under it recovered.
I think the facts found in this case do establish that the agreement to increase the price by 10 per cent.
reached at the end of June, 1973, was caused by what may be called ‘economic duress.’
The yard were adamant in insisting on the increased price without having any legal justification for so doing and the owners realised that the yard would not accept anything other than an unqualified agreement to the increase.
The owners might have claimed damages in arbitration against the yard with all the inherent unavoidable uncertainties of litigation, but in view of the position of the owners vis-d-vis their relations with Shell it would be unreasonable to hold that this is the course they should have taken: see Astley v. Reynolds (1731) 2 Str. 915.
The owners made a very reasonable offer of arbitration coupled with security for any award in the yard's favour that might be made, but this was refused.
They then made their agreement, which can truly I think be said to have been made under compulsion, by the telex of June 28, without prejudice to their rights.
I do not consider the yard's ignorance of the Shell charter material.
It may well be that had they known of it they would have been even more exigent.
If I am right in the conclusion reached with some doubt earlier that there was consideration for the 10 per cent.
increase agreement reached at the end of June, 1973, and if it be right to regard this as having been reached under a kind of duress in the form of economic pressure, then what is said in Chitty on Contracts (24th ed.), para. 442, to which both counsel referred me, is relevant, namely that a contract entered into under duress is voidable and not void
‘that a person who has entered into the contract may either affirm or avoid such contract after the duress has ceased; and if he has so voluntarily acted under it with a full knowledge of all the circumstances he may be held bound on the ground of ratification, or if, after escaping from the duress, he takes no steps to set aside the transaction he may be found to have affirmed it.’
[His Lordship reviewed the facts.]
I have come to the conclusion that the important points here are that (i) since there was no danger at this time in registering a protest,(ii) the final payments were made without any qualification, and (iii) were followed by a delay until July 31, 1975, before the owners put forward their claim, the correct inference to draw, taking an objective view of the facts, is that the action and inaction of the owners can only be regarded as an affirmation of the variation in June, 1973, of the terms of the original contract by the agreement to pay the additional 10 per cent.
In reaching this conclusion I have not, of course, overlooked the findings in the special case [that the owners never intended to affirm the agreement for extra payments]but I do not think that an intention on the part of the owners not to affirm the agreement for the extra payments, not indicated to the yard, can avail them in view of their overt acts.
As was said in Deacon v. Transport Regulation Board (1958) V.R. 458, 460, in considering whether a payment was made voluntarily or not: ‘No secret mental reservation of the doer is material.
The question is—what would his conduct indicate to a reasonable man as his mental state.’
I think this test is equally app]icable to the decision this court has to make whether a voidable contract has been affirmed or not and I have applied this test in reaching the conclusion I have just expressed.
I think I should add very shortly that having considered the many authorities cited, even if I had come to a different conclusion on the issue about consideration, I would have come to the same decision adverse to the owners on the question whether the payments were made voluntarily in the sense of being made to close the transaction.
Judgment for the yard.
Question
1.
In the light of Williams v. Roffey, should Mocatta J. have held that the performance of their contract by the yard was a benefit, and therefore consideration, to the owners because it enabled them to perform their very advantageous charter agreement with Shell (corresponding to the avoidance of the penalty in Williams and the encouragement of the potential defaulters in Anangel)?
2.
Was Mocatta J. right to hold that the automatic obligation to increase the retum letter of credit was consideration?
If the extra 10 per cent.
was a gift, was it perhaps an onerous gift like that in Johnsey Estates Ltd. v. Lewis & Manley and cases cited in the Note, above, p. 199?
FOAKES v. BEER
House of Lords (1884) 9 App.Cas. 605; 54 L.J.Q.B. 130; 51 L.T. 833; 33 W.R. 233
Appeal from an order of the Court of Appeal.
On August 11, 1875, the respondent recovered judgment against the appellant for £2,077 17s. 2d. for debt and £13 1s. 10d. for costs.
On December 21, 1876, a memorandum of agreement was made and signed by the appellant and respondent in the following terms:
‘Whereas the said John Weston Foakes is indebted to the said Julia Beer and she has obtained a judgment in Her Majesty's High Court of Justice, Exchequer Division, for the sum of £2,090 19s.
And whereas the said John Weston Foakes has requested the said Julia Beer to give him time in which to pay such judgment, which she has agreed to do on the following conditions.
Now this agreement witnesseth that in consideration of the said John Weston Foakes paying to the said Julia Beer on the signing of this agreement the sum of £500, the receipt whereof she doth hereby acknowledge in part satisfaction of the said judgment debt of £2,090 19s., and on condition of his paying her or her executors, administrators, assigns or nominee the sum of £150 on the 1st day of July and the 1st day of January or within one calendar month after each of the said days respectively in every year until the whole of the said sum of £2,090 19s. shall have been fully paid and satisfied, the first of such payments to be made on the 1st day of July next, then she the said Julia Beer hereby undertakes and agrees that she, her executors, administrators or assigns, will not take any proceedings whatever on the said judgment.
The respondent having in June, 1882, taken out a summons for leave to proceed  on the judgment, an issue was directed to be tried between the respondent as plaintiff and the appellant as defendant whether any and what amount was on July 1, 1882, due upon the judgment.
At the trial of the issue before Cave J. it was proved that the whole sum of £2,090 19S. had been paid by instalments, but the respondent claimed interest.
The jury under his Lordship's direction found that the appellant had paid all the sums which by the agreement of December 21, 1876, he undertook to pay and within the times therein specified.
Cave J. was of the opinion that whether the judgment was satisfied or not, the respondent was, by reason of the agreement, not entitled to issue execution for any sum on the judgment.
The Queen's Bench Division (Watkin Williams and Mathew n.) discharged an order for a new trial on the ground of misdirection.
The Court of Appeal (Brett M.R., Lindley and Fry L.JJ.) reversed that decision and entered judgment for the respondent for the interest due with costs:(1883) 11 Q.B.D. 221.
EARL OF SELBORNE L.C.: My Lords, upon the construction of the agreement of December 21, 1876, I cannot differ from the conclusion in which both the courts below were agreed.
If the operative part could properly be controlled by the recitals, I think there would be much reason to say that the only thing contemplated by the recitals was giving time for payment, without any relinquishment, on the part of the judgment creditor, of any portion of the amount recoverable (whether for principal or for interest) under the judgment.
But the agreement of the judgment creditor, which follows the recitals, is that she ‘will not take any proceedings whatever on the judgment,’ if a certain condition is fulfilled.
What is that condition?
Payment of the sum of £150 in every half year, ‘until the whole of said sum of £2,090 19s.’(the aggregate amount of the principal debt and costs, for which judgment had been entered)‘shall have been fully paid and satisfied.’
A particular ‘sum’ is here mentioned, which does not include the interest then due, or future interest.
Whatever was meant to be payable at all, under this agreement, was clearly to be payable by half-yearly instalments of £150 each; any other construction must necessarily make the conditional promise nugatory.
But to say that the half-yearly payments were to continue till the whole sum of £2,090 19s., ‘and interest thereon,’ should have been fully paid and satisfied, would be to introduce very important words into the agreement which are not there, and of which I cannot say that they are necessarily implied.
Although, therefore, I may (as indeed I do) very much doubt whether the effect of the agreement, as a conditional waiver of the interest to which she was by law entitled under the judgment, was really present to the mind of the judgment creditor, still I cannot deny that it might have that effect, if capable of being legally enforced.
The question, therefore, is nakedly raised by this appeal, whether your Lordships are now prepared, not only to overrule, as contrary to law, the doctrine stated by Sir Edward Coke to have been laid down by all the judges of the Common Pleas in Pinnel's Case (1602) 5 Co.Rep. 117a, in 1602, and repeated in his note to Littleton, 344, Co.Litt. 212b, but to treat a prospective agreement, not under seal, for satisfaction of a debt by a series of payments on account to a total amount less than the whole debt, as binding in law, provided these payments are regularly made; the case not being one of a composition with a common debtor, agreed to, inter se, by several creditors…
The doctrine itself, as laid down by Sir Edward Coke, may have been criticised as questionable in principle by some persons whose opinions are entitled to respect, but it has never been judicially overruled; on the contrary I think it has always, since the sixteenth century, been accepted as law.
If so, I cannot think that your Lordships would do right, if you were now to reverse, as erroneous, a judgment of the Court of Appeal, proceeding upon a doctrine which has been accepted as part of the law of England for 280 years….
The distinction between the effect of a deed under seal, and that of an agreement by parol, or by writing not under seal, may seem arbitrary, but it is established in our law; nor is it really unreasonable or practically inconvenient that the law should require particular solemnities to give a gratuitous contract the force of a binding obligation.
If the question be (as, in the actual state of the law, I think it is), whether consideration is, or is not, given in a case of this kind, by the debtor who pays down part of the debt presently due from him, for a promise by the creditor to relinquish, after certain further payments on account, the residue of the debt, I cannot say that I think consideration is given, in the sense which I have always understood that word as used in our law.
It might be (and indeed I think it would be) an improvement in our law, if a release or acquittance of the whole debt, on payment of any sum which the creditor might be content to receive by way of accord and satisfaction (though less than the whole), were held to be, generally, binding, though not under seal; nor should I be unwilling to see equal force given to a prospective agreement, like the present, in writing though not under seal; but I think it impossible, without refinements which practically alter the sense of the word, to treat such a release or acquittance as supported by any new consideration proceeding from the debtor.
All the authorities subsequent to Cumber v. Wane (1721) 1 Stra. 426 which were relied upon by the appellant at your Lordships' Bar (such as Sibree v. Tripp (1846) 15 M. & W. 23; Curlewis v. Clark (1849) 3 Exch. 375 and Goddard v. O'Brien (1882) 9 Q.B.D. 37) have proceeded upon the distinction that, by giving negotiable paper or otherwise, there has been some new consideration for a new agreement, distinct from mere money payments in or towards discharge of the original liability.
I think it unnecessary to go through those cases, or to examine the particular grounds on which each of them was decided.
There are no such facts in the case now before your Lordships.
What is called ‘any benefit, or even any legal possibility of benefit,’ in Mr. Smith's notes to Cumber v. Wane, is not (as I conceive) that sort of benefit which a creditor may derive from getting payment of part of the money due to him from a debtor who might otherwise keep him at arm's length, or possibly become insolvent, but is some independent benefit, actual or contingent, of a kind which might in law be a good and valuable consideration for any other sort of agreement not under seal.
My conclusion is, that the order appealed from should be affirmed, and the appeal dismissed, with costs, and I so move your Lordships.
LORD BLACKBURN [having held that the agreement was one to take £500
D.& C. Builders v. Rees (below, p. 267) decides that there is no material distinction between giving a small sum in cash and giving the same amount by a negotiable instrument.
in satisfaction of the whole sum of £2,090 19s., subject to the condition that, unless the balance of the principal debt was paid by instalments, the whole might be enforced with interest, turned to the question whether payment of a lesser sum is good satisfaction:]
This is a question, I think, of difficulty.
In Coke, Littleton 212b., Lord Coke says: ‘where the condition is for payment of £20, the obligor or feoffor cannot at the time appointed pay a lesser sum in satisfaction of the whole, because it is apparent that a lesser sum of money cannot be a satisfaction of a greater…
If the obligor or feoffor pay a lesser sum either before the day or at another place than is limited by the condition, and the obligee or feoffee receiveth it, this is a good satisfaction.’
For this he cites Pinnel's Case.
That was an action on a bond for £16, conditioned for the payment of £8 10s. on November 11, 1600 Plea that defendant, at plaintiff's request, before the said day, to wit, on October 1, paid to the plaintiff £5 2s. 2d., which the plaintiff accepted in full satisfaction of the £8 10s.
The plaintiff had judgment for the insufficient pleading.
But though this was so, Lord Coke reports that it was resolved by the whole Court of Common Pleas ‘that payment of a lesser sum on the day in satisfaction of a greater cannot be any satisfaction for the whole, because it appears to the judges that by no possibility a lesser sum can be satisfaction to the plaintiff for a greater sum: but the gift of a horse, hawk, or robe, etc., in satisfaction is good for it shall be intended that a horse, hawk, or robe, etc., might be more beneficial to the plaintiff than the money, in respect of some circumstance, or otherwise the plaintiff would not have accepted it in satisfaction.
But when the whole sum is due, by no intendment the acceptance of parcel can be a satisfaction to the plaintiff; but in the case at bar it was resolved that the payment and acceptance of parcel before the day in satisfaction of the whole would be a good satisfaction in regard of circumstance of time; for peradventure parcel of it before the day would be more beneficial to him than the whole at the day, and the value of the satisfaction is not material; so if I am bound in £20 to pay you £10 at Westminster, and you request me to pay you £5 at the day at York, and you will accept it in full satisfaction for the whole £10, it is a good satisfaction for the whole, for the expenses to pay it at York is sufficient satisfaction.’
There are two things here resolved.
First, that where a matter paid and accepted in satisfaction of a debt certain might by any possibility be more beneficial to the creditor than his debt, the court will not inquire into the adequacy of the consideration.
If the creditor, without any fraud, accepted it in satisfaction when it was not a sufficient satisfaction it was his own fault.
And that payment before the day might be more beneficial, and consequently that the plea was in substance good, and this must have been decided in the case.
The bond was a common form of agreement whereby, e.g. C loaned D £810s. and D executed a bond (under seal) promising to pay a larger sum, say £16, on a certain day, say November 11, 1600, subject to a condition that, if he paid £810s. before that day, the bond was to be void.
See A. W. B. Simpson, ‘The Penal Bond with Conditional Defeasance’(1966) 82 L.Q.R. 392.
The defendant omitted to plead that he tendered the money in full satisfaction: ‘And always the manner of the tender and of the payment shall be directed by him who made the tender or payment, and not by him who accepts it.’
There is a second point stated to have been resolved, viz.: ‘That payment of a lesser sum on the day cannot be any satisfaction of the whole, because it appears to the judges that by no possibility a lesser sum can be a satisfaction to the plaintiff for a greater sum.’
This was certainly not necessary for the decision of the case; but though the resolution of the Court of Common Pleas was only a dictum, it seems to me clear that Lord Coke deliberately adopted the dictum, and the great weight of his authority makes it necessary to be cautious before saying that what he deliberately adopted as law was a mistake, and though I cannot find that in any subsequent case this dictum has been made the ground of the decision, except in Fitch v. Sutton (1804) 5 East 230, as to which I shall make some remarks later, and in Down v. Hatcher (1839) 10 Ad. & El.
121, as to which Parke B., in Cooper v. Parker (1855) 15 C.B. 828, said, ‘Whenever the question may arise as to whether Down v. Hatcher is good law, I should have a great deal to say against it,’ yet there certainly are cases in which great judges have treated the dictum in Pinnel's Case as good law.
For instance, in Sibree v. Tripp, Parke B. says, ‘It is clear if the claim be a liquidated and ascertained sum, payment of part cannot be satisfaction of the whole, although it may, under certain circumstances, be evidence of a gift of the remainder.’
And Alderson B., in the same case, says, ‘It is undoubtedly true that payment of a portion of a liquidated demand, in the same manner as the whole liquidated demand which ought to be paid, is payment only in part, because it is not one bargain, but two: viz., payment of part, and an agreement without consideration to give up the residue.
The courts might very well have held the contrary, and have left the matter to the agreement of the parties, but undoubtedly the law is so settled.’
After such strong expressions of opinion, I doubt much whether any judge sitting in a court of the first instance would be justified in treating the question as open.
But as this has very seldom, if at all, been the ground of the decision even in a court of the first instance, and certainly never been the ground of a decision in the Court of Exchequer Chamber, still less in this House, I did think it open in your Lordships' House to reconsider this question.
And, notwithstanding the very high authority of Lord Coke, I think it is not the fact that to accept prompt payment of a part only of a liquidated demand can never be more beneficial than to insist on payment of the whole.
And if it be not the fact, it cannot be apparent to the judges…
[Having considered the earlier authorities his Lordship continued:]
What principally weighs with me in thinking that Lord Coke made a mistake of fact is my conviction that all men of business, whether merchants or tradesmen, do every day recognise and act on the ground that prompt payment of a part of their demand may be more beneficial to them than it would be to insist on their rights and enforce payment of the whole.
Even where the debtor is perfectly solvent, and sure to pay at last, this is often so.
Where the credit of the debtor is doubtful it must be more so.
I had persuaded myself that there was no such long-continued action on this dictum as to render it improper in this House to reconsider the question.
I had written my reasons for so thinking; but as they were not satisfactory to the other noble and learned Lords who heard the case, I do not now repeat them nor persist in them.
I assent to the judgment proposed, though it is not that which I had originally thought proper.
LORDS WATSON and FITZGERALD held that, on the true construction of the agreement, Beer was entitled to recover the interest.
The only effect of the agreement was to give Foakes time to pay and not to forgive him anything.
If they were wrong about that, they agreed that there was no consideration for a promise to forgo the interest.
Order appealed from affirmed; and appeal dismissed with costs.
Questions
1.
What was the meaning of the agreement (a) according to Beer,(b) according to Foakes?
Which view was accepted by the majority of the House?
2.
What was the expressed ‘consideration’?
Was it (a) the promise of £500, or (b) the payment of £500, or (c) the payment of £500 and the promise of the remainder by instalments?
3.
What was the ratio decidendi of Pinnel's Case?
Was the rule in Pinnel's Case binding on the House of Lords?
4.
Did the judges think the rule they applied was a good one?
5.
Cheshire and Fifoot (8th ed.), p. 90, wrote:’…
Doctor Foakes was not seeking ‘legally to enforce the agreement’ against Mrs. Beer.
He was setting it up by way of defence to her application for leave to proceed on the judgment.
He was therefore under no necessity to establish a contract and the question of consideration was irrelevant.
The learned Lords concentrated on the wrong issue.’
Do you agree?
Was not the question whether Beer's promise not to take proceedings was binding?
6.
Cheshire, Fifoot and Furmston (12th ed.), p. 93 say ‘It will be observed that the plaintiff sued in Pinnel's Case not in assumpsit but in debt, so that no question of consideration arose’ But it was not the promise to pay the debt which was in issue but the promise not to enforce the debt.
Did not that raise an issue of consideration?
See also below, pp. 249–276; and see Kelly, 27 M.L.R. (1964) 540.
7.
If the parties did not intend the interest to be forgiven, might not the contract have been rectified (if the argument based on consideration had failed)?
How would Lord Denning have decided the case?
See D. & C. Builders v. Rees, below, p. 267.
VANBERGEN v. ST.
EDMUNDS PROPERTIES LTD.
Court of Appeal [1933]2 K.B.
223; 102 L.J.K.B. 369; 149 L.T. 182
Appeal from a decision of Macnaghten J. on the further consideration of an action tried by him with a special jury.
In July 1932 the plaintiff was indebted to the defendants in the sum of £208 odd for costs under a judgment and order.
By his statement of claim, the plaintiff alleged that on July 6, 1932, the defendants by their solicitor, a Mr. Kennard, verbally agreed with him that, if he would on July 7, 1932, pay the £208 in cash into a bank at Eastbourne for the credit of the solicitor's firm at the Law Courts branch of the Bank of England, that payment would satisfy all sums that he owed them and a bankruptcy notice which they had issued in respect of part of the debt would not be served on him.
On July 7, the plaintiff did pay the £208 to the Eastbourne bank with instructions to remit it as agreed.
He alleged that, the same day, he advised the solicitors of the payment and, on July 8, the defendants' clerk; but that, in breach of the agreement, the bankruptcy notice was served on him.
He claimed damages for the breach of contract.
The defendants denied the agreement and pleaded that, if it were made, there was no consideration for making it.
The jury found that the agreement was made and returned a verdict for the plaintiff, awarding damages of £500.
On the further consideration of the action, Macnaghten J. held that, as the plaintiff, under the agreement, was to pay not to the creditors but to the credit of their solicitors there was a sufficient consideration.
The defendants appealed.
LORD HANWORTH M.R. [after stating the facts and accepting the principle that a creditor is not bound by an agreement to accept a smaller sum in satisfaction of a larger ascertained amount, unless there be a benefit or even any legal possibility of benefit to the creditor thrown in]: We have, therefore, to consider whether the agreement that was made here on July 6 was an agreement to do anything else than simply to pay on Friday, July 8, into the hand of the creditors the sum which was already ascertained and in respect of which there was not only the legal liability, but a duty enforceable by any mode of execution against the debtor.
Was there any sort of advantage, any sort of independent benefit, actual or contingent, of a kind which might be a good and valuable consideration moving towards the creditors?
Macnaghten J. dealt with the question whether the action is maintainable on the ground of the principle of Foakes v. Beer (above, p.240), to which I have referred, and he says: ‘In the present case the jury, by their verdict, have found that on July 6 Mr. Kennard made an offer that if, on the following day, the plaintiff obtained the money and paid it into a bank at Eastbourne with instructions to remit it to the account of Stanley Evans & Co. at the Law Courts branch of the Bank of England, he would not serve the bankruptcy notice.
That offer became a contract when the plaintiff accepted it.
The plaintiff, by going to Eastbourne, obtaining the money, and remitting it in the manner suggested, made it a binding contract on the part of Mr. Kennard that he would not serve the bankruptcy notice.’
I cannot find out of the evidence any facts which support the view or which justify the inference.
The words which I have read are plain: it was Mr. Vanbergen who said he was going down to Eastbourne, that he was going down as part of his business, and that he did not think he would be getting back after his business on Thursday in time to pay it on Thursday, and the concession arose out of the question whether or not the debtor could be back in town in time to bring it himself, because he frankly said he was trying to get a little more time.
When the creditors found that the debtor had to go down to Eastbourne in any event, then the concession was given by the creditors.
But they reaped no advantage; there was nothing moving towards them which could be deemed to be a consideration, with the result that the case is one in which the contract is made, but remains unenforceable in law….
The appeal must be allowed and judgment entered for the defendants with costs.
LAWRENCE and ROMER L.JJ. delivered concurring judgments.
Appeal allowed.
Question
Because the variation in mode of payment is exclusively for the benefit of the debtor it is no consideration to the creditor.
But suppose that the creditor accepts the debtor's old car in satisfaction of a debt of £2,000, protesting that he would much rather have the cash and eventually taking the car only because there seems to be no hope of anything better.
Can he resile from this agreement when the debtor subsequently comes into money?
Note:
In Couldery v. Bartrum (1881) 19 Ch.D. 394 at 400, Jessel M.R., discussing the rule in Pinnel's Case and compositions with creditors, said’…as every debtor had not a stock of canary birds, or tomtits, or rubbish of that kind, to add to his dividend, it was felt desirable to bind the creditors in a sensible way by saying that, if they all agreed, there should be a consideration imported from the agreement constituting an addition to the dividend, so as to make the agreement no longer nudum pactum, but an agreement made for valuable consideration, then there would be satisfaction.
’ But in 1937 the Law Revision Committee, 6th Interim Report, para. 22, p. 16, referred to ‘the problem, still unsolved, of discovering the consideration for a debtor's composition with his creditors.’
There is no difficulty in finding consideration between the creditors.
Each agrees to accept the dividend in full satisfaction in consideration of every other creditor who is a party to the agreement doing so.
If one creditor then sues for the balance of his debt he commits a breach of contract with each of those creditors.
But the debtor is not a party to the contract.
However in West Yorkshire Darracq Agency Ltd. (in liquidation) v. Coleridge [1911 2 K.B.
326, where the debtor (the liquidator) was a party to the agreement between the creditors (the directors of the company), Horridge J. held that ‘by becoming a party he obtained the benefit of the consideration which each of the directors gave to his co-director by waiving his right to his fees.’
The basis of the debtor's defence seems to be that the action is a fraud on the other parties to the contract to forbear from suing.
See below, pp. 308–312.
If that is so should it make any difference whether the debtor is a party to the agreement (he is not a party to the contract) or not?
Are not the forbearing creditors equally defrauded in either case?
If the creditors decide to rescind their agreement and sue for the full amount of their debts, can the creditor rely on the agreement as a defence, whether or not he was a party to it?
In Comr. of Stamp Duties v. Bone [1976]2 All E.R.354 at 360 (P.C.) Lord Russell, speaking for five Lords of Appeal, said: ‘A debt can only be truly released and extinguished by agreement for valuable consideration or under seal.
By ‘giving’ or ‘forgiving’or ‘releasing’by will a debt to the debtor, a testator, in their Lordships' opinion, is but leaving a legacy of the amount of the debt…
The debt remains outstanding as an asset of the estate…’
HIRACHAND PUNAMCHAND v. TEMPLE
Court of Appeal [1911]2 K.B.
330; 80 L.J.K.B. 1155; 105 L.T. 277; 27 T.L.R. 430
Appeal from the judgment of Scrutton J.
Sir Richard Temple, father of Lt. Temple who was indebted to the plaintiffs as the maker of a promissory note, wrote to the plaintiffs offering an amount less than that of the debt in full settlement of the debt and enclosed a draft for the smaller amount.
The plaintiffs, having cashed and retained the proceeds of the draft, brought the present action against Lt. Temple for the balance.
Scrutton J. gave judgment for the plaintiffs for the amount claimed.
The defendant appealed.
VAUGHAN WILLIAMS L.J.…
In my judgment, this draft having been sent to the plaintiffs by Sir Richard Temple, and retained and cashed by them, we ought to draw the conclusion that the plaintiff, who kept and cashed the draft, agreed to accept it on the terms upon which it was sent….
Under these circumstances, assuming that there was no accord and satisfaction, what form of defence, if any, could be pleaded by the defendant?
In my judgment it would be that the plaintiffs had ceased really to be holders of the negotiable instrument on which they sued.
They had ceased to be such holders, because, in effect, in their hands the document had ceased to be a negotiable instrument quite as much as if there had been on the acceptance of the draft by the plaintiffs an erasure of the writing of the signature to the note.
But, alternatively, assuming  that this was not so, and that the instrument did not cease to be a negotiable instrument, then, in my judgment, from the moment when the draft sent by Sir Richard Temple was cashed by the plaintiffs a trust was created as between Sir Richard Temple and the moneylenders in favour of the former, so that any money which the latter might receive upon the promissory note, if they did receive any, would be held by them in trust for him.…
…then, without any question of resort to a court of equity, there might have been a defence in a court of law on the ground that any money recoverable on the note by the plaintiffs was recoverable by them merely as trustees for Sir Richard Temple, and that, under the circumstances disclosed by the correspondence, the relations between the father and son were such that it was impossible to suppose that the father wished to insist on payment of the note by the son.
Having said thus much, I desire to add a word or two with regard to the case of Cook v. Lister (13 C.B. (N.S.) 543) in the Common Pleas.
If the judgments in that case are looked at, it will be found that Willes J. said, in explaining the grounds of his judgment that under circumstances like those of the present case, the debt is gone, because it would be a fraud upon the stranger who pays part of a debt in discharge of the whole, that an action should be brought for the debt.
I have founded my judgment upon the grounds which I have already expressed, but I do not wish to be understood as thereby negativing the proposition that a defence might be set up on the alternative basis mentioned by Willes J. In my opinion this appeal should be allowed.
FLETCHER MOULTON L.J.: I am of the opinion that by that transaction between the plaintiffs and Sir Richard Temple the debt on the promissory note became extinct.
I agree with the view expressed by Willes J. in Cook v. Lister.
The effect of such an agreement between a creditor and a third party with regard to the debt is to render it impossible for the creditor afterwards to sue the debtor for it.
The way in which this is worked out in law may be that it would be an abuse of the process of the court to allow the creditor under such circumstances to sue, or it may be, and I prefer that view, that there is an extinction of the debt; but, whichever way it is put, it comes to the same thing, namely that, after acceptance by the creditor of a sum offered by a third party in settlement of the claim against the debtor, the creditor cannot maintain an action for the balance….
[His Lordship then distinguished Foakes v. Beer as applying between debtor and creditor.]
If a third person steps in and gives a consideration for the discharge of the debtor, it does not matter whether he does it in meal or in malt, or what proportion the amount given bears to the amount of the debt.
Here the money was paid by a third person, and I have no doubt that, upon the acceptance of that money by the plaintiffs with full knowledge of the terms on which it was offered, the debt was absolutely extinguished.
FARWELL L.J.: The plaintiffs could only accept the money on the terms upon which it was offered.
We were pressed with Day v. McLea ((1889) 22 Q.B.D. 610), where the debtor himself sent a cheque for an amount smaller than that of the debt to the creditor on the terms that it should be  in satisfaction of the debt.
In that case, there being no consideration for the discharge of the balance of the debt, it was held that the creditor could retain the money, and sue for the balance.
The same reasoning does not apply where the money is sent by a stranger, in which case it can only be accepted on the terms upon which it is sent.
In the former case the creditor can reply to the debtor, ‘you owe me more than this, and if you sue for a return of this, I shall set off my larger claim against it.’
In the latter case, the creditor has no excuse or justification for retaining the stranger's money, unless he complies with the conditions on which it was paid.
I agree with Fletcher Moulton L.J.
that the plaintiffs cannot be heard to say that they have acted dishonestly when an honest construction can be put upon their conduct by treating their acceptance and retention of the money as being upon the terms on which it was offered.
Appeal allowed.
Question
Do you agree with Fletcher Moulton L.J.
that refusal of the creditor's claim comes to the same thing as the extinction of the debt?
Suppose that the father had later authorised the creditor to sue for the balance of the debt—or required him to do so as trustee (see Vaughan Williams L.J.)?
Would the son be liable?
Suppose, father being impoverished and son having come into money, the father had required the creditor to sue for the whole sum?
CENTRAL LONDON PROPERTY TRUST LTD. v. HIGH TREES HOUSE LTD
King's Bench Division [1947]1 K.B.
130;[1947]L.J.R. 77; 175 L.T. 333; 62 T.L.R. 557;[1956]1 All E.R.
256
Action tried by Denning J.
By a lease under seal made on September 24, 1937, the plaintiffs, Central London Property Trust Ltd., granted to the defendants High Trees House Ltd., a subsidiary of the plaintiff company, a tenancy of a block of flats for the term of 99 years from September 29, 1937, at a ground rent of £2,500 a year.
The block of flats was a new one and had not been fully occupied at the beginning of the war owing to the absence of people from London.
With war conditions prevailing, it was apparent to those responsible that the rent reserved under the lease could not be paid out of the profits of the flats and, accordingly, discussions took place between the directors of the two companies concerned, which were closely associated, and an arrangement was made between them which was put into writing.
On January 3, 1940, the plaintiffs wrote to the defendants in these terms, ‘we confirm the arrangement made between us by which the ground rent should be reduced as from the commencement of the lease to £1,250 per annum,’ and on April 2, 1940, a confirmatory resolution to the same effect was passed by the plaintiff company.
On March 20, 1941, a receiver was appointed by the debenture holders of the plaintiffs and on his death on February 28, 1944, his place was taken by his partner.
The defendants paid the reduced rent from 1941 down to the beginning of 1945, by which time all the flats in the block were fully let, and continued to pay it thereafter.
In September, 1945, the then receiver of the plaintiff company looked into the matter of the lease and ascertained that the rent actually reserved by it was £2,500.
On September 21, 1945, he wrote to the defendants saying that rent must be paid at the full rate and claiming that arrears amounting to £7,916 were due.
Subsequently, he instituted the present friendly proceedings to test the legal position in regard to the rate at which the rent was payable.
In the  action the plaintiffs sought to recover £625, being the amount represented by the difference between rent at the rate of £2,500 and £1,250 per annum for the quarters ending September 29 and December 25, 1945.
BY their defence the defendants pleaded (1) that the letter of January 3, 1940, constituted an agreement that the rent reserved should be £1,250 only, and that such agreement related to the whole term of the lease,(2) in the alternative, that the plaintiff company were estopped from alleging that the rent exceeded £1,250 per annum, and (3) as a further alternative, that by failing to demand rent in excess of £1,250 before their letter of September 21, 1945 (received by the defendants on September 24), they had waived their rights in respect of any rent, in excess of that at the rate of £1,250, which had accrued up to September 24, 1945.
DENNING J. stated the facts and continued: If I were to consider this matter without regard to recent developments in the law, there is no doubt that, had the plaintiffs claimed it, they would have been entitled to recover ground rent at the rate of £2,500 a year from the beginning of the term, since the lease under which it was payable was a lease under seal which, according to the old common law, could not be varied by an agreement by parol (whether in writing or not), but only by deed.
Equity, however, stepped in, and said that if there had been a variation of a deed by a simple contract (which in the case of a lease required to be in writing would have to be evidenced by writing), the courts may give effect to it as is shown in Berry v. Berry [1929]2 K.B.
316.
That equitable doctrine, however, could hardly apply in the present case because the variation here might be said to have been made without consideration.
With regard to estoppel, the representation made in relation to reducing the rent was not a representation of an existing fact.
It was a representation, in effect, as to the future, namely, that payment of the rent would not be enforced at the full rate but only at the reduced rate.
Such a representation would not give rise to an estoppel, because, as was said in Jorden v. Money (1854) 5 H.L.C. 185 (below, p.252), a representation as to the future must be embodied as a contract or be nothing.
But what is the position in view of developments in the law in recent years?
The law has not been standing still since Jorden v. Money.
There has been a series of decisions over the past 50 years which, although they are said to be cases of estoppel are not really such.
They are cases in which a promise was made which was intended to create legal relations and which, to the knowledge of the person making the promise, was going to be acted on by the person to whom it was made, and which was in fact so acted on.
In such cases the courts have said that the promise must be honoured.
The cases to which I particularly desire to refer are: Fenner v. Blake[1900]lQ.B.426; Re Wickham(1917)34 T.L.R. 158; Re William Porter & Co.
Ltd. [19371 2 All E.R.
361 and Buttery v. Pickard [1946]W.N. 25.
As I have said they are not cases of estoppel in the strict sense.
They are really promises — promises intended to be binding, intended to be acted on, and in fact acted on.
Jorden v. Money can be distinguished, because there the promisor made it dear that she did not intend to be legally bound, whereas in the cases to which I refer the proper inference was that the promisor did intend to be bound.
In each case the court held the promise to be binding on the party making it, even though under the old common law it might be difficult to find any consideration for it.
The courts have  not gone so far as to give a cause of action in damages for the breach of such a promise, but they have refused to allow the party making it to act inconsistently with it.
It is in that sense, and that sense only, that such a promise gives rise to an estoppel.
The decisions are a natural result of the fusion of law and equity: for the cases of Hughes v. Metropolitan Railway (below, p. 254); Birmingham and District Land Co. v. London & North Western Rly. (below, p.255); and Salisbury (Marguess) v. Gilmore [1942]2 K.B.
38, 51, afford a sufficient basis for saying that a party would not be allowed in equity to go back on such a promise.
In my opinion, the time has now come for the validity of such a promise to be recognised.
The logical consequence, no doubt, is that a promise to accept a smaller sum in discharge of a larger sum, if acted upon, is binding notwithstanding the absence of consideration: and if the fusion of law and equity leads to this result, so much the better.
That aspect was not considered in Foakes v. Beer (above, p. 240).
At this time of day, however, when law and equity have been joined together for over 70 years, principles must be reconsidered in the light of their combined effect.
It is to be noticed that in the Sixth Interim Report of the Law Revision Committee, paras.
35, 40, it is recommended that such a promise as that to which I have referred, should be enforceable in law even though no consideration for it has been given by the promisee.
It seems to me that, to the extent I have mentioned, that result has now been achieved by the decisions of the courts.
I am satisfied that a promise such as that to which I have referred is binding and the only question remaining for my consideration is the scope of the promise in the present case.
I am satisfied on all the evidence that the promise here was that the ground rent should be reduced to £1,250 a year as a temporary expedient while the block of flats was not fully, or substantially fully let, owing to the conditions prevailing.
That means that the reduction in the rent applied throughout the years down to the end of 1944, but early in 1945 it is plain that the flats were fully let, and, indeed the rents received from them (many of them not being affected by the Rent Restrictions Acts), were increased beyond the figure at which it was originally contemplated that they would be let.
At all events the rent from them must have been very considerable.
I find that the conditions prevailing at the time when the reduction in rent was made, had completely passed away by the early months of 1945.
I am satisfied that the promise was understood by all parties only to apply under the conditions prevailing at the time when it was made, namely, when the flats were only partially let, and that it did not extend any further than that.
When the flats became fully let, early in 1945, the reduction ceased to apply.
In those circumstances, under the law as I hold it, it seems to me that rent is payable at the full rate for the quarters ending September 29 and December 25, 1945.
If the case had been one of estoppel, it might be said that in any event the estoppel would cease when the conditions to which the representation applied came to an end, or it also might be said that it would only come to an end on notice.
In either case it is only a way of ascertaining what is the scope of the representation.
I prefer to apply the principle that a promise intended to be binding, intended to be acted on and in fact acted on, is binding so far as its terms properly apply.
Here it was binding  as covering the period down to the early part of 1945, and as from that time full rent is payable.
I therefore give judgment for the plaintiff company for the amount claimed.
Judgment for the plaintiff.
Note
Denning J. hints that Foakes v. Beer (1884) might have been decided differently if the fusion of law and equity by the Judicature Acts 1873–1875 had been considered.
He says that the decisions on which he relies, the most important of which is Hughes v. Metropolitan Radway (1877), below, p. 254, were a natural result of that fusion.
Why, then was the principle in Hughes not applied in Foakes v. Beer?
Lords Selborne and Blackburn were in both cases.
Is the answer that the principle applied in Hughes was entirely inapplicable to both Foakes v. Beer and High Trees?
That principle might be formulated as follows: if A tells B (by words or conduct) that B need not perform a contractual (or other) obligation owed by B to A and B takes A at his word and does not perform that obligation, A cannot treat that non-performance as a breach of contract entitling him to damages or to terminate the contract.
It would be entirely wrong that A should be allowed to treat as a legal wrong that to which he has consented.
It was this principle which applied in Hughes.
A, the landlord, having (by conduct) told B, his tenant, ‘You need not fulfil your contractual duty to repair the premises within six months of the notice I have given you,’ could not forfeit the lease (that is, terminate the contract) on the ground that B had broken his contract.
Foakes v. Beer appears to be an application of a second, quite different, principle: if A tells B that B need not perform a contractual (or other) obligation owed by B to A, A can change his mind and require B to perform that obligation in so far as it is still possible to do so.
A is not alleging that B has broken his contract—he is simply saying ‘Now you must perform—and if you fail to do so, that will be a breach of contract.’
If Hughes was relevant to the decision in Foakes it must follow that Pinnel's Case was equally relevant to the decision in Hughes but it was not cited in the latter case and it would surely have been very surprising it if had been.
Many of the cases which have from time to time been relied on in support of the High Trees doctrine are clearly examples of only the first principle.
For example, Panoutsos v. Raymond Hadley [1917]2 K.B.
473, C.A., a case frequently cited by Lord Denning: under a contract of sale by A to B, B has a duty to open a confirmed credit.
A, by words or conduct, tells B that the unconfirmed credit which B has opened will do.
A may not terminate the contract on the ground that B has committed a breach by not opening a confirmed credit—but he may insist that B opens a confirmed credit within a reasonable time and, if B does not do so, he will then be in breach of contract.
In High Trees, the landlord, having accepted half rent for, say, one year, would clearly have been precluded from asserting, ‘You have broken your contract and I forfeit the lease.
’ That would have been exactly analogous to Hughes.
It does not follow that he could not say, ‘You must now pay me the arrears of rent for the past year.’
Foakes v. Beer says he could do that.
Denning J. denies it.
It is the doctrine that the promise has this wider effect which is known as ‘equitable estoppel’ or, more commonly, ‘promissory estoppel.’
See Maharaj v. Chand [1986]3 All E.R.
107, P.C. 