

A SEASON OF ICE
After the first success in the matter of Amy Larner, who was now comfortably situated with Dr Horrocks's friends in Saxburgh, Edwin Frere found himself a little at a loss, for his parish proved less permeable than he had hoped to the motions of the spirit.
He had inherited a sleepy congregation from Matthew Stukely.
Only the church band — two clarionets, a serpent, a bassoon and an ill-tempered violoncello — brought much vigour to the services; after the harmonies of King's their enthusiasm fell stridently on the Rector's ear.
His wish that the entire community might join in the responses had met with no immediate assent and so, apart from the hymns, his own voice and the clerk's must remain the sole conductors of divine energy.
There were, however, some lusty singers among his parishioners, and he looked forward to the time when it might prove possible to fill the chancel with an unsurpliced choir.
Otherwise they were a dour lot these rural East Anglians.
Though the village seemed blessedly free from active dissent, even those most in need seemed more suspicious of than grateful for Frere's efforts of charitable service.
His visits were regarded as occasions for embarrassment rather than pleasure or consolation, and he was left wondering why, when his motives were generous, these people should find it so difficult to respond with a matching warmth.
Sadly, if patiently, he came to recognize that, though he might be their Rector, he remained — and would, he feared, for some time remain — a foreigner first.
Neither had Frere derived much encouragement from his fellow clergymen in the area.
The best of them, Canon Ivory in Saxburgh, brought more diligence to the care of his hives and garden than to the needs of his parish.
The worst were spreaders of terror, like Cuthbert in Thrandeston, or crassly negligent, like  Jackman of Shippenhall who spent his days ruing the loss of his investment in a bogus railway company, and took pleasure only in riding to hounds.
The sole promise of rewarding friendship had come from Sir Henry Agnew and his daughter; yet both now, it seemed, were deeply engaged on speculative work of their own, and had taken to a life of almost complete seclusion.
Despite the difficulties Frere was committed to his new life and regretted only that enthusiasm came less easily to his wife.
An educated woman, attuned to the refinements of Cambridge society, Emilia found it hard to relate otherwise than de haut en bas even to the local gentry.
Though she tried as faithfully as she might to devote herself to the needs of this rude community, she knew that she was not greatly liked and the knowledge injured her.
It was not that she felt a need for approval, but it was disheartening that these people should show so little comprehension of the sacrifice she had made in wedding her life to theirs.
Nor would Edwin concede more than a spineless encouragement that she be hopeful and humble in their work together.
He seemed incapable of accepting that she was very lonely.
Mere dared not silence, but neither could he see the value of, Emilia's recurrent nostalgic reveries over their former life; but he was deeply troubled when she drew his attention to the fact that the services of a curate could be acquired for as little as thirty pounds a year.
He knew what was suggested by her apparently abstract interest and would not hear of it, yet the price of his deafness was high.
Emilia's subsequent ill-temper spent itself on the domestic staff, and she interpreted his own efforts to placate the ruffled servants as treachery.
‘You will always seek the easy way, Edwin,’ she complained, ‘and it will not serve.
The softness of your manner may appear to win their loyalty but only feeds their impertinence.
And it is I, not you, who must bear the brunt of it.
Were you to bring a tenth of the consideration that you show them and your parishioners to needs that lie closer to home you would find a more contented wife at your side.
I would not be like this.
It is not native to my disposition.
Were my friends in Cambridge to see the change in me I vow they would not believe it.
I can hardly believe it myself.’
As the days grew shorter, the Rectory colder, the pleasure they  took in reading together or playing backgammon before the fire began to pall.
Their prayers beside the bed were more articulate in their silences than anything that was uttered aloud.
And then, miraculously it seemed, the most fervent of Frere's prayers was answered.
Shortly after a delay in her monthly courses Emilia fainted and both knew that, at last, she was pregnant.
To all who heard it — even if they did not understand the full depths of the resonance he intended — Edwin Frere's first Christmas sermon to the congregation of Munding St Mary's was clearly an inspired delivery.
There, at the heart of the cold season, at the very dead of winter, he spoke in bright impassioned terms of the birth of the Christ-child as the abiding promise of new life.
His previous sermons had been pitched a little too high for their comprehension.
The words had sailed over their heads to be lost among the hammer-beams.
One could not doze easily as one had done in Matt Stukely's day for there was something too insistently personal in this new parson's efforts to reach them; yet they had remained stolidly unreached till now when the fervour of his exhortation spoke to them as with an angel's tongue.
It was cold inside the little candle-lit church but each heart was briefly warmed by the Rector's words and yearned again for its lost innocence.
At the first chords of the carol —‘O Come, All Ye Faithful’— they raised their voices as though they sought to equal in adoration the praises of the angels in Bethlehem long ago.
To complete the picture it is necessary to add that, at each reference to babies and new life, Mrs Bostock and Eliza Waters had exchanged meaningful smiles.
They knew the secret of the parson's enthusiasm.
They knew too that the parson s wire was distressed by a persistent sickness that left her retching and queasy; and though there was some satisfaction in seeing her humbled, the two friends were quick to remark on how little such eagerly expectant fathers as the parson truly understood of the tribulations of the woman's role in these mysteries.
Nevertheless it was out of his own immediate sense of the renewal of life, his very own good news that seemed to match the eternal Good News out of Bethlehem, that Frere spoke to his  congregation that Christmas.
He knew that, for the first time, his words had found them.
He was glowing like an altar-candle as he spoke, and the words presented themselves like gifts.
They were hardly his own yet sprang from his heart as though, in those exalted moments, it were itself a living vessel of the Christmas mystery.
New life, green as the holly leaf, was at work inside him as surely as it stirred inside his wife.
Around him the voices of his congregation swelled in jubilant carol.
His own rich baritone rang out with joy, and at the words Lo he abhors not the Virgin's womb, Frere thought briefly, almost affectionately, of Gypsy May in the cold and dark outside those walls.
What was she, after all, but a crude precursor of the Divine Mother whose labours they celebrated here in a church consecrated to her name?
At all times all wise men had revered the mysterious organ of generation through which alone might life be entered.
It was no devourer but the very portal of life.
So, Sing, choirs of angels, Sing in exultation, Sing, all ye citizens of Heaven above.
Glory to God in the highest’
Glory.
In excelcis Gloria.
Early that January a bitter wind blowing off the far Urals seized East Anglia in a grip of ice.
After a night-long blizzard the villagers of Munding woke to find the water-meadows glittering and still, the ford across the lane crusted over.
The repose of snow was everywhere.
The wind had dropped but the still air winced with frost.
All the pumps were frozen and had to be freed with burning straw.
Mattocks were taken to the ice-bound troughs.
Icicles dangled from roof-thatch and porch.
Each window pane hung dizzily fronded.
Cattle moaned in the stalls.
When they staled in the yards it quickly froze.
The geese seemed driven off their heads with ice as the nights became a vast gallery of frozen stars, the air so stiff it scarcely yielded breath.
The moon itself was not colder or more silent than this strangely arctic Munding landscape.
Already it felt as though the earth would never warm again.
Like it or not, Louisa Agnew was driven back upon the Hall.
Observing her return from the Decoy Lodge one afternoon, blue  and chapped about the lips, her father forbad further voyages across the lake until that frozen wind relented.
So well had her work progressed at the Lodge, and so greatly — for all the discomfort — had she enjoyed her solitude, that Louisa momentarily tried defiance; but she was shivering uncontrollably even as she did so.
She knew it was with good reason that she had brought her papers back across the lake that day.
There was no virtue in having her fire-soul expire in ice while she laboured to make it burn more brightly for the world.
If Nature herself sought to impede her progress, then resistance was mere pride and folly.
There would be time enough in more clement days to come.
By the next dawn — a Saturday — even the lake at Easterness was frozen over.
For the first time in years it was thick enough to bear.
Furthermore the wind had dropped, the sun shone brilliantly over the ice, and already, early in the morning, small boys were sliding through the radiant air, whooping and hallooing, and sending broken boughs skidding across the frozen surface with a hollow, reverberating whoosh.
Few people in the village had skates but those who did were not the only ones to gather at the lake that morning without invitation or fear of rebuke.
Such a rare marvel had instantly become public property.
Even Sir Henry came out of his chill library to stand for a time, wrapped in greatcoat and mufflers, surveying the Breughel-like gathering at the lake.
‘Tundra,’ he said with distaste, the word accompanied by a white plume of breath.
‘Don't much care for it myself but it seems the people do.
Louisa, we should have Ducker get out the stove…roast some chestnuts…mull some wine.
If any of these poor beggars die of cold old Starling will have a hard time digging a hole for them.’
‘You arrived at the thought a moment before I did,’ his daughter answered.
‘It's good to see you outdoors again, father.
To see some colour in your cheeks.’
Henry Agnew sniffed.
‘Well, I've tasted the air and found it frigid.
Enough is enough.’
‘You will not stay to watch me skate?’
She pouted at the shake of his fur hat.
‘And surely once word reaches Saxburgh that the lake is bearing Tom Horrocks will ride out to take a turn on the ice?’
‘Then he may join me indoors when he's had enough, as I already have.’
With that the old man turned away to give orders that the assembled villagers be shown the hospitality of the Hall.
Privily he would have liked to enjoy the fun but his heart was already labouring against the cold.
It frightened him a little.
Louisa had been skidding unsteadily about the ice for the best part of an hour when a carriage came round the rear drive of the Hall and, after a moment's debate, Edwin Frere sprang down to give a helping hand to his well-muffled wife.
Louisa was surprised by the arrival and glad of it, for young Frank Wharton had been ragging mercilessly her occasional graceless descents to the ice, petticoats and undergarments protruding from her skirt, skates flailing above them.
Frank's incorrigible efforts at flirtation had become tiresome to her and, the truth of the matter was, he was no great dandy on the ice himself for all his mockery.
It was a relief therefore to make for the frozen shore where the parson was protesting that his wife would be safer and more comfortable if she remained in the carriage.
She might observe the proceedings equally well from there.
‘I am no invalid,’ Emilia replied.
‘If you will not permit me to skate you must at least allow me to stand near the ice.
This is as close as I have felt to Cambridgeshire for some considerable time.’
She turned to greet Louisa with a ruddy-cheeked smile.
‘Good morning, Miss Agnew.
Do I discern that skating has not been a frequent pleasure in these parts?’
‘Sadly so, Mrs Frere, as my inelegance attests.
The lake rarely freezes so we have little opportunity to discover our ice-legs.
But you are looking well this morning.
It is a great delight to see the glow of health about you.
We have wine on the mull.
May I offer you a warming glass?’
Emilia sighed and waved a weak, refusing hand.
‘I fear it will not agree with me.
It is a pleasure, like that of the ice, I must forego…in the interests of the third of our small party, you understand?’
‘Of course.
But, Mr Frere, surely I can persuade you?’
‘In a moment, Miss Agnew, I would be delighted — but first I must try our Norfolk ice.’
‘It seems from the eager glint in your eye that you are a practised hand…or do I mean foot?’
‘In my day, Miss Agnew, in my day.’
‘Then you must impress us, Mr Frere.
If you skate with the same passion as you preach I dare say you will have the whole parish at your feet.’
It was perhaps more than the chill air that flushed the parson's cheeks as he bent to fasten his skates.
‘After the narrow dikes of Cambridgeshire,’ he said standing again, ‘the span of this lake offers an exhilarating prospect.
Will you accompany me, Miss Agnew?’
‘I should rather keep company with Mrs Frere.
We shall stand breathless in admiration together.’
‘Then here I go.’
Frere stepped on to the ice, sniffed at the cold air, and then, hands clasped at his back, the tail of his frock-coat lifting a little in the breeze, he sailed off.
One confident stride after another pushed him out across the ice until he wheeled sharply, shedding a spume of flakes at his feet.
He smiled back at them, shifting his weight smoothly from foot to foot as he reversed, turned again and was off at an ever accelerating pace round the bend of the lake and swiftly out of sight.
Louisa gasped with delight to see the man and his reflection travel together so fluently.
The party of astonished villagers raised a spontaneous cheer at this virtuoso performance.
Open-mouthed, a little aghast perhaps, Frank Wharton pushed himself stealthily further out across the ice where he could view the parson's progress, the better to see how the thing should be done.
‘Upon my soul,’ Louisa exclaimed to Emilia Frere, ‘your husband is a man of surprises.
Why, he is as proud as a regimental stallion.
I confess his grace amazes me.’
Emilia smiled with satisfaction but said nothing.
Inwardly she chafed a little that she too could not take to the ice and show this country maid a quicksilver pair of heels.
How exhausting it was the way circumstances conspired against her simple pleasures.
Momentarily Louisa was troubled by her companion's silence.
Had a too open show of admiration given offence?— for she had felt a flame leap to her throat to watch the man's confident pride in his body, the actuality of his skill, the sheer command.
Who would have thought the ear-tugging parson to have such grace?
Who would have thought it?
Then her eyes were caught by Frere's swift return around the  bend of the lake.
Imprinted against the sculpted white drifts of the opposite shore he sprang from the ice in a swift, frisky curvet, landed with perfect balance, and sped towards them with a lithe, energetic swing from foot to foot, faultlessly timed.
The shores rang to the sound of his skates against the ice, a resonant hollow warble drawn at each stride from the depths of the lake.
He pulled himself erect and floated effortlessly across the shining surface to brake in a shower of ice-shards at their feet.
He was panting and smiling, an ice-glow radiant at his face.
‘This is heaven,’ he said.
‘Certainly you skate like an angel, Mr Frere.’
The male voice came from behind Louisa and Emilia.
They turned and saw Tom Horrocks smiling there, a pair of skates slung over his shoulder.
‘If the road to Heaven ever freezes over you'll be there before the rest of us.
But then I suppose you would be anyway.
At least I shall be warmer in the opposite direction.’
‘I very much doubt you will have the chance to discover,’ Frere laughed.
‘Take a turn with me, Doctor, and I'll lay my faith to your scepticism that I make the weir and back before you.’
Tom Horrocks snorted.
‘I'm too old a hand to make wagers with sharpers, Mr Frere — even those sporting bands.
But if a stately progress to the other shore and back will serve your turn then I'm your man.
provided, of course, I'm furnished with a glass of good red mull before we set out.
It's been a cold ride from Saxburgh.
And are those hot chestnuts that I see?’
‘They are indeed,’ Louisa answered.
‘Come, help yourself.’
Horrocks chatted affably a moment with Tilly who presided over the hoc griddle amidst a ring of ragged children.
He took a chestnut from the pan and bounced it from hand to hand as he turned cheerily to enquire after Mrs Frere's welfare.
‘It's good to see you out and about.
Fresh air is what you need — that and time will see you through these early discomforts.
And you must eat.
Here, have a chestnut.’
Laughing he tossed the hot nut, and Emilia, squealing, caught it in gloved hands.
‘You'll take a glass with me, Mr Frere?’
‘Indeed I will.’
The mull was hot, well-spiced and laced with brandy.
Horrocks smacked his lips.
‘Ichor!’ he exclaimed, ‘— the gods’own blood.
I shall need it if I am to race with Mercury here.’
Louisa started a little at the name so casually used.
Mercury, or Mercurius as he was known to the alchemists, had been much on her mind of late.
He was the tutelary deity of the Hermetic Art —; a slippery, ambiguous figure who was, according to that great master Gerhard Dorn, ‘the true hermaphroditic Adam’.
Only the previous day Louisa had been pondering a passage from the Aurelia occulta in which Mercurius promised to bestow on the adept the powers of male and female, of heaven and earth.
By the philosophers I am named Mercurius, he said there, my spouse is the gold; I am the old dragon found everywhere on the globe of the earth, father and mother, young and old, very strong and very weak…often the order of nature is peversed in me.
I am dark and light.
I am known yet do not exist at all.
I am the carbuncle of the sun, the most noble purified earth, through which you may change copper, iron, tin and lead into gold.
As the familiar words passed through her memory again Louisa was gazing at Edwin Frere where he stood on the ice, warming his hands on the glass of mulled wine, smiling in chatter with Tom Horrocks.
In this moment all contraries seemed reconciled in him — shyness and strength, awkwardness and grace, the spirit bright within the balanced body, his parson's black against the white of the distant drifts.
Beyond him a gleaming snow-light travelled across the lake, and, for a moment, it appeared to flake from his hair.
It shimmered even more vividly around the sunlit icy reflection at his feet with the bright iron of the skate-blades between.
Frere stood tall on the ice, his head thrown back in laughter.
The breath was cold at Louisa's lips.
There was a faltering, unanticipated agitation within her.
This day was turning strange.
She felt as though something quite terrible was about to happen.
Then she knew herself addressed by Emilia Frere.
‘I'm so sorry,’ she answered.
‘An angel passing, my dear?’
Louisa smiled uncertainly.
‘It is so strange, don't you find?
This sudden ice…our little world so utterly transformed.
It feels almost as though it might stay this way for ever.’
Discreetly Emilia dropped the unwanted chestnut in the snow and gathered the collars of her coat about her.
‘It is my earnest hope that it will not.’
Frere turned towards her in concern.
‘You are cold, my dear?
You wish to leave?’
‘Perhaps a few minutes more,’ she answered.
‘You must not disappoint the Doctor of his chase…’
Horrocks looked up from the strapping of his skates.
‘You are well-wrapped, Mrs Frere.
The air will do you no harm.
And this light.
Just look at it.
What do you think, Mr Frere?
Do you not agree that if God ever did say Let there be light he must have been over Norfolk at the time?’
‘He is still there, Dr Horrocks.
Look, his angels are shining from those great hammer-beams of cloud.’
‘To a believer's eye mayhap.
For me the light alone is enough.’
Horrocks saw the shadow of disapproval cross Emilia's face and smiled.
‘Come then, Frere,’ he said, ‘humiliate me.
You will join us, Louisa?’
He stepped down among the frozen reeds.
‘I fear the two of you will leave me far behind.’
‘Not at all,’ Frere answered.
‘Come, we shall skate three-handed, like the horses of a Russian sleigh.’
‘Excellent,’ said Horrocks, ‘that way I am sure to stand.’
‘Or I shall drag you both down with me.’
Louisa stepped on to the ice, crossed her hands and held them out to her escorts.
She was breathing quickly.
‘This is very gallant.’
‘By the left then,’ Horrocks urged, ‘and off we go.’
Slowly at first, then ever more rapidly, she was drawn out across the lake.
Ahead of her glittered the tracks of Frere's previous solitary excursion.
The wind came cold and fast to her face.
Supported by her two companions she found that she need not even move her feet.
Once they had turned the Mount, with the full span of the ice shining before them, the two men gathered pace, at once in harmony and contention, drawing vigour from the presence of the young woman between them, who cried out, not in fear but encouraging them on to greater exertions.
Her lips were open so that the cold air came gasping there like water flowing much too fast to drink.
Helpless other than in the firm clasp of their hands, she was all exhilaration; sweeping, it seemed, down a steep cylinder of ice and air.
Both the sun and the pale moon were in the sky above her, and she was, in the words of an old adept, ‘running without running, moving without motion’.
Ice shot from their feet like sparks, scattering behind  them.
And on they sped so swiftly that she might almost have cried out with Ostanes, less in trepidation than delight, ‘Save me, O God, for I stand between two exalted brilliances…
Each of them has reached me and I know not how to save myself.’
Then Tom Horrocks was panting beside her.
‘Enough,’ he called, ‘enough.
This old horse is jaded.’
Firmly clutching her hand he slowed, and Frere arced around them on still skates so that he made a sweeping circle on the ice before they came, breathless, to a halt.
Tom Horrocks dropped his head, hands at his knees, groaning and smiling up at them.
‘Another ten seconds,’ he gasped, ‘and I should have been down, or Louisa torn limb from limb between us.
You are a fit man, Mr Frere…
You must carry me back.’
He stood erect again, reached a hip-flask from his pocket and proffered it.
Smiling, Frere declined.
Seized by an impulse of delight, and with an untypical desire to impress, he pushed away again and was suddenly spinning like a top on his skates, arms outstretched.
Pigeon-toed beneath her crinoline, Louisa clapped his performance, and the sound of her clapping sped across the ice to echo back from the trees.
Ducks, disgruntled among barbed reeds, took flight.
Further down the lake, back in the direction whence they had come, children were playing coach and horses with a sled.
The sound of their cries tinkled on frigid air.
Tossing his head, Frere braked to a sudden stop.
Horrocks, who had watched with the flask arrested half-way to his mouth, said, ‘Here's to you, Mr Frere — a true prince of the ice,’ and swigged at his brandy.
Frere stood feeling the park sway around him as he panted, and when the dizzy motion stopped he was looking through the brilliant air at a thatched dwelling, snow-laden, secreted among the trees, its dark jetty seized in ice.
‘What a splendid situation,’ he said.
‘I had not noticed it before.’
‘The old Decoy Lodge,’ said Horrocks.
‘But who loves solitude enough to live there, I wonder?’
‘That is my phrontistery, Mr Frere’, Louisa smiled, ‘— my retreat in more clement weather.
That is where I go to be myself.’
‘In my experience, Frere answered, ‘you are that everywhere, Miss Agnew.’
‘But I have secrets, Mr Frere, and one needs a place to keep them.’
He gazed at her, puzzled, for a moment, then assumed that he was teased.
‘You could not have found one more sequestered’, he said, ‘— or more lovely.’
‘I thought the Lodge had been shut up,’ the doctor put in.
‘I have opened it again.’
Louisa rubbed her hands for warmth.
Even inside the gloves her fingers were stinging a little.
‘And Henry does not object?’
Louisa arched her brows.
‘He does not greatly care for it, but I need its solitude if I am to accomplish what I am about.’
‘May one be so inquisitive as to enquire what that is?’
‘Nothing of which you would approve, Doctor Horrocks,’ she teased, and saw immediately that the Rector might misunderstand.
She turned towards him, ‘Nor of which you would disapprove, I hope.’
‘More mumbo jumbo?’
Horrocks laughed.
‘I am sure you would think so.’
‘Henry should know better than to keep you cooped up with his books.
If I were ten years younger, my girl, I should come and carry you away myself.’
‘And ruin your bachelor peace with my tattle?
I think you deceive us both.’
‘This is where you belong,’ the doctor protested, ‘out here, in the light of day.
There is more to life than the mind, young woman.’
‘Indeed there is.
More too than the flesh — for all your assertions to the contrary.’
Tom Horrocks shook his head and slipped the flask back into his pocket.
‘Either way,’ he said, ‘the flesh has its needs, and they must out or fust.
Am I not right, Mr Frere?’
Frere stood flustered at the turn their banter had taken.
Such intimate familiarity was no part of his normal intercourse with the parish.
He was surprised that the doctor should seek to draw him into such boldness with one who was of the other sex, and the daughter of a friend.
He tried for abstraction.
‘There is a case to be made for asceticism…’
‘A damned special case,’ Horrocks grunted.
‘Louisa is no nun.
Look at those eyes.
If there is not more mischief there than…’
But his comparison was interrupted by a shouting down the lake.
All three of them turned their heads.
Young Frank Wharton stood unsteadily on his skates, waving one hand and calling, ‘Mr Frere.
Mr Frere.
You must come at once.’
The chill air was suddenly colder about them.
‘Something is amiss,’ Frere said.
‘You will excuse me…’
At a speed that neither could match Louisa and Horrocks saw him hasten back down the lake.
They were still some distance away when he slewed to a halt beside Frank Warton and, after the briefest confabulation, sped on.
Frank shouted, ‘Doctor, you must come too.
It's Mrs Frere.’
Louisa and Horrocks exchanged anxious glances.
‘You can make your way back without me?’ he asked.
‘Of course.
Hurry.’
On his way to the lake-head Horrocks learned from Frank that the parson's wife had swooned all of a heap by her carriage.
‘As soon as we get back,’ Horrocks ordered, ‘fetch my bag for me.
It hangs by the saddle of my bay.
Be sharp about it.’
The doctor was sweating from his exertions as he pushed his way through the silent ring around Mrs Frere.
‘Stand back there,’ he snapped.
‘Give the woman air.’
Panting and frightened, Frere cradled his wife's head in the crook of his arm.
A cape had been laid beneath her and she was wrapped in Frere's own coat.
Emilia's face was white almost as the snow, but she was conscious and moaning now.
Mrs Tillotson stood wringing her hands.
‘That happen all of a flash,’ she was saying.
‘One minute she were up by the carriage, the next she were down on her back like a tumbled ewe.’
Horrocks knelt, put his hand to the woman's brow then to the pulse at her wrist.
‘All right, my dear,’ he murmured, ‘we'll have you right as rain in a moment.
Are you in pain at all?’
Emilia closed her eyes and nodded.
‘I think…’ she faltered, opened her eyes again.
Horrocks saw the fear there.
He cast a quick glance into Frere's anxious face.
‘It is the morning-sickness?’
Frere asked.
‘Stand over her a moment,’ Horrocks said.
‘You too, Tilly.
You must forgive me, Frere.’
He moved the coat aside, quickly lifted Emilia's skirt and the petticoats beneath, then drew them  down again.
The glance had confirmed his suspicions.
He looked up at Mrs Tillotson.
‘Can we fashion some sort of stretcher?
We must bring her into the Hall.’
Emilia heard the urgency in his voice.
For a moment she stared, wide-eyed, then her head drooped to her shoulder.
‘Where the devil's Frank with my bag?’ the doctor snapped, for —; as much in shock as in pain — Emilia had fainted away again.
‘I should have taken her home sooner,’ Frere was saying.
‘We should not have come at all.’
‘Don't berate yourself, man,’ the doctor answered gruffly.
‘If this was going to happen it would have happened anyway.’
He saw the terrible realization dawn on Frere's face.
His voice softened a little.
‘It may not seem so now, but I promise you a miscarriage is one of nature's mercies.’
Louisa arrived in time to hear this and to see, a moment later, the tears start to Frere's eyes, then she was down beside the unconscious woman, holding her head.
When she looked up again she saw the tears roll in silence to Frere's chin.
‘I'm so sorry,’ she heard herself saying.
‘I am so terribly sorry.’
Frere was stunned with grief.
It was Louisa as much as the doctor who supervised the carrying of Emilia into the Hall, holding her cold hand, murmuring small phrases of consolation and encouragement as the improvised litter was lifted carefully up the stairs and the invalid laid in the same bed where she had passed her first night at Easterness.
There was an expression of frozen terror on Emilia's face.
It stood between her and tears, as though they too were frozen even before they might reach the air.
The careful procession into the Hall had felt like a kind of funeral.
At the doctor's bidding Frere waited outside the bedroom, awkwardly attended by Henry Agnew.
‘It may be for the best, man,’ Agnew was saying, ‘though God knows I know how you must feel.
My own wife you know…’
But he halted there, seeing more cause for anxiety than consolation in his path.
‘Perhaps some brandy…for shock?’
Staring at space, Frere shook his head.
There was a great gash torn in his world.
Nothing would focus.
Everything was frozen yet strangely unstill.
Outside he could hear children shouting on  the lake.
The world went on, ignorant how everything was changed.
The Hall had become an island in space, its time altered, its atmosphere scarcely breathable.
Everything there was very fragile.
There had been some error.
This was not how it was to be.
Edwin Frere looked into Agnew's old face and saw only hopeless consternation there, as though he too were overwhelmed with feelings so vast and flood-like that no word might answer them.
Somewhere a clock was chiming.
Louisa Agnew was feeling not faint but dazed.
The contrast with her exhilaration on the frozen lake had come so swiftly.
In the bedroom she had done everything that Tom Horrocks had bidden her, reflexively, without panic; yet she had known herself for the first time up against the frailty of the human organism —; the mess of it, the degradation.
There had been a great deal of blood.
Emilia was tallow-pale, a frail parcel of flesh, shedding a life that was her own and not her own.
There were things to be done, and they had been done, and everything was inexplicable.
Tilly and Alice, she knew, would be able to speak of it; already, below stairs, the events were becoming narrative, being talked into a kind of submission.
She herself was silenced now.
There was no adequacy of words — only this tranced awareness of mortality, and of the pain that the Rector and his wife must share to the exclusion of all others, alone in the bedroom, while Louisa stood between her father and the doctor in the hall, her limbs aching, her mind strangely uncertain of itself.
‘It would be unwise to try to move her back to the Rectory,’ Tom Horrocks was saying.
‘Not for two or three days, I think.
There is some risk of infection, of fever.’
Henry Agnew cleared his throat and nodded.
Louisa saw that some further response was required.
‘Of course, she must stay here,’ she answered.
‘I will care for her myself.’
‘I'm as much concerned for her emotional as her bodily welfare,’ the doctor warned.
‘I understand that the Freres had long wanted this child.
She may seek to blame herself.
She may  feel that she has failed her husband.
Such feelings are understandable but she must not be allowed to brood on them.
They are without foundation and can only injure here.’
Tom Horrocks reflected for a moment on the little he knew of Emilia Frere.
‘It may not be easy, I fear.’
‘She's not an easy woman,’ said Agnew.
‘Mrs Frere is less strong than she would have us all believe.’
Secretly, and with some self-reproach, he found himself resenting the circumstances of this imposition.
‘The husband too will require attention.
The shock of it will come hard.’
Remembering the parson's delight on the ice, Tom Horrocks shook his head.
‘I tell you, there are times when I could agree with the good doctor of Norwich, old Tom Browne, that it were better if we humans propagated in the manner of trees.
There would be a sight less suffering in the world.’
‘And less joy,’ Henry Agnew muttered quietly, remembering his wife and finding his better feelings in the memory, ‘less joy.’
With a sudden access of cold doubt Louisa Agnew recognized that, beyond the narrow world of her books, of neither suffering nor joy had she any great understanding.
Emilia Frere passed three nights in the bedroom at the Hall before Tom Horrocks professed himself satisfied that all danger was passed and she might return to the Rectory.
At first— perhaps under the soothing influence of laudanum —; she had seemed grateful for, even to enjoy, the attention she received.
Soon, however, she confessed to finding Mrs Tillotson a fusspot and Alice a tiresome chatterbox.
She would receive visits only from her husband and Louisa.
Louisa was patient with this choice.
Though she was not entirely at ease with Mrs Frere her heart flooded with sympathy for her loss.
As best she might she encouraged her to speak her grief, but soon saw that her efforts, however tender, were experienced as intrusion, as invasion almost.
Emilia showed little wish to speak, Louisa had to content herself with reading aloud beside the bed, though the books she suggested were soon rejected in favour of such verses as those of Felicia Hemans and Anna Letitia Barbauld — works that were not at all to her own  taste.
Yet the reading appeared to bring Emilia a kind of doleful peace.
After both his first two visits Frere came unhappily from the bedroom, managing a brave but unconvincing smile and admitting only his boundless gratitude to Louisa for her pains.
He had the look of a punished dog, but he too was unwilling to speak whatever troubled feelings lay behind his mien.
Louisa felt a little helpless before his diffident manner, and she was surprised when Emilia insisted that she remain in the room throughout Frere's third visit; surprised and discomfited, for it was not a happy interview.
The parson was as effusive in his attentions as circumstance would allow, but Emilia petulantly resisted them.
Louisa was left feeling that she had been appointed audience to a play of the wife's devising, one in which the heroine's suffering was the principal theme and which might, indeed, have been moving had not the sense of theatre been so pronounced, and had the script been less expressive of a plaintive heart than of its tribulations.
In the hope that it might cheer his wife Frere had brought a letter from her dearest friend in Cambridge, who was, of course, as yet unaware of Emilia's condition.
The letter was opened and read in silence.
‘How Charlotte misses me,’ she said at last, ‘and how well she understands!
She quotes Hazlitt, Edwin: ‘There is nothing good to be had in the country, or if there is, they will not let you have it.’
' Emilia smiled across at Louisa.
‘Of course, my dear, it is not entirely true.
When I am quite well again I must inform her so.
Edwin, I would be utterly desolate were it not for my faithful companion here.
We owe a great debt of gratitude.’
‘Indeed we do, my dear.’
Observing Louisa's embarrassment, Frere tried a change of course.
‘I have written to your family,’ he said.
I am in hopes that your sister Hattie will come to ease your convalescence at the Rectory.’
‘Is it yet posted?’
‘Not yet.
I was intending to…’
‘I should not wish her to come yet.
Nor that my father be made unduly anxious on my account.’
She looked to Louisa again.
‘My father is not at all a well man.
Indeed, I had the greatest reservations about leaving him.’
Her gaze returned to her husband.
‘I think you have been too forward, Edwin.
We should wait until  we are quite certain that all is well.
Then I myself shall write in reassurance.’
‘If you think it best.’
‘I do.
Do you not agree, Louisa?’
‘As I do not have the good fortune to know your family, Emilia, I am hardly in a position to say, though I feel sure they would wish to know of your distress.’
‘They shall.
In good time they shall.
But one must not burden others unnecessarily.
I am already distraught that you yourself have been put to such pains.’
Even as she reassured Emilia once more that her concern was groundless Louisa found herself reflecting on the power of the weak, its hold upon the minds of others.
How sad was the Rector's face, she thought; sad as the sound of a cello on a rainy afternoon.
Deeply as she sympathized with the woman's condition she saw no reason why the husband should be made its victim.
She was troubled by the contrast between Edwin Frere, ice-dancer, and this submissive comforter.
Yet even as she felt humiliated on his behalf she recognized that she too had been drawn into complicity with Emilia's will.
Where had the woman learned such stratagems?
Like father, like daughter, she guessed — but then had she not herself devoted her days to a father's needs?
And with what consequences, she wondered, for her own development?
How complex was the human world!
How much more so than the enigmas of her books!
All that had once seemed clear was clouding now, and she chafed under the demand for moral adjustment to this difficult guest with her very real needs.
Did she have so little charity after all?
Almost she disliked herself.
On what was to be the patient's last night at the Hall Louisa looked up from her reading and saw that Emilia was in tears.
Something akin to gratitude overwhelmed her.
Many times Louisa had wished that the woman might weep as her husband had done, might permit something deeper than care for her creature comforts to reach her.
Delicately Louisa had tried again and again to create the opportunity, but she had been allowed no room.
Whatever pangs of grief and guilt and shame Emilia might  suffer had remained locked inside her, an unapproachable wound.
Astringently if politely, Louisa had been held at bay; till now, when at the lines:
Here must I stop;
Or is there aught beyond?
What hand unseen
Impels me onward through the glowing orbs
Of habitable nature, far remote,
To the dread con fines of eternal night,
To solitudes of waste, unpeopled space,
The deserts of creation, wide and wild,
Where embryo systems and unkindled suns
Sleep in the womb of Chaos?
she heard Emilia sniff and saw the tears in her eyes.
‘My dear.’
Louisa put down the book, crossed to the bed and wrapped an arm about Emilia's shoulders.
There was no deep release of grief, but a tense shuddering of the muscles, a stifled whimpering behind the handkerchief held tightly at Emilia's face.
‘You must let the tears come now,’ Louisa murmured.
‘You must own your grief.
You have tried to be too strong.’
‘It is true,’ Emilia cried, and her breast shuddered again, and the handkerchief was pressed more tightly against her face.
For a long time they clung together so until, with a haggard shaking of her head, Emilia freed herself from the embrace, struggled for, and found, a measure of composure.
Louisa sat back a little on the bed to allow her greater room to breathe, to speak.
‘We are friends are we not?’
Emilia asked weakly.
‘Of course we are.’
With her own handkerchief Louisa dabbed the tears from Emilia's cheek.
It was not precisely true, but since Emilia's first frail arrival in the room there had been no such promise of intimacy between the two women.
‘My dear, since we first came to this terrible place you are the only person to show me true consideration.’
Astonished as she was by this bitter description of the home she loved, Louisa kept her voice gentle.
‘I am sure that cannot be so.
Everyone here cares for you.’
Emilia was shaking her head.
‘Be true with me,’ she said.
‘We  must be true with one another or I fear I shall go quite…’
The handkerchief stifled at birth the terrible thought.
Alarmed now, Louisa stroked the woman's shoulder.
Too well she knew how difficult the others in the Hall had found her, how most of the parish regarded the Rector's wife as an aloof, critical figure who acted solely from duty, with little warmth.
And this was not the moment to suggest that Emilia, with her refusal to let go of Cambridge, to be truly present in the parish, might herself be at fault.
‘I think at least’, she suggested carefully, ‘that you are forgetting your husband.
He is…’
‘My husband is a man,’ Emilia interrupted from the impatience of her pain, ‘with a man's insensitivities.’
‘He is grieving very deeply.’
‘For his child, don't you see?
He is grieving for his child.’
‘But not that alone.
My dear, he is distraught with anxiety for you.’
Breathing heavily Emilia stared at the younger woman as though bereft of all hope that she might be understood.
‘You should hear the poor man…’
Louisa began again, but faltered when she saw Emilia close her eyes and shake her head in the little bonnet she wore.
Then the head was turned aside on the pillow, staring across the room.
‘It is natural that you should suffer from such doubts,’ Louisa attempted.
‘Dr Horrocks told me that you would feel the pain of this experience as…’
‘You do not understand.’
Distressed by the dull anger in her voice, Louisa waited.
‘I am so alone.’
If there was an element of self-pity there it was also a statement of fact.
Louisa received it so, and her heart went out to the suffering woman.
‘Oh my dear.’
Emilia withdrew at her approach.
‘I think I am not long for this place,’ she muttered quietly.
‘Oh come now,’ Louisa answered.
‘The Doctor is more than happy with your progress.
Why, I would guess that after tomorrow's visit he will send you packing back off to your home.
You are on the mend, I promise you.
This very distress is a sure sign of it.
‘That is not my home,’ Emilia said.
Louisa saw immediately that she had misunderstood.
Emilia turned her head to look at her again.
‘You are such a child,’ she said.
‘You cannot know.’
The expression on her face was strange — part sympathy, part derision — and the weakness had gone from her voice.
‘Then you must try to tell me.’
Emilia lay in silence for a long time, biting her lip.
Louisa saw that she had misjudged this woman.
So little had been released from that tight grip, and there was so little natural affinity between them that, for all the hours they had spent in this room together, they remained strangers to one another.
Louisa had lied when she said they were friends.
If she had spoken in charity to an unhappy invalid it had also been negligent of a larger truth: that they were representative of two very different principles —; principles that might meet only in an hour of need, or in honest confrontation with one another.
They might almost have been of a different species.
That Emilia thought her a mere child revealed how little she understood; but then Louisa herself had only limited comprehension of what remained dark and unspoken in this woman who studied her, almost coldly, summoning resolve.
‘You will listen to me now?’
Emilia said.
Swallowing, Louisa nodded.
She held Emilia's eyes in her own grave gaze.
‘And you will hold everything I say in confidence?
In sacred confidence?’
To demur would be to banish the woman still deeper into the wastes of her own loneliness.
Away from the fireplace now Louisa was beginning to feel cold.
She pulled her shawl closer about her shoulders and said uncertainly, ‘Of course.’
Emilia sighed.
One hand seemed to test the quality of the coverlet between her fingers.
‘You have not known a man,’ she said.
‘Really known, I mean…not as a daughter knows her father, however deep the affection she holds for him.
You have not yet suffered at their nakedness, and therefore you have never known how blind they are, how weak.
Nor do you know how cruel that blindness and weakness can be — and all the more so when they are sugared over with sentiment and concern, with the pretence of tenderness.
I promise you, it is quite terrible.
Until  you have known it you will have no conception of what it is to be truly lonely.
To feel yourself a shell-less creature, bereft and vulnerable.’
Emilia stared up, sharp-eyed, at her listener, who was amazed, almost horrified to see the narrow smile at her lips.
‘I think, my dear, you have not yet learned what a curse it is to be born woman.
You think it is all a matter of love and loving, of care and caring…
Very well, I too have had such thoughts.
Before I came here I too believed that love and duty were the compatible ingredients of a woman's life…that loyalty and patience and service were all.
I had not seen that hatred might prove an indispensable friend.’
Again she studied Louisa, smiling at the impact of the word.
‘Now you will misunderstand me again.
You will think that I hate my husband.
I assure you I do not.
He is too weak to bear the force of that…even if I felt it, and I am not a cruel woman.
But I hate this life here.
I hate this place.
And I have grave doubts that I will be able to endure it for long after this…débâcle…this hideousness.’
Appalled by the woman's candour, aware that no word of demurral would answer, Louisa looked down on her unspeaking.
Emilia wished only to be heard.
She sought neither argument nor consolation.
She was a woman alone, making as best she might a terrible virtue of her solitude.
A time might come when she would regret these words, when she would hate Louisa for having heard them.
But they must be heard.
And in silence that passed no judgment, that neither condoned nor denied.
Louisa's hands were very cold.
‘You are wondering why I tell you this.
It is because if I tell no one it will drive me mad, and I have no wish to be mad.
That is why I must leave this place.
There is nothing for me here, don't you see?
It is a wilderness.
There are no people.’
Emilia was breathing quickly now, almost panting.
‘I cannot even grieve over this child, for it would have kept me here.
I didn't want it…not here.
It would have been my gaoler.’
She looked up at Louisa in appeal.
‘I have to get away from here, you see.
It must be done.
Not yet.
Not quite yet.
But soon.’
‘Your husband’, Louisa said, ‘— does he know of these feelings?’
Emilia narrowed her eyes.
‘He knows but he will not hear.
He will not speak of it.
He dare not.
But it will happen…not quite  yet but at the point where he will no longer hinder me with the pretence that he would have me stay.
He must want me to go.’
Louisa was held by those urgent eyes, drawn more deeply than she would have wished into the darkness behind.
‘Can you be so sure that that will happen?’
‘I shall make it happen.’
‘And your husband.
What shall become…?’
Emilia silenced her with a raised finger.
‘That also is why I am telling you this.
Edwin is a weak man.
You will discover that for yourself, if you have not already done so.
He will suffer, of course…as I have suffered…but he will not leave.
Not at first.
He will not feel able to leave, and so for a time he will strive to manage alone.
He may even make a good appearance of doing so.
And he will have the sympathy of the entire parish, of course.
But eventually he will need help.
He will need care.
He will need to be told what he must do.’
Emilia stared at Louisa.
‘You will think me a terrible woman.
Perhaps I am.
But I am not without feeling.
And I meant what I said about you at the start of this.
You may still be a child but you are the only person in this dreadful place who understands the meaning of care.
You must promise that you will show it to him as you have done to me.’
Louisa was transfixed by the woman's gaze.
She felt as though a web had been thrown over her, the same web in which —; however little he knew it — Edwin Frere was deeply entangled.
As though to tighten it a hand came to rest on hers.
Cold as it was, Louisa could feel its power.
She felt that all compassion must have passed from Emilia with the emptying of her womb except for this last residue that smouldered in the promise she exacted now.
For a moment they were both looking at the gold band on Emilia's wedding-finger.
Louisa was breathing very quickly.
Something must be done to free her from this grip.
‘Mrs Frere’, she began, ‘…
Emilia, I think it of the utmost importance that…’
‘Promise me.’
‘I cannot believe that…’
‘It is true.
Promise me.
I implore you.’
The grip tightened.
‘Promise me, or I shall have no peace.’
As she looked down into that face on which all tears had long since dried, Louisa had the deranging sensation that she was in the  presence of a dying woman.
‘Should it come to pass…’
‘It will.
There is no other way.
It will come to pass.’
And Louisa saw the finality of the woman's will.
It was quite absolute.
‘Then I must promise.’
But the hand was still held.
‘Edwin must know nothing of this.
This confidence is sacred.
You have accepted it.’
Confused, almost in tears, Louisa nodded.
Emilia sighed and released her grip.
Her head relaxed back on the pillow.
‘Leave me now,’ she said.
‘I must say my prayers.’
In a trance of dismay Louisa saw that the woman was very far from death; she was no longer ill; not even, as she had earlier been, unhappy.
She was gathering her strength for the season of ice that must settle over Munding Rectory.
THE FIRING
Back at The Pightle, outside the magic circle of the Decoy Lodge, I woke to the Monday sound of rain.
A fine drizzle dripped from the thatch-eaves and brought the scent of the box-hedge through the open window.
When I switched on the radio a sober voice intoned the day's bad news.
I lay there trying to square what I heard with the new enthusiasm derived from Edward and Laura, for I'd left the Lodge around two in the morning, ready to set off with them the next day in search of the horizon.
The whisky had helped, of course, and something anarchic in me responded to Laura's brightened mood.
Edward had become sparkier and we laughed a lot.
I remembered peeing with him under the stars, asking questions about the danger of translating a private spiritual vision into social action.
After all, fanatic ayatollahs and born-again Christians eager for the Rapture set no encouraging example.
He talked about those who had been fired by the spirit but had lost touch with the soul; about unassimilated shadows which foisted evil on to enemies rather than bringing responsibility back home; he talked of tight-ropes and sword-bridges and the narrow course between the clashing rocks.
Then, fastening his zip, he said, ‘One must trust to that star in man which is the visionary imagination.
It wants to live, to thrive.
And the star’— he tipped his head in the general direction of the galaxies —‘is the perfect symbol for the hope it brings because, like a star, it is glimpsed most clearly from the corner of the eye.’
Heady stuff, and to reject it outright with a condescending intellectual leer would have felt like a return trip down the chute into futility; but now, with the radio offering a bleaker view of things, I was less certain why I'd agreed so eagerly to meet him in the library of the Hall this morning.
Bob came by, his umbrella dripping at the door.
Apparently  he'd called the previous evening and been surprised I wasn't there.
He was just checking that I hadn't left for good, was glad that I hadn't, and was that real coffee he could smell?
I liked Bob.
He was predictable but that contrasted happily with Edward's slippery shifts of mood, and there was nothing abstract about either his neighbourliness or his politics.
Both were a generous extension of human decency.
For him, humanism and socialism were the logical development of that common sense which was his strength and, perhaps, his limitation.
Now he was a retired countryman with time on his hands, looking for company.
It felt churlish to tell him that I was in a hurry, that the coffee would have to be quick.
In Munding nobody was in a hurry.
‘I see,’ he said when he learned that I was meeting Edward.
‘That where you were last night?’
I nodded, placing a steaming mug before him.
He sipped it hot, hummed his appreciation.
‘So have you found out what it is yet?’
I looked across at him, unconnected.
‘His obsession.’
‘I'm not sure I'd call it that.’
‘What would you call it?’
‘He is working on something.
In fact, that's why I'm meeting him.
He thinks I might be able to lend a hand.’
‘I see.
The man he wouldn't have a use for is now lending a hand.’
I'd forgotten that I'd said that, and was, in any case, already regretting the admission.
I was also beginning to see why Edward had been loth to speak openly about his work.
Incredulity in one's listener is a great silencer, particularly when it verges on ridicule, and Bob was likely to prove a milder critic than I had been.
‘May one ask what with?’
I had been thinking quickly.
‘Some historical research he's doing.’
‘I thought he didn't believe in history.’
‘It's about the Agnew family.
Some of Ralph's ancestors.’
‘Did they do something interesting then?
Struck me as a dull lot by and large.
On the wrong side in the Civil War, profiteering from the Napoleonic Wars, dutifully sending two sons to get  butchered in Flanders.
Mindless gentry — with a single decent exception.
One of them made a stand for repeal of the Corn Laws, which must have taken some guts in this neck of the woods.’
Then Bob smiled as if in dawning realization.
‘'Course, I suppose our friend might be interested in old Madcap Agnew.
Kindred spirit there perhaps.
Notorious boozer and womanizer.’
‘I don't think so.’
But Bob had warmed to the idea.
‘Your typical Regency rakehell, that one.
Declared incompetent in the end and locked away.
G.P.I.’ Bob tapped his nose and added, ‘Syphilis to you.
But hardly worth a book I'd have thought.’
‘That's not what he's doing.’
‘Then what?’
How to answer?
How to account for the improbable mating of a dream and — yes, Bob was probably right — an obsession.
If I were to try to explain the little I understood about alchemy it would run through my fingers like water.
I would do no better with my dream.
Though he had been a psychiatric nurse Bob attached more value to medication and group therapy than to dream interpretation.
He would have steered well clear of the wilder shores of analytic enquiry.
He had been a sort of excellent Ambulance Brigade man in a world of psychological casualties, and was in no doubt that the cause of mental stress was largely social: people went mad in a mad world.
So far, and no further, would he and Edward have agreed.
I said, ‘I'll tell you when I understand it better myself.’
‘Curiouser and curiouser, said Alice.
Which ancestor is it then?’
‘Henry Agnew — mid-nineteenth century — and…’
‘The Corn Laws man.’
‘I didn't know that.’
‘What else is interesting about him?’
‘He was…a poet.’
‘Ah, I see.
I didn't know that.
Was he any good?’
‘I'm not sure.’
Again the dubious regard — it seemed I wasn't sure of very much.
‘Nesbit needs help making up his mind?’
‘There's a lot of stuff to read.
It's still in manuscript.’
Lamer and lamer, but Bob was discreet enough not to press.
Or perhaps he'd simply lost interest in the diversions of aesthetes.
‘I should have thought your time would be better spent studying the common people.
The leisured classes have had more attention than they deserve.
What about the poor beggars who were worked to death to feed them?
Have you any idea what it was like round here in those days?— women and kids out in the fields till all hours, gleaning, stone-picking, hauling the wagons when they got bogged down.
Life in this place’— a tilt of the head took in The Pightle —‘must have been squalid.
Short commons, endless insecurity, real fear of losing the roof over their heads, and all the best men cropped — packed off to Botany Bay for poaching.
This was a real village once — none of your weekend cottages and retirement homes like mine.
And England wasn't very merry, I can tell you — not in the hungry Forties.’
He sighed, shook his head gloomily.
‘The way things are going we'll be back there soon.
Victorian values!
Power and money with a bit of sanctimonious charity thrown in to square their consciences —; that's what your Victorian gentry cared about.
Like this bloody government.’
Listening, I felt still more unsure of the meaning and relevance of Edward's enterprise.
Bob knocked back his coffee, and I was about to stand when he said, ‘Listen, Alex, I don't know if I should say this to a poet, but there are some things a damn sight more urgent than the doggerel of a dead country squire.
Have you heard the news lately?’
He took in my grimace and sniffed.
‘Makes you sick.
I mean, how the devil did we let things get this way?’
He looked up, not expecting an answer, but to fix me with his stare.
‘It's our fault —; my generation.
Two bloody wars and we're still content to snooze and let that lot get on with it.
Gave our power away, you see, and there are always people ready to grab it.
Time we woke up again.
Are you in CND, Alex?’
‘I'm not a joiner, Bob.’
‘You should think about it.
Bet you didn't know, for instance, that there's a nuclear siren right here in the village?
In Munding, for God's sake!
Horrible little black box it is, bang over Mrs Jex's head at the Post Office.
A sort of gauge with a dial that shifts from red alert to black alert…to warn of fall-out.
Mrs Jex says it gives her nightmares.
I mean, what's she supposed to do if it goes  off — waddle round the village telling us all to duck?
It's bloody madness.
That'll soon put a stop to Nesbit's historical research…put a stop to history altogether.’
‘He's not blind to the facts, Bob.’
‘But what's he doing about them — card tricks?’
Casting about, I found only platitude.
‘It takes all sorts…’
Bob harumphed but saw the quick glance at my watch.
Sighing, he got up.
He had tried.
At the door he turned.
‘How's the girl?’
‘Laura?
She's fine.’
A searching moment indicated that it was my motives rather than her welfare that were under question.
The conversation had been unsettling in other ways.
As I walked through the drizzle I imagined showing up at Bob's CND group and saying, ‘Don't worry.
It's okay.
If Edward and I can sort out the secret of the Hermetic Mystery your problems are over.
It's all a matter of Pelicans, you see…’
Only Bob, with his experience as a psychiatric nurse, would take me seriously.
No, what drew me to the Hall was personal.
Profoundly personal.
The aftermath, perhaps, of the panic-stricken self-absorption that had seized my life after Jess's defection.
The sense that something new was needed if I was to learn to breathe on empty air.
Booze had not worked.
Sex had not worked.
Both had ended in the humiliation of that brawl at a dance and me taking a swing at a hapless policeman.
It was that sense which had brought me to Munding, which had set me hunting the Green Man in the woods.
It had been intensified by the mysterious directive of my dream, and by the provocative conversations with Edward.
What I was doing now was no crazier — and no less crazy — than they; but I was not about to pretend that the future of the planet depended on my explorations.
Only me — my future: Alex Darken taking another step in the daft jig of his life, pushed from the rear by his own dark dreams.
No rationalist after all: a terminal romantic.
Ralph Agnew was standing in the porch of his Estate Office, talking to his gamekeeper, George Bales, a tall, booted man wearing a green nylon anorak ripped at the sleeve.
I'd seen him in the Feathers, surly in his own corner of the Snug, not liked by, not liking, the other villagers.
Had I known I was trespassing on his domain I would never have entered the woods so lightly.
He nodded as Ralph greeted me, touched the neb of his flat cap, and walked away.
‘You're looking for Edward, right?’
Ralph said.
‘Expected you sooner.
He's up in the library already.’
‘Bob Crossley called in — held me up.’
‘No hurry, old chap.
Those papers have been there for more than a century.
Drop more dust won't hurt.
Glad you and Edward have hit it off.
Had a feeling you might.
Bit of a shaky start though?’
‘He's an unusual man.’
‘A rum'n — that's what they call him round here.
Solid gold, though.
Solid gold.’
‘Aurum non vulgi.’
I smiled.
Ralph narrowed his eyes at me, further dislocating the lop-sided twist to his face.
‘Latin scholar, I hear.’
‘Hardly that.’
‘Not what Edward tells me.
Anyway, you should be some help to him and he needs it.
Frankly, what he's up to…
Well, it's all Greek to me, but so long as it keeps him happy.’
He glanced away, almost as though in embarrassment.
I had the feeling of a patron drawn deeper than he would have liked into the unpredictable consequences of his generosity — a lonely figure, heir to the Agnew fortune and tradition, yet unmarried, childless, last of his line.
Edward could not be typical of his friends, but I remembered that Clive had called him a friend to verse, and that he had read my work.
There must be more to this country squire than was disclosed by his clipped mannerisms and his habit of smiling each time he spoke, as though to ease his way through a dubious world.
He looked at his watch.
‘Well, I have an appointment in Saxburgh, and Edward will be wondering where you are.’
He leaned towards me, confidential.
‘Take care of him, won't you?
He's not nearly as tough as he makes out.
Been through some bad times, you see.’
The smile had gone.
The  corner of his lips twitched a little with a solemnity which suggested only a matter of some gravity would persuade him to venture this close to the personal.
Then, before I could respond, he resumed the seigneurial stance.
‘You know your way up?’
I did, and to my disappointment, I found Edward alone in the library.
‘Thought you'd backed out,’ he muttered as I took off my damp coat.
‘Sorry.
I got held up.
Laura not here?’
Edward sniffed and looked away.
‘Laura has work of her own.’
I waited for further explanation and none came.
Edward's fingers drummed on the edge of the desk.
I was the new boy at the office, he the old hand wondering what to make of me; but if he was having second thoughts he dismissed them in a sudden grin.
‘Right, there are some books I want you to look at — general background to give you the feel of the thing.
But I thought we might take a quick look at the muniments room first.
Come on through.’
A door from the library led through into an oak-panelled room with tall mullioned windows.
‘I've sorted out all the stuff from our period,’ he said.
‘It's over there.’
He pointed across to where a corner of the room was stacked with coffers, cabin-trunks, packing cases, pile upon pile of what looked like shoe-boxes and other cardboard containers.
‘They're all full of papers,’ he said.
‘You see my problem?’
I saw.
But already I was half in love with the old library.
I hadn't been there by daylight before and my bibliophile heart had lifted at the sight of those tall glass cabinets, shelf over shelf of finely bound volumes, each of them a door on the possible.
The air was still as a church in there, the rainy light playing through the leaded windows with their view across the parkland and the lake.
It was a dream-chamber, redolent of leather and polish and the scented dust of books.
And, yes, smelling of centuries of privilege too, of aloof refined seclusion.
In the normal run of things I would have had no business there, no access.
This, however, was not the normal run of things.
Nor were the books that Edward showed me the kind of thing  I would normally have read — not, at least, as anything more than a casual browse among the dustier nooks of human eccentricity.
It was like stepping from the main street into a cobbled alley's curiosity shop — that shock of surprise to discover again what an intricate and peculiar organ the imagination is, what extravagant uses it has found for time.
Even under Edward's guidance it proved difficult to feel my way into the texts he gave me to read.
They were tantalizingly obscure — no sooner did you think you'd begun to grasp the gist when it slipped through your fingers.
Again and again apparently rational lines of argument suddenly congealed into a porridge of images, while some texts dispensed with argument completely and the mind was left to wrestle with Olympian assertions that left Edward's own rhetoric sounding like cool logic.
Witness the Smaragdine Tablet of Hermes Trismegistus, which was, he assured me, the seminal document of all alchemical thought:
True, without error, certain and most true; that which is above is as that which is below, and that which is below is as that which is above, for performing the miracles of the One Thing; and as all things were from One, by the mediation of One, so all things arose from this One Thing by adaptation; the father of it is the Sun, the mother of it is the Moon; the wind carries it in its belly; the nurse thereof is the Earth.
This is the father of all perfection, or consummation of the whole world.
The power of it is integral, if it be turned into earth.
Thou shalt separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from the gross, gently with great sagacity; it ascends from earth to heaven, and again descends to earth; and receives the strength of the superiors and the inferiors — so thou hast the glory of the whole world; therefore let all obscurity flee before thee.
This is the strong fortitude of all fortitudes, overcoming every subtle and penetrating every solid thing.
So the world was created.
Hence were all wonderful adaptations of which this is the manner.
Therefore am I called Thrice Great Hermes, having the Three Parts of the philosophy of the whole world.
That which I have written is consummated concerning the operation of the sun.
Faced with such rhapsodic prose I felt it would take more subtlety and sagacity than I could command to make obscurity flee before me.
‘But don't you see?’
Edward encouraged.
‘The whole point is to excite curiosity, to stimulate the sleeping powers of the mind.
If I talk about ‘psychic integration’ or reunion with the Divine Archetype, these are abstractions on which the mind has little purchase.
But if I speak of a stone that turneth all to gold, or a treasure hidden in the menstruum of whores, then the imagination is set to work.
The rational intellect is side-stepped and one must look within.
I mean even the highest spirit of Reason which, according to Nicholas of Cusa, guards the gate in the wall around Paradise — a wall which is built of contradictions.
If we are ever to pass through what a shrewd American has named the ‘moronic inferno’ into what I call ‘the oxyinoronic paradiso’, then responses from a deeper level are required.
That's what these texts demand.’
‘You don't think it's more likely to put people off altogether?’
‘That too is the point.
The one-sided man who clings to rationality will dismiss it all as gibberish — a word, incidentally, derived from Jabir, one of the greatest of Arab adepts.
If he goes hunting through the texts for a quick recipe for gold or earthly power he'll soon get lost, give up.
But the man who desires to know himself more completely — however strange and confusing his discoveries may be — he is drawn further within until he finds in the texts a mirror of his own complexity.
And — if he is lucky — of the simple secret at its heart.’
‘So the language acts as a kind of filter?’
‘On one level, yes.
But as a poet you will appreciate that some experiences are communicable only through symbols — symbols which lose all virtue in any attempt at paraphrase or analysis.
Symbols are the deep grammar of experience, and the alchemist inhabits a symbolic universe.
He means precisely what he says —; but one must enter the language on its own terms or the meaning vanishes.
However, without access to the transforming experience from which those symbols spring they remain impenetrable.’
‘Like much of your own verse?’
I hazarded.
Caught on the hop, Edward frowned.
For a moment I  expected a knuckle-rapping response, but after a brief hesitation, he said, ‘My verse was obscure because I was obscure to myself.
I was a young man then…a young fool.
I heard the music but I had no inkling how serious these matters were.
Or how dangerous.’
He returned from a pained abstraction, and smiled at me a little ruefully.
‘I was much like you — infatuated with my own talent, worshipping only my own intellect…
A crime for which, as Ficino points out, a capital punishment is appointed.
And in the symbolic domain the punishment is entirely appropriate — dismemberment, beheading.’
His thoughts shifted quickly away.
‘Ficino.
The Asclepian Dialogue of Hermes…
Now there's a text that speaks plainly enough.’
He wandered to the shelves and came back thumbing through an old volume.
‘Listen to this: No one shall look up to Heaven.
The religious man shall be counted insane; the irreligious shall be thought wise; the furious, brave; and the worst of men shall be considered good.
for the soul, and all things about it, shall not only be the subjects of laughter, but shall be considered as vanity.
Every divine voice shall, by a necessary silence, be dumb; the fruits of the earth shall be corrupted; and the air itself shall languish with a sorrowful stupor.
The language may sound archaic,’ he commented, ‘but he got his facts right.
Henry Agnew saw that time coming.
Look here.’
He showed me the page of the book — the passage had been furiously scored with a pen nib.
‘Well, it's here now — and it's time that silence was broken.’
Edward looked up again and stared into my frown.
‘Stay with it.
Eventually things will come clearer.
Or better still — ignore the words for the moment.
Concentrate on the pictures.
I think you'll find they speak the language of your dreams.’
From the densely stacked bookcases he took down some lavishly illustrated volumes and left me alone to wonder at them.
Those illustrations were like admission to someone else's dreams — at times glowing with visionary fire, at others the pitchblende hallucinations of a tormented mind.
Set in rich Venetian palaces or wild surrealist landscapes, they might depict the slow death of a bearded king, or miners at work beneath an enchanted hill.
There were chariots driven by demons, pulled by strange winged beasts.
Sun-kings and Moon-queens stood in stately adoration of each other or, in other guises, warred.
Childish lovers sported in a glass retort.
A black three-headed hell-hound rent and  devoured the pathetic human figures in its power.
I was an innocent let loose in an exotic, heraldic kingdom of mythical beasts and grotesque hermaphroditic figures that rose from the copulations of the kings and their sister-queens.
Yet in that fantastic cavalcade of monsters, freaks and angels, there were two moments in which I recognized something of myself.
The first was when I came across a picture of a heavily armoured man jousting with a naked woman, like knights at a tournament.
He had the sun for his head, she the moon.
He was riding a lion, she side-saddle on a black gryphon, and they were fighting.
But they both had shields against which the lances struck, and the beauty of it was that on her shield was the insignia of the sun, on his that of the moon; so they were each protected by the principle they opposed.
The background against which they fought was arid red desert; they might have been fighting to make it green again; yet one had the feeling that if either defeated the other it would be disaster.
More eloquently than a thousand words the picture showed the need for, and the difficulty of, reconciliation between the sexes.
I began to loosen my armour.
Later I turned a page and uttered a gasp of stunned surprise that made Edward look up from the manuscript he scrutinized.
He came across to look at the image open on my lectern: a wild man covered in shaggy green fur was fighting a little hon with a club.
The drawing had a sprightly vigorous line, and there was a pleasing rhythmic balance between the sway of the wild man's body and the crouch of the snarling beast.
The Green Man wore a coronet of leaves and a girdle of stems at his waist.
The unknown artist had painted the fur with such a delicate brush you felt you might stroke it.
The bearded face smiled in its mantle of green hair
‘You recognize him?’
Edward asked.
I nodded, silent.
‘Another dream?’
‘I keep bumping into him.
I've been trying to write about him for weeks.’
Edward looked up from the picture and studied mc for a long moment.
‘Perhaps you will,’ he said eventually.
‘Perhaps you will.’
I wasn't left to ramble through this new realm for long.
Edward brought me a box of Louisa's file cards and a scholarly Latin dictionary.
‘Time you got stuck in,’ he said.
‘You've seen how much there is to do.’
The plain fact was I had not grasped the magnitude of Edward's task when he first unfolded it to me.
There was a mountain of paper in the muniments room, the neglected monument to decades of industry, neatly hand-written in paling ink.
It was worse than a mountain — it was a maze; and how intricate its twists I soon discovered.
I tried to picture what she must have been like, the young woman who had diligently allowed her life to fade away working at this solitary chore.
The years of her youth had been sacrificed to her father's obsession.
Why hadn't she rebelled — gone crazy even?
Perhaps she had; but there was nothing mad about the composed face I'd been shown in the portrait and the photograph, only an infinity of patience.
That patience must have been well-schooled here, and I would need lots of it myself if I was to follow her tracks from card to cryptic card through all the boxes.
Still, I wasn't being paid — I'd resisted Edward's offer of money; I was pretty sure he didn't have much and, for the moment, I didn't need it.
Unpaid, I could drop this when I chose.
Yet once I started work I became increasingly absorbed.
The oddly medieval flavour of the Latin notes intrigued me, and there were occasional memoranda in the formal English of Louisa's day.
Here is evidence, I read on one card, that the Pagan Mysteries were instituted pure.
And on another: Here it is manifest how the Way of Life is found only through a Death, and that, without the deprival of all other knowledge, Self Knowledge itself is not to be achieved.
An admirable paradox!
It was like listening to a voice whispering across time, an eerie sensation that became a frisson when I read: Time was, Time is, and Time shall be, but here the Adept stands outside of time within the penetralium of mystery.
Though much of what I translated defied comprehension, it was provocatively enigmatic.
I began to see what Edward had meant about secrecy being a great enticer, about how the sleeping powers of the mind might wake.
And there was something else.
Daunting and preposterous as the task appeared, I was glad to be busy again, of use.
When Edward saw that I was willing to work, and that the ground covered in a day could be almost doubled with my help, he relaxed and became more open with me.
As the days passed in the library I increasingly understood why Laura had been attracted to Edward — the wry, sidespin dart of his humour, the sudden shy warmth of expressed affection, the uncompromising certainty that in all things meaning inhered, and the strict honesty which refused glib answers.
Had I not worked closely with him I would have seen little of this.
He wouldn't have bothered to show it; I would have been too arrogant to look.
But work is a firm bonder, and never more so than when a task is both fascinating and absurdly difficult.
What we were faced with was an enormous puzzle — a cryptic crossword with the clues in Latin, unnumbered, and not much of a grid for guide.
I translated the clues and passed them across to Edward who frowned over them, making entries in his own files, collating cards with texts, referring often to Louisa's journals and Henry's copious notes, trying to piece a pattern together.
Confronted with such vast heaps of material one had to think of it as a game.
That was how I saw it: Henry and Louisa Agnew, long dead but mysteriously alive under this mountain of paper, were one team; Edward and I the other.
It began to feel — though I suppose this is true to the essential beauty of all sport — that we were working together, the four of us, for the love of the game.
Gradually the outlines of the Hermetic myth came clear to me.
Like more orthodox Christians, the alchemists maintained that mankind had suffered a fall; but this lapse from grace was not seen merely as a matter of original sin.
It was a critical moment in the great experiment of Nature.
It was the very access of consciousness — life's arrival at the moment where it might contemplate and shape its own existence.
But consciousness comes at a price, and the price is banishment from the Garden.
When we wake it is to find ourselves alone and separate, trapped in the toils of matter.
There were close links between the alchemists and the gnostics, and for the gnostics the picture was bleaker still.
Life in the material world was tragic, they claimed — so evil that it could  not be the work of a benevolent God.
The universe itself was cracked.
It was the creation of the Demiurge, the Archon, the mad lord of this world.
It was wrong to value it, wrong to bear children even, for that was only to add to the sum of suffering.
It was the task of the spirit to resist complicity, even to the point of burning for this belief — this knowledge — for it was, of course, entirely unacceptable to orthodox Christianity.
For the Christians the only answer to the human plight was trust in the redemptive love of Christ.
For the alchemists such passive dependence was not enough.
In every human body, they insisted, there remains a spark of the Divine Principle which once irradiated its entire being.
Cased in the base metal of our fallen state, this ‘star-fire’ yearns to return whence it came.
It longs to be golden again.
The alchemists maintained that through the correct disciplines such a return might be made.
If one knew how to go about it the Fall was reversible.
The transmutation of base metal to gold was the paradigm of this sacred task.
Unlike the Indian mystics they did not regard the material world as mere illusion, though they were not blind to its illusory aspects.
A seed of star-fire lay imprisoned in all things.
It might be freed.
Matter itself might be redeemed and made translucent.
In working to change the substances, the alchemists also changed themselves.
In changing themselves they added their own weight to the effort by which the world itself might be changed.
It was clear that their economy was based on no common gold.
But what to make of this?
Much as I might personally long for a world where sun and moon danced together and all the trees clapped their hands, it remained intangible.
It remained a myth.
And, yes, Edward could point out that we live in a time when the very meaning of the word myth has been debased, that it has come to signify only what is untrue, false, misleading; and, yes, I could largely agree that it is nevertheless by myths we live, and what matters is how large the contrary truths a myth reconciles in its embrace.
But here I still sat, unenlightened, puzzling.
I saw only that, in this magical new view of the world to which I had been introduced, scepticism and gullibility must be harnessed in tandem if nothing was to be missed.
Such an attitude  required fresh springs of energy, and the effect — I was delighted to sense it as I woke each day — was to make me more bouncy and mettlesome than I had been for weeks.
For three days I went into the library at the Hall hoping to find Laura there and each day I was disappointed.
Each evening when we tidied away our papers I expected Edward to invite me over to the Lodge for a drink or a meal, and the invitation was not extended.
Much as the work fascinated me, and fonder each day as I became of Edward, there was nevertheless a growing sense of frustration.
It was Laura who had first recruited me to this task, she who had seen that I might be involved.
It was the thought of her that had drawn me back to the Lodge with my dream, and if this odd enterprise had any meaning at all it must lie, I believed, somewhere between the three of us.
Yet studiously, subtly, with no obvious exertion on Edward's part, Laura and I were being kept at a distance.
Was that perhaps what she wanted?
Or need I look no further than the old man's unspoken mistrust of my intentions?
I suspected the latter.
It both peeved and amused me.
From my angle Edward and I were now firm friends.
His charm had seduced me.
He had my affection and my loyalty, and I thought I deserved his trust.
Yet he had a way of manipulating our conversations on to ground of his choosing where he spoke so admirably that only afterwards did one realize how other issues, other questions, had been delicately side-stepped.
So Laura remained, like Louisa herself, a silent, invisible presence between us.
The next day Edward came late to the library in an untypically gloomy mood.
As I worked at my translations I heard him mutter and grunt at his desk.
He seemed fixed in a dour, obsessive concentration that defied approach.
It was a hot day.
Through the tall leaded windows the bright span of water flittered and shone.
It felt absurd that we should be indoors poring over papers when we might have been out there, basking in dappled sunlight, bathing in the lake.
I was restless, sticky under the armpits, for the first time a little bored.
Laura was more on my mind than Louisa.
What was she doing?
Had she begun to resent my usurpation of her role as Edward's collaborator?
Our  silence about her was ridiculous.
I made up my mind to broach the issue over lunch.
I suggested that it was a waste of a glorious day to eat indoors.
Why didn't we make a picnic by the lake?
‘Might as well,’ he agreed.
‘I'm getting nowhere here.’
When we had eaten in silence I asked him what the trouble was.
‘I sometimes think Sisyphus had an easier task,’ he said without humour.
‘Just when you think you're on to something it all unravels.’
‘Do I detect the voice of the demon Doubt?’
‘I don't know.
Take no notice of me.
I had a bad night.’
I smelled some recurrence of the tension between him and Laura and looked for a way to open the subject.
‘It's a pity that Laura didn't just ask Louisa what her secret was — when she saw her, I mean.’
It had been intended lightly but Edward was not amused.
‘I'd rather you didn't joke about that.’
‘You really believe that she saw her?’
‘I know she did.’
I sat in silence, waiting.
‘And Ralph knows it too.
There were details to her description she could have known no other way.’
‘I'm impressed.’
I caught the dubious lift of Edward's brow.
‘It was only the one time?’
‘There have been other experiences.’
‘Such as?’
‘As you clearly don't trust them there seems little point in going into them.’
His tone was final.
A cold silence came between us.
After a time I said, ‘I'm sorry.
My flippancy…habit of a lifetime.’
‘Not a lifetime.
Merely a trick you learned in college.
As a child you would have known better.’
‘Before my star-fire dimmed?’
Edward saw that he was teased, and smiled.
‘Only your brain is dim.
But I imagine even that is bright enough to recognize an extraordinary woman when it sees one.’
‘No argument.
Tell me about her.’
‘Laura can speak for herself.’
‘Except that I don't get to see much of her.’
The web of lines around Edward's eyes wrinkled in a frown.
‘Your tone would seem to imply that I am some sort of Bluebeard who keeps her incarcerated.
The fact is she is busy.’
‘At what?’
‘Her own work.’
‘Which is?’
Wisdom teeth have been more easily drawn.
A long moment passed before he sniffed and said, ‘She is a potter.’
‘Really?
I'd no idea.
She has a wheel at the Lodge?’
‘She doesn't work with the wheel.
Her pots are hand-built.
She makes her own glazes from vegetable ash and fires them in a small wood-burning kiln we built together.’
‘A sort of practical alchemy?’
‘Precisely.’
I began to realize how inadequate my picture of Laura was; that I had made no room in my thoughts for an independent life of her own, let alone one as earthed and pragmatic as the potter's craft.
No wonder I'd seen so little of her.
She was busy, making, while Edward and I ballooned through the intellectual stratosphere with nothing to show for our efforts but an increase of paper.
I was intrigued by what we were doing, but no one would ever eat or drink from it.
It lacked substance — almost as much as had my fantasies that Edward was deliberately keeping us apart.
I said, ‘I'd very much like to see some of her work.’
‘I doubt she will let you.’
‘Why not?’
‘It is a private matter.
No one goes into her studio.
I have seen little of her work myself, and she won't thank me for mentioning it.
Most of it she destroys.’
‘But why?’
‘Because she has no wish to add to the sum of things in the world unless they answer.
To her dream of the real, I mean.
It is very exacting.
Also I am quite certain she would wish me to say no more about it.’
‘So Louisa isn't the only one with secrets?’
Again Edward did not smile.
‘There is much in Laura's world that is private.
It is a matter of protection.
She is best understood as a refugee.
Her confidence is…fragile.’
I tried to marry this judgment with the memory of the sturdy  young woman I'd seen joking in the glade; who had come breezily into The Pightle telling me to water the plants and daring me to a duel of wits with Edward; who had seemed so certain of me over against his cautious vacillation. fragile was not the first word that would have occurred to me, unless I had overlooked something vital — something which, I remembered, Bob had noted.
As for Edward — it was clear that I'd stumbled on to sensitive ground.
He was staring at the lake, regretful perhaps that he'd said too much not to say more.
‘There have been…difficulties in her life.’
No further question was invited, so I said, ‘It must get pretty lonely out at the Lodge.’
‘She likes it that way.’
But I remembered her asking whether I didn't go crazy on my own at The Pightle.
‘Not all the time, surely?
I mean, the other night — she seemed to cheer up then.
You're sure she doesn't need company?’
‘I've tried to tell her that.
But she's working very hard right now.
Perhaps too hard.
Now that you've freed her a little from my demands, you see…’
I saw that I might, in more than one way, have been used.
‘Don't misunderstand me.
She's very much with us in spirit.
What you saw the other night…it happens, yes.
We get tired and sometimes we take it out on one another.
But…’
He seemed to look across at me.
‘We mean a great deal to each other.’
There was an appeal in his eyes, almost a throwing of himself upon my mercy.
‘I helped her through a bad time, you see.
One that involved disturbing experiences of her gifts…
They weren't understood.
Which is why she still prefers not to speak of them.
No one understood their importance until…’
‘She met you.’
‘Yes.’
His eyes shifted away again.
I wondered whether he was not, after all, over-protective.
It wouldn't be the first time that a man had lovingly supported a woman through crisis only to discover that when she was strong again his own need was to confine her in a dependent role.
There were gentle ways of playing Bluebeard too.
‘I wouldn't want you to think it's all one way,’ he resumed uncertainly.
‘For me…
Well, when we came together…
It  renewed my own sense of meaning.
I had been preoccupied with the alchemical vision for some time, but it had become words, ideas, a mere prejudice in favour of the angels, if you like.
But Laura was what I could only think.
What I have to struggle for again and again is instinct with her.
She makes it real for me.
Sometimes I think to her cost…’
Something wondering and recapitulatory in his tone brought to mind the way I had often spoken of Jess in her absence: odd, I thought, the way men tended to prize their partners more highly when they were elsewhere; almost as though the idea of relationship was more satisfactory than its practice.
Neither of us had been prepared for this sudden release of feeling; Edward seemed embarrassed by the confession, I embarrassed by his embarrassment, and regretting my earlier ungenerous thoughts…
Embarrassing too, the recognition that my interest in Laura remained less innocent than I'd persuaded myself.
Edward clearly adored her; I had no wish to hurt him, so perhaps things were best as they were — he and I working alone.
But my heart dipped at the thought.
In the meantime Edward had been thinking too.
This was the first time he had shared anything personal with me, and that he could let the mask slip a little was a measure of his growing trust.
A shy smile hinted that he did not entirely regret it.
Then he slapped his thigh, stood up, leaping from embarrassment to action.
‘But you're right, dammit.
She needs to get out of herself.
We all do.
We should do something together.
We should go to the sea.’
I looked up in amazement at the abrupt shift.
‘That's it.’
He clapped his hands together.
‘Come on.’
‘But if she doesn't want to leave her work…’
‘I'll seduce her.
I'll charm her from the tree.
Great God, I've become a bore.
I've forgotten how to laugh.
I need to dance again.’
He did a sprightly two-step, twirled, and was off across the lawn, shouting, ‘Come on, Darken.
On your feet.
Thalassa!
The sea, the sea!’
Friends then, the three of us — me sitting in the back of the old Countryman as it rattled along, Edward at the wheel singing  Verdi as though he'd just found the key to the Hermetic Mystery if not that of the aria he'd chosen, while Laura, who had taken some persuading, groaned and laughed beside him.
We headed for the north Norfolk coast, careering through the bright afternoon until Edward parked by a staithe where a creek coiled across a salt marsh, and we all piled out.
The mastheads of beached yachts tinkled in a stiff breeze.
It was a place of sea-pinks and oyster-catchers, where small birds dusted their wings in fennel and made the air smell of aniseed.
Mudbound tideposts staggered out into the creek, and out across the flats a marram-fastened line of sand-dunes concealed the distant sea.
Edward was the only one of us who had been here before.
Clearly he loved the Place.
He struck out on the diked path that sheltered a corn-field from the sea wind.
It was the still afternoon of a weekday in term-time, and we had the world to ourselves.
After a long walk we came out between the dunes and were staring at the sea.
The tide was far out over a wide plain of sand but you could see its many colours silvering towards those reaches where sky and horizon misted together.
The expanse of beach was so denuded of any trace of the present century we might have stepped out on to a distant planet.
Again I wondered at Edward's way of making me feel like the useless son out of a folk-tale who had stumbled by chance into the hollow hills.
I stood with the breeze flapping at my collar, watching the spin-drift sand, promising that one day I would write about this place.
When I turned I saw Edward dancing on the shore.
‘He really needed this.’
Laura was standing a little behind me, smiling as the wind tousled her hair.
‘He said much the same about you.’
‘Then he was right.
He usually is…in the end.’
‘About everything?’
‘About what matters.’
She glanced across at me, flicking the hair from her face.
‘What about you?’
‘Oh I'm usually wrong.’
She caught my smile.
‘Dumb-bell!
I mean how are you?’
How was I?
Glad to be here.
Feeling good about the air and sea.
A little sad suddenly.
I said, ‘Fine.
In better shape than I was.’
‘That's good.’
‘Also slightly cross-eyed over those texts.’
For a second she was puzzled by the change of tack, then smiled, wrinkling her nose.
‘They're really weird, don't you think?’
‘I'm surprised you think so.’
She shrugged, looked out to sea again.
‘They're Edward's thing, not mine.
I can't read them — not for long.
They pile up on me.
I mean, they're so dense — the language, the symbols.
Like an Austrian church — too full of stuff.
I like things simple.’
‘I'm glad to hear it.
I was beginning to think it was me who was dense.’
But she ignored the joke, looked out across the duneland expanse, the wide acreage of sand and sea.
‘They go on and on about Nature, but just look at it.
No clutter.
Nothing superfluous.
Just light and air, changing all the time, moving through places that words won't reach.’
‘But unaware of itself?
It needs us to give it voice.’
‘Maybe that's just our need.
It has voices of its own — the necessary sounds.
Not like all those books.
It's my guess that Louisa came to feel this way — that that's why she burned her book.
I think she might have done it without regret.’
‘Does Edward know you feel this way?’
‘I've never said it before.
I'm not even sure what I mean.
Perhaps that's why we sometimes find it hard to talk about her.
I have a feeling for her, that's all, and it frustrates him.’
She gave a little snort and smiled across at me almost mischievously.
‘He claims I have unfair advantages.’
‘Your gifts?’
‘Just being a woman, I think.
He says he has to go bat-fowling for what I take for granted — whatever bat-fowling may be.’
‘If it means stumbling about in the dark I sympathize.’
‘But then,’ she added, ‘he has a way of finding the right words — when he's sure of his ground, I mean.
And it's like magic —; everything suddenly takes shape, makes sense.
I can't do that.’
‘He's a poet’, I said, ‘— whether he's writing or not.
Do you know why he gave up?’
She shook her head.
‘He won't say, and I've learned not to ask.
I know there's a lot of darkness there and he won't share it.
I think he thinks he's protecting me, but…’
She faltered there, shrugged.
‘And you find that frustrating.’
‘Not really.
But it makes me sad.
I'd rather have him like this.’
She smiled across to where Edward still frolicked on the sand.
‘I'm glad you've helped him back.’
‘I wasn't even sure he liked me at first.’
‘That was never true.
But he didn't trust you.
I remember after that first night at the Hall he said there was something unnerving about you.’
‘Unnerving?’
‘If I remember right he said, ‘There's something unnerving about such energy so unaware of itself.’
Something like that.
It might have been ‘power’.’
She thought about it, trying to recollect, then shrugged again.
‘I told him you were someone who was too used to getting his own way, and probably still dumbstruck that you hadn't got it.
Was I right?’
Her breezy smile left little room for more than a grin of agreement.
‘Something like that…though I wouldn't have thanked you for saying so.’
‘But I didn't know you were a big dreamer then.
So we were both right.’
She looked away, not coyly but with an elusive smile.
‘The fact is, he likes you very much, and I'm really glad you found each other.
It makes my life a whole lot simpler.’
Which was not, in that moment, quite what I wanted to hear; but it was so transparently sincere I had to accept it.
After emerging from one three-way wreck so recently, I reminded myself, it would be crazy to look for anything other than simplicity.
After a moment I said, ‘How's your own work coming?’
‘Edward told you about that?’
‘A little, but he was very discreet.’
She wrinkled her nose, sighed.
‘I'm building towards another firing, but it's slow…getting things right…not getting in my own way.
I've been too close up against it.
I needed a break as much as Edward.
Look at him.’
I looked up and saw Edward jumping up and down, performing an elaborate semaphore with his hat.
‘He wants us to play.
Come on.’
She ran down the dune, calling, ‘Okay, I'm coming.’
I watched smiling as they owled and pussy-catted along the  beach.
Then she snatched his hat and teased him with it, threatening to throw it in a runnel of sea-water among the banks.
Edward chased her, shouting, ‘Rescue, Darken — this trollop has hijacked my hat.’
I joined in on Laura's side with Edward as pig-in-the-middle, windmilling for the hat that sailed like a Frisbee between us, until we collapsed, panting with laughter, then stared in silence at the sea.
Laura collected sea-shells, looking for forms and colours she might work into her pots.
She found a shapely length of salt-stained driftwood with a whorled grain.
It was water-logged, half-buried in the sand, and surprisingly heavy but she insisted that we bring it back to the car with us.
She needed it.
It had value.
We had tea in a still half-deserted seaside town and when we came out of the cafe Edward produced from his pocket a tomato-shaped ketchup-holder which had taken Laura's fancy and amused Edward with its outrageous farting noise.
Neither of us had noticed him pocket it.
‘Steal for you?’ he answered Laura's astonished protest, ‘I'd do time.
I'd swing for you, my dear.
I'd willingly die.’
On the way back we stopped at a pub where Edward regaled us, and disturbed the landlord, with hilarious anecdotes of raffish nights around Fitzrovia as a young man.
They were elicited by my questions about his earlier career, and most of them seemed new to Laura for she laughed with unfeignable gaiety, her head at moments in helpless tears against his chest.
‘What are you grinning at, Cambridge?’ he demanded — he'd given me the nickname after some reference I made to my own past; it was an affectionate pan of coals for my head —‘It's perfectly true.
And I should know.
I made it up myself.’
‘I was grinning,’ I said, ‘because I was thinking how lucky I am to know you two.’
‘Lucky he calls it!
Such a privilege comes only as the gift of Providence.
And if you don't believe me, ask a Bushman.
‘There's a dream and it is dreaming us,’ they say.
Know a thing or two those clever little buggers.
Damn sight more than that boor behind the bar.
I've had enough of this particular sip-well.
Let's go.’
They dropped me at The Pightle door.
I heard them laughing  still as the car pulled off down the lane.
A little to my own amazement I found myself happy for them.
Two or three weeks passed surprisingly quickly.
Apart from the accumulation of translated index cards, Edward and I made little progress, but our humour was good.
When he did show signs of depression I could usually shake him out of it, and we took a schoolboyish delight in finding ways to disconcert Ralph's snooty man, Talbot, who brought morning coffee and afternoon tea up to the library, and evidently disapproved or both us and our enterprise.
Ralph looked in on us every now and then with awkward, undemanding enquiries about our progress, and received Edward's sardonic remarks with a reticent grace.
I was glad to be Edward's colleague and friend rather than suffering the indignities he subtly laid on his patron.
It must have been odd for Ralph, I thought, to feel like an intruder in his own library.
In breaks in our work Edward entertained me with curious stories of the old alchemists.
Raymond Lully featured among them, though in apocryphal form, as the subject of a singular conversion experience: inflamed by illicit passion for a married woman, he would brook no denial until she took him to her house and there, in the presence of her husband, bared to Raymond's astonished eyes a breast almost entirely devoured by cancer.
Thereafter he became a missionary of heathen Africa, wrote a seminal alchemical text called the Clavicula, and was reputed to turn himself into a red cock when occasion demanded.
He seems to have lost the knack when he most needed it, for he was stoned to death by unimpressed heathens.
Then there was Denis Zachaire, a young gentleman of Guienne, who invested all the money meant for his education in — the furnishing of an alchemical laboratory — regrettably to no better effect than the loss of his tutor who died from the quantity of soot he inhaled.
But Zachaire was bitten by the gold bug and wandered around Europe, one jump ahead of the plague, seeking to learn from the motley swarm of alchemists to be found in the abbeys and cities.
By his own account, after much expenditure of charcoal and years of failure, he discovered a powder through which he made a successful projection of sufficient gold to pay off  his creditors.
According to one story (though this was told of others too), he was later murdered in his sleep by a servant who ran off with both the powder and Zachaire's wife.
Alchemy, it seemed, was not an entirely happy affair.
The man known as Helvetius might have produced gold which withstood the tests of assayers, but Bernard Trevisan was duped out of a fortune before finally performing the magnum opus, and Thomas Norton prepared the Elixir twice and was twice robbed of it before dying in poverty.
Michael Sendivogius was imprisoned by the Emperor Rudolph on pain of yielding his secrets, and it was he who wrote what struck me as fair comment on the Hermetic enterprise in an imaginary complaint of the alchemist to Nature:
Now I see that I know nothing, only I must not say so for I should lose the good opinion of my neighbours and they would no longer trust me with money for my experiments.
There are many countries and many greedy persons who will suffer themselves to be gulled by my promise of mountains of gold.
Thus day will follow day, and in the meantime the King or my donkey will die, or I myself.
Edward advised me not to be fooled by this open confession of fraud: it was an early exercise in disinformation.
Each of the alchemists, he claimed, was in his way an incarnation of Mercurius — the ever-ambiguous tutelary spirit of the Art who promised much and was not to be had for the asking.
The true face of the Hermetic philosopher was to be seen in the final picture of the Mutus Liber where the adept and his mystic sister raised their fingers to their lips in the gesture of the secret.
This was why Louisa Agnew had chosen the title of that text for her epitaph; and if he and I were ever to unravel that secret, he said, we should get back to work.
Inevitably I saw more of Edward than of Laura.
She was hard at work in her jealously private workshop, though she called in briefly at the library from time to time, and I was invited back to the Lodge for meals some evenings.
I delighted them once with a return invitation to dine at The Pightle.
The soufflé made up in  ambition for what it lacked in accomplishment, but the wine was good.
We talked a lot, laughed a lot, drank a lot — another round in the warming game of friendship that left me happy at the time, and aching afterwards as I contemplated the lonely bed.
Under question, Edward told me a little more about Laura's past than she herself was willing to volunteer.
Her father was president of his own securities corporation, an East Coast patrician —; ‘a Mammonite,’ Edward called him —‘a man whose feelings have been arrested by money, power, the dead hand of his ancestors.
He's a kind of Giant Holdfast who both loves and terrorizes his children.
His wife is a doer-of-good-works.
She keeps their home as clean as a refrigerator and about as warm.
Sadly, they lack both the elegant wit of the eastern intelligentsia and the street-irony of those who do not share their advantages.
You can smell dead redskins in the woods about the house.’
Pressed more closely he told me that for a number of years Laura had lived an almost schizophrenic life, symbolized by two quite different wardrobes — one for her parents, ‘the Goody-Twoshoes suits’, the other for what she believed to be her real self.
He claimed that her private world had been little more than an experiment in frenzy, and that a breakdown had been inevitable.
It came when her parents pried into her secrets and were horrified by what they found.
In particular they were appalled by thy discovery that their daughter was deeply in love with a young Jew.
Neither Laura nor the young man had been strong enough to withstand their frigidly withering assault.
‘After that,’ Edward said, ‘she wouldn't speak, scarcely ate.
She was afraid that her very capacity for love had been defiled.
Her feelings were frozen.
She had no great wish to live, and slipped into an anorexic depression which kept her to her room, resisting all approaches.
She tells me it felt as though she was living in a violent void, that she was losing touch with everything until…’
He hesitated, decided, continued.
‘What happened was the first recurrence of an experience she had not had since she was a child.
I really don't feel free to tell you about this, but it seems to have been both deeply deranging and profoundly helpful.
It was also kept intensely private.
It happened many times over a  period of weeks and, between the…visitations…there were moments when she doubted her own sanity.
It can still frighten her, though she has learned how to handle its tensions, how to guide such experiences and use them.
But if you wish to know more you will have to ask Laura.
I doubt she will want to tell you.
I gathered that her parents had seen only that Laura was losing touch with reality.
They insisted that she consult a psychiatrist and, fortunately, Laura had the strength to insist that it be a woman.
One was found —‘a pragmatic, civilized feminist who did not pretend to understand all that had happened to Laura but had the good sense to see that she was a great deal saner than her parents.
It was she who eventually recommended that Laura go to a college she knew of — one where she would find an environment supportive of her experience.
The college is in Connecticut.
It is called the Heartsease Institute.
I have a long-standing association with its work.
That is where we met, and the rest you know.’
He would say little more for my questions infringed on what he considered Laura's private domain.
When I asked him about the college he volunteered only that it was an experimental community of researchers and students —‘the kind of imaginative endeavour you will find only in the States.’
It offered, I was told, ‘a variety of approaches to the more inclusive aspects of speculative enquiry into the natural order.’
It seemed an unlikely sort of place, and even more unlikely that Laura's conservative parents should entrust their daughter to it.
‘But they were desperate,’ Edward answered, ‘and desperation is often strangely fruitful.
Somewhere they knew they had crippled her life, and their own responses were inadequate.
They're sad people really.’
‘You've met them?’
Edward sighed.
‘Yes…
I tried to talk to her father…by the poolhouse.
Over root-beer, would you believe?
For a moment I thought he was about to dare to let himself like me, but the wife was watching, alas.
Mind you, he was also daunted by the fact that I was some years his senior.
The poor devil wasn't sure whether to call me ‘sir’ or ‘scoundrel’.
Had the idea I was after his money, I suppose.
And the thought that I was bedding his  daughter…’
Edward winced mischievously up at me.
‘You should go to America.
The action's there.
It's the alembick of the age — one that might blow up in all our faces, and yet…
I don't know.
I only know that Laura is well out of it.’
‘She doesn't want to go back ever?’
‘Why should she?
She is much loved here.
Her life has meaning now.’
Edward looked at his watch.
‘Cambridge, you're a great waster of time.
I have things to do.’
Reflecting how Laura herself invariably shied away from mention of her gifts, I was left with my thoughts.
Either Edward's account was true, or there was some bizarre pattern of collusion between them — he providing cover for her insecurity, or — equally possible — she reinforcing his.
For the life of me, I couldn't say which was the case.
Later that afternoon he came to me with some of my translations from the index cards.
‘I'm puzzled by something you've turned up,’ he said.
‘These parenthetical references to a mystic brother.’
‘Frater mysticus meus,’ I said.
‘My mystic brother, right?’
‘Yes, but the term means nothing to me.
There's no precedent for it.
The female assistant was known as the mystic sister, but the man was always the Adept, the Master, Magister.
Louisa wouldn't have thought of her father as a mystic brother.’
‘Could she have been thinking of her real brother?’
Edward wrinkled his nose dubiously.
‘He took no interest in the work.
He rarely even came down from town.’
I smiled at him.
‘Perhaps they were in telepathic communication?’
Edward was not amused.
‘There was something I noticed about those references,’ I added in recompense.
‘They all looked as though they'd been written at a different time from the rest of the notes on the cards.
The ink's different.
Even the handwriting.
See what you think.’
Edward studied the original cards — most of them contained quotations from the Rosarium philosophorum, a text I hadn't read.
They were principally concerned with the Coniunctio Solis et Lunae, the marriage of the solar and lunar principles.
One was from the Arisleus Vision: ‘With so much love did Beya embrace  Gabricus that she entirely absorbed him in her own nature and dissolved him in inseparable atoms.’
I'd thought about that one for a long time, wondering who Beya and Gabricus were, and had paid little attention to the note in brackets which had been added afterwards:(Frater mysticus meus.)
‘I think you may be right,’ Edward said after a moment.
‘This is closer to the handwriting of her later letters.
She must have gone back over the cards much later, when she was old.
But what did she mean by it?’
‘No clues in the journals?’
‘Not as far as I remember.
She stopped making entries when she began work on the Treatise.
The last entry is in January 1849.
She must have been too busy after that.
If only she'd kept it up.’
‘Was there anything significant about that last entry?’
‘Not really.
Just her regrets about the Rector's wife who'd had a miscarriage…
Frater mysticus meus.’
He whispered the words aloud as though to conjure the hidden meaning from the card.
‘You think it might be important?’
‘It's certainly puzzling…
But then what isn't, dammit?’
‘Might Laura have some idea?’
‘She might,’ Edward said dubiously.
‘I'll ask her this evening.’
Puzzling still, he returned to his desk.
I riffled through the shoebox of index cards and found several more with the same cryptic postscript.
Marking the places from which they'd come with scraps of paper, I decided to translate them first.
I had another dream that night, less orderly and dramatic than my dream of alchemy, but it felt significant.
I was checking the rooms of The Pightle for leaks and other necessary repairs when I discovered an entirely new wing.
There were several rooms, all in good condition, which seemed to have been rented out though I was aware that they remained my responsibility.
One room had the smell of a hospital ward, and there were patients asleep there with a nurse in attendance who was not surprised by my intrusion.
I passed down the ward and opened a door at the end of a passage.
A whole order of nuns was waiting to welcome me.
I remembered that they had been there all along, and wondered how I could ever have forgotten them.
The scene shifted and I found myself at the head of a stairwell, aware that yet another place might be reached but only by somersaulting over the banister and walking my feet down the opposite wall as one might descend a defile in a crag.
Others had done it, I knew, but I felt nervous about accomplishing the tricky manoeuvre.
Then Laura appeared, and there was something odd in the manner of her appearance.
She felt more substantial than the other figures in the dream, almost as though she had troubled to step out of her own dreams to assist me with mine.
I was relieved to see her and encouraged by the confidence she gave me.
I gripped the banister and swung myself head over heels, then came out on the roof of a tower.
When I made my way down its spiral staircase I found myself in the main thoroughfare of the town where I was born.
The dream ended with the thought that if I had known this was the main road I need not have resorted to the acrobatics that had brought me there.
I woke feeling good, eager to get back to the Hall, but I wrote down the dream first, thinking I would tell it to Edward.
Then, over breakfast, I decided I'd keep it to myself.
Edward was in a foul mood, applying himself obsessively to his studies, encouraging no conversation.
When we broke for coffee I asked him whether he'd consulted Laura about the references I'd turned up.
‘Yes.’
‘Well?’
‘Nothing helpful.’
‘You're sure?’
‘Of course I'm sure.’
‘What did she say?’
Edward scowled at me.
‘Her mind wasn't really on it.
She's at a crucial point with her own work.
We were at cross-purposes.’
‘You mean you had a row?’
‘Yes, we had a row.
Not that it's any of your damned business.’
Except that I had to live with the aftermath.
It was the first time the old coldness had returned.
For a moment I thought he was about to apologize, but he didn't.
He  resumed his work.
I looked across to where he sat hunched like a crow over carrion, and thought what a cantankerous old sod he could be when he chose.
Around three Talbot came up to the library with a telephone-set in his hand.
‘There's a call for you, sir.
If you'd care to use the extension plug by your desk no doubt the Estate Office will connect you.
For once Edward was in no mood to bait the man.
He glowered at the instrument, plugged it in, then picked up the receiver.
I returned my attention to the papers on my desk as Talbot left the room.
Though I had the distinct impression that Edward would have preferred me to leave too, he said nothing, merely drummed his fingers on the desk top, then snapped, ‘Well?’ into the receiver.
I heard the faint warble of Laura's voice but could discern no words.
‘Oh for God's sake, why couldn't you wait till the weekend?
I thought we agreed.
You know I'd have helped you then.’
There was a mixture of irritation and concern in his voice.
He was shaking his head as he listened.
‘I know you'd prefer to do it on your own, but it's obvious you can't.
You were bound to run into trouble.
Do you need me to come right now?’
‘…’
‘What on earth for?’
‘…’
‘But that was an accident.
My concentration slipped.
I'm not about to do it again.’
There was a further prolonged warble, to which Edward replied, ‘I think we can manage perfectly well on our own.’
He swivelled his chair away from me and stared out of the window.
‘But if you weren't even sure you wanted me around…’
‘…’
‘All right.
On your own head be it.’
Laura said something else, Edward grunted and put down the phone.
His chair swivelled back my way.
Again the fingers drummed.
‘Listen, Laura's having trouble with a firing.
She's running out of chopped wood and needs help.
Last time I practically took my thumb off and apparently she doesn't trust  me not to do it again.
She wondered whether…’
‘I'd love to,’ I said.
It was another stunningly hot, windless day, the sky an unclouded eggshell-blue, the temperature in the high seventies, so it was good to hang my head from the open window of Edward's car and let the air come pelting at my face.
I had never seen a kiln fired before and the unpredictable behaviour of live flame could only add to the already restless sensuality of the afternoon.
The prospect exhilarated.
Yet somehow Edward must be appeased, so I sought to make a virtue of my ignorance, asking questions that would allow him to air his greater experience.
He knew what I was doing, and answered only in clipped, unhelpful sentences.
‘All you have to do is chop.
And keep out of her way.
She does the whole thing by feel…listening to the kiln.’
‘But something's gone wrong this time?’
‘It's a delicate business.
Not like a machine.
It's alive.
You have to nurse it along.
She must have got the balance wrong and it's stuck.
She should never have tried to do it alone.’
He braked in the yard at the rear of the Lodge, and through the windscreen I saw a plume of smoke rising almost vertically beyond a pantiled outbuilding which I assumed must be Laura's studio.
Edward saw it too and his mood changed.
His eyes glinted at me.
I saw the excitement there.
‘Come on then,’ he said, ‘let's make the elements dance.’
He led the way round the studio.
I saw an open shed stacked with timber, graded according to its thickness, and then, as we turned the flint gable, there was Laura crouched before the kiln in a muddle of faggots and fire-irons, her rump in the air, legs bare beneath the sawn-off fringes of her denim shorts, wearing a blue-grey sleeveless T-shirt that had ridden up around her waist.
One of its shoulder straps had drooped to her upper arm.
Her hair was piled at her head, tied in a scarlet bandanna, and when she turned her face to look wanly up at us there were soot-marks on her brow and cheeks where she had wiped away the sweat with the back of her hand.
‘I can't get the draught right,’ she said.
‘I need more wind.’
‘Where've you got to?’
Edward demanded.
‘About 900 I think.
But I've been stuck here for ages.
It was going fine till I tried for a reduction.
Then the temperature dropped and I can't get it moving again.’
She stood up, adjusted the strap at her shoulder, and smiled at me.
‘Hello.
Am I glad to see you.’
Edward crouched to his knees before the firebox and peered into the sickly blaze.
‘What's the atmosphere like?’
‘Pretty soupy.
See what you think.’
Laura moved round to the side of the kiln — it was a roughly built cube of fire-bricks the colour of pale sand, with a bricked-up Norman door-arch on one side and a narrow throat at the rear which led to a tall, cast-iron stovepipe wired for support to the studio wall and a bough of a late-flowering cherry tree across the yard.
The whole thing had the odd appearance of a brick-built Mississippi steamboat beached and panting to get back to the lake.
Laura removed a wedge-shaped bung from the wall and peered in.
Sighing, Edward moved round to join her, muttering again that she shouldn't have started the firing on her own.
‘Don't give me a hard time,’ she begged.
‘I've got troubles enough.’
A hand at his brow, Edward squinted into the chamber.
‘Murky.
Too much uncombusted carbon in there.
Thought so from the firebox.
You've choked it.’
‘I know I have, dammit.
I needed more of the thinner timber, but I can't fetch, chop and feed it at the same time.’
‘What did I tell you?
Where's the bloody hatchet?’
‘Edward, I'm not having you chop.
Not after last time.’
‘Let me,’ I put in.
Edward glowered.
‘It's his hands, you see.
They're not steady enough.’
Laura shot a quick glance Edward's way.
‘It's stupid, Edward.
You know it is.
Look, what I really need is to have more of those old floorboards brought round.
They're tinder-dry.
They should get it moving again.
Would you mind?’
For a moment Edward stood there, assessing her with a cold eye, then he slipped off his linen jacket, and looked at me.
‘Come on then.
Give me a hand.’
Together we brought round a pile of boards and I started  chopping while Laura fed the slender faggots to the flame, and Edward tinkered with the loose bricks that controlled the air supply.
It was hot beside the mouth of the kiln and I was soon sweating; but the air was bright around me, the narrow prospect of the lake still and cool in the distance.
I pulled off my shirt and threw it beyond the woodpile.
It felt good to be active again after the days cooped in the library's shade.
‘It's all a question of balance,’ Edward muttered.
‘All the elements are here.
They want to work together.’
He stared suddenly at Laura.
‘You did remember to bless the kiln?’
‘'Course I did.
We just need a bit more breeze, that's all.’
‘We could whistle for one, like sailors,’ I said.
‘Or work for it,’ Edward snapped.
‘We need to waft the air.’
He looked about for a thing to waft with, saw nothing satisfactory, scowled and said, ‘I suppose I'll have to find a fan of some sort.’
Laura made a mischievous move as he walked away.
‘He's been in a bad mood all day,’ I said.
‘I'm not surprised.
We had one hell of a row last night.
Look, it's great of you to come.
Edward and I would only have gotten in each other 's hair.’
‘My pleasure.
At least I know how to chop — if I'm ignorant about everything else you're doing.’
‘It's very basic really.
When the draught's okay the flame gets drawn over the bag-wall at the back of the firebox, then it sweeps round the arch of the kiln-chamber, down through the pots into the throat and out up the chimney.
That's the theory anyway.
I didn't reach temperature last time.
We had a real struggle, then Edward practically took his hands off.
Disaster.
But he might be right about this.
Kilns are temperamental — if you get the balance wrong you can feed it till you go blue in the face and get nowhere.’
‘What temperature do you have to reach?’
‘The glazes flux at 1280 centigrade.’
‘That's hot.’
‘Very hot.
You'll see the whole kiln shake before we get there.’
‘How will you know when you're there?’
‘Give it another couple of minutes and I'll show you.
This is coming better.
The wood's just right.’
When she was satisfied  with the state of the blaze Laura led me round to the side of the kiln, removed the bung and gestured for me to look in.
I felt the heat hit my face as I stared through the opening with narrowed eyes.
I saw two small spires through the spy-hole, and beyond them the intense red haze of the kiln chamber.
The atmosphere was less turbid than I'd expected from Edward's description — a glowing, orange-red furnace of heat in which I could make out the shadowy profiles of two pots.
‘You see the cones?
One of them will melt when we reach a thousand.
The other goes at glaze temperature.
But you can tell from the colour as well.’
‘I think the top of one's bending a bit.’
She pushed me aside, peered into the chamber.
‘You're right.
And the atmosphere's cleared.
We're on our way again.
Great!
You've brought me luck.
Come on, more wood, more wood.
Let's keep it moving.’
I started to chop furiously again, the dry wood riving and splintering under the hand-axe.
Laura crouched beside me feeding the fire with a smooth, regular rhythm, sweat shining at her shoulder-blades, the T-shirt damp at her back.
When Edward reappeared carrying a wicker carpet-beater she called, ‘It's all right.
We've done it.
We're on the move.’
He stood disgruntled, staring down at us.
Again I felt his displeasure.
I tried grinning up at him.
‘I think you've done it between you,’ I said.
‘Made an alchemist of me, I mean.
I've got the bug.’
He nodded, smiling thinly, and fanned himself with the now redundant carpet-beater.
‘We'll give it another quarter of an hour or so,’ Laura said, ‘and I'll try for another reduction.
What do you think, Edward?’
‘They're your pots,’ he answered unhelpfully.
Again Laura shot him an uncertain glance, then returned her attention to the fire.
‘Would anyone else care for a drink?’
Edward asked.
‘I put some cans in the fridge,’ Laura said.
‘Alex must be gasping.
Me too.
It's a great idea.’
Edward turned back to the Lodge.
‘Reduction?’
I asked, pushing across another stack of faggots.
‘You cut off the air and starve the atmosphere of oxygen.
The atmosphere has to find it somewhere so it goes after the  molecules locked in the glazes and that's when the real magic happens.’
There was a sheen of elation in her eyes which had widened, sparkling, at the word magic.
It was as though she herself were under a spell, transmuted suddenly to a higher pitch, animated and volatile — as the alchemists were altered by their work.
Even with the soot-stains on her skin — perhaps because of them — I had never seen her look so radiant.
Her mouth was open slightly, the tongue damp at her lower lip, her whole face eager, capable of every challenge.
I looked and saw nothing remotely fragile there.
Then she was aware of my gaze, glanced away, blew a puff of air upwards at her face, pinched the T-shirt between her fingers and flapped it for draught.
I returned my eyes to the axe.
By the time Edward returned with a tray of beer-cans the fire was blazing with famished enthusiasm.
I pulled the ring-top from the can and drank greedily, for the heat of the day and the kiln's hot breath had parched my throat.
More decorously, Edward lifted his can before drinking.
‘Here's to a successful firing, my dear.’
‘I'm sure it will be.
I can feel it.’
She looked up suddenly where a shower of blossom swirled from the cherry-boughs.
‘Even the breeze is getting up.
It's going to be all right.’
‘An extraordinary exercise of trust, don't you think, Cambridge.
To craft the pots so patiently from earth and water and then deliver them over to the mercies of fire and air.’
‘That's what I love about it’, Laura said, ‘— the risk, the trust.’
‘The unpredictability,’ Edward added.
‘The surprise.’
He turned to me again.
‘One never knows what the fire will do, and it has so many aspects.
Look at the way this merry rage has risen from the sullen beast we found earlier.
Consider the immense energies slowly eating out their heart up there,’— he nodded upwards at the sun, dazzling westwards across the lake —‘and the Pentecostal flame which brings the gift of tongues.
Then there is the darker, unintelligible fire of the inferno, which burns and gives no light.’
He grinned across at me darkly.
‘Nor should one forget the ignis fatuus, familiar as it is to us all.’
He took a swig from his can, smacked his lips.
‘There is a story of a Japanese potter who was commanded by his Emperor to reproduce a marvellous glaze he had chanced upon as a mere hazard of the fire.
He tried for years without success until finally, in utter  despair, he threw himself into the kiln.
When the pots were taken out…
Of course, you bright boy, you have anticipated me…
Yes, the Emperor's command had been fulfilled.
Which is why, of course, all artists burn.’
Laura had no time for such abstractions.
‘Come on, Edward,’ she interrupted.
‘Alex needs more planks.
Would you mind…?’
‘As my words appear to have lost their power to charm I suppose I may as well diminish myself to beast of burden.’
‘Don't try to carry too many at once.’
‘I am not yet a total incompetent,’ he muttered walking away.
I chopped.
Edward came back struggling with a load of planks, and I got up to help him.
‘I can manage,’ he said brusquely, threw them down, and went back for more.
The pine boards snapped beneath the stamp of my foot.
I swung the axe in swift rhythm, glad of the release it gave to the tension I felt building inside and around me.
Then, when she judged the moment right, Laura shut down the damper in the smokestack, sealed the air-vents, and the whole kiln began to throb and pant black smoke.
‘Look out,’ she cried as tongues of flame blow-torched from the crevices around the bung and came licking back at us from the firebox.
A dragon might have been suffocating there.
It was hard to believe that this clumsy box of bricks was strong enough to withstand the pressure of its wings.
The whole enterprise felt suddenly dark and dangerous.
For the first time I began to recognize the power of the forces that Laura was summoning to her need.
Fascinated, I watched the flames gasp for air, the carbon-black exhaust of smoke billowing from the chimney-mouth, the throb of imprisoned energies.
Laura stood, tall and lithe, glowing with sweat, listening to the growl of the kiln, hands clenched tightly at her sides.
Edward came back, dropped the planks, and stared at the kiln as into a mirror of his own increasing frustration.
For longer, much longer than I would have dared, Laura held us all there, sustaining the kiln's turbulent rage, then said quietly, ‘Alex, take this glove.
Go to the damper and open it when I give the word.’
The damper was no more than a thin sheet of steel inserted into the stovepipe.
I waited, feeling the heat thrown from the chimney, then Laura cried, ‘Now!’ and pushed open the air-vents with  a fire-iron.
I pulled the damper out: it was glowing red-hot along its length.
‘Great God, look,’ Edward shouted, ‘a pillar of fire,’and pointed upwards where a rush of living flame burgeoned from the chimney like a fiery tulip against the vivid blue of the sky.
‘That should have done ic,’ Laura whispered.
Then more briskly, ‘Quick, we'll have lost temperature.
Keep the wood coming, Alex.
We might just catch it right.’
I had been working for more than an hour and my wrists ached from the continuous chopping, but I was filled with an immense exhilaration.
The release of flame had swirled right through me.
I was as much arsonist as alchemist now, swinging the axe gleefully, impervious to everything but the fire's appetite.
never in my life had I done anything like this before.
I remember thinking that this was to be alive.
Even the air I breathed — charred with smoke, sweetened by the scent of surrounding trees — had a different taste.
It was the taste of Spring at climax, of an afternoon in which, at the touch of the rising breeze, cherry-blossom floated from the boughs in a frail pink torrent of petals that drifted through the shimmering heat-haze to cling at the sweat on one's skin.
Rapt in her attention to the kiln, Laura demanded finer and finer splinters of wood.
She slipped them rapidly into the hot mouth where they were instantly consumed in a shower of Sparks.
Sweat was running from my temples, stinging at the corners of my eyes, and when I paused to wipe them Edward shouted, ‘Come on, come on, give me the bloody axe.’
I glanced quickly at Laura.
‘You need a break,’ she said.
‘For God's sake be careful, Edward.’
Reluctantly I handed over the axe and made way for him, then stood, stretching my back.
When I looked at my watch I was amazed to see that it was well after six.
I realized I was hungry and it didn't matter.
There was no way I could care about anything now till this kiln was fired.
It would be done this time.
If I had to sweat blood it would be done.
But it made sense at least to stretch my cramped legs, so I strolled down to the edge of the lake and lit a cigarette.
Sunlight glittered across the water as though that too tingled with golden fire.
I remembered what Edward had said about the presence of all the elements, wanting to work together, to meet and merge.
And  Laura — if she had been earth and water as she shaped her pots, she was now, like Cleopatra, all fire and air.
Alive inside my skin, indifferent to the blister smarting in the soft cruck of my thumb, I sensed the world changing round me —; a sensation of risk, of things poised on a hot brink where anything might happen and never be the same again.
I think I already knew then that I would not return to my job at the Polytechnic, for the security of that monthly cheque had lost all meaning.
The job was a cage where the wild man in me fretted and chafed.
I could step out between the bars, and a day like this declared every reason for the risk.
Why settle for the predictable, it demanded, when nothing truly attuned to the precarious magic of being alive can ever be predicted?
I thought about Marcus and Lily, how they would have loved it here — the lake, the kiln, the excitement of the firing.
I released a long, tense breath, flicked the stub of my cigarette into the lake, and turned to look back where Edward and Laura squatted before the smoking kiln, for all the world the alchemist and his mystic sister, except that the roles were powerfully reversed, and — I realized suddenly — they were arguing under their breath.
‘They're still too thick,’ Laura complained.
‘Goddammit, I'm doing the best I can.’
‘Every time you fumble I lose ten degrees.
Look, give the axe to Alex.
He knows what he's doing with it.
I don't want you to hurt yourself.’
Before Edward could answer she sprang to her feet.
‘Alex, I'm losing it.
Can you come?’
‘It's all right,’ Edward growled.
‘Just have some patience, will you?’
‘It's not me, dammit.
It's the fire.
You know this last haul's the hardest.
I'm not going to lose it this time.’
Edward looked on scowling as I came over.
There was a long, hot moment in which all three of us were penned in a triangle of critical regard — Laura fiercely indifferent to everything except the health of her blaze; me awkwardly between, holding out my hand for the axe; Edward, old man suddenly, hating his years and his uncertain hands, humiliated, furious with Laura, resentful of my youth, and profoundly unwilling to surrender the axe.
He held it there like a weapon.
For an instant I seemed to be staring into smoke.
What I saw was scary enough to  make me lower my hand.
‘Edward,’ Laura said quietly, ‘be reasonable.
Look, why don't you go and get some food together?
I can't leave this and we'll all be starving by the time we reach temperature.’
He stared at her incredulously.
Her gaze shifted away to where the fire craved fuel, then turned back to him again.
‘Please, Edward.
I can't cope with everything.’
Ignoring me, cancelling me from the face of the earth, he glowered at her a moment longer through narrowed eyes, then let the axe drop, turned on his heel, and walked away.
Laura called after him, half-reproachfully, half in appeal.
There was no answer.
Laura and I looked at one another uncertainly.
She pushed back her hair where it had slipped from the bandanna, then tried to shrug off the tension with a sigh.
‘Oh come on, let's feed the fire.’
I picked up the axe and began to chop.
She crouched at the firebox, shooting the wood into its mouth as quickly as it came, then cowered back from the sudden heat as the blaze was roused again.
‘I'm not going to let him spoil it,’ she muttered.
‘Not this time.
This really matters to me.’
‘I think I know how he must feel.’
‘His feelings aren't the only important thing in the world.’
‘He knows that.
Let him cool off.
He'll be all right.
I've seen him like this in the library — grim as hell one minute, chortling the next.’
‘You don't know him like I do.
He's just impossible sometimes.’
She sighed, shook her head and picked up more faggots.
‘Come on, fire, be sweet to me.
We're nearly there.’
For the best part of an hour I chopped and Laura fed the flame.
We said very little — simply worked together, sweating, sniffing, aware of each other bent in crazy service to this marvellous beast she'd roused.
Eventually she got up, removed the bung once more with a gloved hand, and stepped back as a tongue of yellow flame licked out at her.
Then shielding her eyes with her arm she craned to peer inside.
‘Oh yes,’ she cried.
‘Alex, come and see.
It's incredible.’
I dropped the axe, wiped my temples and joined her where she held the incandescent bung away from her skin.
For a moment I thought the heat from the bung-hole might incinerate my brows, but when I squinted beneath an outstretched palm the sight stole my breath.
What had been only a dense red glow when I first looked into the chamber was now a torrent of liquid flame.
It swirled among pots that tingled and glimmered in a dance of fly-ash.
The first cone was melted to a puddle, the second was bending in obeisance to the blaze — as I felt myself to be, stooped there before the kiln, wanting to gaze and gaze, but the vision was barely supportable.
In the instant before Laura replaced the bung I understood how that ancient Japanese potter might have flung himself into those dazzling fountains.
I turned to share the wonder of it, but she was gazing up at the bloom of flame surging from the chimney's mouth, and beyond where the evening-star glittered against the deepening blue sky.
We stood together in silence for a long moment.
Her lips opened in a half-dazed smile of speechless delight.
She bit her bottom lip, brought her arms together at her chest so that her hands met at her mouth.
‘We've done it,’ she whispered into the little cave made by her fingers.
‘We've really done it.’
Then she was jumping up and down, turned suddenly, threw her arms around me, eyes tightly closed, squeezing me against her.
I tightened my own grip, felt the soft blur of her hair at my cheek.
Then her hands were at her back, unclasping mine.
‘Quick,’ she said.
‘I've got to soak the kiln.
We need to hold it here for another half hour.
Come on, before it drops.’
I stood, thrown, watching her leap back to the firebox.
‘Come on,’ she cried eagerly, ‘I need more wood.’
So we were back before the firebox, exhausted and happy, and Laura had just shut down the kiln, when Edward came round into the yard again.
‘We've done it,’ Laura called.
‘Edward, we've done it.
I've put it to bed.
Be happy for me.
Be happy, please.’
I gazed across at him, willing him not to wreck this moment.
I could see the contention in his wrinkled face.
Then an arm lifted, as though of its own accord, and came to rest on the crown of his head.
He had missed her moment — he knew he had missed it —; yet his eyes softened suddenly, and you could almost see the shadow fall from his shoulders as he twinkled down at Laura where she knelt before her dying fire.
as if it was the most natural thing in the world he said, ‘God bless you, my dear, I knew all along it would be all right.
Come and give me a hug.’
Laughing she sprang to her feet.
He moved towards her, opening his arms, and I saw there were tears at the corners of his eyes.
‘Well done,’ he whispered, eyes closed, holding his cheek against her.
‘Well done.’
They hugged each other in silence for a long time.
I stared at the mess of faggots round the hearth of the closed kiln, supernumerary now.
Then I heard Edward's voice.
‘You too, Cambridge.
Come join this orgy of delight.
You've earned a kiss.’
‘That's right,’ Laura exclaimed, ‘I couldn't have done it without you.
Without both of you.’
They each held out a free arm.
Smiling, I rose to join them, and when they both pressed their lips to my cheeks I caught the smell of whisky on Edward's breath.
‘What Nature leaves imperfect,’ he quoted, ‘we perfect with our Art.’
Then we were all clasped in a threefold embrace, Laura calling out her thanks to the sky.
I felt Edward's pressure at my hip wheeling the hug until the three of us circled in a scrum of affection.
‘Nature takes delight in Nature,’ Edward whispered as we turned; then, a little louder, ‘Nature contains Nature’; and shouting then as though the triumph of the hour was entirely his: ‘And Nature can overcome Nature.’
Laughing, we broke apart.
‘I know what my nature needs right now,’ Laura said.
‘A feast awaits you indoors,’ Edward answered.
‘The burgundy breathes.
The chef has done his worst.’
‘Wonderful.
But there's a thing I have to do.’
She grinned, said, ‘I'm going to jump in the lake,’ and she was off, sprinting and skipping, pulling her T-shirt over her head, round to the front of the Lodge.
Edward and I stared at one another.
A moment later we heard a splash and a squeal, more splashing, a flutter of duck, whoops of delight.
A little blearily Edward laughed.
I said, ‘That sounds like a good idea.’
‘Be my guest.’
‘You don't mind?’
‘Should I?’
We were each held for an instant in the other's dubious quiz.
‘You're smelling a little high,’ he said, ‘and we have no shower.’
‘What about you?’
‘I have already bathed my wounds.’
‘Then…’
‘After all, there's nothing you haven't seen before.’
‘She told you?’
‘Laura tells me everything…eventually.’
He sniffed.
‘Go on, for God's sake.
Let's see what you're made of.’
He followed me round to the jetty where Laura's clothes were scattered across the lawn.
‘Come on in,’ she shouted.
‘It's bliss.’
Her hair was loose, shining where it floated on the surface around her head.
Smoothly she lifted her arms in a back-stroke, then twisted the blur of her body and struck out into the lake with a fluent, practised crawl.
Edward watched as I kicked off my shoes and socks, unbuckled my jeans and let them fall.
I handed him my watch, stared at his grin for a moment, then slipped out of my shorts and ran out on to the jetty to plunge into the sudden cold shock of the lake.
When I surfaced, gasping, the sky was intensely blue and I saw the moon, cratered and radiant, high over the tower on the distant Mount.
We were some distance out in the lake when Edward eventually called from the shore that supper was spoiling.
Until that moment no single glance had suggested more than shared pleasure in the lake by night, two friends at swim.
Laura's challenge to race back was uttered in that spirit, but she was the better swimmer and reached the jetty strokes ahead of me.
She must have known I was watching as she lifted herself from the lake, water running down her long back, the skin glistening in the light cast from the house across the lawn.
I couldn't take my eyes off her as she swivelled to rinse the mud from her legs, then flexed her arms, swept back her hair to shake it, and the motion rippled through her body.
She opened her eyes, smiled down where I stood waist-deep in water still — the smile itself a quick gasp on evening air — then she was upright, running along the jetty to where Edward waited with the towels.
He wasn't looking at her — he was looking at me, and there was a snakeskin feel to his face.
It was the glance of an instant only.
I tried to shake it from my mind as I shook the water from my hair, but I knew what that face felt like from the inside.
It was imagining its own absence from the scene, and disbelieving innocence.
As far at least as I was  concerned, it did so with due cause.
And Laura?
I didn't know.
If she'd relaxed in her skin after the hot work over the kiln, she hadn't flaunted it; not till that moment, and even then, had she been clothed, the smile might have signified no more than amused affection.
But she was frank and inaccessible as a Modigliani nude; and I was back in the green glow of the glade — except that this time I too was observed.
By the time we came to eat it was evident that Edward was already drunk.
He ate little of the meal he'd prepared, but added more than half the wine to the mix of beer and whisky inside him.
I tried to engage him in conversation about the analogy between pottery and alchemy, and Laura prompted him to share ideas that had long been familiar to them both, but he showed little interest.
Self-consciously, I shifted the ground to literature, regretting that the emblems of alchemy were now too arcane to be of service to modern writers.
‘If you'd had your eyes open,’ he growled, ‘you'd have seen that such is certainly not the case,’and muttered, ‘Numbskull’, under his breath.
The charm — that demon glitter of narrowed eyes which had given the lie to all previous insults — was conspicuously absent.
He turned to Laura.
‘The man's half-educated.
Barely that.’
He downed more wine.
Suddenly I was back in the presence of the unpredictable figure I'd met in the library at Easterness that first night, and as uncertain now as then.
‘Who did you have in mind?’
I asked.
‘I didn't have anyone in mind.
I have them by heart, where they belong.’
‘All right.
But who?’
‘James Joyce modern enough for you?
Or is he old hat already?
‘The first till last alshemist’— that's what he called himself.’
For a-moment I thought his tongue had slurred the word, then I remembered Joyce's fluent way with puns.
‘But I don't suppose you've taken the trouble to read Finnegans Wake?’
‘I had a hard time getting through Ulysses,’ I responded as lightly as I could.
‘See what I mean?’ he demanded of Laura, who gave me a quick, apologetic glance, then looked down at the table.
‘It's been a marvellous day, Edward.
Don't spoil it.’
‘Man asked me a question, didn't he?
Or made some asinine observation or other.
Don't remember now.
I didn't start it.
Know that.’
‘He was just making conversation.’
‘And I was just responding.
Or am I not permitted to speak in my own house?’
‘Tell me about Joyce,’ I said quickly, and found myself fixed by a menacing leer.
Slowly his head turned from me to Laura.
‘With Laura's gracious permission,’ he said, sarcasm spacing the words.
She sighed and looked away.
Then he studied me again, breathing heavily, the corner of his mouth twitching a little.
‘Joyce knew it…chymical wedding, I mean.
More than you'll ever know.
Listen to this: ‘equals of opposites, evolved by a one-same power of nature or spirit, as the sole condition and means of…means of…’’
He screwed his eyes, pressed the thumb-knuckle of the hand holding a cigarette into his forehead, struggling to remember, then jerked his head up, scowling.
The ash fell from his cigarette on to the table-cloth.
‘Laura, how's it go?’
‘I don't remember.’
‘Yes you do, dammit.
You're just being pissy with me.
How's it bloody go.
Man wants to learn.’
Staring at him coldly, Laura completed the quotation: ‘as the sole condition and means of its himundher manifestation and polarized for reunion by the symphysis of their antipathies.’
‘That's it.
Symphysis of their antipathies.
Pure alchemy.
Twentieth-century state of the art.
Satisfied?
Any wiser, you little Cambridge shit?
And what about Yeats, for God's sake?
The Rosa Alchimia.
Haven't read that either, I suppose?
What do they teach in crammers these days?
Manage your own hand jobs, can you?
And then there's Lowry — sweet, sozzled Malcolm Lowry.
He tried.
He tried.
We're talking men now.
Real men.
We're talking burning-ground.
None of your navel-lint, tit-licking pen-fuckers so infatuated with the twitchings of the ego they remain sublimely indifferent to the obscene fact that their words are worth less than the flies tormenting the eyelids of an African child.
And who gives a toss about litter-a-chewer anyway?
Is that what you're in this for?
Scratching round our backyard for pickings to pad your lines out with?
That it, eh?’
Laura stepped in to cover my obvious discomfort.
‘Please  don't do this, Edward.’
‘It's all right,’ I murmured.
‘It is not all right,’ Edward snarled, and pointed an unsteady finger at me.
‘You stay out of this.’
He turned on Laura, with a caustic grin.
‘Fancy him, do we?
That the game?
That what it's about?’
‘Oh for God's sake.’
‘Think I'm blind, do you?
Old and blind.
That what you think?’
‘I think you've had too much to drink, that's all.’
‘Liar.
Lying bitch.’
I could see the breath shaking in Laura's voice as she said, quietly, ‘Edward, if you're not careful you might regret this very much.’
He stared at her, swaying in his chair, then all the malevolent rage seemed to collapse inside him.
‘Done it before,’ he muttered.
‘Done it before.’
He looked across at me with watery, beseeching eyes as if he had just told me the entire, intolerable story of his life.
His hand was trembling, half-open, on the table-cloth.
He looked at the cigarette, almost burnt-out between nicotine-stained fingers, and stubbed it on his plate again and again until it was quite crumpled.
He sniffed, and looked up at Laura.
‘You're quite right, my dear.
Darken,’— his great, wrinkled head revolved slowly towards me —‘forgive.
Old fool, you see.
The booze.
No good for me.
Pay no heed.’
‘It's forgotten,’ I said, but my own hand was trembling a little as it reached to take the unsteady, hairy hand he offered across the table.
‘Hope so.
Didn't know what I was saying.’
There was a long silence in which he sat, nodding, before he released his grip.
His free hand reached for the bottle again, then pulled back.
He beat the edge of the table with the flat of it — an old gorilla, caged — shook his head as though to clear it, then jerked uncertainly to his feet.
The chair would have fallen to the floor had Laura not reached out to catch it.
‘Had enough,’ he said.
‘Going to bed.’
He lurched towards Laura, kissed the crown of her head, and mumbled, ‘Forgive, forgive,’ into her hair.
‘It's all right,’ she said.
‘Yes, it's all right.
It's good.
It's as it should be.
All is for the  best in the most impossible of worlds.’
Then he smiled across at me, a doleful witness for his own prosecution, and shambled from the room.
Laura and I sat in tense silence, listening to the creak of the stairs.
She opened her lips to speak.
I said, ‘Don't say it.
It wasn't your fault.’
‘I really wanted us to be happy.’
‘I know.’
‘He's impossible.’
‘But he loves you very much.’
‘He needs me.’
‘That too.’
‘And I owe him…’
She closed her eyes, sighed, frowned down at the table where the ash lay like his spoor.
‘Does this happen often?’
‘It's been getting worse.’
‘Is that my fault?’
She looked up, puzzled by the question.
‘Why should it be?
No, it s not that.
It's…
I don't know.
It's happened before.
I tried to leave him once when he got like this.
In the States.’
‘And he went to pieces?’
She shook her head.
‘I did.’
When she looked up at me there was a kind of glazed defiance in her eyes.
‘I left him because I couldn't handle the shadow his expectations threw over me…the way he cast me as a member of his dream.
I started to think he finally made it impossible for me to be myself.’
Again the eyes were lowered.
‘I came back because I discovered that without him my head splits into a thousand pieces.
I couldn't work, couldn't feel my way.
Nothing made any sense.’
I tried to say that I understood, that I'd felt much the same way when I lost Jess.
‘But you came through,’ she said.
‘On your own, I mean.
Without Edward I…
There are things I can't explain.’
‘Try.’
‘Look, if it wasn't for him…’
She had been prepared for none of this, stalled now, changed her mind.
‘It wouldn't make any sense to you.
He's the only one who really understands.’
‘He told me a little about what happened to you in the States,’ I encouraged.
‘About Hester?’
Immediately I saw that if Edward had mentioned that name it would have been deemed a great betrayal.
‘No.
Only that you had some very confusing experiences…’
I waited.
Agitated, she made no move to change the course of the conversation or to end it.
I took a further risk.
‘Who's Hester?’
She glanced up warily, found nothing but sympathy in my gaze.
‘That's just it.
She's not.
Not any more.
She was an ancestor of mine.
She's been dead longer than Louisa, but…’
I could feel the hairs rise at the back of my neck as I said, ‘You've seen her?’
She nodded, reached for a cigarette and lit it.
‘I used to.
I used to a lot.
Whenever things were really bad we'd talk…’
Had Edward told me this I would not have believed.
Even now, despite the patent honesty of her eyes, there was resistance.
‘You see what I mean?’ she said.
‘It sounds crazy, right?
Well, I was crazy…sure I was for a time.
But not about that.’
It was as though she was accruing power over against Edward's earlier impossible behaviour, against my possible disbelief.
‘And not about Louisa either…
Edward knows it, but he won't hear.
He thinks I've got it wrong and…’
Her breath came in a shaky release of tension.
‘That's one of the things that's come between us.
But — what I was talking about — he knows it's not crazy.
He knows it's real.’
Whatever the crux of their disagreement she was not about to disclose it.
She had no such trust in me.
I said, ‘Why shouldn't it be real?
I only have to switch on the news to hear things a whole lot crazier than that.’
I'd tried to keep my voice light, coaxing, but she studied me coolly as though she'd picked up my unspoken reservations and would not forget them.
The expression on her face read my last remark as no more than a condescending gesture of patient sympathy such as she must have met many times before.
Or perhaps she wasn't considering my words at all, for she said suddenly, ‘I should stick to clay.
That's real.’
And then, a moment later, ‘Oh God, I was a bitch to him today.’
‘Come on, that's not fair.
There's no point punishing…’
‘Look,’ she interrupted, ‘I can't leave him too long.
I know him  — he'll just be lying there miserable…’
The appeal in her eyes was asking me to leave.
‘You'll be all right?’
She nodded, summoning strength.
I saw the candle-lit flash of the little star at her throat; saw too that to contrive a longer stay would only put her under further pressure.
Already there were shadows of exhaustion round her eyes.
I pushed back my chair and got up.
‘Well, at least the kiln's in good shape.’
She smiled, though wanly.
‘Bless you for that.’
‘I wouldn't have missed it for anything.’
‘I'd offer to run you back but…’
‘It's okay.
I like to walk.’
I saw the mess on the table and said, ‘Oh God, the dishes…’
‘Don't worry.
You've done enough.
Really.’
At the door I turned to look at her.
‘You don't have to be haunted by the past — or by that abominable old sod upstairs.
You're alive here, now, entirely in your own right.
No mother, no father, no ghosts.
You're a kiln-firer.
A free spirit.
I think it might be an excellent idea if you forgot about everything else for a minute and let me hold you.’
I might have said all of this, and I said none of it.
I felt many things for which, in these confused circumstances, there were no permissible words.
And it was impossible to tell whether her own gaze held anything more than the bewildered gratitude and regret that were clearly there.
So I silently willed her to know that if life with Edward became insupportable there was a place for her to come.
Yet she would have been upstairs with the old man before I was out of the moonlit yard.
SYMBOLIC AND DIABOLIC
It was the morning of Emilia Frere's departure from the Hall and for a few minutes Louisa found herself alone with the Rector, who fingered the brim of his hat and beamed like the milky sun outside.
Though she had foreseen the need for such a private moment Louisa would certainly not have chosen it to occur so quickly.
Her thoughts were muddled still, and her feelings scattered in small exclusive groups like members of a difficult meeting yet to be called to order.
They kept slipping away, as her father had already slipped away, with no more than a mumbled excuse, to jot down a line of verse that had presented itself while he stood in some abstraction.
Tom Horrocks, who might otherwise have furnished a convenient buffer, had been drawn to the kitchen by the smell of newly baked bread, and was doubtless flirting disgracefully with Tilly and the kitchen-maids.
In the meantime Emilia was in her room still, fussing for an unconscionably long time over her appearance.
So Louisa must decide how best to employ the unsought opportunity of her confinement with the Rector, and she was entirely unready.
‘Fortunately,’ she said in belated response to Frere's remark of a moment before, ‘the drive to the Rectory is not far.’
‘And the day’, he observed, ‘moderately clement.’
‘Emilia will be well wrapped.’
‘Indeed.’
And there yet another exchange of platitudes gravelled on silence.
She had been trying to marshal a persuasive line of argument in her mind.
If the truth is at last unavoidable, it ran, and if it must bring consolation in its train, then surely there should be no need to dread its disclosure?
But there was something unsatisfactory about its  far from syllogistical terms, and she was left unconvinced.
As her eyes strayed, yet again, to the clock on the mantelpiece, she wondered whether it was, after all, a matter of timing — that what in auspicious circumstances might be helpful could, in others, be quite devastating.
How difficult this was!
Evidently the Rector felt himself obliged to remedy the silence.
‘Tom Horrocks has put my mind quite at rest,’ he said.
‘He is a considerate man.’
‘And an excellent physician.’
‘Yes.
His reputation reaches beyond the county, I believe.’
‘We are fortunate to enjoy his services,’ said Frere, though he immediately regretted the choice of verb: heartening though Horrocks's manner was, there was small occasion for pleasure in a doctor's professional attendance.
‘I know him better as a friend,’ Louisa confessed, ‘having always enjoyed good health.’
‘It is a great blessing.’
The hat took a further turn in Frere's hands.
‘We must count our blessings, Miss Agnew.
They are manifold.’
For a moment Louisa wondered whether this platitudinous sentiment might be turned to advantage, but it could not be done without contrivance; and when she looked up she saw how the Rector's face aspired to bravery.
During the past few days anxiety had shadowed his eyes like bruises; they were brighter now and eager in their attention to the door through which his wife must soon enter.
Plainly he was recovering himself.
Were Louisa to speak what pressed upon her mind it would, she saw, quite undo him.
‘I was wondering…’
Frere began again, hesitantly.
But Louisa was elsewhere still.
She was reflecting once more how her continued silence might preserve the unsought trust confided in her, but it remained a betrayal of her friendship for this man.
Never had she been so confused.
‘I thought, once Emilia is with us…’
‘Yes, Mr Frere?’
‘I thought…a prayer of thanksgiving?’
‘It would be entirely appropriate.’
‘You would join us?’
‘It would be a great joy.’
‘Your father?’
‘Has promised to return in a moment.’
‘I felt sure you would consent.’
Yet behind the grateful smile one cloud remained.
‘But the Doctor…
Tom?
I would dearly wish him to be there and yet I would not impose on his convictions.’
‘Nor, I feel sure, would he wish to give offence by abstention.’
‘Then you think…?’
‘I do.’
This was, apparently, a burden lifted from his mind.
It was more than that, for now all anxieties were dispelled.
The smile was clear.
Handsomely, warmly so.
Louisa was filled with a terrible wonder at Frere's ignorance.
Again she found herself astounded that Emilia should have so little feeling for him.
His diffidence was the shy guise of uncommon sensitivity.
Other parsons of her acquaintance would have nothing but commination for Tom Horrocks's head; they would have demanded brusquely that all kneel and at least pay lip-service to their own self-righteousness; but this man…
She wanted to cross the room.
She wanted to press her hand on his, say, ‘My dear, Mr Frere, I beg you to forgive what must appear an intolerable intrusion, but I have reason to believe your present happiness must be short-lived unless…’
Unless what?
In her imagination Louisa saw the man confronted by the chill implacable will which had seized her own hand the previous night and imprisoned her in confidence…that sacred confidence.
How fiercely Emilia had insisted on it.
It lay now like a stone across Louisa's tongue.
And there was nothing sacred there.
It felt like a curse rather.
It profaned the very bonds of speech.
If she herself was at a loss to cope with the perplexities it wrought, what chance would this tender spirit stand before it?
Such happiness as had returned with his wife's recovery would wither as she spoke.
Her candour, however delicately phrased, would blight it.
What was meant for a joyous occasion would shrivel to a general wretchedness.
Yet if she did not speak…
There might be no other moment.
Louisa felt the palpitation of her heart.
There was a flutter in  her throat as she drew the breath to speak.
‘Mr Frere, there is a matter that I must…
She faltered at his eager eye.
He waited, unwitting, ready to be of service.
He was all unprepared.
Again his encouraging smile discomposed her.
The door opened and Emilia was there, caped and bonneted, a pale disgruntlement in her face.
‘Ah, here you are.
I had begun to believe the Hall quite deserted.’
Frere sprang to his feet.
‘Emilia, dearest, do you imagine I could abandon you now at the very moment I have longed for?
Miss Agnew and I have been patiently awaiting your appearance.’
Emilia deflected the warmth of his approach.
She turned an exact gaze upon Louisa, then a studied flickering of eyelashes affirmed complicity.
‘My dear,’ she said, ‘you look a little wan this morning.
Have I quite worn you out with my demands?
Edwin,’ she added, without moving her gaze, ‘Louisa has been so great a comfort to me I can hardly bear this parting.’
For a moment Louisa could not bring herself to answer the frail smile.
How she loathed this web that had been spun so swiftly round her.
She felt soiled by it.
‘I believe it is possible’, Frere was saying, ‘that there may be some small service we can do in return.
Miss Agnew, you were about to say?’
And she was caught between them.
Fool, she was thinking angrily, and she could not restrain the quick glance that sought Emilia's eyes.
In a shocked instant she saw it: had she seized the moment that was lost for ever now, had she spoken to Frere, unfolded the unhappy fate in store for him, it would have spelled disaster.
The scenes were acted swiftly in her mind: when Frere turned in bewilderment to Emilia the woman would deny that any such confidence had been exchanged; accused of mischief, Louisa would be forgiven by neither; the ‘intolerable slander’(for such it would be called) would furnish a pretext for Emilia's immediate departure from Munding; and Frere, if he remained, would be friendless.
Was it possible then that, in its impotence before a lie, the truth could do great harm?
She stood, numb with shame, fingers tugging at the bracelet round her wrist until it caused her pain.
‘My dear?’
Emilia encouraged.
Louisa looked away, out of the window — how she wished she was out there in the frosty air, in the simplicity of the Lodge, alone, in the one place where her tarnished star-fire might begin to gleam again.
But she must speak.
‘It was nothing’, she said, ‘…a passing thought.’
Then she willed herself to look back at them.
‘Nothing that may not be answered by the prayer that Mr Frere would have me join.’
She took in his mild perplexity.
‘Excuse me a moment,’ she added hastily, ‘I must find father and Dr Horrocks.
And I am sure that Tilly and the staff would wish to join us in expressing their heartfelt relief.’
Before either the Rector or his wife could speak again Louisa hurried from the room.
Behind her she heard Emilia say, ‘I think the child will be quite desolate to see me go.
Her life is very empty here.’
When the thaw came to Munding it came as rain, a wind-driven chilling rain that flooded the water-meadows and made the ford impassable.
Pipes, sprained by the ice, burst now, reed-thatches leaked; at least one low-lying cottage in the hollow was awash.
Water, it seemed, was everywhere; the lanes were mired with it, dikes deep, clogged here and there by flotsam into dams that would sunder and flood under the pressure of constant rain.
A sodden pedlar out of Saxburgh brought the news that the mill-race there had broken its banks and the pond lay right across the Norwich road.
The bridge at Pottisham was down.
Further along the river, it was rumoured, a wherryman had drowned.
Certainly people in Shippenhall were out on their roofs for boats to rescue them, and still there was no let up in the rain.
Only in Munding Rectory had there been no thaw.
Clearly Emilia Frere's decline was more emotional than physical, for it would respond to no remedy.
Visitors were not welcomed upstairs, and if Mrs Bostock haughtily insisted on the sovereign nature of her companionship she met with little encouragement in that belief.
Mrs Frere's refusal to respond (Mrs Bostock later informed Eliza Waters) was as dreary as the rain, and as impervious to her  visitor's desire that it should cease.
My dear, one had positively risked an influenza to bring her some good cheer, and to what end?
There had been nothing achieved by the expedition save the coachman's cold which now threatened to lay low the rest of her staff.
However, one knew one's duty even if the parson's wife seemed negligent of hers.
Eliza Waters, who was herself venturing upon a cold, would have found it difficult to agree more.
Yet, to be quite fair, Mrs Bostock conceded, one must consider the possibility that the fault might lie with the husband.
Miss Waters was certain that this was so, but she would be most interested to hear how her friend had arrived at that conclusion.
Was it not obvious (she was answered) that the man felt sorrier for himself than for his wife?
He was all milk and water.
He lacked the fire to take a firm hand with the woman.
Why, if Bostock treated her that way she would be inclined to fetch a stick to him, for the vapours (as Mrs Frere so dismally attested) would be the sole alternative.
One must pity the woman, however tiresome she made the task.
The fact was, the Rector had no sense of priorities — he would be happier washing the feet of the poor than ordering a dignified social life such as a woman in Mrs Frere's position had the right to expect.
‘If only she would not go on about Cambridge so,’ Miss Waters regretted.
‘My dear, the woman no longer does even that.
Indeed, some tattle of Cambridge life would have been a pleasurable relief.
The poor thing can hardly bring herself to speak at all.
One might as well not be there.’
‘And the Rector showed no gratitude for the interest taken?’
‘But you know the man as well as I,’ Mrs Bostock protested.
‘He bumbled and tugged at his ear and said he hoped I might call again at a more opportune moment, though I did not believe a word of it.
He wanted me out, my dear.
That much was evident.
I greatly fear that there is something not right about the man.’
‘Not right?’
‘Not right.’
‘I do agree,’ said Miss Waters, then regretted that she had agreed too quickly, for Mrs Bostock would venture no further  except to opine that the Reverend Frere was, at the very least, too little of this world to serve as a useful guide to the next.
‘Charity begins at home,’ she concluded, ‘and that is not a home I shall seek to enter again in a hurry.’
And what more could Miss Waters do but affirm that if one could not perform one's Christian duty without being treated as a busybody then the parish had come to a sorry pass?
Having fought to overcome his grief at the loss of the child, the object of this critical review had, in fact, sought every means he dared to stop the great gap it opened in the domestic life of the Rectory.
Frere's thanksgiving for his wife's recovery was heartfelt, for that loss would have been irreparable; and his rejoicing at her return was genuine enough; but how short-lived.
Muted as it was in consideration of Emilia's still frail condition, the joy, which was inevitably tinged with sadness, had been allowed small room to breathe.
Indeed, it had expired almost on the short journey home.
For Emilia, as for himself, Dr Horrocks's reassurance that miscarriage was a kind of mercy had brought no deep comfort, and Frere would not remind her of it, for he had quickly seen that, in some way he was far from comprehending, the loss was more secondary to her than it was to himself.
Was she then secretly distressed by the thought that she had failed him?
If so, he would not have her blame herself.
The failure was less hers than his own for not having taken better care.
He would never forgive his absence at her moment of need — the fault was freely confessed in an agony of self-reproach; but such, it seemed, was not Emilia's unspoken thought.
Failure was not a word that answered.
Nor did his attempt to view their shared suffering as part of the Lord's mysterious providence — a present ill from which a future good might spring — in any way ameliorate her condition.
She listened to his earnest philosophizing and did no more than that.
Where she must take comfort, he insisted, was in the doctor's assurance that there was no reason why she should not conceive again.
Had Tom Horrocks not promised her so himself?
Out of their love for each other, in God's good time, another child would grow.
An hour was sure to come when this very room would ring loud with infant cries.
Why, on cold winter nights like this, they might even briefly rue the desire that had brought a  howling babe between themselves and sleep.
Emilia was neither comforted nor amused.
She sighed, her pale brow resting on the fingertips of the ringed hand.
If Edwin did not mind, she wished only to be left alone.
Conversation exhausted her.
After a long moment's unhappy shifting from foot to foot, Frere granted her wish.
That was the first day.
On the second night, at her emphatic request, Frere moved, temporarily, into another room.
It was not merely the weather that made the Decoy Lodge feel gloomier, more shadowy than Louisa remembered, not merely the damp that left her bones so chill.
The rooms were hollow about her, unresponsive, as though, resentful of her absence, they had returned to desuetude and would not lightly be chivvied back.
It was dispiriting, and Louisa found it hard to settle to her work.
For too long she gazed at the rain across the lake.
It swooped and gusted, then hung impermeably, aspiring almost to a solid state.
There were moments when it felt like a portcullis downward-slammed between herself and the human community.
She had not expected this.
As soon as the ice broke on the lake she had returned to the Lodge with an appetite for work, for solitude.
On her way to the boathouse that dawn — before the rain began and too early for her father to rise in protest — thin panes of ice had snapped beneath her feet.
She saw leaves of the last fall encased inside them and, yes, it was cold, but there was a fine frosty light, and the mist over the lake made her think of a stoat's white fur.
With a sense of release, of invisibility almost, she slipped within its folds.
Only out on the water with Pedro panting in the prow had she dared to admit that for the first time in her life she had felt herself a prisoner at the Hall.
Not one peaceful night had passed since Emilia Frere exacted her promise; not even after she and her husband were gone, back to whatever wretchedness awaited them in the Rectory.
Alone in her room, Louisa had been unable to put them from her thoughts.
She found it painful to anticipate the poor man's misery, and was dismayed co recognize how ferocious was her  dislike for the woman.
Never had she experienced such negative intensity of feeling.
It would not square with any value she had taught herself to cherish, for she believed herself above such petty sentiments, and could cope with them now only by turning her dislike upon herself.
What sort of creature was she after all who could feel only loathing for a woman who had suffered so?
Emilia had been long sick with pregnancy; she had lost the child; and somewhere she was terribly afraid.
Having experienced none of these things, what right had Louisa to judge of this?
Who knew what an unhappy woman might say in such straits, and how little she might mean it?
The memory of that cold hand on hers spoke otherwise.
Louisa had slept badly and dreamed ill.
On waking each day she had been out of temper.
She wanted only to be free of this, for the lake to clear, so she could retreat to her task.
Her invisible companions at the Lodge were pure hearts all.
She longed only to be one among them.
And now she was here, and her mind was still shadowed by that unsolicited intelligence.
Staring at the rain, she recalled her first conversation with Emilia, how they had discussed The Tenant of Wildfell Hall and the woman had protested a righteous indignation at the thought of a wife deserting her husband.
Yet with how much less justice than Helen Huntingdon did she contemplate it now!
Louisa strove for charity.
It would not come.
What displaced it was a sense of outrage that a man as kindly and compassionate as Edwin Frere should find himself shackled to a vixen.
Almost it made one doubt one's trust in the Divine Intellect that decreed such things.
There was no prof it in these thoughts.
They served only to make her own heart sore and to mar her concentration.
She reached for her pen and dipped it into the well so fiercely that when she lifted it a blot fell across the page.
She sighed crossly, was about to dispose of the paper when a wicked thought possessed her.
Under the black splodge of ink she drew the neck and shoulders, then the severe, aloof posture of the woman she despised.
It was a few moments' work to have her sitting with her baggage in a gig, to crown the blot with a ridiculous hat, and to write the word CAMBRIDGE on a downward-sloping signpost.
At the rear of the speeding carriage, she inked in a cloud of dust.
‘Be gone, Emilia Frere,’ she found herself thinking.
‘Get you from this parish.
Abandon Munding Rectory and your husband.
I shall keep my promise.’
It was in the realm of pastoral care that Edwin Frere believed himself most truly priest.
After a discouraging start he had begun, he thought, to win the confidence of the villagers.
He had hit the right note of playful yet dignified affection with the children — mischievous Sam Yaxley had proved an ally there; and even throughout the days of his own distress he had comforted the sick and sorrowful, acting in the simple trust that, however removed chose impoverished lives might seem from his own, they were members of one another.
Long before his ordination Frere had been persuaded that the human heart was held in common and, therefore, a word truly spoken either way could touch and move it.
Forgetful of the silence which prevailed over his own most troubling experiences, he believed that direct and gentle questioning might embolden even the least articulate sufferer to speak all the grief and rage of the heart, and so dispel it.
In this conviction, he tried, as priest, to stand open to meeting; for it was in the ground of meeting that true comfort grew.
He heard all patiently, taking the pain within himself in the hope that he might show by his own fallible example how much greater was the patient love of Christ.
So, yes, with a neighbour he would have known precisely what to do.
With his own wife he scarce dare attempt it.
He stood before her wretchedness like an incompetent at the scene of an accident.
Flowers, he had thought; surely they must lift her heart.
But this was a lean season for flowers, so he had gone out into the rain looking for snowdrops.
He had found them and he loved them: the little heads like frail iron, withstanding this wolf-month cold; and, when you opened the white petals, there were the green veins, promise of the Spring to come.
They were, surely, the perfect emblem of Emilia's need?
He had attempted a verse on the theme, but the lines lacked grace.
He had abandoned it and taken the flowers to speak for themselves at her bedside, but she did not hear them.
What he had seen there Emilia failed to  see; when he pointed it out, she turned away.
She would accept no other visitors and yet, he sensed, she did not want him near.
His very tenderness seemed a burden to her.
But this was not the hardest thing to bear.
Alone in the room where he passed his nights, Frere closed the chapter of the Bible which had long ceased to occupy his thoughts.
Tomorrow, he decided, he must press her to a full disclosure of the grief harboured in her heart.
Yet no sooner was the decision taken than he quailed at the prospect, for he knew that a full expression of the rage lying at the root of Emilia's melancholic condition must quickly overwhelm him.
Unspoken though they were, the facts of the case were plain, and he could no longer conceal them from himself.
His wife hated their life here in Munding, and what had happened in the ice-bound park at Easterness had become for her the final bitter vindication of that hate.
Munding was a place where her vitality bled away.
There was nothing for her here; and if this was admitted between them it must swiftly prove an admission with only one exit.
Morose and fretful, Frere contemplated a further defeated return to Cambridge — his promises unkept, his congregation resigned to a curate's care, his mind racked by remorse and a crippling sense of his own twice-proven inadequacy.
No, it was intolerable.
She had promised him obedience.
She had vowed to honour him for better or for worse, just as he must honour her in sickness as he did in health.
His marriage to this parish was inviolable in its own sacred vows.
He was as little free to renege on them.
So what was he to do but bear with her?
Accept her cold rebuffs without anger or impatience; be there for her as best he might in the fond hope that this dreary rain must cease, that Spring must come again, and she might wake one day to that glorious span of light across the water-meadows.
As he turned back the coverlet of the bed where he must sleep alone, Frere consoled himself with the thought that what he was incapable of accomplishing himself might be accomplished for him by time and that providential hand, of which, in his earnest efforts outside the home, he was the faithful instrument.
It was perhaps a coward's answer, and he was honest enough to  admit it.
But he would pray — both for Emilia's recovery from affliction, and for the strength he would need throughout the long thawing of the ice about her heart.
One person at least had emerged from the unhappy events at Easterness with a renewed enthusiasm for life.
Alone at his desk in the library, Henry Agnew put down his pen, blotted the page and placed it neatly atop the growing stack of paper at his side.
Then he looked up at the portrait of Sir Humphrey Agnew and smiled.
What a day of work this had been!
For some time now he had been certain that he had at last evolved a diction appropriate both to the requirements of classical epic and to the subtleties of the alchemical process.
No mean problem, this, in a time largely deafened to such sober music, and were it not for the incomparable examples of Spenser and Milton, he might finally have despaired; but what they in their day had achieved for their grave themes ought (he had long believed) to be possible for the richer store of myth and symbol at his disposal; and now the lines had begun to move with the majesty he desired.
He too now soared ‘in the high region of his fancies with his garland and singing robes about him.’
He too was poet.
If only Louisa were by to share the joy of it.
Yet even the fact of her absence was cause for congratulation, for what she had presciently foretold had come to pass.
He had indeed allowed himself to become too dependent on her, and he had paid the price of it.
He had been so blinded by his need for her light that he had failed to see how deeply he stood in her shadow, and his work had been frustrated thereby.
For a time, when she first took to the seclusion of the Lodge, days had been wasted in a sort of restless grief, but it had passed, resentment fell away, and gradually he found his way back into his own strength.
It was he, after all, who was the master of the Art, and now that Louisa had taken upon herself the task of preparing his way he was freed from the immediate pressure of time.
He could work more calmly, and had even — so surely had his confidence returned —; felt free enough to step outdoors to watch the skating, though the grip of the cold at his lungs had troubled him.
Then he had thought all lost in the sudden distraction of the parson's wife's  misfortune.
All might have been ruined there, with that nervous, alien presence in the house, the comings and goings, the servants all of a huff.
Yet considerate as ever, Louisa had shielded him from the worst of the intrusion.
He had pressed on with the work, permitting no more interruption than common courtesy required, and had joined in the prayer of thanksgiving with a truly heartfelt gratitude not occasioned only by the woman's departure.
Something in the quality of Frere's devotion had touched him.
Bumbler the man might be, but his unaffected tenderness reminded Agnew of the care he had lavished on his own wife in her dying days.
He remembered his own great grief, and how he had finally emerged from it with a renewed sense of purpose; for though his epic was intended to address the spiritual crisis of the age, it had also been conceived as a requiem for his lost wife and a celebration of her unwavering faith in his ability.
Reflecting on the parson's fortitude in distress, his manifest care for his wife, and his humble acceptance of divine will, Agnew had felt a sense of shame that his original impulse had been clouded by the passing years.
It returned now as an act of re-dedication; and suddenly the work progressed.
So intense was the flow of inspiration, he had barely noticed the rain at his window, and was amazed to be told later of floods and drownings.
He had been elsewhere, rapt in meditation, as the harvest of his long withdrawal from the world came home.
Verse after verse had sprung from silence to run in fiery lines across the page.
Never had he known such rapture.
Gratefully he might echo the joyful cry of Trismegistus in The Golden Treatise:
Approach, ye sons of Wisdom, and rejoice: let us now rejoice together; for the reign of death is finished and the son doth rule; he is invested in the scarlet garment, and the purple is put on.
Across the lake, in the Decoy Lodge, the mood was less exalted, for eventually all the demons of solitude came to visit Louisa Agnew where she worked alone.
How well she was coming to know them: the Mid-day Demon of Accidie who dulled her  mind and drained the words of meaning; the Seraph-Serpents, ever hot upon his heels, whose bite flustered her to panic and anxiety; then, by dark, the Ochim — doleful screech-owls whose appetite always demanded more than she knew how to give.
Every anchorite had known and suffered from these phantoms of the mind: how naïve she had been to imagine herself exempt.
Yet the visitations had begun innocently enough.
The first indeed had presented itself as no more than vivid memory, though — if she were honest with herself — she would admit it had arisen from a kind of fear.
As had not been the case throughout her first sojourn at the Lodge, she would start from her thoughts at some unexpected sound — a movement of the timbers, a mouse stirring in the wainscot, a drenched thrush fluffing its feathers in the thatch-eaves.
Even Pedro, pattering nervily about the room, seemed more restless than usual, and when he slept his dreams were troubled.
Gradually Louisa began to wonder whether her father had been right after all, whether she had been as unwise as he claimed to shut herself away in this sequestered place.
At moments when her concentration was disturbed, when dusk came too soon and its shadows flittered dismally about the room, almost she might think she was afraid.
Once, when the shock of alarm thrilled through her with more than usual intensity, she began to sing, softly, to keep her spirits up, and several phrases had passed her lips before she realized that the song came from her childhood — that she had not sung those words for almost twenty years, had forgotten them even until this moment when, with startling clarity, her memory travelled back in time.
It was a summer afternoon — she could barely have been more than eight years old — and she had come to the Lodge with her brother and their cousin, Laetitia, who was visiting the Hall with her parents.
Henry was thirteen then, Lettice a year younger.
Henry had not wanted to bring Louisa on the expedition but she had cried to go, and the adults insisted that she not be left behind.
No one had known that Henry planned to take the skiff and voyage across the lake into the forbidden territory of the Decoy Lodge.
If the Lodge was not quite ruinous then, it was in poor repair.
No one had used it for years.
The reed-thatch was spiky and unkempt, windows were broken, one of the doors unhinged.
Breathless with a sense of violation, the three children had entered.
At the time Louisa was more impressed by the fact that Henry had lied to their father than by the dreariness of the place.
Irritated by her presence, Henry had mocked and teased her nevertheless, for he could be quite beastly when the mood took him that way.
He found a rusty man-trap in a cupboard — an evil contraption of chains and springs and teeth — and assured her that it had taken the leg off more than one poacher in its day.
‘Look,’ he said, pointing to some darker smudges of rust, ‘you can still see the bloodstains here, and here.’
Gratified by his sister's distress, he then whispered that he had a dark secret to tell them: the place was haunted.
What the girls had to understand, he whispered, was that his father's father had used the Lodge for very wicked purposes, things so wicked that he had gone quite mad and died in a madhouse.
From there, no doubt, he'd gone straight to Hell; but there were times when he and his wicked mistresses were still to be seen walking here, their shades drawn back from Hellfire to visit the scene of their sins.
The lie had a pronounced effect upon Lettice who immediately ventured on a small excursion into terror.
Louisa found her cousin's whimpers more unnerving than the story itself, but Henry, older, shrewder, discerned an encouraging element of titillation in Laetitia's fear.
‘What sort of sins?’
Louisa innocently asked, for this hitherto untold family news greatly interested her.
The sins were far too wicked to be named, Henry had answered with a confidential glance at Lettice who held her dainty hands at her mouth, wide-eyed.
Moreover, that was not the only spookish thing about the place: Henry knew for a fact that hundreds of years before, there had been a magician in the family.
His name was Sir Humphrey Agnew, and he had consorted with a witch hereabouts.
Louisa had heard of Sir Humphrey, but not that he was a magician.
‘He most certainly was,’ Henry insisted, ‘and the witch's name  was Janet.
Everyone for miles around lived in terror of them.
I've seen the cauldrons that they used to cast their spells.
Father keeps them hidden away in a room off his library.’
This was impressive.
Had Humphrey and Janet been very wicked too, Lettice wanted to know, and did they too haunt the Lodge?
Henry said that he wouldn't be at all surprised; but Lettice need not be afraid as long as she stayed close to him.
‘Are you very brave?’
Lettice asked.
Henry assured her that he was.
Much braver than Louisa —; who was offended by this comparison and declared that she was not at all afraid.
‘Oh yes you are,’ said Henry.
‘Oh no I'm not,’ Louisa had protested then with all the virtue of truth in her small voice.
She had been undaunted even when Henry said he'd wager that she dare not stay alone in the Lodge while he and Lettice explored the woods outside.
The stake had been set at a silver thruppence — a thruppence which (Louisa remembered smiling now) she had never seen, for the afternoon had ended in disaster.
She must have sat alone there for a good quarter of an hour, singing to herself, before Henry and Lettice came crashing back through the woods, squealing that they had seen Humphrey and Janet and must take to the skiff at once.
Genuinely frightened by their fear, little Louisa had rushed after them and sat trembling beside Lettice in the skiff while young Henry rowed for all he was worth.
When she dared to look back, however, she saw nothing more alarming than Jem Bales, the woodman, and behind him, in the shadow of the trees, a woman who might have been Audrey, the kitchen-maid, though she could not be quite sure.
perhaps Henry and Lettice had seen something else?
Whatever the case, the exploit cost Henry a thrashing later that day, and Louisa had too much heart to ask about her thruppence.
Emerging from those rapt moments of remembrance, Louisa put down her pen.
The work had been far from her thoughts all evening.
She had written little in the hour before the sudden sound had startled her and she began to sing to herself, the words of that same song she had sung so long before in this same room.
How clearly it had all come back to her — even the piping treble of her own childish voice.
The lamp guttered a little in the chimney draught.
She was returned to the present now, to the papers at her desk, to the rain barracking against the window-glass; but her thoughts were wandering still.
Had Henry spoken truer than he knew, she wondered, for at a dismal time like this the Lodge was a shadowy place.
It had been a part of her intention in coming here to banish those shades: already it seemed they were darkening her mind as surely as they still lowered across her father's.
She sensed that, even in contesting her decision to make use of the Lodge, her father had found it impossible to speak his full revulsion for the place.
The mere thought of Madcap Agnew — a name rarely mentioned in the Hall — appeared to stultify him.
What could the man have done that had been so vile?
Her only reference was the behaviour of Huntingdon and his set in Acton Bell's novel — the gambling, the womanizing, the drink, and the meanness of temper such vices induced.
Those activities were so evidently a waste of spirit that Louisa had never understood how men were so easily lured by them.
Yet lured they were, ever deeper into the toils of matter, and women with them too.
Was it only lovelessness then that made an evil of the flesh?
For in the Hermetic Art — symbolic though its language was — the mating of Sol and Luna was a moment of great joy and exaltation.
It was the healing of ills, the great mysterium.
That humankind had been created male and female was, of itself, the promise that such mystery might be made flesh.
Yet if the density of her father's silence spoke true, then Madcap Agnew had used this place to make of that mystery something vile indeed.
Alone with the pages of her book, Louisa felt depleted by the knowledge that the world for which she wrote was so completely estranged from the values she cherished.
It preferred, apparently, to revel blindly in its senses, as though life were no more than a rout of appetite and sensation rather than the dream of gold she sought to share.
And then she recalled the words Emilia Frere had spoken: You have not known a man…you have not suffered at their nakedness.
If the words had chilled her at first hearing it was more because of the cold light they cast on the woman's most intimate life than for any reference to her own innocence.
They troubled her more  deeply now.
From whatever inaccessible pit of bitterness the words reached out to touch an empty place in her own life.
In these matters Emilia Frere knew more than she, for the woman had crossed the threshold of the married state; she had delivered herself over to the meeting of the flesh as Louisa had not been called upon to do; she had experienced what the uninitiate could only surmise.
For Louisa this crucial moment of a woman's life —; the very act by which life itself was assured of continuity —; remained a mystery.
In her preoccupation with other, larger and less accessible mysteries she had been too certain of the supreme value of her endeavours to attach great value to the consequent deprivations; but now she remembered also how Tom Horrocks had lightly berated her celibate condition while they skated with Edwin on the frozen lake.
In their different ways both Tom and Emilia had alluded to the same experience; and before that experience she was utterly virgin.
Yet her work touched on it at every point; and without such experience, without the knowledge of such suffering — if suffering it was — what authority did she possess to speak a word of meaning in the world?
With a pang of dismay she saw how everything she knew came only from a marriage between native intelligence and the wisdom of old books.
Though the books were sound, her apprehension clear, the meeting joyful, could that possibly be experience enough?
She looked back through the many pages she had written, and saw the great names glitter there — Proclus, Plotinus, Iamblichus, Ficino, Pico, Agrippa.
Ardent spirits all.
Men who had known and endured the world.
These and the adepts of the Art were her fiery masters.
Apart from her father and her brother, these were the only men she had ever deeply known.
She loved them all and, yes, she could write of them.
Out of her mating with their books a small book of her own would be born.
She had set her mind to it, and it would certainly be accomplished; but in that winter dusk, as the rain fretted at her window, as she recalled the innocence of the child who had once sung alone in the house where her grandfather had done such wrong, Louisa Anne Agnew, already twenty-seven years old, wondered whether her life had yet properly begun at all.
‘As far as I am concerned,’ said Dr Horrocks, ‘the matter is plain enough.’
‘I am greatly relieved to hear it,’ said Edwin Frere.
The noise in the doctor's throat might have been a groan or a growl.
‘I am afraid you misunderstand me.
The plain fact of the matter is, there is nothing I can do for your wife.’
Then he saw from the sudden anxiety on the parson's face that this too might be misunderstood.
He hastened to add, ‘Physically, Mrs Frere is sound as a bell.
There is no good reason why she should remain in her bed, and the darkness of the room can only aggravate her melancholic condition.
She must stir herself, Mr Frere, and if she will not, then you must stir her.’
From the despair in the parson's eyes the doctor saw that this remedy had already been tried to no avail.
Clearly the dose had not been severe enough.
But how, delicately, to suggest as much?
‘At the very least, this taste for laudanum must be discouraged.
The tincture has its uses, but restoration of active vigour is not among them.
It does not help, Mr Frere, it does not help.’
Frere's eyes were now wandering unhappily.
‘Come, sir,’ the doctor pressed.
‘You must take her firmly in hand.
In so far as decorum allows I have tried to do so myself, and at some cost to my reputation for a sympathetic bedside manner.
As you will have observed, your wife was not pleased to see me; she remained impatient of my attentions throughout, and the only prof it from the visit is my own.
I need hardly say that I don't care to have things so.
Don't care for it at all.’
Frere murmured an apology which Horrocks hastily dismissed.
‘Dammit man, I know these things can be difficult but some people must be bullied back to shape.
And there are occasions — this is most certainly one of them — when it is the husband's place, not the doctor's, to do the bullying.
You must learn to sharpen your tongue, sir.
Even in the pulpit there are moments when mildness of manner is not enough.
It is certainly the case in bed.’
Frere's face reddened — a blush, yes, but also a hint of anger too.
‘I have exhorted my wife to the point where I am at a loss for patient words,’ he protested.
‘Would you have me take a crop to her, Dr Horrocks?’
The doctor smiled.
‘You might show her one.
A touch more of the spirit that is in you now can do no harm.’
Sighing, Frere flapped his hands at his sides like a seal.
‘You will forgive me if I insist that I understand Mrs Frere better than you do yourself.
It will only turn her to stone, I promise you.
It would do the same to me.’
‘Stone against stone sparks fire, Mr Frere.
Set a fire beneath her bed and I warrant she'll be out quick enough.’
Tom Horrocks had scented something suspect in Emilia Frere's continuing frailty —; it had been too sharply belied by the animus in her eyes.
Yet he saw that this rough humour would not serve.
‘It is not in my nature,’ Frere appealed.
The doctor weighed his man.
‘Perhaps, after all, you are in need of help.
Mrs Frere needs company, stimulus…’
‘She will see no one but myself.’
‘What about her own family?
Has she no sister perhaps?’
‘Indeed she does, but she will not have me write to her.’
Good God, man, you don t need her consent.
Do it at once.
Have her come.
The surprise alone will be restorative.
Take my advice, sir — put pen to paper instantly.’
The thought of Harriet fussing about the Rectory held little charm for her brother-in-law.
In his opinion, though it had never been openly expressed, she was little more than a flibbertigibbet whose thoughts rarely ranged further afield than the next gratification.
Neither was at ease in the other's company.
But the doctor was right: he stood in need of help, and where else was there to turn?
‘Perhaps it would be wise,’ he said.
‘I shall do it today.’
‘Excellent.
See to it that the resolve does not expire with my departure.’
Dr Horrocks turned in search of his hat and crop, then decided that a further word was needful.
‘We are friends, I think, Mr Frere?’
‘I have been happy to think so.’
‘Then, as a friend, let me ask you to have a care for yourself as well.
My manner can be a little brusque, I grant you, but there is a reason for it — a sound professional reason.
The care of others can be a wearing business.
One must take steps to preserve one's own virtue — I use the word in the classical sense, you understand.
I  advise you to take some such steps yourself.
Otherwise, my dear fellow, you will soon be of no use to wife, man nor beast.
Remember — I saw you on the ice.
You did not falter there.
You displayed a rare vitality.
I am certain that your wife is not the only one who would prof it from its wider deployment.
Delight and laughter, sir, delight and laughter!
If you hear tell of better tonics I should be glad to hear of them.’
But the doctor discerned no more than the ghost of either in the Rector's smile.
‘Well, you must excuse me now,’ he sighed.
‘I have other calls upon my time.’
Outside, Tom Horrocks stood for a moment stroking the nose of his great bay.
He was fond of the man who fretted beside him, and a touch impatient with him too.
But when ears were deaf what use were admonitions?
He put a foot to the stirrup and swung himself into the saddle.
‘Fish or mend nets, Mr Frere,’ he said.
‘One or t'other and I don't mind which.’
And with that he reined the mare's head about and was off down the lane, brandishing the crop, significantly, above his shoulder.
Frere watched him go, and such hopes as he might briefly have entertained receded with the clop of hooves.
For an instant envying his friend's unmarried state, he turned into the house to pacify whatever agitated waters the doctor had left in his wake.
Sometimes far into the evening she kept herself locked at the desk, writing, writing.
No longer could she take any pleasure in the act; almost she had come to hate the interminable travail.
Her wrist was stiff, her fingers calloused by the pen.
And yet, as though not she but some other invisible agency were the true author of the work, page after page was done.
It was a process of automatic writing such as she had heard tell of in the sillier drawing-rooms of the county where idle men and women amused and, she suspected, sometimes alarmed themselves by tinkering in realms they did not understand; except that this was very different, for the entirety of her intellect was engaged.
It danced in consort with whatever power it was that provoked her thought, and so energetically at times that, when a day's work was over, she felt as weary as one of the dancing princesses from a fairy-tale, exhausted by their demon partners.
music began to fail.
At the beginning of each new paragraph she must summon her strength to overcome enormous resistances.
A voice whispered that the work was nonsense, too far removed from the interests of the age to be of value.
It would be mocked, scorned, spurned.
She merely revealed herself for what she was: a cloistered innocent, lacking the fashionable touch, too earnest by half in her endeavours to persuade a jaded world that she knew best.
Still worse, her mind was recurrently invaded now by carnal fantascies.
She had reached the point in her argument where she must examine and explicate the emblems offered by the masters for the Coniunctio Solis et Lunae, the redemptive marriage-dance of sun and moon.
Such emblems were manifold and she was embarrassed by their riches.
Only after considerable thought and a number of false starts had she decided to take for her key reference the mysterious poem called the Enigma Philosophorum from Elias Ashmole's ‘Theatre of Chemistry’:
It was, she thought, perfect for her needs.
Gnomic, succinct, its puns and allusions introduced all the themes she must develop, yet it remained abstract enough for her mind to keep firm purchase on her errant feelings.
Such was her hope and her intent, but once launched upon her exposition she quickly found herself confused by the royal actors of the Art.
They were not to be chastened by homilies like children at a Sunday school.
Flamboyant, mercurial creatures, they had passionate wills of their own; they exercised a devious, seductive fascination.
She struggled to preserve detachment, yet even as her mind appeared to perform its duty, covering page after page with swiftly written words, elsewhere it found ever more disturbing ways to misbehave.
Nor was it the mind alone.
Her body had reached a climactic moment of its cycle, and felt famished and restless.
Its clamourings against solitude were a constant distraction from the cooler processes of thought; yet even as her spirit chafed at this conflict between body and mind, Louisa understood that such stress was specific to her task and not to be avoided.
Body and mind were among the contraries to be reconciled, and the true union of opposites was always preceded by bitter conflict.
If her treatise was to fulfil the expectations raised by its prologue, she must make this difficult passage now — though it was, at times, an agony merely to remain seated at her desk.
The turns of the work became ever more perplexing as the themes she must address became ever more entangled with the tensions she endured.
In former ages certain masters had solved the problem by avoiding words entirely and resorting to pictures alone.
There had been nothing either prurient or arbitrary in their choice of frankly sexual emblems to embody the mystery of the Conjunction; but even in times less hypocritical than her own such pictures had proved subject to misinterpretation.
How much greater then the difficulty of conveying the mystery in words, and to an age reluctant to contemplate those experiences where the pathos of our animal nature stands in greatest tension with the highest aspirations of the soul!
Nor was she herself exempt from confusion.
In the erotic landscape on which her thoughts now opened, the illusory and the actual were so intimately twinned that only the most cautious eye might  distinguish between them; and at each passionate encounter the symbolic and the literal seemed to enfold their embrace more tightly.
Day by day her bewilderment increased, and, such was the fascination exercised upon the mind by these anarchic powers, she might find herself at any step allured in folly, and dizzily unaware of her plight.
She had, in part, been prepared for this.
After all, Mercurius was the tutelary deity of the Art, and it was of his very nature to beguile and confuse in this manner; but she could take no comfort from the knowledge, for she must pursue him as through a hall of mirrors, from one bride-chamber to the next, and at each remove he shifted shape with such dispiriting agility that, again and again, she might have cried out loud for rest.
And then, one afternoon, with the rain still beating down outside, appallingly he assumed the face of Madcap Agnew.
Aghast, incredulous, she craned to see more clearly if this was indeed her own mad forebear toying there inside her thought; and he turned to leer at her.
Louisa recoiled.
The image vanished, but for several minutes now she sat in shock.
It had been his face.
Those features were familiar from the portrait in the Hall — the raffish eyes, the shining cheekbones, the lines about the lips and nostrils, that air of derisive irony.
All were unmistakable; but if the crazed face of her grandfather had elided with the beckoning features of Mercurius then something had gone very wrong.
She looked back over what she had written: the words were empty, devoid of all vitality.
It was not merely a matter of correction here and there — these were ashes; at best a discord such as some chained bear might pound on a piano.
She released her breath in a sigh of exasperation.
It was an attempt to preserve her objectivity, but it could not suppress a rising panic.
She had deluded herself; she had believed that innocence of spirit and a devout purpose were adequate guides through this treacherous domain, but the facts were clear enough now: she had diminished mystery to pious platitude, and some devious element at work in the deeps of her imagination was scorning her efforts even as she made them…
Did you truly believe, it seemed to say, that I was to be so easily pinned down?
Suddenly she felt cold.
Half-consciously, she reached to pull  the wrap more tightly round her shoulders; and still some seconds passed before she realized.
The fire was still burning in the hearth; all the draughts had long since been stopped; but the room itself had gone chill around her.
The cold came like the dowsing of a light.
It was like a smell on the air.
She was surrounded by it.
Her palms, she saw, were damp.
Simultaneously, it seemed, there had been a change in barometric pressure.
The room was unnaturally still about her, but the stillness might shatter at any second.
It was waiting for something to happen; as she too was waiting for something to happen — something which must, at all costs, be forbidden.
Then it felt as though the world was sliding inside-out as, slowly, noiselessly, a panel swivelled in her mind.
A hand somewhere might have touched a secret spring, for a whole wall was turning on a hinge to reveal a hidden chamber.
There were figures in there, sounds.
Either she must close her eyes against this or she must enter.
Unnerved, stricken with terror now, there was no choice; but the darkness of her tightly shut eyelids offered no release.
It brought the images to sharper focus.
The chamber was candle-lit.
A man was there, reclining on a Récamier sofa, one booted leg slung along its length, the heel of the other cocked against the floor.
His shirt was casually unbuttoned at the chest, the trousers high at the waist and tight about his hips.
They were, she observed, of a cut long since outmoded.
A ringed hand held a thin cigar which — as if in impatient expectation of her arrival — he stubbed in a silver tray.
The Lodge had altered around her.
She recognized none of the hangings, the furniture, the instruments scattered about.
It was like a disorderly tack-room, smelling of saddle-leather — except that the air was also heavy with some dry exotic odour, dense and sensual.
And everywhere — an emanation of the cold itself — there was a sense of incipient evil.
Distantly she could feel the tremor of a heart still recognizably her own — though whether it shook with terror or from the first stirrings of a ferocious excitement was hard to distinguish now.
Her mind was no longer entirely her own.
Every nerve smouldered on a short fuse.
There was an insatiable need for action.
With what remained of her objective consciousness Louisa strove  to tell herself that this encounter was not of her reality, not of her willing…but even as she struggled she felt herself drawn under the influence of a mind at once alien and familiar — a mind resolute to lacerate its own fine sensibility, and with a perverse, intellectual sang-froid.
Slowly, as under the scientific patience of a practised tormentor, all things were disfigured now.
Around her and — more terribly — within her, everything which had once promised exultation and delight was warping to extravagance and vice.
Everything — however vile — was possible, and nothing forbidden.
The consequences left her sick with shame.
So far did the experience lie beyond the normal province of time, she could not later tell whether it lasted for moments only or extended into hours.
What was certain was that throughout its duration she felt wasted by an emptiness that no extremes of violence, and no throes of humiliation, could even remotely begin to fill.
Bedevilled so, and moaning at her desk, she might have frozen there had not Pedro come fretfully to her side.
He pushed his muzzle into her lap, wagging his rump, pleading to be let out.
Louisa crashed back into time.
Instantly she knew that she too must get out of the Lodge.
Even in the heavy rain she had to be out in clean air, running among the trees, anywhere other than inside the hot chamber of her skull.
As soon as the door was opened Pedro was gone.
Louisa snatched her cape from the peg, banged the door shut behind her and leaned against it, panting.
She saw Pedro disappear among the trees, called after him vainly, then stood in the rain, hands holding the hood tight over her ears.
Then she too was gone, running, making for the trees.
At that same moment, many miles away, Harriet Frogmore —; Emilia's younger sister and wife of a Cambridge gentleman-of-leisure — sat in what she was pleased to call her study, pondering the letter arrived that day from Norfolk.
Hattie was not the kind of woman ever to be troubled by demons.
Her social calendar was far too full to entertain such disagreeable company, and should any turn up inadvertently  among her guests then someone else must deal with them.
Her own vague, frankly scatter-brained manner would always get away with it.
Chatterboxes do.
Regrettably, however, she felt that Edwin's importunate letter must be taken seriously.
No doubt he exaggerated (such was his wont where his conscience was concerned); yet the only news she had received from Em herself had not been happy; and now — to learn that she had suffered a miscarriage in that desert place at such a time of year, and that she had not felt able to share the grief of it with her own affectionate sister…
Well, something was plainly wrong, and it was evident that Edwin was far too feeble to cope with it alone.
Hattie read the letter again, and sighed.
as if her father's interminable complaints were not enough, no matter how she put herself out to please him.
He had ever favoured Em — there were no two ways about it — and Em had been quite wrong to post herself to Norfolk in the first place.
Sydney Smith had been wrong too; it seemed that the country was not even a healthy grave; though, judging from Edwin's pusillanimous letter, Smith might have been in the right when he suggested that there were three sexes — men, women and clergymen!
What qualities Em had ever seen in Edwin Frere quite beggared comprehension.
The thought of several days cooped up with the man in some dreary Rectory was…
Well, it was uninspiring, and Hattie needed inspiration.
But she must go.
Plainly she must go.
Her appointments for the following week could, at a pinch, be postponed.
Frogmore must hold the fort.
Hattie opened her writing-case, took out a sheet of paper and her pen, then sat gazing wistfully out of the window over Parker's piece while she wondered whether or not to co-operate with Edwin's stratagem that this must appear a chance visit.
How complicated the man made everything!
Emilia would never be deceived; the sisters knew one another far too well.
In fact, on second thoughts, would it not be far more sensible to invite Emilia to come to Cambridge?
Surely, to get her out of that tedious place — if only for a time — must be a better answer.
And that way she need cancel nothing.
Em would enjoy the stimulus of old friends.
It would cheer her no end, and it would delight their father too.
Of course!
Then it occurred to her that this new plan would require two letters — this first and an explanatory note to Edwin, which was tiresome.
Yet not half so tiresome as a February expedition across the fens.
How clever of her to think of this!
She would remind Froggy of it the next time he ragged her for a noodle.
Calling vainly for her dog, Louisa pushed on deeper between the trees.
She longed to encounter some other human presence and could not bear the thought of it.
She felt contaminate.
She would infect even the trivialities of conversation with the vileness of her thought.
So she kept to the woods, following the way Pedro had led, until she came at last to the clearing at the head of the ride.
It was the place where her grandfather, indulging some pharaonic whim, had planned to raise an obelisk.
He might have done so, she reflected bitterly, had not madness made him its own monument first.
She stood with the cape drenched about her, the rain at her back, and knew she would never go back to the Lodge.
The memory of what had happened there defied all thought.
She had been too long the creature of thought, and now she had seen.
She refused to think, to see, again.
She looked down the long ride to where, at the distant foot of its slope, the lake shuddered in the wind.
She stared into its surface, which exercised a deep downward draw, as when one peered into a well and felt one's thoughts involuntarily plummet.
She stared and stared until there was no division between the lake and her mind.
Both were unappeasable.
Here, like the mingled waters of a flood, was the first chaos of things.
It was the dead sea of being female.
Here one drowned.
A gust of wind tugged the hood to her shoulders.
Freed hair fluttered about her eyes in soft, damp lashes.
She must toss her head to see the lake clear again, and the action recalled how differently she had felt on the day when she skated there with Edwin Frere and Tom.
She wanted to feel the world real around her again.
She wanted to touch and be touched.
She wanted to be comforted with closeness, to forget everything in such  immediate intimacy, to be told that it was all right, that the world was real, and she had woken from a bad, bad dream…
And there was nowhere to turn.
Even Pedro had fled from her.
And if she abandoned the search for him, and hurried to the Hall, back to her father, what comfort there?
A forty-year madness, he had called it, one which had laid waste the best years of her young life; yet he was back in the thick of his obsession now, and so elated by his own recent progress that he lacked the time to ask about her own.
A wave of rage assailed her.
He was a self-absorbed old fool.
He had drained all the virtue from her.
He had taken her innocence and beguiled it, filled her childish head with enthusiasm for his own mad fantasies, and left her depleted, a high-minded virgin on the rocks of her own barren dreams.
A monstrosity.
There was so much anger in her she could not see what might be done with it.
And how had all this happened?
Because her father was afraid of life.
As a child he had been unable to cope with the passions around him; he had hidden himself away in books, consoling himself with golden reveries.
And then, as a man, he had needed a fellow-conspirator to make those consolations real, to confirm him in the righteousness of his seclusion from the world.
Wisely, her brother had refused; but she…
She had wandered innocently into this self-sealing labyrinth of fantasy until she was afraid of life herself.
As now, in this terrible rain, she was afraid.
Emilia Frere had been right after all.
To be a woman was to be a shell-less creature, bereft and vulnerable.
It was to be the sport of men's insensitive obsession, raw matter tormented for the truth.
One could survive only by silence and a strict refusal of complicity.
One survived by guile.
But the thoughts sickened her.
She was as much their victim as the naked flesh she had seen in that bleak vision had been victim to the flail.
They did not fill the emptiness inside her; they only scarified it.
She recoiled from the ugliness of it all, for the bitter reflections felt part of the epidemic of hatred she had encountered in the Lodge, and to brood on them was to remain its passive prisoner.
Had her father not tried to warn her after all?
She should never have shut herself away in that dreadful place.
And in another  matter he was right: she had possessed no knowledge of the rigours of the task when she so confidently proposed it.
On both counts he had tried to stay her impetuous hand.
As always she had won her way, and now she was paying the price of it.
She was suffering as he must have suffered; and if he knew her pain might he not come to her, as she had so often come to him, gently reminding her that despair was an unavoidable but essential ordeal, of the quest?
He might; but would she believe him if he did?
In this miasma of voices, which were to be trusted?
And if she tried to tell her father what she had experienced in the Lodge, what then?
He would, she knew, be terrified himself.
He would immediately forbid her return.
But was that not what she wanted — for a voice outside the clamour of her own head to tell her that she need not go back, that she must not go back?
That it was folly to persevere, a needless risk.
What she wanted was permission to cease.
Was she a child then still, that she could not take the decision for herself?
In confusion again, Louisa looked up and saw that the light was performing wondrously now across the lake.
The billows of cloud were gleaming as they moved through the rain, and briefly her senses lifted at the sight, but there was no instant consolation there — only, inside a crowded mind, a sudden increase of space.
Animate or inanimate, indifferent or not, there was something luminous and terrible about these clouds, raining as they did on the just and the unjust alike.
Willingly she would have surrendered the gift of consciousness if only she might drift like these in a blind passion of being, exempt from question; yet even as she yearned wistfully so, another voice inside her agitated mind was whispering the old caveat from the Rosarium: that all error arose from failure to begin with the proper substance, from a proud forgetfulness that the magisterium is Nature's work and not the worker's.
She had no desire to hear it but the voice was insistent.
It required a calmer appraisal of her predicament.
If she returned to the Hall and told her father what she had endured she would be forbidden to return — that was what must happen.
And what then would become of her days?
The task would never be resumed.
She would have no heart for it.
She  would drift listlessly about the rooms, her dreams extinguished.
It would be the end of all her high ambitions, and though the world would not greatly suffer thereby — for by now she had lost all confidence that anything she might say would alter the course of things — that crisis which was privately her own would remain for ever unresolved.
If she did not return to the Lodge she might never experience such terror again, but the memory of it would never leave her.
It might diminish with time, secreting itself away in some irregularly attended cranny of her brain, but it would be there, waiting, finding its moments.
Somewhere, for ever, she would be afraid.
Her sanity might be preserved, but wherein would its value lie?
Yet if she went back…
Again she found herself trembling at the thought.
Nothing could persuade her to enter the Lodge again.
Yet she could not remain here, huddled against the rain which ran down her face and still would disguise from no one the humiliation of her tears.
She was still sick at heart when she passed down through the last glade and found herself staring at the Lodge's covert thatch, its closed door, She stood for a time in the yard outside, afraid to enter.
She walked away, around the house to the jetty where her skiff bobbed on its painter, puddled with rain.
She must bail before she could leave if she was not further to dampen her skirt; but what did that matter?
She was already drenched.
That alone might account for her shivering.
And still there was no sign of Pedro.
With more bravery than she had ever mustered before, Louisa retraced her steps.
She pushed open the door on silence.
The fire was dead in the hearth, the shadows gathering.
She stepped inside and, still wearing the soaked cape, ready at an instant to flee, sat down at her desk.
The pages of her book stared back at her.
She waited.
For a long time she waited, and nothing more terrible came to enter that silence than her own dark imaginings.
A decision was taken then.
And Pedro's continued absence insisted that she act on it at once.
Half an hour later, driven by a resolve almost beyond her comprehension, she was across the lake, informing Tilly that it had become necessary for her to take up more permanent  residence at the Lodge.
The wet journeys back and forth were, she explained, a weary imposition on her time, and she had decided that until the work was done she would pass the nights there.
Provisions must be laid in, now, that day.
Sheets and blankets would be needed, candles, food.
More alarmed by her mistress's drawn features and wet clothes than by her brusque manner, Mrs Tillotson wondered aloud whether this could possibly be wise.
Wise or not, Louisa insisted angrily, it was essential.
She would be grateful if Tilly would stir herself about it.
‘I should be a deal happier,’ Mrs Tillotson protested, ‘if the master were consulted first.’
‘by no means must he be disturbed,’ Louisa snapped.
‘Nor will I have you worry him behind my back.
I am about his business and must accomplish it as best I may.
Is that quite clearly understood?’
Astonished but not dismayed by this severity, the housekeeper surveyed her bedraggled mistress.
With that homely air of perplexed affection that had so long endeared her to Louisa's heart, she gave voice to a remaining consideration.
It seemed, at that moment, to distress her above all others.
‘But there will be no one by at night to dress your hair.’
Louisa laughed then, though her laughter was close to tears.
‘Then I shall be a fright,’ she answered.
‘Forgive me, Tilly, I don't mean to dismay you, but you have no understanding of how urgently these matters press.
You must trust my judgment.
I am safe enough at the Lodge and with your help I shall make all snug.
Now come, waste no more of my time.
I must be back before light fails.’
And how deeply she wished she could feel the confidence impressed upon her voice as she added with forced lightness, ‘Apart from any other consideration, I still have a wet dog to find.’
Unconvinced, shaking her grey curls under the mob-cap, Mrs Tillotson did as she was bidden.
The bedroom was insufferably dark, though if he insisted that the drapes be further drawn they would open only on to a dour and leaden sky.
‘You have heard from Hattie?’ he enquired.
‘I have.’
‘And what does she have to say?’
There was a long silence.
Which he must finally break.
‘My dear?’
‘Did I not ask you that my family not be troubled?’
‘Indeed you did, Emilia, but…’
‘Do my wishes count for nothing in this house?’
‘You know that is not the case.
All of us desire nothing more than that you should take hold of your life again…more freely exercise your will.
There is no future in this confinement from the world.’
‘Do you think I would choose to be so?’
‘Indeed I do not,’ lied Edwin Frere.
‘Yet you must have help to free you from this condition and, frankly, I have found myself at a loss.
When the good Doctor suggested that I override your wish and write to…’
‘That man was behind this then?
I might have guessed.’
‘He has only your best interests at heart.’
‘The man has no heart.
You have no conception how deeply he distressed me.
He would be better employed as beadle, or as taskmaster in the Saxburgh Union.’
‘Nevertheless, he wishes you well.
If his manner was a little rough…’
The sentence was stifled under the thick cushion of Emilia's sigh.
‘Well, the harm is done,’ she said, and placed the letter at her bedside-table next to the sal volatile.
‘No harm, I am sure of it.
Only good can come from loving company.
Tell me, what does Hattie say?’
Frere was unaware of it but his sister-in-law had spared herself the burden of a second letter.
He was, in consequence, in an agony of apprehension.
‘She wishes the impossible.’
‘She does?’
‘Though she seems most eager to see me.’
‘But why not?
We have plenty of room here at the Rectory.
It would be a delight to have her bright spirit about the place.’
‘I know you do not greatly care for her, Edwin.
Do not patronize me.
I am not yet without my wits.’
Chastened, Frere said, ‘Hattie would be excellent company for you.
You could take the country air together.
Surely your sister could do what I have failed to do…restore your cheer, your vigour?’
‘As always you grasp the stick by the wrong end.
Hattie wishes me to visit her, in Cambridge.’
For a moment Edwin Frere was stunned.
How could the silly chit have so mistaken his intent?
He had been at such pains.
Never had a letter been more carefully worded.
‘She is of the opinion that the loneliness of this place accounts for my condition.
She believes that the respite of a holiday in Cambridge would speed my recovery.
Of course, it is out of the question.’
‘But I made it absolutely clear how frail you were…that it was imperative that she come here…’
Emilia looked up sharply in the gloom.
‘Imperative?
You used that word?
Harriet mentions nothing of this.’
Caught in the toils of his own deceit, Frere's eyes scouted the room.
He found its heavy odour suffocating.
‘I thought…the surprise…’
‘You would seek to conspire with my sister behind…’
Suddenly he was out of all patience.
‘Dear God, Emilia, there is no pleasing you and your family.
What am I supposed to do?
Whatever motion I make you hasten to find fault.
You terrorize the servants, insult the good Doctor, accuse me of sedition…
Is all the world to blame but you?
Why, you become as tiresome as your father.’
Had he smacked her across the face the result could not have been more devastating.
Emilia stared at him with Medusa's eyes a moment then eased herself further into the bed where she lay gripping the coverlet with white fingers.
On the stone mask of her face no tears appeared.
Frere got up from his chair, hating himself, to prowl the room like a caged panther.
Damn the woman, he would not apologize.
He was almost of a mind to tear the sheets from the bed, heave her out, send her sprawling in an agony of humiliation across the floor.
Emilia said quietly, ‘I think you have it in your heart to murder me.’
‘Don't be preposterous, madam.’
But a hot darkness sweltered at his head.
The breath was constricted in his chest and he found it difficult to swallow.
Dear God, what had he done that things should come to such a pass as this?
He turned to face his wife who lay, it seemed, transfixed with terror at his unprecedented rage, and hating him, hating him.
Violently he shook his head and slammed out of the room.
If Louisa had not dreamed badly on her first night at the Lodge it was because she hardly slept at all.
Little enough daylight was left by the time Pedro came skulking back, and for most of the evening she had sat, talking to him, stroking the soft rug of his ear between tense fingers, and waiting for the fit to come again.
Nothing had happened.
Louisa hardly knew whether she felt more relieved or cheated, for the act of summoning all the courage and then being able to employ it only against her own anxiety had depleted her to no useful purpose.
She felt as a nervous duellist must feel when his challenger fails the appointment — angry, braver in the aftermath than in the apprehension, her stomach slightly queasy with unassimilated dread.
The truckle-bed had been narrow and hard, and she was profoundly unwilling to surrender herself to sleep.
Though the Lodge was quiet enough, it would have been a too perilous lowering of her guard, so she tossed and turned until not long before dawn when her body took matters into its own exhausted hands.
The next day had been largely wasted.
When she saw that her tense efforts to concentrate were getting nowhere she made a swift expedition back to the Hall.
She wished to collect two items overlooked in the haste of her first departure: her deck of Tarot cards and, for wise consoling company, the porcelain figure of a Chinese mandarin which had stood for many years in her bedroom at the Hall.
His face was smiling and, when you tapped the head, it rocked on a concealed axle so that he seemed to chortle at the absurdity of human antics.
It was the smile she wanted with her, for she had felt its lack about her in the Lodge, and now that lack was remedied.
Yet even under the Chinaman's cheerful protection the second night was little improvement on the first.
Though she had slept longer, her dreams, if not alarming, had been most unpleasant, and she woke feeling unrested.
Later that day she had been forced to catnap at her desk, having achieved little else of consequence there.
Brief as it was, the sleep did her good.
On waking, it occurred to her with renewed conviction that the experience of two days before might have been no more than a temporary aberration of an exhausted mind.
In the cool light of this brighter day it was hard to conceive of it as a visitation of demons.
She looked back over the recently written unsatisfactory pages of her book, and there was no doubt that her mind must have been tired.
She winced at their infelicities, at the clumsy way they beat about the bush.
She saw that it had been a mistake — an evasion perhaps?—; to hamper herself with the abstractions of that cryptic poem.
Her attempts at explication had only clouded her own contemporary voice, and led her far astray from the feeling heart of the matter.
She was fresher now, more confident; confident enough to scrap the entire chapter and begin anew.
An hour or so was spent drafting a new outline for this second approach on the mysteries of the Coniunctio and, when she was satisfied that its thread was strong enough to guide her through the maze, she took up again the pursuit of Mercurius through the bridal-chambers of the mind.
Around nine o'clock on what was now her third night at the Lodge she looked up from the page and saw a face at the dark window staring in at her through the rain.
Instantly the entire surface of her skin went cold.
She stared at the window aghast, and the woman's face stared back, shadowy and haggard, blurred by the streaming rain.
She stared in at Louisa like a crazed creature, silently beseeching help.
Several seconds passed before the face of the strange woman dissolved into her own recognized reflection.
Heart pounding still from the certainty that here was the returning shade of one of her grandfather's mistresses, Louisa slumped back into her chair and dropped the pen.
When she looked back at the window there was the face again; but it was attempting now to smile.
She had been foolish to neglect to draw the window-blind, but there was no comfort in this self-reproof.
The plain fact was she had been terrified by her own reflection, and this was not lightly  to be dismissed.
Anonymous anxieties still swirled inside her.
Again the questions returned.
Why was she subjecting herself to this penal state of solitary confinement?
Why was she afraid?
Of what?
And then — with final, frightening clarity — what inward turbulence of her own soul might possibly explain this sense of Madcap Agnew's unrequited presence in the Lodge?
For a moment, like a scholar contending both with his own conscience and the uncovered fact which calls an entire thesis into question, Louisa gazed in fascination at the thought, then flinched from it.
Surely it was disproportionate?
What need to import further obscure perplexities into an already complex situation — particularly when simpler and convincing explanations lay to hand?
She was a woman alone on a blustery night with no one by in case of need: here was reason enough for timidity.
Were she not to experience such moments of trepidation there would be something strange m her nature indeed.
To calm herself she scrutinized the evening's work.
Her heart fell again.
If she had neutered the quick of mystery in platitude before, she was smothering it with symbols now.
It was hopeless, hopeless.
Again panic seized her.
Fighting it, she scrumpled the pages in her hands.
There was no question but that something vital had been missed, ignored, neglected there…something scarily associated with the darksome presence of her grandfather.
She was in flight from it — as she had imagined that woman in the rain in flight.
And, like her, she was drawn back, again and again, to the very place of terror that she fled.
As her father had so often complained, to engage with this task was to enter a labyrinth, and it seemed that whichever way she turned she came to this impasse.
Perhaps, like the frightened creature she had imagined in the night — it was after all herself —; it would always be so until she turned and truly faced the thing she feared?
Louisa stared at her reflection in the drenched, dark glass.
She stared until it was hard to know which was herself — the disconsolate woman in the chill room or the other sorrowful face in the night outside.
Somewhere, it seemed, she was ignorant of both.
A further decision was taken then.
She pushed back her chair, stood up and crossed the room to open her box of tarot cards.
Four hours later she had begun to understand.
Almost the entire deck of cards — sixty-six of them — were spread out on the floor before the fire.
At the centre of a triangle of twenty-two cards, within a rectilinear arch constructed from the rest, lay the single card she had consciously chosen to represent herself.
It was The Queen of Swords.
Louisa's solitude, the wary alertness of her face, the way — symbolically at least— she brought the bright sword of her intellect to her defence — these and many other factors required this particular card and no other as her ambassador in the court of Le Grand Jeu.
This was the name of the spread she had chosen, and it displayed an entire interior self-portrait on a scale she had never attempted before.
Reading that wealth of images had tested her powers of concentration to the utmost, yet this act of unremitting self-scrutiny had left her more energized than exhausted, for much of critical importance had emerged.
The reading had fully revealed a fact which she had dimly apprehended before but lacked the courage to confront until she saw it reflected in the mirror of the spread.
The fact was that for many years she and her father had been living with a dangerous illusion; and the illusion was that they were entirely virtuous in their endeavours, entirely on the angels' side.
She had striven to make her work perfect — forgetful that it was not perfection which life required, but completeness.
And what a failure of sensibility this had been!
To make the recognition now was not to deny that she and her father had been aware of their flaws and petty vices; but to consider themselves only commonly fallible was less than half the tale.
They had ever been larger than common in their aspirations, and the shadow they cast was correspondingly deep.
In angry self-reproach, Louisa saw how much sooner it should have been evident to her that in identifying so completely with his most noble ancestor, her father had been at pains to exclude all thought of his more immediate and darker legacy.
Aware that Madcap Agnew's name was scarcely mentioned in the Hall, that the Lodge had been for many years a forbidden place, and that her father's heart still quailed to reflect on the terrors he had suffered as a child, Louisa had not dared to let her reflections on this  unhappy history reach far enough.
Still worse, she had allowed herself to be drawn into a conspiracy of exclusion.
She had made — and with far less justification than her father — the same grave error as he.
Had it not been for the ignorant impetuosity which demanded the Lodge as the most appropriate environment for her work, the truth might have continued to elude them.
Nevertheless, the facts of the case were now plain enough in her spread: Madcap Agnew remained as much alive inside them as did the glorious seventeenth-century adept of the Art.
He was, perhaps, more powerfully so, and not merely as a matter of proximate generation but precisely because such strenuous efforts had been made to exclude him.
In an enterprise such as theirs every aspect of the complex inward theatre must be brought into play and assigned its proper place; and this — though she shuddered at the consequence —; included the daemonic figure of her grandfather.
Refused admission by the front door, he had forced his way through the back —; and with quite terrifying violence.
It seemed that her brother had been right after all when he warned her that the Decoy Lodge was haunted.
Madcap Agnew was still here.
He was here because she was here herself.
In part at least, she was his returning shade, and that shade was clamouring now to be embraced.
The truth was fearsome and unavoidable.
She remain uncertain still what was to be done with it, though she consoled herself with the thought that in entering the court of Le Grand Jeu and submitting to its verdict, she had already taken the first tentative steps.
Yet she knew that the ordeal to come must tax all her strength and, not impossibly, exceed it.
Nor was a reckoning with her grandfather's shade the only sentence imposed by the spread.
Another and equally disconcerting presence had materialized there — one which she had attempted to diminish some time ago and send packing from her thoughts.
Yet there the figure remained and was, in a way, still less acceptable, for the mean spirit it betrayed lacked stature.
To acknowledge it — as the cards insisted that she must — a portion of herself, was to recognize features which were paltry and despicable; it forced the reluctant awareness that she was, in part at least, a smaller person than she believed herself to be.
But there in her spread was Emilia Frere — afraid of life, querulous, cold-hearted — and they were, it seemed, sisters beneath the skin.
Somehow she too must be embraced.
The whole picture ranged wider far, but two vital considerations immediately emerged.
The first was that she and her book would have nothing complete to say to the age until her grandfather's misspent energy had been redeemed inside herself.
The second gave cause for more personal concern.
It was evident from the spread that enormous powers were available within her — powers which might be channelled into rich creation, or which might, if not subjected to correct restraint, become destructive.
She began to understand how the bleak vision she had been shown was no more and no less than the extremes to which such powers might go if once they lost touch with the exactions of a loving heart.
Hitherto she had experienced the unruly masculine spirit inside her soul as little more than a matter for jocular asides or occasional remorse to see it bound like Pedro into mischief; but notice had now been served.
The powers of this spirit were immense and impersonal.
Unassimilated, they might one day wreak havoc in her life.
How to engage with it then, when at the first glimpse of its potentially monstrous nature she had fled?
It still terrified her —; even more now that it was acknowledged as a portion of her soul.
She was far from confident that she possessed the moral courage to endure further revelations from that dark side of her moon.
Yet the process of reading the spread had been like mounting a ladder that vanished beneath her: once started there was no return.
She could not now pretend that none of this was known to her, that she was still simply a diligent and faithful daughter, loyal handmaid of a noble art.
Consciousness exacted its price: as surely as it increased freedom so it diminished it.
She must proceed.
Congenial or not, the truth had been made evident to her in the spread.
She had seen it there not in terrible isolation but as a part, a vital part, of a larger pattern — one that pointed the way towards completion of her task.
Completion must be her watchword now, whatever admissions it entailed; and was not completion at the very heart of the Coniunctio — the central symbol which had proved the stumbling-stone of her work?
It was the reconciliation of Sol and Luna after the violence of their strife, the  chymical wedding of Sulphur and Quicksilver, the meeting of the dark and light in close embrace from which the golden stone was born.
She had known this all along, but she knew it with a different knowledge now.
It was a more than intellectual comprehension; and to write of it she must strive to become that meeting.
She must submit to its ordeals.
Last time Madcap Agnew had stepped unbidden from the chamber of her mind.
She must summon him now.
Unconscious of the hour, driven by a nervous certainty, Louisa crossed to her desk, smoothed her hand across a fresh sheet of paper, and took up her pen.
‘Well, old fellow in the cellarage,’ she whispered lightly to herself, though the breath was shallow in her throat, ‘it seems I must speak with you at last.’
If the domestic servants at the Rectory were surprised when their mistress came downstairs the following morning, her husband was astounded.
Had his violent loss of temper done the trick after all?
Was his wife human again?
Under her cold regard Frere quickly saw that his outburst would not easily be forgotten.
And why should it, he reflected, when a sullen anger smouldered in him still?
He had scarcely slept that night.
He had let the sun go down on his wrath and woken with it.
Anger, he saw, had not been lightly numbered among the deadly sins.
For Horace it might have been a short madness; in Frere it threatened to become a running sore.
Not even George Herbert's counsel that the country-parson's rage might here and there be justified had comforted.
Nor could he even remember now what he had said in that burst of spleen.
He dreaded that it might be unforgivable.
‘My dear,’ he attempted, ‘how good to see you up and about again.’
Emilia informed the maid that she would take a lightly poached egg and some toast.
Thereafter there was silence in the dining-room.
‘I was about to visit old Will Yaxley at The Pightle,’ Frere volunteered eventually.
‘I fear he cannot last much longer…
But I will remain here and keep you company if you wish.’
Again there was no answer.
Frere swallowed, looked about him.
‘His will be my first funeral in Munding I believe.’
‘Then perhaps you had better attend to the mending of his soul.
He is a spiteful man and a drunkard.
One who appears to find more comfort in the Feathers than the church.’
There was an absence of interest in Emilia's voice.
‘Yes, perhaps I should go.’
‘As you wish.’
Frere's breakfast was finished.
He ringed his napkin, scraped back the chair, made to get up, then had second thoughts.
‘You are feeling stronger today?’
‘A little.’
‘I am glad to hear it.’
Again he made to rise.
‘There is dust on the banister-rail, Edwin.
You had not observed the servants’ negligence?’
Frere sighed.
‘My mind has not been on dust, Emilia.’
Studiously Emilia declined the implication.
‘Then I must speak to Mary myself,’ she said.
‘When I have done so I think I shall retire again.’
‘A little at a time is perhaps best.
I would not have you overtire yourself.’
Frere hesitated, cleared his throat.
‘Emilia, about yesterday afternoon…’
‘I prefer not to speak of it.’
‘Surely we must?’
‘You may speak if you wish.
I shall not answer.’
‘You will accept no apology?’
She regarded him without warmth.
‘In my opinion, if we are to survive together here it is best that we behave as though that…incident…had not occurred.’
That such a policy was entirely unfeasible was evident in her manner.
He was on the point of saying so when he despaired.
No, thought Frere, this is my first funeral.
Let us bury it and be done.
‘Very well.
If you prefer it so.’
He got up from his chair.
‘And how am I to respond to Hattie's letter?’
Whatever way you choose, damn you, he thought.
He said, ‘Can there be any question?
You are not yet well.’
‘That is true.’
‘Then you must thank her for the invitation and suggest a postponement.’
Emilia nodded.
‘You would have no objection to my going when I feel ready to do so?’
‘Of course not.
Why should I?’
‘As you are not free to go yourself I merely wondered whether you might not feel my absence.’
Dear God, he was beginning to think he would be glad of it.
‘Of course I should.
But a few days…’
‘I was thinking of a longer stay.’
‘You were?’
‘As you know, father has not been well and Hattie is not the most reliable of attendants.
She says in her letter that he misses me dreadfully.’
She would not hold his gaze.
A cold suspicion entered Frere's mind.
He realized that he could no longer trust his wife.
‘How long a visit did you have in mind?’
‘Oh I cannot possibly say at this point.
The very thought of the journey wearies me…
Several weeks perhaps.’
‘Several?’
‘Two or three.
Perhaps more.
I really cannot say.’
What was this sudden panic round his heart?— as though he had stepped on a rotten floorboard and it had fallen through.
‘Well,’ he hedged, ‘as this is not an immediate matter we must speak of it again,’and turned away.
‘Of course, if you would rather I wilted here…?’
And there was the rage again.
‘Emilia,’ he demanded roughly, ‘what are you saying to me?’
‘If you continue to speak to me in that cold manner,’ she answered, ‘I shall say nothing at all.
Go to your dying drunkard — it is quite clear you are out of all patience with me.’
At which point the maid returned with a salver and a rack of toast.
‘We will speak of this again,’ said Frere.