

THREE
The girl was not more than fourteen.
She lay on her back on a wooden trestle table which stood under a palm leaf awning in the shady corner of a broad courtyard in the Place of Healing.
They had placed linen wadding soaked in water around her to keep her body cool, but despite the attentions of the attendants there was no stopping the persistent flies, and although it was still early enough in the season of shemu for the sun's heat to be mild, her face was already puffy.
Huy could see no mark on the body to indicate how she had died.
She was naked, except for golden anklets and bracelets set with emeralds.
A rich girl, then; but he could see that already from the delicacy of her skin, and the fine soft hands which lay crossed over her small breasts.
‘What is this?’ he asked Merymose cautiously.
The two of them stood side by side by the corpse.
From time to time a little breeze, trapped in the courtyard, eddied and gusted in their direction, bringing with it the first hint of the sweet smell of decay.
‘It is something I need your help with.
Or at least your advice.’
Huy glanced at his companion, but there was nothing in his expression except serious concern.
There was not even tension or anxiety.
It was as if what had happened did not surprise him.
‘But you know my background.
It's unlikely that asking my help will be approved by your masters.’
Merymose returned his look.
‘For the moment I am in sole charge of this death.
In any case, I am not making an official request.’
Huy hesitated.
‘It is difficult for me.
You cannot forget who I am and what I was.
With a political prisoner escaped, all of us who were at the City of the Horizon must come under increased scrutiny.’
‘Your house will certainly be watched.’
‘And I will be followed.
I might lead your men to the fugitive.’
‘That is true.
But, if you were prepared to be of service to us…’
‘What makes you think I can be of help?’
‘Everything Taheb has told me about you.
Don't blame her.
She wants to help you; and of course people will employ you to help them solve their problems; but that will not make you popular with the Medjays or with Horemheb.’
‘Thank you for the advice.
I will be careful.’
Merymose relaxed slightly.
‘It is a pity that you are not a Medjay yourself.
Our organisation is only efficient at keeping the streets quiet, and then not always.
As for what you do investigation — that is something new.
It interests me, but I am one of very few, and I need instruction.’
‘It would be a case of one blind man leading another.’
‘At least they would be moving along the road.
And they might learn to find their way together.’
‘They might fall over a cliff together, too.’
Huy was put at his most suspicious by the policeman's flattery.
‘Are you not curious about this girl?
At least look at her.
I cannot keep the body later than this evening.
It must be handed over to the embalmers then, or it will be too late.’
Huy paused before asking, ‘Who was she?’
‘Her name was Iritnefert.
Her father is Ipuky.’
Huy looked sharply at the Medjay.
‘Ipuky — you mean the Controller of the Silver Mines?’
Merymose nodded.
‘What happened?’
Huy was alarmed.
Ipuky was one of the most important men in Tutankhamun's court.
‘We don't know.
A group of workmen crossing over to the Valley just before dawn found her by the shore.’
‘Where were they crossing?
Not from the harbour?’
‘No, further downriver.’
‘Nearer the palace?’
‘Yes.’
Huy thought for a moment.
Ipuky had a house in the palace compound.
‘As soon as they reported it, Ipuky was informed and I was sent for.’
‘The horses?’
‘Yes.’
Huy looked at the girl again.
She had a delicate, innocent face; the cheeks still round with the plumpness of childhood.
Someone had closed her eyes, placing white stones on the lids to keep them down.
 There was nothing in the cast of her features to suggest that she had been alarmed or frightened at the moment of her death.
‘Did anybody take note of how she looked when she was found?
Of how she was lying on the ground, for example?’
‘The first people to arrive were servants from Ipuky's household, and they took the body there.
If I hadn't requested a delay the embalmers would have already covered her in natron.’
Merymose looked grim.
‘You were brave to make that request.
What did they think of it?’
‘They were astonished; but Ipuky is an intelligent man, and he wants whoever did this caught.
I am sure his wife thought I was in league with Set.’
Merymose's face betrayed a flicker of amusement.
‘But the murderer must be brought in, or I will have to pay the price.’
‘It is a pity you didn't see the girl at the place she died.
That might have told us much.’
‘I know.
I talked to the workmen.
The foreman said that the girl was lying on her back, her hands folded, as she is now.’
‘Was she dressed?’
‘She was naked.’
Huy stepped closer to the body.
He had no medical knowledge, and no idea of what to do, what to look for; but the calmness of the body intrigued him.
It raised many questions.
He touched it softly.
The sun had warmed the skin, giving it the illusion of life.
‘Are there any marks on her back?’
‘None that I noticed.’
Huy looked at the girl's hands again: they were without a blemish.
Her heels were grazed.
The rest of her skin, over all the visible part of her body, was clear and unbroken.
He would need a doctor to tell him if she had been violated, but there was no indication of it, not even a bruise on an arm where a strong hand might have held her.
He reached gently behind her head and felt her hair and the back of her neck, detecting no damage.
He registered the stiffness in her body as he lowered her head again.
‘Well?’ asked Merymose.
‘I can tell nothing,’ Huy said.
‘There has been no violence, and there is no way of telling the manner of her death.’
Merymose sighed.
‘That is what the doctors say.’
‘Have you spoken to Ipuky?’
‘They have shut themselves in their house.
I will speak to their chief steward before night.’
‘What will happen to Iritnefert?’
‘Since she can tell us no more, I will give the order for the embalmers to take her.’
He paused irresolutely.
‘The way this has been done, you might think a god was to blame.
Has she been struck down by heaven, do you think?’
‘No.’
‘If she were not the daughter of such an important family…’
‘Yes, how much easier it would be.
I am sorry I could not help.
Perhaps Taheb overestimated my talent.’
‘I will speak to you again of this.’
‘You know where I am.
How much time will they give you?’
‘Seventy days.
The time that it takes to embalm her and send her to the Fields of Aarru.’
Huy wondered, as he walked away, what Merymose would do if in that short time no killer had been found.
Someone would be made to die for the crime; but for all his reservations, Merymose did not strike him as the kind of man who would fall  on just anyone in order to present a solution.
At least, not until the three months had passed and the knife was poised over his own neck.
His route took him past the City of Dreams.
Remembering the wig which now he did not need, he pushed open the door and entered the antechamber which served as a reception area and office.
There was no other way out of the building than through here, though the girls may have had a secret exit of their own, and this antechamber was guarded more fiercely by Nubenehem than ever a desert demon guarded its cave.
The large Nubian was discussing something — evidently money — with a client who bent over the desk towards her, his back to Huy.
A middle-aged man, well-dressed, but furtive.
‘It's too much!’ he hissed at the madam.
‘For what you want to do, it's a bargain.
Take it or leave it.’
He half turned, indecisive, and Huy caught sight of a grey profile, vaguely familiar, but the man turned back to Nubenehem before he could place it.
‘All right.
But they'd better be good.’
‘You'll have a ringside seat.’
The man giggled — a horrible noise — before setting off for the curtain at the back of the room.
‘Just a minute.’
‘What now?’
‘Pay first.’
Cursing under his breath, and still keeping his face averted from Huy, the man threw a handful of small silver bars in front of the fat woman, who scooped them up almost before they had settled on the surface of the table.
‘They'll show you where to go inside.’
The man vanished.
Only now did Huy approach.
‘Who was that?’
‘You know better than to ask questions like that.
He's too important a client for me to tell you.’
‘That's a lot of money he paid.’
‘What he likes is specialised.
We don't usually do it.’
The Nubian looked up from the couch where she half lay by a low table on which a number of limestone flakes were scattered.
They were covered with calculations.
‘The accounts,’ she explained, deliberately changing the subject.
‘The farmers coming in from outside the city always want to pay in so much emmer, so many hides, so much barley.
I tell them to pay in metal, it is easier for me to negotiate, but they always reply that it's too hard for them to get.
I'd refuse them admission altogether if I could afford to lose the business.’
‘I doubt if you'd go under.’
‘Maybe not.
But this is still a chore I could do without.
If you've come for a session with Kafy, you're out of luck she's booked for the whole night by one of the priests from the Temple of Khepri.
If you've come to collect your wig —’
‘I won't need it now.’
‘Run off, has he?’
Huy looked at her.
‘An order is an order,’ continued Nubenehem, unruffled.
‘And an order fulfilled has to be paid for — if you want more favours in the future.’
She rose heavily, fat cascading over her hips, and crossed the room to a large cupboard set in the wall.
Drawing a number of bolts, she opened its door and withdrew from the interior an elderly, moth-eaten wig which she flourished in front of Huy.
‘There!’
‘It's terrible.
It'd walk away by itself if you put it on the floor.’
‘You wanted something quickly.
This isn't a perukier's, you know.’
‘You should be ashamed of yourself, treating a good customer like this.’
‘Not such a good customer recently,’ retorted Nubenehem, letting herself flop back down on her couch.
‘What's happened to you?
Min desert you?’
Their conversation was interrupted by the familiar sound of a girl's badly-acted laughter from behind the bead curtain which led to the interior of the brothel, punctuated by the growling of  a man who is under the illusion that he is cock of the dunghill.
The girl remained unseen, but the man emerged a moment later, his eyes, as they caught Huy's, switching from initial guilt to fraternal collusion as he saw that Huy was someone he did not know.
In the dark days of the Southern Capital under Akhenaten, Nubenehem had told him once, a father who had sold his daughter into prostitution sometime later visited the City of Dreams to watch a session: his daughter, whom he had never touched himself, was one of the participants.
It seemed that the father had gone straight from the brothel to the River and drowned himself.
But there was nothing furtive or guilty about this customer, who radiated well being and contentment.
‘Nice little ass, that Hathfertiti; but a bit of a tight squeeze.’
He gave Huy a connoisseur's wink.
‘It's a pity you've gone off fucking,’ continued Nubenehem when the customer had left.
‘There was a girl here not long ago, looking for fun, wanting to earn a bit on the side.
God knows why.
One of the aristos slumming.
She was your type, maybe a bit on the young side.
But you could smell the mandrake fruit on her across the room.
I'll tell you what; I'll give you the wig for a silver deben.
I'll even throw in some henna for you to tart it up.’
Huy dug into the leather pouch at his side, concealed under a fold of his kilt, and withdrew its contents: a couple of silver deben were all it contained.
Leaving the whorehouse with the wig tucked under an arm, he reflected that it was worth at least what he had paid to have Surere off his back.
At the same time he found it interesting that prison had made the former district governor more passionate about the cause championed by Akhenaten.
The pharaoh had thrown out beliefs held for two thousand years, rejecting them as superstitions, and replaced them all by a single god, whose spirit could not be contained in images, whose love extended to all people, and who lived in the power of the sunlight.
In the twelve bright years of the young pharaoh's reign — he had died insane aged twenty-nine, his dream and his country  in ruins — a new light had seemed to dance in the souls of men too.
But prison had protected Surere from the truth.
Huy himself, who had had to adapt to the new world constructed after Akhenaten's fall by Horemheb, had learnt above all that ideals do not change people.
He acknowledged now that the majority of people, the great brown mass of the fieldworkers, had not even been noticed by the visionary pharaoh he had followed with such devotion, let alone been affected by his thinking.
In a matter of weeks, not months, the old, disgraced order had reasserted itself.
The priests of the old deities had emerged from the desert or from hiding in neglected provincial cities in Shemau and To-mehu, and established themselves again, without difficulty, the people grateful to have the old gods returned to them, who demanded no more than unquestioning duty, propitiation and sacrifice; gods who did not require a man to think for himself; gods who forgave sin if the price was right, and who guaranteed a good time in the Hereafter.
Surere had been unusually inflexible for an intelligent man.
Always insisting on the purity of life, on the importance of family existence, he had gone far beyond the mild precepts laid down by his mentor.
Before madness overcame him, Akhenaten had at least understood that there would always be a gulf between an ideal and its realisation.
The Aten itself was amoral; but in life one should always forgive a man who had sinned.
In his province, Huy remembered, Surere had tried to impose what he had interpreted as the supporting columns of a decent society: sexual  responsibility and even monogamy were held to be the roots of a stable family; sexual relations between members of that family were restricted to cousins.
Concubines were discouraged.
In Surere's province, there had been many transgressions, despite the loss of privilege which was the only punishment he had dared impose, though there were rumours that in some cases he would have preferred to apply the death penalty.
There were rumours that in some cases he had.
Even the king, who, unlike his district governor, had practised these precepts himself, had not expected his subjects to do so too, though he hoped they would strive towards the  ideal.
His own queen, whom Surere had revered so deeply, when she requested that she be buried not in the new City of the Horizon, but near her old home, in the Valley of the Dead across the river from the Southern Capital, had been granted her wish, though it had hurt Akhenaten deeply.
Nefertiti had died young.
Five floods at least had fertilised the Black Land since her departure in the Boat of the Night.
Since her husband had gone to join her, her tomb had been neglected, and sand was already drifting across its entrance, covering it inexorably in a red blanket.
It had been thought among the citizens of the Southern Capital that the new pharaoh, Tutankhamun, whose own Chief Wife was a daughter of Nefertiti, might have renovated the Death Halls of her mother.
His neglect of such a sacred duty had scandalised some, even members of the old priesthood, but behind Tutankhamun's inaction the policies of Horemheb were discerned, and no public protest was raised.
The king, after all, owned the land, the people, every animal and everything that grew.
There was no questioning his word or deed.
Even the thought of doing so would not enter the hearts of most.
Huy wondered how Surere would react to the world he found himself in now.
He had not visited the Southern Capital, Huy felt sure, for at least eight years, and possibly longer, following the removal of the court to the new City of the Horizon downriver.
In that time, its geography had changed little, the only difference being that more and more houses had squeezed themselves on to the mound of detritus that had built up over generations to form the hill on which the city squatted, above the highest level of flood the river could attain.
The man had survived in his pursuit of a political career by mingling adaptability with discretion.
But his adaptability did not apply to his tenets, merely to his instinct for self-preservation.
An amoral man applying a fixed morality to others might not have hoped for the success Surere had had; but now, with so much ranged against him, in a world so different from the one he had lorded it in, Huy wondered how he would get on.
He found himself hoping that the man would succeed in his plan to take a knot of followers remaining  faithful to the Aten — if they existed — out to the deserts which, he had heard, extended to the east of the Great Green, and form an outpost of the new religion there.
Huy had lived a more realistic life.
He remembered the release he had felt when he had first heard the teachings of Akhenaten, which had cut away the rotten trappings of the old beliefs, festooned as they were with the cynical speculation of the priests.
Now, though, having to live again in a world where ideals were something to be discussed by intellectuals and certain priests, but never applied, as they would have got in the way of Horemheb's programme of reform, Huy found his feelings dulled.
Unable to accept again the superstitions he had discarded, nevertheless with time and misfortune he found himself turning back to the three deities who had guided his early life, and helped him through his harsh apprenticeship as a scribe: the reasonable Thoth, ibis-headed, god of the scribes; Horus, son of Osiris; and the protector of the hearth, Bes — the little god of his childhood.
As he reached his door he found his thoughts turning once more to the urgent problem of putting food in his belly, and a part of his mind registered with pleasure that these thoughts were at last supplanting the ones in which he alternately pined for Aset and visited unholy vengeance upon her.
As for his former wife, Aahmes, she had become a shadowy figure who sent him a letter from the Delta every new year, at the midsummer opet festival, with news of his favourite son, Heby.
He tried to imagine how the boy would look now that he was nine.
In her last letter, Aahmes had spoken of a new marriage.
Huy tried to imagine her going through the simple ceremony with someone else, and could not.
What seemed most real was that Heby would have a new father — someone who was there, instead of a remote figure several days' sail upriver.
He was grateful to Taheb for having sought work for him through Merymose, and wondered if he had been unduly mistrustful of her.
Perhaps she had begun to realise that she had been the victim of an unhappy marriage, rather than simply the cause of one.
After her husband's death she had borne herself with a mournful dignity which had  done her standing no harm, and taken the funeral food to the tomb herself with a regularity and devotion which would have shamed women lamenting better-loved partners.
Now he had met her again, he found a different woman — and the one who was now emerging was the one with whom, ironically, Amotju could have been happy.
Huy entered his house, and its drabness both depressed and reproached him.
He scratched together some lentils and nebes bread, and found a small jar of black beer and a clay straw to suck it with, thinking of the contrast between last night's dinner and this.
After he had eaten he lit a small oil lamp to dispel the gathering gloom, and by its light fought off the silence by indulging in some desultory tidying, which consisted of gathering together assorted scrolls of papyrus and articles of clothing scattered about, and dumping them into two chests — one for each.
He dropped the wig into the papyrus-chest, wondering what he would do with it, and whose head it had adorned before Nubenehem had come by it.
Thinking of that, he made a mental note to burn it in the morning.
Finally tiredness overcame him and he went out into the yard to fill the water jars for his bath.
Then he climbed the steps to his bedroom, stripping off his kilt, and lay down stiffly.
He expected to fall asleep quickly, but his heart would not let him.
For no reason that he could think of, the image of Nubenehem's customer, the furtive man in the brothel, came back to him.
Why was he familiar?
And why was such a well-dressed man using a brothel like the City of Dreams?
Huy nagged at the problem until, unable to solve it, he became drowsy.
Perhaps after all it was nothing more than that the man reminded him of someone from the old days, and it was not unknown for people from the palace compound to slum in the harbour quarter now and then.
The following morning he awoke refreshed, and the day no longer stretched before him like a void.
Not that there was any more purpose in his life than there had been yesterday; but the events of the previous twenty-four hours had shown him that Ra could and would produce the unexpected at the  most surprising moment, and he could not suppress the hope that his chance meeting with Merymose might lead somewhere.
Huy had been more help to the Medjay than he realised; but it was on his own account that he decided to take up Taheb's invitation and visit her.
He was curious about how she would react — had she just given it out of social politeness, or had she meant it?
Also he was interested to find out more about the dead girl and her father, Ipuky.
There was no question of his approaching the father directly as a man such as Huy would not be allowed into the palace compound; but Taheb was a rich businesswoman, and if she did not have any personal knowledge of the family, she would have contacts who would.
As he left the house Huy glanced around the square, and along the streets that led from it; but there was no movement at any of the few windows which looked on to the street, and the handful of people about were all familiar to him.
He realised that it had been a while now since he had put himself on the lookout for Medjays shadowing him.
The ones appointed to do the job had never been very good at it, but he had heard a rumour that Horemheb was training a secret corps of police, answering to him alone but set up in the pharaoh's name and in the interests of national security.
It could be that the men and women of this corps were already on the streets and that, army trained, they would be better at surveillance.
He thought briefly about Surere again, and wondered with something akin to panic whether he would reappear; then, angered with himself at this disloyalty to a former colleague and certainly a fellow-sufferer under the new regime, he dismissed the matter and concentrated instead on what he would say to Taheb.
He made his way through the twisting streets of the harbour district, crossing the little squares where the market traders were spreading linen sheets on the ground before decking them with neat conical piles of vegetables and spices whose reds, yellows and greens shone out brightly against the white.
Against walls, jars of oil, cheap wine, and black and red beer were stacked, and here and there a low table displayed jewellery.
Near one of these, a guardian-baboon squatted, on  a leash long enough to enable it to run after any would-be shoplifter and seize his thigh in its jaws.
The ape gave Huy a baleful stare as he passed, then blinked and yawned, displaying a set of formidable yellow incisors.
Nearby, a fisherman was gutting his catch, while his wife, weighing machine in hand, sorted the individual mullet by size.
The smell of freshly-fried falafels hung on the air, reminding Huy that he had not yet breakfasted.
Gradually the streets became broader, the squares larger and less crowded with traders.
He walked south-eastwards from the River, uphill towards the wealthy residential district where Taheb lived.
Tamarisk and acacia trees stood by walls whose whitewash was truly white, not dun coloured, and which hid formal gardens, not cramped courtyards hung with washing.
Huy passed fewer people as he penetrated the quarter, and most of them were servants.
The occasional curtained litter or rickshaw sheltered its rich occupant from the sun as he or she ventured out on some errand.
Nobody paid any attention to Huy.
He guessed that, if anything, he must look like an under-steward employed in a moderately well-off family.
That was certainly the impression he gave to Taheb's gatekeeper, a squat man with one wall-eye, who appraised him pessimistically with the other when he asked for the mistress of the house.
He was saved by another servant who recognised him from the banquet.
Amid apologies, he was ushered in, and led to a familiar inner courtyard to wait.
The courtyard was where he had last seen his friend Amotju.
Then, it had been an austere place, with only plain wooden furniture, painted dull red, to relieve the stark whiteness of the walls.
Now, Taheb had set it with large earthenware tubs, from which a profusion of tall dark-green plants grew.
Two of them bore long fruits like courgettes, though pink in colour and set with needles like a cactus.
Two-thirds of the way up the wall a frieze had been painted, depicting the work of the shipping company which Amotju had inherited from his father.
There, unmistakably, were the pylons of the port of Peru-nefer, near the Northern Capital.
Further along, there was an Eastern Sea  ship, beating down under its huge sail along the desert coast on its way south to Punt to collect a cargo of exotica: blackwood so dense it sank in water; the fierce spotted cats which could be tamed to become the pets, or hunting land falcons of the rich; myrrh; the long teeth of the great forest beast.
On another wall, the heavier ships which crossed the Great Green on less arduous journeys to Byblos and Kheftyu.
‘Do you approve?’ a voice behind him said, and he turned to see Taheb, dressed in a pleated robe of light wool, slit for coolness on one side to the top of her brown thigh, and edged in dark blue threaded with gold.
‘Yes.
You have made many changes.’
‘It is important, if you are to continue to live in the same house.’
‘Had you considered moving?’
She shrugged.
‘I am comfortable here, and there is the office.
I bear no ill-will, so there are no ghosts to rise against me.’
Huy spread his hands.
‘You invited me, so I came.
But I should have sent word.’
She smiled.
‘You have chosen a good time.
The wind freshened, and the two diorite barges in harbour due to go south sailed early.
So — you may command me.’
She opened her long arms and let them fall gently to her sides again with another smile, gesturing to a couch and taking a seat herself nearby.
As she walked to it, Huy wished that he could see more than the slit in the dress revealed.
How could this woman have become so attractive?
She had been withered before; now she was in bloom.
‘Do you know why Merymose was called away from here so urgently?’ he asked, as a body servant brought honey cakes and wine.
Taheb's face became sad.
‘Yes.
Poor Iritnefert.’
‘I want to ask you about her.’
She raised her eyebrows.
‘Has Merymose brought you in on his investigation?’
‘No — but thank you for the contact.’
She shrugged.
‘Your work is interesting, and I think you are  good at it.
Merymose is an intelligent man.
You might learn from each other.’
Huy wanted to ask more about the policeman, but decided that now was not the time.
He did not know Taheb well enough to trust her yet.
‘Did you know the girl?’ he said.
‘We knew the family.
Occasionally we would be contracted by Ipuky to bring a cargo of silver ingots north from the mines on the Eastern Sea, and then upriver from the Delta.
There is an overland trade-route now, so we do less business with them.’
‘What sort of man is he?’
Taheb's smile did not slip, but she was immediately guarded.
‘How much further is this going?’
‘No further than me.
I cannot speak to Ipuky myself, though no doubt Merymose will.’
He hesitated, and then continued.
‘I am interested.
That is all.
Merymose asked me to look at the body.’
‘Poor girl.
Was she mutilated?’
Huy looked at her curiously.
‘No.
She was unblemished.
Do you ask that for any reason?’
‘I associate murder with violence.
I imagined she'd been knifed, violated.
You have an inquisitive and suspicious mind.’
‘It is getting worse.’
‘So, why are you asking me these questions, and why should I answer them?’
‘I am asking them to satisfy myself, and because doing nothing bores me.
It may be that my help will be called for.
If not, I will do nothing with the information you give me.
It will be as if this conversation had never taken place.’
‘You are diplomatic.’
She embraced him with her eyes, pleased, and as she poured them both more wine, rewarded him with a view of her leg.
Fine golden hairs, which but for the sunlight on them would have been invisible, shone against the soft brown skin of her thigh.
What had happened to the old Taheb?
‘Ipuky is a civil servant.
I am too young to remember but I think he began his career as a supervisor in the  turquoise mines of the Northern Desert, towards the end of the reign of Nebmare Amenophis.
I know that he was one of the ones who resented the rise of the military.
He kept petitioning Amenophis to restrict the granting of golden battle honours — not that the battles were anything more than skirmishes then.’
‘Do you know what happened to him during the reign of the Great Criminal?’
Huy was grimly amused at how easily he could deny his former master's name.
‘You don't have to obey Horemheb's decrees here, and we are not overheard,’ said Taheb.
She seemed irritated that he had not taken her into his confidence by using Akhenaten's real name.
‘The answer to your question is that I don't know.
But he was certainly in office — probably still in the mines department — and managed to hang on afterwards.
Did you never see him at the City of the Horizon?
There were plenty of career administrators and businessmen along with the idealists, you know.
And they were just as necessary to Akhenaten — possibly more so.’
‘And most of them were forgiven.’
‘That should not make you bitter.
Of course they were.
They were given the chance to recant, they did so, and they went on with their work.
They are the ribs and backbone of the Black Land, and the army is its muscle.
Without them the heart cannot function, however much it rules them.’
‘Can it rule what it cannot control?’
‘Yes, as long as it thinks it controls.
Akhenaten tried to break that pattern and look what happened.’
‘Tell me more about Ipuky's family.’
Taheb considered.
‘There were three children.
Iritnefert was the only daughter, and she was the youngest.
She was unmarried, and there was no one in prospect as far as I know.
Her mother divorced Ipuky and went to live in the north of the country with one older son.
Paheri.
He was already grown, and became a priest of the Aten.’
Huy drew in his breath.
‘What is it?’ asked Taheb.
‘Did you know him?’
‘Yes.
He was Surere's right-hand man.
But I did not know that he was Ipuky's son.’
They were silent for a moment, both thinking of the escaped quarryman-prisoner.
‘I wonder what happened to Paheri, after Akhenaten's fall,’ said Taheb.
‘He disappeared, like so many,’ said Huy.
‘There would not have been many to mourn him.’
‘Except his mother.
He always thought that she had been wronged by Ipuky.’
‘She must have been the only woman Paheri ever liked.
His nickname was Sword of Surere.
They may even have been lovers, though they parted company towards the end.’
‘What happened?’
‘There was a bitter row.
Paheri accused Surere of taking too soft a line; but I also heard that he'd found Surere in bed with a stable boy.
Surere certainly began to enjoy the fruits of power towards the end, but Paheri was a deeply jealous man.’
Huy made a dismissive gesture.
‘That is all history, and Paheri must certainly be dead.
Where in the north did Ipuky's wife go?
I don't think she ever came to the City of the Horizon.’
‘She came from Buto originally.
I think that is where she lives still.
She never remarried.’
‘But Ipuky did.’
‘Of course.
In his position, he had to.
I do not know the name of his new Chief Wife, but I think that apart from her, he only maintains concubines.
Most people think Ipuky is married to his work.
He has the reputation of being a cold man, and appears to enjoy neither his power nor his wealth, though I find that difficult to believe since he works so hard to keep them.’
‘Are there children by his second marriage?’
‘I do not know them, nor how many there are.’
‘How old might they be?’
‘Certainly no older than eight.
Still children.’
Huy paused, thinking.
‘And do you know anything of Ipuky's other son — Paheri's brother?’
This time Taheb was evasive.
She tried not to show it, but she was not quick enough for Huy.
‘I don't know.
There was something wrong with him.
I think the family managed to find him some kind of posting in a province in the north-west, towards the Land of the Twin Rivers.
But no one has heard anything of him since the collapse of the northern empire.’
Huy knew better than to press her, and changed the subject.
He already had enough to think about.
‘How are your own children?’
She looked at him archly.
‘Growing up.
I am twenty-five.
An old woman.’
‘Tell me that again in fifteen years.
You will cause many sighs yet.’
‘You should have been a courtier.’
‘I did try.’
A scribe came into the courtyard timidly, his pen-box swinging from his left shoulder and a sheaf of documents in his hands, stained with red and black ink.
‘I am sorry,’ he said to Taheb, nodding carefully to Huy and bringing his arm across his chest in greeting.
‘These are the shipping lists you asked for.
You said they were to be brought as soon as they were drawn up.’
Huy stood up.
‘There is no need for you to go,’ said Taheb.
‘Yes.’
She shrugged, standing too, taking the papers and nodding dismissal at the scribe.
She came a little closer to Huy.
‘If only I could find you a job here.’
‘Long ago I wanted to be a boatman.
Now I know I shall never have the skill.
I cannot work as a scribe, and I am beginning to enjoy being free.
How could I be useful to you?’
Taheb embraced him with her eyes again, but said nothing.
Huy could not interpret the nature of that look.
‘I must ask you one more question.
You knew Iritnefert a little?’
‘Yes, a little.’
‘What was she like?’
There was a pause before she answered.
‘A fire in the wind,’ Taheb said.
FOUR
It was a slow process, needing the kind of patience he did not have, but at least Huy was spared the tedium of the cutters, whose sole job was to trim the reeds to a regular length, about the same as a man's forearm.
The next step was for the peelers to strip the reeds of their rind, cutting it off with sharp double-bladed knives made of flint.
These two tasks completed, the exposed pith was cut into narrow strips like ribbons, which were then placed side by side on a large, perfectly-flat slab of limestone which was kept permanently damp by boys scattering water on it, ever-moving fingers flicking across from earthenware pots.
The slices were perfectly aligned, and then a second layer was placed across them at right angles.
Huy's job was to tamp this second layer down on to the first.
With two other men he worked his way rhythmically across the sheet, beating the second layer gently with rounded mallets until the starches produced from the pith welded all the strips together to form a sheet, the size of the stone, of white papyrus.
Once the process was completed, older boys, apprentice papermakers, came and dislodged the sheet, taking it away to the drying trestles, where it had to be carefully watched and removed after it had dried but before it began to turn yellow in the sun.
In another part of the factory, the sheets were glued together to make large rolls, or cut into smaller pieces for letters and shorter documents.
Huy had taken the job after ten days of waiting hopefully for word from Merymose.
Then, the emptiness of his purse and the bareness of his kitchen had forced him to find work of any kind.
Confronting Nubenehem with his problem, she had introduced him to another customer of the City of Dreams, an  elderly papermaster with flaccid skin and a bald pate ringed with long, dank hair.
This man, who told Huy that he only went to the place to drink, never having had a problem when it came to finding a girl, was looking urgently for somebody to work on his paperbeating team as one of his men had died suddenly from river fever.
Huy knew something about papyrus, having spent most of his life writing on it, and had managed to convince the man that he knew how to make it, without giving away too much of his true background.
He had been taken on.
At first, as he worked, he had reminisced pleasantly to himself about the smells and the texture of paper and ink, and about the pleasure of opening a new roll of papyrus, laid out as far as there was need on soft leather spread over a wooden writing desk; then mixing the ink powder with water, and the nervous moment of dipping the brush to make the first signs — to load the brush just so, in order that the ink would be absorbed by the paper before it could run down it.
He remembered the floggings which, when he was a student, had followed the botching of a papyrus.
Now, after thirty days at this backbreaking and endless task, he realised why.
But his fellow workers were happy and prosperous.
Demand for their product was unceasing, and their labour was steady and safe.
Its dullness stifled Huy's heart, and he began to question the sense of feeding his belly at the expense of his mind, though such noble sentiments could hardly be his to indulge.
He thought of Merymose, and wondered how he was progressing, with time running out as the embalmers pressed on with their task.
He had not returned to see Taheb, partly out of pride, partly out of uncertainty.
At their last meeting a line had been reached, and despite the urgings of his senses at the time, he was not sure that they wanted to cross it.
At the same time he was puzzled by her silence, after such friendliness.
Was she thinking as he was?
Was each of them waiting for the other to make the next move?
Ten more days were to pass before the longed for interruption to Huy's humdrum existence occurred.
For some time now he had not been aware of being followed, and he knew, too, that no one had searched his house in his absence.
Every day when  he left for work, he would leave objects such as a scroll or a limestone flake, or his kohl-pot, a certain measured distance from the edge of the table on which they lay, and from each other.
However carefully the house might have been searched, those distances would have changed.
They never did.
Huy put it all down to his regular job.
Perhaps the authorities thought that he had finally knuckled under.
It occurred to him that a full belly was not all he had his tedious employment to thank for.
One evening, however, as the never-failing north wind freshened, rustling the tops of the dom palms as he walked back to the harbour quarter, he had the impression that someone was dogging his steps.
To make sure, he altered his usual route, ducking down alleys no wider than a donkey's girth, slipping across little squares where five ways met.
The streets of the harbour quarter were quite unlike the regular, broad thoroughfares of the rest of the city.
This part of town had grown up organically, defying and outgrowing any order the town planners may once have tried to impose, and Huy knew it intimately.
Yet he was unable to shake off his pursuer.
Finally he gave up the attempt, and took the most direct way back to his house.
He was almost there when he heard the sound of running feet behind him, and turned to see Merymose coming towards him.
‘Thank you for the guided tour,’ said the Medjay.
He looked tired and drawn, but his mouth was still a determined line.
‘It was you?
I'd have thought you'd have made a better job of it.’
‘I wanted you to know someone was following you, so that I could be sure you'd lead me a dance.
That was the only way I could check that no one else was on your tail.’
‘Why?’
‘I'll tell you inside.
I shouldn't be here, and I certainly shouldn't be talking to you, but I have no option.’
Once seated in Huy's living room, Merymose relaxed, but only a little, and he could not remain in his chair long, but kept getting up and pacing the narrow space between the front door and the rear wall.
‘First of all, I should explain why you heard no more from me after you came to see Iritnefert's body.
Somebody must have reported the meeting, because I was summoned to the priest-administrator's room at the palace the next day for a tongue lashing.
Something along the lines of loss of professional dignity, enlisting the aid of socially undesirable persons in official business.
I was lucky to keep the case.’
‘Have you made any progress?’
‘I haven't been allowed to move.
I wasn't able to talk to Ipuky myself.
I wonder if that would have helped.
All I have been able to find out is that he was a remote father.
After the mother's departure, he lost interest in the girl, turned over her upbringing to one of the house matrons.
She was severe, used to have Iritnefert whipped for the slightest misconduct.
The girl grew up without love.’
‘That is much.’
‘That is all.
There is no clue to follow.
And now I am no longer in charge.’
Huy looked at him.
‘Who is?’
‘Kenamun.’
Huy knew the man by sight and reputation.
In temperament he was not unlike Surere, a career official who had dedicated himself to climbing to the top of the power structure, though he had chosen the priesthood as his channel.
He was as inflexible in his allegiance to Amun and the old gods as Surere was to the Aten, and during the reign of Akhenaten he had fled to the oasis of Kharga to escape death.
His loyalty had stood him in good stead after the restoration, and he was now a commissioner of police for religious conformity — a post which did not prevent him from working in any other area which Horemheb, through the king, saw fit to appoint him to.
‘When did this happen?’
‘Yesterday.’
‘Do you know why?’
Merymose sighed.
‘There has been another killing.
They begin to think that it is the work of a demon.
But how?
There is no violence.
Not a mark on the body.’
‘Who was she?’
‘The youngest daughter of Reni, the Chief Scribe.’
‘How old was she?’
‘She would have been fourteen at the time of the Opet festival.’
Huy looked grim.
‘And how was she found?’
‘The middle sister found her by the pool in their garden.
The family also live in the palace compound.
She was naked, laid out with as much care as if Anubis himself had done it.’
‘Did you see her yourself?’
‘Yes.
Reni ordered that the body shouldn't be touched and sent a servant directly to me.
I should have reported it first, but I thought I could always plead urgency if I was disciplined again, and I couldn't take the risk of being denied access.’
‘Did you talk to Reni?’
‘Yes.
He's an intelligent man, but his heart was darkened by his daughter's death, and there was nothing he could tell me.
His house is large, and his children are old enough to be free, though all still live under his roof.
He and his Chief Wife dined alone at sunset, then he went to his office to work.
He didn't see any of the children that evening, except the oldest girl, who is eighteen and unmarried, and acts as his secretary.
The middle sister discovered the body when she came home at about the sixth hour of night.’
‘How many children are there?’
‘Two surviving daughters, and two sons.’
‘When did he summon you?’
‘Soon after.
I went immediately, as I said.’
Merymose looked troubled.
‘I reported the killing as soon as I left them, leaving a man there and asking them to touch nothing; that was about the ninth hour.
Then I waited for orders.
At about the second hour of day I was told that Kenamun would be leading the investigation.
Of both killings.’
‘With the same time limit they gave you?’
The Medjay smiled wearily.
‘That threat has now been lifted.
Even they can see that there must be a connection between the deaths.’
Huy did not reply.
He knew Reni well, as he was the only scribe who had held high office both under Akhenaten and the  new regime.
It was certain that he had bought his freedom by betraying former colleagues.
He had been farsighted enough to recant before Akhenaten's death, making a discreet escape from the City of the Horizon by barge at night with his family.
Once he had arrived at the Southern Capital, he had proclaimed his loyalty to the old gods loudly and publicly, disowning the Aten and throwing himself on the mercy of the priests of Amun, who even then were growing bold as the revolutionary pharaoh lost his grip both on reality and his empire.
‘I read your heart,’ said Merymose.
‘Do you read mine?’
‘The connection is too slender.’
But Huy's thoughts raced.
The daughters of two high officials, both of whom had survived the change of regime — both of whom, depending on your point of view, could be seen to have betrayed Akhenaten.
‘In any case,’ he continued, ‘I do not see how I can help you.
You said yourself that you are taking a risk by meeting me.’
Merymose paused before replying, and when he did so he was awkward.
‘I do not know why I even trust you, but I have no men trained to use their hearts in the way you are able to as a gift of Ptah.
You seem to know your craft instinctively.’
‘Taheb must have been very warm in her praise.’
‘I have listened to you twice now myself.’
Merymose stood up and made for the door.
‘Look out for me first.
I will go if no one is there.’
‘You cannot make a habit of coming here.’
‘I will ask Kenamun if we can engage you — professionally.
He is more broad minded than the priest-administrator; and he wants to succeed in this.
How much better to engage someone to help who cannot claim official credit for himself when the matter is solved.’
‘You give me little encouragement.’
‘You will be paid, Huy.
In any case, you were not born just to make paper.’
‘I don't know what I was born to do.
I don't know that it matters.’
‘Perhaps your true profession has found you.
It is something that happens.’
Huy paused before replying.
‘I have a question for you.’
‘Yes?’
‘What did you do during the Great Criminal's reign?’
If he was going to work with Merymose, they both had to reach a position of trust.
Merymose's face hardened, and it was a long time before he answered.
‘I was in the garrison at Byblos.
When Aziru sent his Khabiris against us, finally, we had been under siege for three years.
In that time the Great Criminal sent us not even one reply to our requests for help.
We were starving and reduced by disease.
Typhus.
Have you ever seen the effect of that?
It was a far cry from the golden court of the City of the Horizon.’
For a moment he paused, the bitter lines around his mouth deepening.
Then he continued.
‘When the Khabiri attacked we were powerless against them.
They are desert raiders.
They slaughtered the men and the children, and took away the women.
As I was an officer, they devised a special treat for me: they raped my wife and my ten-year-old daughter in front of me, three of them to each, sticking their penises into each of the gateways.
Then they used their spears on them.
They threw me from the battlements into the sea, but the rocks were merciless and did not kill me, though I have never longed for death so much as I did then.
But a man must wait until Osiris calls him.’
Merymose fell silent again.
‘My Ka decided that I must live.
I swam down the coast, carried by the current.
When I got ashore I stole a small fishing boat and sailed it to the Delta.
I joined the Medjays in the south, and served at Napata, before they posted me here.’
Huy cast around for something to say, and found nothing.
When he did, it was awkward and inappropriate: ‘You must hate us.’
‘I hate no one.
You cannot hate when you have died inside.’
After Merymose had gone, Huy closed up the house and walked down to the City of Dreams.
‘Do you never sleep?’ he said to Nubenehem, who was rooted to her couch in her half-reclining posture.
There was a jar of thick yellow palm wine on the table beside her.
‘Never when there is a living to be made,’ she grinned.
‘What do you want?’
‘You mentioned a girl you said was my type.’
‘Little Nefi?
You're out of luck.
She hasn't been back.’
‘Did you give her work?’
‘She was keen, but had no experience.
To be frank I was going to give her to you to break in.’
Nubenehem offered Huy the jar but he waved it away.
‘Tell me what she looked like.’
‘I did.
Young.
Innocent.
Puppy fat on her cheeks.
Plump young body.
Very willing to show it off, she was.
I wouldn't have minded turning her over myself.’
‘Did you?’
Nubenehem's look became less friendly.
‘No.
These days I stick to less exhausting pleasures.’
She indicated the wine jar.
‘Why?’
‘No reason.’
‘Like to watch some of that, would you, women together?’
Huy paused.
‘I am going to describe a girl to you.
As exactly as I can.
You tell me if that's the girl I missed.’
Summoning up as many details as he could remember, and trying to breathe life into her, Huy described Iritnefert.
‘That's her,’ said Nubenehem.
‘So you found her after all.
What was she doing?
Working the docks?’
He was about to leave when the bead curtain was drawn aside and Kafy stood there.
She looked at him resentfully.
‘Well, well.
Don't I know you from somewhere?’
Huy returned her gaze.
Her eyes remained hard, but he knew it was an act.
Her body was inviting him.
He knew that it was an invitation he would accept.
He took a step towards her.
Nubenehem held out her hand.
‘Pay first,’ she said.
The corridor beyond the bead curtain was long and dingy, lit every three or four paces by an oil lamp in a niche.
Innumerable nights of such light had made the walls smoky.
Muted sounds, and, once, a cry of pain, came from behind the closed doors that led off it on either side.
‘Here we are,’ said Kafy, stopping at a door which was open.
The room beyond was cosy, lit by three lamps and heavy with dark blue drapery.
Kafy slipped her hand under his kilt and closed it round his penis, smiling, pulling him into the room by it.
He would not have liked to guess her age, had never seen her in anything other than half-light, and knew nothing about her beyond the fact that she came from a village to the north which she had told him, stood in the shadow of the pyramid of Saqqara.
‘Where have you been?’ she asked.
‘Nowhere.’
‘Have you tired of me?’
‘No.’
He stopped her, taking her hands in his.
‘What is it?’
Her eyes stopped acting.
‘One question.’
She looked resigned.
‘You never stop working, do you?’
‘There was a man here a few days ago.
I saw him talking to Nubeneham.
Well dressed, and perhaps elderly.
I thought I knew him.’
‘I didn't see him.’
‘I think he had come for some sort of show.
He paid well.’
Kafy's eyes lit up for a moment, and then shut him out.
‘You'd better ask Nubenehem.’
‘I did.
She wouldn't tell me.’
She smiled.
‘I'd help you if I could.’
But her eyes were not smiling.
He knew he would get no more out of her, just as he knew she was getting impatient.
He reached for her, pulling away the tight linen shift to expose a taut brown body with generous firm breasts.
Merymose's story had made him want to lose himself.
He could not have stayed in his empty house.
She unknotted his kilt and sank to her knees, knowing how he liked to begin.
‘It's been a long time; too long,’ she smiled, slipping him into her mouth.
As she bent forward, he saw that her left shoulder was disfigured by a terrible bruise.
A malevolent demon was standing on his head.
It had buried its adze in his fontanelle, and was working the thing backwards and forwards methodically to split open his skull.
Meanwhile two stonemasons inside his brain were using claw chisels to cut their way out through his eyes.
He tried to sit up, but the most cautious movement threw his tormentors into a mania of activity and his stomach hurled a messy bile into his mouth.
There was another taste.
Figs.
Huy forced himself into a sitting position by degrees and brought the empty jar of fig liquor into vision.
The raging optimism which it had instilled in him last night, under whose influence he had finally escaped from Merymose's story, was now replaced by a simple whimpering plea to whatever god listened to self-pitying hangover sufferers just to let him be all right again, his own man, as soon as possible.
The only thing he was thankful for was that it was the eleventh day, the rest day.
His binge would not have cost him his work.
Having at last managed to hold himself upright for five minutes without feeling the need to vomit, he started to order his heart.
At first all that would come into it were moralising precepts about drink which he remembered from having to copy them as exercises when he was a student: I am told you go from street to street where everything stinks to the gods of alcohol.
Alcohol will turn men away from you and send your soul to hell; you will be like a ship with a broken rudder, like a temple without its god, like a house without bread…
Whoever wrote that had never had unpleasant memories to drown, thought Huy, or been confronted with truths too horrible to face.
On the other hand, when you resurfaced, there were the memories and the truths still; they had not gone away, and the only difference was that one was now less equipped to deal with them than before.
That was what made men go on drinking, Huy supposed.
A constant retreat; putting your senses to sleep rather than facing and destroying the cause of your distress.
He wondered if Merymose ever drank heavily.
Huy doubted it.
His head sang with pain and his stomach heeled over as he stood up, his hand flailing for the back of a chair to support  him.
Having got this far, he allowed himself another minute or so before confronting the thousand-day journey which separated him from the bathroom.
Then, forcing himself to breathe regularly, he set off.
Later, having bathed and, if not eaten, at least drunk some herb tea, he felt that he might, after all, survive.
He chewed coriander seeds to sweeten his breath and, feeling ready to face the world, had decided to put on his newest, cleanest kilt, with the leather sandals and the one headdress left from more prosperous days.
He would try to gain access to the palace, if not to the houses of Ipuky and Reni.
He did not hold out much hope that Merymose would persuade Kenamun to engage him, but there was no harm in familiarising himself with the terrain in advance if he could.
He was interrupted in dressing by a knock at the door, and opened it to a man he recognised, one of Taheb's body servants, an Assyrian who despite years in the Black Land still wore a long oiled black beard in ringlets.
He touched his right hand to his forehead, lips and chest, and without a word presented a note to Huy, from Taheb, asking him to come to her immediately.
‘Do you know what this is about?’ he asked the Assyrian.
‘No.
But it is urgent.
She is waiting for you, and look, she has sent her litter for you.’
By the time Huy arrived at the house he was free of the last traces of the tormentors in his head.
He climbed down from the litter and the Assyrian conducted him not to the little courtyard but through the house to an upper room, whose high windows faced north to catch the wind.
The room, painted a white so fresh that it seemed pale blue, was cool and soothing.
Huy noticed a jug with wine and beakers set on a table made of white, polished wood and inlaid with river-horse ivory and gold.
Beyond it, the west wall opened on to a wide balcony shaded by deep eaves supported on slender lotus-columns, which gave a view down across the city to the broad grey sweep of the river, sluggish and low at this time of year, but sacrificing none of its dignity.
From  here he could see the crowded harbour quarter, the rooftops so close together that they welded in the heat haze into one whole.
Beyond them and further south sprawled the larger roofs of the palace compound, the buildings there, as he knew, separated by broad, shady boulevards paved with polished limestone kept regularly watered in case it should become too hot for the feet of the rich.
She did not keep him long.
Dressed soberly in a long-sleeved, ankle-length tunic which, though cut loosely, came high up to her neck, she approached him with both hands extended in greeting.
‘I am glad you are here.
Have I taken you away from anything?’
‘The Assyrian said you needed to see me urgently.’
‘I thought I had better say that, or you might not come.
You smell of corianders.
That means you were drinking last night.’
‘Yes.
Merymose came to see me.
He told me of his past.’
Taheb looked thoughtful.
‘It is a sad story.
But was that the only reason?’
‘Something else, too.’
‘Will you tell me?’
‘No.
Not now.
Forgive me.
It is nothing important.
Nothing to do with Aset, either.’
She smiled a little sadly.
‘Then I will not be curious, though it runs against my nature.’
‘He wants my help.
He has acquired a new chief.
A priest called Kenamun.’
‘Ah yes.
The martinet.’
‘He has never courted popularity.’
Taheb looked at him in surprise.
‘Oh, but he has — with women.’
‘And has he succeeded?’
‘No.’
‘What do you think of him?’
Taheb looked inwards before replying.
‘He is a difficult man to impress.
Not that I have ever tried.’
‘I may have to.’
‘Merymose is a braver man than I thought, if he is going to Kenamun of all people for the help of a former scribe of the Great Criminal!’
Taheb poured wine, which Huy was bound by etiquette to accept, though his heart resisted it.
But to his surprise the drink was light, young, and faintly flavoured with honey, together with another taste, so subtle that he could not identify it.
When he drank, the liquid flooded through him like sunlight.
‘To life,’ she said, toasting him.
‘To life,’ he replied.
She looked at him enigmatically for a moment, and then said, ‘I have kept you from something.
You look furtive.’
He smiled.
‘I was planning to get into the palace.’
‘Then you should have come to me first.
They would never let you in alone, even though you are wearing your best clothes.
Who were you hoping to pass yourself off as?’
The same words might have been spoken through tight lips by the old Taheb.
Now they came out spiced with delicate, ironic humour.
Huy found it impossible not to relax.
‘I should have thought,’ he said.
He was as sure as he could be of anything that Taheb was an ally to cultivate.
Perhaps it was the effect of the enchanted drink, but he suddenly knew that what had made him hesitate before, her social rank, now seemed a ridiculous objection.
‘I know Ipuky through Amotju, and Reni and my father were business associates.’
‘Reni?
You know about his daughter, then?’
‘Yes.
It is a tragedy.
She was so trusting.
Who can be doing this?
Why?’
‘There does not have to be a reason.’
But Huy looked inwards.
Taheb smiled at him.
‘You might as well ask me your questions, Huy.
You are wondering how much I know, and how I know.
It is because the rich in this city are in a club news travels fast between families.
It is hard to keep anything private but in this case privacy wasn't desired.
People are frantic.
Those with half-grown children are beginning to panic, especially those with girls.’
‘Where are your children?’
‘I have sent them to my brother in the Northern Capital until you solve this for us.’
‘You have great faith.’
‘If it is not the work of bad gods, you will solve it.’
‘Chance is my only ally.’
‘It is not such a terrible one.’
Their words hung in the air between them.
Now they were silent.
The atmosphere in the room became palpable, as if it had changed to clear, viscous fluid.
It was not unpleasant, and Huy wondered whether it was the effect of the wine.
Every pore of his skin felt aware, as sensitive as it did after the luxury of a hot bath.
He was standing by the balcony.
Taheb put down her wine, stood up, and crossed towards him.
She took his beaker away and placed it on the balcony wall.
Now her arms rested loosely on his bare shoulders, skin against skin.
It burned.
‘It's funny,’ she murmured.
‘Amotju was so slim and tall, and you are built more like a warrior or a boatman than a scribe.’
‘My nickname at writing school was Bes.
What did you put in the wine?’
‘Just a little mandrake fruit.
You haven't been in touch with me for an age, and I have wanted you since I saw you again at dinner.
I wanted to be sure of you, you see.’
‘Did you take some?’
‘Of course.
It heightens the fun.
So they tell me.
I have never tried it before.’
‘Then how did you know the right dose?’
She laughed.
‘Do you never stop asking questions?
I want to feel you against me.’
Briefly her hands left him, darting behind her neck to undo a clasp.
When she brought them away again, the dress fell like a curtain, revealing a strong body, broad shouldered but with slender hips and delicate breasts.
‘Do you like what you see?’
Around him, the air swam gently, and he swam in it, with her, as his kilt, his sandals, his headdress, seemed to fall away.
A couch had appeared on the balcony — had it always been  there?— and they were lying on it together, though he could not remember moving to it.
She leant against him, their nipples touching, caressing his thighs with hers.
Perhaps by magic, her hands were flowing with lotus oil, and with it her firm fingers anointed him.
Supporting her with his right arm, his left hand strayed from her breasts to her thigh, and from there slowly completed the journey to the mouth of the Cave of Sweet Mysteries, lingering long enough to find the little temple of Min and arouse him as she began to gasp for breath, her tongue making passionate sallies into his ear.
He turned his face so that their lips could join, making another temple where their tongues embraced, stroking each other, running over teeth.
Opening his eyes, he noticed a bloom of perspiration on her bronze shoulder, and slid his mouth over her skin to lick it off.
Then he let his head fall to her breasts, taking each as far into his mouth as he could and teasing the nipples with his tongue.
He lowered his head further, until he was drinking in the sweetness of her loins with his nose and his lips, kissing and teasing, sucking the tiny proud god who reared at the entrance to the Cave as she sighed and groaned softly far above him.
Then she drew him up to her, and lowered her own head to take him in her mouth, her tongue darting out in tender forays at the base of his penis, stroking his belly with her hair as her teeth gently nibbled his manhood.
Later she rose too, and their lips and tongues met again, full of sweet tastes.
Their hands were busy with each other, lubricated by the lotus oil, their perspiration and the wine of Min which had entered the mouth of the Cave.
She held him firmly, pumping his penis up and down slowly and rhythmically, twisting it slightly as she did so.
He bit his lip to curb the god, then buried his mouth in the curve where her neck met her shoulder, smelling her smell, wanting to drown in her.
They floated to the floor.
Huy clasped her buttocks, his palms pressing hard against their softness, his fingertips urgently exploring that other cave they protected.
With one hand Taheb did the same, while the other guided him into her.
They cleaved to each other, lips hard against lips, bodies crushed together, her heels against the small of his back, clinging there as they bucked and dived, soared and plummeted together.
For two hours they made love, never leaving each other, even for the brief periods when they lay still, nibbling ears and lips gently; always delaying the splendour until the last possible moment, and always achieving it together, gasping and roaring, moaning and crying, seven times.
At last they stopped, lying together, smelling the rich smell, feeling their sweat grow chill on them.
Servants came, and wrapped them in soft new sheets together, and carried them to the bed which they had set up in the white room.
Then they slept, hour upon hour, folded tightly together.
When he woke, it was to the sensation of her breath cool on his chest.
When she woke, her eyes were like fires in the depths of the deepest wells.
It was a long time before they spoke.
Words had found their place.
They were of secondary importance.
FIVE
Kenamun was a tall man — too tall, with that fragile thinness which accompanies extreme height.
His hands were large, with swollen knuckles and the long, nervous, hammer-ended fingers that betray a weak centre of life.
They hung at the end of slender wrists and looked as if they had been tacked on to the wrong person.
His head was long and bony, and so shaped that you could see all the contours of the skull beneath the skin.
Here, too, the features were large, and clumsily applied: a nose like a ridge of clay, lips that recalled a Nubian's, though set in a bitter line; a protruding blue chin and ears so prominent that they covered half the sides of his head.
Only his eyes were small, and they were set so deeply in their orbits that you could not tell what colour they were.
They glittered like the backs of scarabs caught in torchlight at the rear of a tomb.
To mitigate his appearance, he had grown a beard — though it was so fine, to conform with custom, that it might have been painted on with a kohl-brush, an impression reinforced by the methodical severity with which the rest of the face had been shaved.
He wore a red-and-gold headdress, and a white tunic trimmed with the same colours.
He stood at an unusually high desk in the room into which Merymose ushered Huy, and there was no sign of any other furniture, beyond an open chest containing scrolls.
Huy concluded that the man worked standing up.
He looked at Huy — as far as Huy could tell: it was more an impression of being looked at, and there was no reading the expression in the eyes — but spoke to Merymose without preamble.
‘So this is the man you say is indispensable to us.’
‘He would be of help,’ said Merymose.
‘We want this solved soon.’
‘Indeed.
But what methods has he that we do not have at our disposal already?’
‘An instinct for asking the right questions.’
‘Of whom?
You know the families we are dealing with.’
‘Frequently, just of himself.’
Kenamun had not removed his gaze from Huy, who began to feel like a specimen, or, worse, a snake stared down by a mongoose.
‘You have recanted your allegiance to the Great Criminal?’
Huy sighed.
‘I was not offered that possibility.
I was merely forbidden to practise my profession.’
‘And you were a scribe.
After all those years of training, that must have been like having your hand cut off.’
Kenamun considered.
‘But you were not sent into exile, or to work in the mines?’
‘No.’
‘And you are a friend of the family of Amotju?’
‘Yes,’ said Huy, recalling Taheb.
Could that have only been yesterday — and at about this time?
The official dropped his gaze abruptly and turned his attention to some papers on his desk.
‘You are a good officer, Merymose,’ he said at last, ‘and although I disagree with you about the capability of our Medjays, I respect your judgment.
You may consult this man, but he is to have no direct or unsupervised contact with the families of the girls, and he is to work only under your orders, not independently.
You will make a report to me daily at the first hour of night.
Finally, he is your responsibility.
If this becomes widely known, I will say that you acted on your own initiative, and you will take the consequences.’
He did not look up, or say anything more.
Huy and Merymose glanced at each other, and withdrew.
‘What is he like?’ asked Huy as soon as they were clear of the building and out in the broad street that ran close to the walls of the palace complex.
After Kenamun's office, the light of day seemed even brighter, the sun warmer.
‘He is an official.
He is on his dignity.
He doesn't know how to go about the work he has been put in charge of, and yet the successful solution of this case will be a great coup for him, politically.
On the other hand, the risk is high, because failure will set him back.
He has few friends, and already the pressure Ipuky and Reni are putting on him through their friends is filtering down to me.
But he made no objection to engaging you.
That is a degree of how desperate he is to get this thing settled.’
They walked down to the river, as a motley crowd milled about the jetties where the ferry boats left for the West Bank.
Over there, generations of pharaohs slept in the tombs, cut deep into the red cliffs of the valley.
The thought of the neglected tomb of Nefertiti passed briefly through Huy's mind.
‘What do the families say?’
‘They are too broken in spirit to know.
There is suspicion of the work of demons; but it is rare for demons to attack the rich, and above all to leave no trace of violence on the bodies.
That there is a clear similarity has escaped no one, and there is fear that other daughters of similar families are at risk.
We have been pestered for men to protect several houses, and as these people have such influence, we cannot refuse.’
‘The girls must have had friends.
Have you spoken to them?’
Huy decided to keep what he had learnt about Iritnefert to himself for the moment.
There was no point in telling Merymose what could not be proved.
There was little likelihood that he would believe it, and, anyway Huy himself was not about to trust the Medjay completely.
‘Yes, some.
Of course the two girls knew each other, too all part of the same set.
It seems that Ipuky's daughter was rebellious; but they either don't know what she got up to, or won't say.
The other girl —’ Merymose hesitated.
‘Yes?’
‘Nothing.
Just an ordinary girl.’
Huy nodded, but the hesitation had not escaped him.
‘Her brothers are angry,’ continued Merymose more confidently.
‘At least, one is angry; the other is inclined to be more…’ he searched for the word, ‘philosophical about it — like his father.’
‘Philosophical?’
Huy imagined the rage he would feel if his son were killed.
‘They accept what has happened; but they do not see anger as the fuel for vengeance.
I know that Ipuky is putting his own men on to this.’
‘That will muddy the water.’
‘What do you want them to do?
Medjays are not trained to investigate such things as these,’ repeated Merymose.
‘And if it is a demon?’
‘The household priests are looking to Osiris for guidance.
So far he has given none.
The household priests take that to mean that the gods are not responsible for these deaths.’
Huy wondered how deep Merymose's belief in the gods ran.
Also, being human, Huy regretted that he was now committed to working with the policeman.
If he had been able to, how gladly he would have hired himself out to either of the wealthy men whose daughters had died.
He doubted if the authorities represented by Merymose and Kenamun would pay him as much as Reni or Ipuky would have; and he doubted if he would receive any reward at all if he were unsuccessful.
He looked up to see Merymose grinning at him.
‘I know what you are thinking,’ he said.
‘Neither of them would have engaged you.
Now that we have an escaped political prisoner on the loose, everybody is fighting shy of having anything to do with people like you.
Of course it doesn't affect the really big fish, but even important officials who recanted formally are looking over their shoulders at the moment.
That these killings have happened at the same time doesn't help’
‘Then thank you for getting me any work at ail.’
Huy countered affability with affability; but he could not help wondering what strings Merymose had had to pull — or how — to get Kenamun to accept him.
He wondered if he should not give his Ka a name, and call it Taheb.
‘What did you tell them at the paperworks?’
‘They didn't ask questions.
I'd given them time to look for  someone to replace me permanently.
And they told me that I can have a job back there any time I want.’
Huy grinned.
Nothing would drag him back to that grind.
They had reached the end of the ferry jetties and ahead of them lay the tightly-knit bulk of the town, its few colours beige, dun, ochre, brown and white — flattened by the sunlight.
The shadows provided some relief, and here and there a man or a donkey dozed in one.
A thin dog sidled up to them, stopping just out of range of a kick, and looked at them with what it hoped was an appealing expression.
It only succeeded in looking craven.
‘We've nothing for you,’ Merymose told the dog, adding to Huy ‘If you're poor and ugly, you can forget about love, eh?’
‘What do you want to do?’ asked Huy.
‘I want to tell you everything I know about all this so far, and in detail.
What do you want to do?’
‘I want to look at the bodies.’
Merymose hesitated again.
‘We'll have to get permission from the families.
They will both be with the embalmers.’
‘Then let's do that.
Fast.’
‘But what can you possibly tell from the bodies, especially now?’
‘They must have died somehow.
It may be that looking at the bodies will tell me.
I might see something that has been missed.’
‘They may have been poisoned.’
‘Poison takes time, and it hurts, it turns the lips black.
Iritnefert looked peaceful, and her body was relaxed.
From what you say, Reni's daughter did not look different.
What was her name?
You never mentioned it.’
‘Neferukhebit.
They called her Nefi.’
Huy's stomach leapt, but he hid his surprise from Merymose.
The policeman was keeping things from him.
Why?
Was it just that he was obeying orders from above?
‘What did she look like?’
Merymose told him.
Huy hoped that the embalmers knew their job, and had preserved the bodies well.
He told himself  that he had little to fear; but he was sweating as they made their way into the city.
Meet by the water, he had told her.
Lying waiting for the family to go to sleep, she had begun to lose courage.
Perhaps, she had thought, she would not go after all.
She would stay, safely in bed, cocooned in the fresh linen sheets scented with seshen, and then perhaps later she would explain, if the opportunity arose.
It might not even be necessary.
But then her pride and her curiosity had got the better of her again, and she remembered why she had agreed to the meeting in the first place.
The thought of what might happen scared her, but it thrilled her too.
Of course, nothing at all might happen.
They might just talk.
But that would be a kind of failure, having summoned up the courage to go this far, to take this step; and though he had warned her that it might hurt a little, she trusted him: he was so gentle, so mature.
He would not do her any real harm.
Once she was certain that the house was asleep she had climbed lightly out of bed, dipping her face into the bowl of washing water on the table near the door and dabbing it dry with a hand towel.
She was careful not to disturb the make-up she had applied secretly before retiring, and checked it quickly in a polished bronze mirror that lay next to the bowl, the deep yellow glow from the oil lamp she had left burning providing her with just enough light to see that none had smudged.
Having satisfied herself, she slipped into a tight calf-length dress which had a strap over the left shoulder but which fell away to the right of her body, leaving one young breast exposed.
Then she snuffed out the light, and waited for a moment, getting her owl-vision.
High in the sky, Khons's chariot reflected only a sliver of light from its sides.
Stepping into the passage she trod on something soft, silky and alive, but was in time to withdraw her naked foot before it wailed.
Instead, a sleepy purring trill told her that the dozing house cat — it was the long-haired one, named after Bubastis, and almost a pet — had mistaken her clumsiness for a caress; she had barely disturbed its sleep.
The corridor was in the  embrace of a deep silence which spread right across the dark garden court below and beyond the open verandah which ran along all four inward-looking walls of the house on the first floor, on to which the bedrooms opened.
The only sound was her father's heavy breathing, occasionally broken by a snore.
She stole past his door with even greater care, unsure whether he was sleeping alone tonight.
It had been long since he had asked her mother to share his bed, and for some time now his favourite had been a young Khabiri concubine, a month younger than she was herself.
And that, if anything, was what had fired her to embark on this adventure.
Aware of the loose board near the top of the stairs, she clung to the wall and then slipped down to the garden in shadow, barely a shadow herself, and making as little noise, though inside her head it seemed as if her heart would waken the dead with its pumping.
The one hurdle still to be jumped was the gatekeeper; but she had chosen her night carefully.
Old Mahu was on duty, and he never left his shelter by the main gate, once he was sure that everyone was asleep.
It was likely that he, too, slept.
She made her way to the small side gate that opened on to the alley and which in the daytime was kept permanently open so that tradesmen could make their way to the kitchens through the vegetable garden.
There was a steady flow of people during the day and in theory the last to use the gate after the second hour of night should be the one responsible for bolting it.
In practice this rarely happened, and anyway since childhood, even before she was old enough to wear her hair in the Lock of Youth twisted over her right shoulder, she had known the location of the hidden bolt, and how to slide it.
She was not wearing her hair tied into the Lock now.
It was loose and tumbled in a dark brown cascade over her narrow shoulders.
It changed her face; she seemed a stranger, a complete adult.
She tried to imagine how she would look when she was old enough to wear a wig, like her mother and the great ladies of the court who surrounded Queen Ankhsenpaamun, though the queen was not much older than she was herself.
For once the little gate was locked, but she quickly pulled  back the stone bolt and slipped outside, drawing the gate closed but not relocking it: she would need to be as little delayed as possible if she were to get back unnoticed, and the first servants rose early, at the ninth hour of night.
She knew by the temperature that it was now about the sixth hour.
Borne on a tiny breeze, there was even a faint hint of morning in the air already, so she would have to hurry.
She knew the meeting place; the pool in the little park on the south side of the palace compound.
She knew it because she frequently went there.
The pool in their own garden had been filled in by her father five years before when her baby brother had drowned there; but she loved to sit by cool water, inured to the stinging flies which gave people from the north so much trouble.
And now she was going there again, for a great adventure; perhaps the greatest in her life.
The anticipation overcame her fear, and there was fear: the thing which had most made her hesitate was the thought of the deaths of her two friends.
But Iritnefert had been found by the river, outside the compound; and Neferukhebit in her own home.
Besides, she would not be alone — only on the journey there and back.
During the hour they would be together, she would be protected.
The thought gave wings to her feet.
She did not want to waste a moment of the time they would have.
She arrived at the park.
It was cool and dark, but familiar, and she felt no fear as she entered it, though she briefly touched the jet amulet at her neck for luck.
She was aware of her body, realising that it was taut as a lute string with anticipation.
Every pore was alive.
She could feel the root of every hair of her head.
She advanced through the shadows less cautiously, her only fear now that there would be no one to meet her.
The thought cast darkness over her heart.
But there, standing at the edge of the pool, half-hidden in the deeper shade cast by a clump of leaning palm trees, he was waiting.
Reassuring, smiling at her, and coming to greet her.
Strange that he should seem so familiar to her now; as if they had always been close.
‘You came.’
She looked up at him, wanting to reach up and stroke his face.
His eyes held her.
She had no will.
‘I never doubted that you would.’
‘I am on fire,’ she said, and was immediately ashamed of her candour.
He moved away from her.
Only a fraction, but she was aware of it.
‘This is a solemn moment.
We must consecrate it to each other and to the gods.’
‘Yes.’
She was too awed to notice anything but passion in the voice.
She knew from pictures in the Book of Instruction clandestinely glimpsed in her father's library what to expect, approximately; and she had seen animals; but exactly what happened she could not imagine.
‘We do not want the gods to regard our deed as evil.’
‘They wouldn't do that.
It is good to create life.’
‘But in an evil world innocence must be protected.
Come.
The water will purify us.’
She watched as if dreaming as he untied his kilt, all he was wearing, and let it fall to the warm ground beneath them.
She looked between his legs, but all was shadow there until he turned towards her and she saw the snake's head loom.
Her first sensation was of unfocused disappointment.
It was not as large or as upright as the one in the Book of Instruction.
‘Now you.’
Dutifully, even hastily, she pulled the strap down over her left arm and stepped out of her dress.
She regretted that it was too dark for him to see how beautiful she had tried to make herself, even using malachite as well as the usual galena.
She let the dress fall and took a shy step towards him.
He put out a hand and caressed her hair, her head, with tenderness and, she thought, curious detachment.
But she knew nothing of these things.
Then he was closer.
There was the warm, acrid male smell of his body, and his left arm was round her, stronger than she thought, holding her against him.
Her face was against his chest.
Clumsily, for he was holding her too tightly for her to manoeuvre, she kissed him there, but he twisted away, bruising her lips and leaving her confused and rejected.
What had she done wrong?
‘Teach me,’ she said, raising her head to look at him.
He did not look into her eyes.
He was steadying her with his left arm, fumbling with something in his right hand.
She was held so tightly now that she could not struggle.
Then at last his lips descended on hers and she closed her eyes.
The pain which followed immediately was so sudden and so extreme that it went beyond feeling.
She opened her eyes but he kept his arm tightly round her, his lips pressed on hers, so she could not move.
But the will do to so did not last.
What seemed an age was only seconds, fractions of seconds, before her open eyes no longer responded to the light they received.
The side of his face became a range of grey hills towards which she was riding, on some animal whose hoofs did not touch the ground.
Then the hills merged into the dark sky behind them, and all was grey, but it was not the hoped-for grey which is the beginning of dawn.
It was a grey that went deeper, and deeper, into night.
SIX
They took the brain from her head with long hooks, delicately drawing the tissue out through her nostrils, and discarding it in a small brazier of red-hot charcoal.
The brain was of no importance.
Then they used water mixed with vinegar in a syringe to rinse the cavity clear, sitting her up so that the residue could run out through her nose.
Afterwards, they carefully cleaned her face before the flies could settle.
The vital organs, the stomach, the intestines, the lungs and the liver, were withdrawn carefully and whole.
The embalmers laid her flat on a long wooden table, and one of them, the master, took a sharp flint knife to make a long incision low down in her side.
Probing with his narrow hands he located the organs he sought, and, using another slender knife, dislodged and withdrew them, handing them to his assistant, who placed them in bronze trays and took them to another table where he covered them with natron salt, to dry and preserve them ready for the four jars which would stand in a chest at the head of the coffin.
Their eternal resting place.
Once he had cleared the body, the master embalmer rinsed it through, first with palm wine, and then with a solution of coriander.
He would now dry it in natron, before packing the cavities he had made with linen treated with myrrh and cassia; the nostrils and eyes plugged with linen soaked in resin, and the hair dressed with as much care as for attendance at a royal wedding.
The master embalmer had seven bodies laid out in various stages of the seventy-day preparation for eternity, and the open-ended hall where he worked was crowded.
He had employed two extra assistants to keep the flies at bay, and  he found he had to force himself not to hurry his craft, not to cut corners.
His clients were rich and demanding, and all the more likely to notice a botched job.
His hall was built on a north-to-south axis, so that the wind blew through it constantly, keeping the air fresh; but the odours of the spices and scented oils he used were the only ones a visitor might smell.
All moisture was drawn out of the dead before they could rot.
It had taken a full day for Merymose to obtain permission for Huy to visit the embalmer.
By the time he'd got it, the two dead girls the scribe wanted to see had been joined by this third.
Her body had been found the morning before by the side of the pool in the little park on the south side of the royal compound.
Now, Huy was visiting the embalmer alone, barely repressing his fury at the delay, but for which a girl's life might have been saved.
Inwardly, too, he cursed the arrogance of the latest victim's father.
Above all he turned his anger towards Kenamun, who, on grounds of security, had forbidden Huy to visit the scene of the third murder when it came to light, where he might have had a chance at last of studying the circumstances of death.
Merymose had already seen the body, but now he had been deputed by an increasingly impatient Kenamun to visit the victim's parents.
The father was a general, a commander of cavalry, and the mother a daughter of the army's chief supplier of salt.
The father had not applied for a Medjay to guard his house, giving as his reason that he had efficient men of his own to do the job.
‘She was called Mertseger,’ the embalmer told Huy as he stood looking down at her.
‘She looks terrible now, but I'm going to put packing in the cheeks to fill them up again after I've dried her out.
The loss of moisture makes the face cave in, look like a skull.
But I'll give her back her beauty.’
The cavity of her abdomen had dropped alarmingly with the removal of its contents.
The dark incision running obliquely from just above her vagina seemed a grosser violation of her corpse than anything inflicted on her in life.
‘Did you notice anything, any wound?’
‘No.
And she had never known a man.
The skin is unbroken,’ he gestured professionally towards the vagina.
‘I don't need a doctor to tell me that.
Do you want to see?’
‘No.’
‘I'll stitch it up when she has dried out.
We seal all the openings to the body.
It is an extra insurance against the maggots.
Once the flies have laid their eggs on a body, there's nothing we can do, so we get that seen to as quickly as possible.’
Huy turned to the two adjoining tables.
On the one farthest away lay Iritnefert, her arms at her sides, held there stiffly, as if she wanted to deny the downward pull of the earth.
Her head was back and her chin raised, resin plugging the eye sockets.
An assistant was carefully applying gold leaf to it.
The lack of eyes robbed the face of all the character it had had, of personality, of the vestige of life.
Huy hoped that when he died it would be in the desert or on the river, so that the vultures or the crocodiles would take him.
He did not like the idea of being closed in a black tomb, though he knew that it would be only his Sahu lying there.
Nevertheless he looked more closely at Iritnefert.
Nothing to tell now of the girl she had been.
The nose, dried out, was pitifully thin and pinched.
The cheeks, also awaiting padding, had vanished into the cavities of the skull.
She looked like a leathery caricature of the old woman she might have become.
‘She'll look as alive as you or me, once we've packed her and made up her face,’ the embalmer reassured him again.
‘Normally we don't like people to see them at this stage.
It's better that way.
It's better for them to see their loved ones as they remember them.’
Huy looked at the man.
They were about the same age, but the embalmer seemed older.
His hands were soft and wax-like from frequent washing.
He was of medium height, and had regular, even features of the kind which are instantly forgettable.
His dark face was framed by raven-black hair so perfectly cut that it barely changed its set as he moved.
His expression was one of amused and slightly sinister detachment, which reminded Huy strangely of the young king's.
You could imagine Tutankhamun sparing a man on the point of execution, or ordering the death of thousands, without the slightest twitch of an eye muscle.
‘I want to see the second one — Neferukhebit,’ said Huy briskly.
He had had enough of carrying on at a snail's pace.
If toes had to be trodden on, too bad.
Merymose might get it in the neck from Kenamun, but if this madman was to be nailed quickly, the odd official would have to sacrifice his dignity.
The embalmer sniffed primly.
‘That is impossible.
As you can see.’
High walls of planking surrounded the body on the second table, forming a trough at the bottom of which the body lay.
Into this natron salt had been poured, covering the corpse completely.
‘How long does this take?’
Huy insisted impatiently.
‘It depends on the weather, on the time of year, on the size of the body.
In this case, not more than thirty days — forty at the most.’
‘And how long has it been so far?’
The embalmer consulted the writing on a limestone flake attached to the edge of the trough.
He tutted, sucked his teeth.
‘How much difference would it make if you cleared this away for a few minutes — that's all?’ persisted Huy.
‘It is important that I see her.’
‘I've told you; it's impossible.
Nobody has ever suggested anything of the sort ever before.
It is unheard of.’
The embalmer was shocked.
Huy forced himself to stay patient.
‘I imagine it is impossible for just anyone to come in here to see your work, as I have?’
‘Quite impossible.’
‘And you know that I am only here because I have royal authority?’
‘Yes.’
‘That authority is given me to help me find the killer of these girls.’
The embalmer looked uncomfortable, and wiped the back  of his neck with a cloth.
His assistants looked across with studiously blank faces as Huy began to raise his voice.
The embalmer himself eyed him more nervously.
This stocky little man, whose educated voice belied his riverman appearance, looked capable of doing damage.
The embalmer glanced to check how close he was to a narrow shelf on which a series of knives were arranged in orderly rows.
‘It is not just me you will be obstructing when you object to my seeing her body.’
‘But to interrupt the process —’
‘For a few minutes?’
‘It has never been done before.
I don't know what the effect will be.
I'd need the parents’ permission.’
Huy had had enough.
‘You have it,’ he lied firmly.
‘In writing?’
Huy growled, taking a step forward.
‘You doubt my word?
I'm an officer of the court.’
Still doubtful, the embalmer beckoned his assistants away from their other tasks.
He was probably thinking that in these times it was not worth taking the risk of offending anyone, just in case they were agents of Horemheb and you ended up in an emerald mine on the Eastern Coast.
Together, the three of them removed the boards which formed the trough and the natron ran off in a tide of white powder on to the floor.
Huy noticed the dessicated corpse of a shrew which must have fallen in when the stuff was first poured over Neferukhebit.
She emerged like a piece of sculpture from the white tide — the first woman, born of rock.
Fussily, the embalmer dusted the remains of the salt from her body.
The last of it to come away was damp, and a faint odour of sweet mustiness clung to it.
Huy was surprised that it was not more unpleasant.
‘Quickly,’ said the embalmer.
Huy looked at her, reaching over to brush a last detail of natron away from her face.
Already the features were changing as moisture was drawn out of the flesh, but remembering how Iritnefert had looked when he had first seen her, he could understand how the two girls could be confused.
They might have been twins.
And, he  reflected, the same innocence, the same near-perfect regularity of feature, was shared by Mertseger, who lay two paces away in the patience of death, awaiting her preparation for the Fields of Aarru.
‘I need to look at her back,’ he said after several minutes of carefully examining the girl's body.
‘That is impossible.’
Huy dismissed the embalmer with a look and abruptly motioned to the two assistants.
‘Come on.
She can't be heavy.’
The assistants looked from Huy to their chief, who nodded assent.
It was a more difficult job than they had imagined, because of the stiffness of the limbs, but by holding the head and the ankles they managed it.
Huy looked carefully at the girl's back, and found what he was seeking.
If only Nubenehem remembered it, then at least he could establish for certain which girl had been at the City of Dreams.
If whoever had killed her had also seen her there, and could be identified…
Well, it would be progress, of a sort.
He nodded his thanks and the men laid her back on the table.
The embalmer helped them replace the planks, and then fussed about whether to sweep up and re-use the original natron, or replace it with fresh salt.
While he was deliberating, another thought suddenly struck Huy, and he leant over the edge of the trough, feeling the girl's stomach and breasts.
‘What are you doing?’ the embalmer asked, outraged.
Huy felt under the small breasts and raised them.
Under the left, just visible, was a minute puncture.
Quickly, he moved across to Iritnefert's body.
The skin under the breasts had puckered and darkened, and it was impossible to see anything.
He made his way back past Neferukhebit to where Mertseger lay.
Under her left breast, whose pale skin was only just beginning to give up its bloom to death, was a tiny, dark-red blob, no bigger than a sand flea.
Armed with his new knowledge, Huy hastened back to the centre of the capital, but Merymose was not to be found.
As it was possible that the Medjay had left word at his house, Huy  went home.
There was no message from the police captain, and he was on the point of leaving again for the City of Dreams when a rickshaw, its linen sunscreens pulled down around the passenger seat, rushed into the square and stopped by him, blocking his path.
Surere was already looking sleeker, Huy thought, as he tried to banish the servile feelings which still rose to the surface when he found himself in the company of his former superior.
Surere, presumably, had sent for him because he needed his help; why was it, then, that he gave the impression of bestowing a favour?
‘It was a risk, sending a letter to my house,’ said Huy.
Surere spread his hands.
‘It would have been a greater one to have visited you in person.
And the boy who served as my messenger is illiterate — a rare gift in a servant.’
Huy pursed his lips.
He had never liked the nakedness with which Surere used people.
Even less did he like the way in which people continued to be taken in by him.
He remembered asking a fellow scribe about this, years ago, as they stood in one of the sun-filled courtyards of the Great Archive at Akhetaten.
‘I can't stand his lordliness; but I admire his moral stance; and the first is always the servant of the second,’ the other scribe had explained serenely, fuelling Huy's dislike.
Still, Huy had answered Surere's summons, had even given in to the messenger's insistence that they travel in the closed rickshaw, so that he would not be able to tell where they were going.
They had gone on for a long distance, before arriving at a door in a long, anonymous wall; the letter bearer, a gloomily serious young man with eyebrows which met across his brow, maintaining a severe silence throughout the journey.
And now this room.
‘You haven't said what you want.’
‘That would have been foolish, in such a letter.’
The bantering tone remained in Surere's voice but he added edge to it for the last word or two.
Huy felt himself warned.
By this man who had no power over him and whom he could sink with one word to Merymose.
But treachery was not in  Huy's blood.
He looked around the miserable room in which they were standing: a low, dark, cramped place with a grudging little window through which thin light crept apologetically.
It fell on a rough table and two stools.
On the table were a jug of water and two wooden beakers, together with a small bowl of salt and a cob of dark bread.
The walls were unpainted, mud-brown, and bare of any decoration or shelf.
No table stood by the plain low bed in the corner, the only other piece of furniture in the room.
‘How long have you been here?’ asked Huy.
‘Thirty days.’
‘And how long will you stay?’
‘Until I am ready to leave.
My preparations are well advanced; but there has been other business to attend to here.’
‘What?’
Huy tried to keep the sharpness out of his voice.
He regretted the abruptness of the question, but Surere did not appear to have noticed.
‘Simply the question of funds.
Even here, I have found there are those who remain loyal to the New Thinking.
I am surprised you do not know of them.’
Surere had managed to obtain a wig that rose high on the crown and fell heavily over the back and shoulders.
It was raven black and the hair was entwined with a slim rope of gold thread and opals.
He wore a light yellow tunic which reached the knee, and on his feet were leather sandals with decorated metal buckles.
Whoever was looking after Surere was not short of money, however simply the man was lodged.
‘You are admiring my finery,’ smiled Surere.
‘Your source of funds is a rich one.’
‘There are men here who remember me, who owe me favours and do not forget.’
Huy wondered if the community which was supporting Surere was less one that adhered to the New Thinking in secret than one which simply shared his sexual habits.
The Black Land had never condemned men or women who loved their own kind, or those who crossed the frontiers between loving those of the same and the opposite sex; but minorities  formed fraternities, and members of the clubs would do each other good turns when they could.
Harbouring an escaped political of Surere's importance, though, hardly came under the banner of simple mutual back-scratching.
‘I am surprised that you do not have more enemies than friends here.’
Surere smiled.
‘Does it amuse you to state the obvious?
Luckily I have many loyal friends here — more, perhaps, than you do.
And in places you would least suspect.’
‘You are more fortunate than most of the survivors of the City of the Horizon,’ said Huy.
‘More fortunate than I am, or Paheri, for example.’
Surere's eyes gave away his thought before he could stop them.
‘What do you know of Paheri?’
‘Is he here?
Ipuky is a powerful man — he could have extended his protection to his son.’
‘Paheri is dead.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Do not talk of him.
To speak his name invites evil.’
‘That is not the belief of one who trusts the Aten.’
‘Do not talk of him, Huy.’
Surere's voice was serious, beseeching.
‘And yet you live like this,’ remarked Huy, indicating the room, forced to let the question of Paheri hang in the air.
The former nomarch's panic at the mention of his old deputy's name was a lead of sorts, but it was a fish that would have to be played.
Surere's gaze became hard.
‘Yes.
It is necessary.
Don't forget that I am in hiding.
I cannot start to live again as I used to.’
He broke off, and when he spoke again, his tone had changed.
It was as if two Kas battled for control of him.
‘There is another reason,’ he continued in a softer voice.
‘I need to harden myself for my new destiny.’
‘For the desert?’ asked Huy cautiously.
‘Yes.’
Huy saw that Surere spoke with absolute seriousness.
He thought again about how the changes which had occurred in the Southern Capital, to which Surere had now been  exposed after so long away, might have affected such an inflexible heart.
‘But your time in the quarries must have strengthened your muscles.’
‘That is true.
But my resolve must also be disciplined.
Before my fall, when I was a great man, I was tempted by meat and wine, and by the luxuries my position brought me.
But these things belong to the past.
I have a new mission.’
Surere leant forward and his head, for the first time, was fully illuminated by the narrow shaft of light that fell through the window.
His face was set.
There was not a trace of irony in his expression and in his eyes Huy discerned a coldness and distance he had not noticed before.
‘What is it?’ he asked, more cautiously.
‘To bring our people back to the innocence they enjoyed under the old king.’
‘That is dangerous talk.
And was it ever innocence?’
‘The tree was destroyed before it could bear fruit!’ shouted Surere, gripping the edge of the table and half rising from his seat.
He quickly controlled himself, however, and continued more calmly.
‘That is why I asked you to meet me.
You could help me.
You could be my lieutenant.’
Huy said nothing, pausing a fraction too long, seeking some reply.
‘You hesitate?’ persisted Surere.
‘I thought you were still one of us!’
‘I do not know what I believe,’ said Huy.
‘The New Thinking touched the elite.
It made no difference to the people.
Now, the Northern Empire is lost, and the Black Land is in a chaos it has not known since Nebphetyre Amosis, two hundred years ago!’
‘Do you think any of this would have happened if Akhenaten had not been thwarted?
If it hadn't been for the machinations of Horemheb…’
Surere broke off in fury.
Huy looked round instinctively.
His former colleague had been speaking loudly, and his talk was treasonable.
He did not have time now to investigate his own feelings, but somewhere at the back of his mind was the thought  that he was, himself, no idealist.
He had to live with things as they were, and his work, as far as it existed, was on the plane of helping individuals who had to live, as he did, in the society which existed.
The idea of going into the deserts of the north to found a new religious colony had no attraction for him, and he was beginning to think that, for all the patina of civilisation which he had reassumed, Surere's years of imprisonment had cost him his reason.
Who was protecting him?
If they did not know all of his plans, they would be placing themselves in great danger.
If they did know, then perhaps they intended to follow Surere into the desert.
‘When do you intend to leave?’
‘Soon.’
‘When?’
Surere looked at him for a long time.
‘Despite your apostasy,’ he said finally, his mouth twisted bitterly, ‘I do not think you will betray me.
Perhaps it is simply that you do not have the courage to do so.
But I will trust you, because there are few with whom I can talk as I can talk to you.
And perhaps what I tell you will, even now, change your mind.
Do not be a disappointment to me, Huy.’
His tone had changed again, and now he spoke like a worried father who still lives in hope for his son.
Huy saw that to play along was the only way to get more information, and Surere had mentioned the protection of innocence as the mainstay of his creed often enough now for the scribe to make connections, though they were as yet half-formed, and his heart was inclined, at their birth, to reject them as falling too pat.
Had not Paheri broken with his master for relaxing his severity, though?
‘Tell me,’ he asked, feigning submission.
Surere looked at him searchingly before, satisfied that he could place his trust here, and also in need of an audience, he began:
‘Think of our Great Queen, Nefertiti.’
Huy recalled that magnificent woman.
The gentle, careful, intelligent eyes that gave nothing away while leaving you with the impression that you and what you were saying were the most intelligent things she had ever beheld and heard.
Even  the fine portrait bust they had made of her did no justice to her living beauty.
‘She was taken away too early in the Boat of the Night.’
The queen had been twenty-two.
‘Her life here was fulfilled,’ said Huy, repeating the stock formula.
‘You cannot say that!
I knew her better than anyone but the king.
I was devoted to her, and she rewarded my devotion with her trust.’
Huy pictured the neglected tomb in the Valley, and wondered if Surere was thinking of it too.
‘She had seven daughters by the king,’ continued Surere.
‘Seven daughters and no sons.
And yet he never sought another Great Wife.
He knew the fruit of their loins was ordained by Aten.
Seven vessels of purity, destined to bear great children, to carry the New Thinking throughout the world, even beyond the Great Green, and south beyond the forests to the sea again.’
Huy looked at him.
Beyond the Great Green and the lands to the north of it, he knew, was the world's end.
A rocky coast, a scattering of wild islands.
The forests to the south had never been crossed.
The world's end lay there too.
‘And what has happened to them?’
Surere went on.
The last princess had been born too soon and too tiny to live.
The oldest, whom the king her father had also married, later took as her husband his successor, Smenkhkare.
The second daughter had died in childhood; the fifth and sixth princesses, still children, were virtual prisoners of Horemheb in the royal palace of the Southern Capital, together with their aunt Nezemmut, Nefertiti's younger sister; and though treated with all the deference their rank demanded, they were never allowed anywhere unattended by a corps of Horemheb's own men.
The fourth sister, the one who had found the child in a basket on the banks of the river, and insisted on adopting him, had married Burraburiash of Babylon and long since left the Black Land.
Her adopted son Ra-Moses was now a junior officer in the Army of the Northern Frontier.
‘One of them is married to our present king,’ Huy said quietly.
The third sister, Ankhsenpaaten, had been given as a child bride to Tutankhaten.
When he became pharaoh, they changed their names in honour of the Old Religion — he to Tutankhamun, she to Ankhsenpaamun.
The old god of the Southern Capital, Amun, with his wife Mut the Vulture and his son Khons the Moon Sailor, had returned in triumphant trinity.
‘Yes!’ said Surere bitterly.
‘And see how she has rewarded the memory of her father.
It would be better if she had died.’
‘You cannot say that.’
‘I can!
I can say it with authority.’
‘Whose?’
Surere's voice dropped.
‘I will tell you.
The king's.’
Huy looked at him closely, unsure how to react, even what to think.
Surere was returning his gaze out of candid, friendly eyes; convinced eyes.
The eyes of a madman.
‘On the authority of which king?’ asked Huy carefully, not wanting to break the fragile atmosphere.
‘Akhenaten.’
Surere's stare did not waver.
It became more triumphant.
‘You see?
He has not abandoned us.
Huy, abandon your cynicism.
Do not go back to the old gods.’
Huy sat fixed to his stool, his heart still.
It could be that the king had returned.
But why now?
And why to Surere?
‘You are sure?’
He knew how banal the question was as soon as he had asked it, but it did not affect Surere's mood.
‘I am as sure of it as I am of this water.’
‘What did he look like?’
Surere made a gesture of impatience.
‘Like himself.
Do you think I only saw his Ba?
Do you think the king would have a mere Ba?
A little feathered thing with a human head?
No, it was himself, in his body, the Eight Elements reunited.’
‘Where did you see him?’
Surere suddenly looked crafty.
‘Too many questions, little brother.
No; now it is for me to speak and you to listen.’
Huy spread his hands submissively, but then winced in pain as Surere suddenly leant forward and seized his shoulder, the strength of ten men in his large, bony hand.
‘His daughter has disappointed him; that is why she has no children,’ continued Surere.
‘That was the first thing he told me.
He is distressed by what the Black Land has become, so soon after his departure for the Fields of Aarru.
That is why he cannot rest there.
He hears the voice of his people constantly, calling him.
And now he has returned to help them, through his chosen disciples.’
Surere stopped, to see what effect his words were having on Huy.
Huy sat in silence, hoping that his expression betrayed nothing of his thoughts.
‘My own instincts were correct, little brother,’ continued Surere, repeating the term of endearment.
‘I had strayed from the path of true justice, and used people for my own ends.
I see now how wrong I was, and yet when I told the king that without resorting to such action I would still be in the granite quarries and so unable to do his bidding, he understood and forgave me.
I even believe he sent Khaemhet the boatman to be my lover and my liberator.’
He paused for a moment, looking past Huy's shoulder, far away, before continuing, but without releasing his tenacious grip.
‘I was right about the Black Land.
Without the moral strength of the New Thinking it will fall back into the old corruption.
Imagine, Huy.
For two thousand years we lived in darkness.
The light dazzled us for a bare ten years with its brilliance, before it was extinguished.
Our task is to rekindle it.
Will you not help me?’
He paused again, this time clearly waiting for an answer.
‘Gladly,’ replied Huy cautiously.
‘But my place is not in the desert.
Surely, there is work to do here too.’
Surere made a dismissive gesture with one elegant arm.
‘The capitals are doomed.
This Southern Capital especially, the seat of — I can barely bring myself to utter the name — Amun, the False One, the Pretender.
It is a city of futile dreams, my friend.
And without the True Light, the Black Land is doomed.’
‘And the king told you all this?’
Huy felt cold.
Outside, the sun still shone, though with the approach of evening the light had lost some of its force and the room grew dimmer.
It was cold here.
He watched a lizard scuttle furtively  along the join between wall and ceiling, and disappear into a crevice.
To Huy's relief, his shoulder was released.
It throbbed.
He wanted to rub it, but the balanos for the bruise that would grow there would have to wait until later.
‘I offered him my thoughts.
I opened my heart to him, and he gave me his blessing.’
‘Did he give you any…orders?’
For a moment, Surere was confused; then his expression cleared.
‘He will, in his time.’
‘And where will he give you them?
In the desert?’
‘If he chooses.
He smiles on my plan.’
‘You have collected followers, I suppose?’
Surere looked at him serenely.
‘I will found my community.
Then they will come.
The king will help me.’
Huy looked at him.
‘I have a last question.’
‘Yes?’
‘Why did you leave my house?
Did you know the Medjays would come?’
Surere smiled.
‘I did not need the king's guidance for that.
I knew they would arrive sooner or later.
I saw them watching your house and I escaped through the back.
Prison teaches you cunning.’
The same covered rickshaw took Huy back to the city.
Once more, Huy had no opportunity to see out, but guessed from the number of twists and turns it made that they were taking a deliberately tortuous route.
Once more, he was accompanied by the taciturn messenger.
When the rickshaw came to a halt, it was not at his house, but at the deserted harbour.
Huy understood why he had been dropped here, from where a large number of roads led off back to the various parts of the city, but guessed that they had underestimated his knowledge of the twisting muddle of streets that formed the harbour quarter.
He had no doubt that he would be able to keep pace with the rickshaw and follow it wherever it went, even now, when the descending darkness created streets of shadow where there were none in reality, and when the eye played tricks on the heart.
The messenger moved so fast that Huy barely saw the club as it swung through the air at his throat.
The force of the blow caught him squarely and sent him sprawling, gasping for breath, temporarily blinded, rolling in the dust.
Spitting and spluttering, forcing his flailing hands and knees to get a grip on the earth and push him back upright, he heard the rushing creak of the rickshaw's wheels and the patter of feet as the haulier sped off into the night.
By the time he had got to his feet and turned round, the square was empty again.
Evidently Surere's caution was still one step ahead of his madness.
Huy wanted a bath, to wash the fatigue away, and put some order into his thoughts.
It seemed several days since he had seen the girls' bodies in their mockery of repose at the embalmer's shed that morning.
As for Surere, Huy had surrendered to the thought that the man had left the Southern Capital long ago.
The discovery that he was still here, that his heart had found time, in that sinister cell he inhabited, to entrench itself in the obsessions of his lifetime, and that he believed himself to be in contact with the ghost of the dead king, were complications Huy could have done without.
He could not admit to his own heart that Surere was involved with the girls' killings; though perhaps — the dark thought was there — Huy was afraid to admit such a thing was possible, as he would then, however innocently, have played a part in their deaths.
There remained the question about whether to tell Merymose that he had seen Surere.
If he were captured, the former district governor would be executed, by the cruellest method prescribed in the Black Land: impaling.
Whatever their differences, could Huy hold himself responsible for sending him to such an end?
He found himself glad that he did not know the location of Surere's hide-out.
Huy made his way home, but, still finding no message there, he forced himself to set off again, heading for the City of Dreams.
He would talk to Nubenehem about his discovery of that morning.
If he drew a positive result from his questions, he would have something else to tell the policeman, as well as the manner in which he believed the victims had been killed.
But as he walked, he became more and more convinced that he would also have to tell him about Surere.
Would Merymose believe that he had no idea of the man's whereabouts now?
‘Are you here for business or pleasure?’ scowled Nubenehem from the couch where she appeared to live.
Rolls of dark fat lolled over the little sofa's back and sides.
More than ever, it seemed to have become a part of her body.
‘Business.’
‘I see.
So, not my business then.
My business is your pleasure.
You should take some.
You didn't spend any time at all with Kafy last time you were here.’
‘How is she?’
Nubenehem scowled.
‘She's gone.’
Huy was surprised.
‘Why?’
‘None of your business.’
‘I noticed she was badly bruised.
Was it a client she didn't like?’
‘I said it's none of your business.’
‘Where has she gone?’
Nubenehem looked at him.
‘You're really concerned, aren't you?
Well, don't worry.
She's gone back to her village, near Saqqara.
But not forever.
She hasn't been killed, like those rich tarts the whole town's gossiping about.’
Huy felt an emptiness in his stomach.
He had been concerned for Kafy; more than he would have thought, for someone whose interest in him stretched no further than his wallet.
Nubenehem was in a bad mood, reaching for her liquor jar and belching.
A stale smell hung in the air.
‘So, what do you want?
If all you want to do is talk, there are plenty of other places you can go.
Bees don't make honey by talking.’
‘I want to ask you about Nefi.’
The woman's eyes became clever.
‘What about her?’
‘Has she been back?’
‘No.
Anyway, I thought you found her.’
‘I lost her again.’
Obviously the town gossip had not revealed who had been killed.
Nubenehem relaxed.
‘There's plenty of girls besides her and Kafy.
I might take you on myself.’
‘Oh yes.
And Min's erection's gone soft, too.’
Nubenehem cackled.
‘You shouldn't talk about the gods like that.’
‘About Nefi,’ Huy continued, carefully.
‘I haven't seen her.’
‘I wondered — something about her — something you might remember.’
‘You described her to me.
That was her.
Little slut, all puppy fat and innocence.
You should have heard the way she talked.
I tell you, she even shocked me.’
‘But she was a good looker, wasn't she?’
‘Plump little lips.
Cheeky little tongue.
Give a man the best kind of pleasure he'd get this side of the Fields of Aarru.’
‘Pity you never saw her naked.’
Nubenehem was getting careful again: ‘What are you driving at, Huy?
Of course I saw her naked.
She wanted to work here.’
‘Did anyone else see her?’
‘Couple of the clients.
Whistled.
Told them she wasn't on the market yet.’
‘You never got her full name?’
‘No.’
‘One thing I'll always remember about her — that little cat tattoo just above her navel.’
Nubenehem clammed up.
‘We're not talking about the same girl.’
‘Oh?’
‘Nefi had a tattoo all right— they all do — but it wasn't a cat, and it wasn't anywhere near her navel.
It was a scorpion, and it was on her shoulder blade.’
‘Oh,’ said Huy, certain of Nefi's identity now.
‘Can't have been the same girl then.’
He turned to go, but halted at the door.
‘Where did Kafy get that bruise?’
‘I told you —’
‘I know.
None of my business.
But I've got friends in the  police now.
Merymose.
Heard of him?
I could get you closed down.
Who was that client I saw in here?
The richly-dressed one who paid you over the odds?’
Nubenehem started to sweat, and half rose.
‘Don't call out the cavalry,’ said Huy.
‘That'll only make things worse.
Who was it?’
Nubenehem was silent, but there was a hint of fear in her eyes.
‘You put on a show for him, didn't you?
A special show.
With Kafy.
That's how she got that bruise.
And that's why she's left.
She didn't want any more.
But you don't have a licence to operate that kind of brothel.
Now, who was he?’
Finally the fat Nubian looked at him.
‘Don't give me any trouble, Huy.
We've known each other for a long time.’
‘Who was he?’
‘You can have any girl you like, free.’
‘Who was he?’
She spread her hands, but her look was defiant.
‘All right!
He was someone from the palace compound.
I don't know why he decided to come here, but they do, now and then, and he paid well.
You're right.
Things got out of hand.’
‘His name.’
‘He didn't give it.’
Huy was not sure if she was lying or not, but she read his thoughts and continued, ‘Even if I knew it I wouldn't give it to you — and you may have enough clout to shut me down, but even Merymose couldn't reach high enough to touch him.’
‘What did he do to Kafy?’
She spat out the words.
‘Nothing.
He just watched.’
SEVEN
‘With a needle?’ asked Merymose, intrigued.
‘Yes.
Or something similar.
A very fine knife, perhaps, or even an embalmer's chisel,’ replied Huy.
‘But how can he have done it?
There wasn't any sign that any of the girls struggled.’
‘What do you think?’
Merymose spread his hands.
‘That they didn't want to struggle?’
‘Yes.’
‘Do you mean they were drugged?’
‘It might have been simpler than that.
They might have trusted him.’
‘What, to stick a knife in their heart?’
Huy shrugged.
‘They might have been embracing.
Perhaps the furthest idea from their hearts was that they were going to be attacked.’
‘But why?’
‘If we knew the answer to that!’
‘But there might be no motive at all.
Where would that leave us?’
‘Oh,’ said Huy.
‘I think there's a motive.
However strange it is, I think there's a motive.’
‘The only thing that's consistent is the way these girls have been killed.’
‘There is much more,’ said Huy, convinced that Merymose must have seen the other similarities too.
‘They all come from similar backgrounds, they all live within the palace.
They're all the daughters of rich officials.
They're all the same age.
They all had…a look of innocence.’
Merymose looked uncomfortable.
‘But what about their characters?
Iritnefert was a firebrand, but she hadn't done anything.
Neferukhebit, well, if what you say is true…’ his voice trailed off.
‘I think it's true.
The brothel keeper had no reason to lie to me, and I've talked to the other clients who saw her there.’
‘How could she want to do such a thing?’
Merymose's voice was harsh.
Huy looked at him.
‘You have been through enough to know what this world is like.’
‘I think of my own daughter.
She never had a chance to grow up, either.’
Merymose looked at Huy.
‘I am going to destroy this spawn of Set.’
Huy had delayed telling Merymose about Surere, waiting for the right moment to come.
Now he wondered if he had left it so late that he would arouse the man's enmity.
There was something else.
Merymose clearly had orders to ignore any trail that led to the palace compound.
It would be unwise, therefore, to say anything to him of what he had learned about Ipuky's sons from his first marriage, or about the other visitor to the City of Dreams.
But yes, he would tell the policeman about Surere now.
Then at least the responsibility would be shared.
‘What about the third girl?’ he asked first.
‘Mertseger.
What have you been able to find out from the parents?’
‘Very little.
They know of nothing.
Certainly no lover.
To talk to them, you would think she had still been playing with toys.
She was their only surviving child.
They were old when they had her.’
‘There is something I must tell you,’ said Huy, tensing himself.
‘Something I have not told you, which I should have done.
I should have told you days ago.’
Merymose looked at him.
‘That surprises me.’
Huy squared his shoulders.
How could he explain his feelings, his reservations, and the reasons for them?
Would Merymose, who had been so badly let down by Akhenaten himself, be able to feel any sympathy at all?
He might simply view as collusion what Huy saw as loyalty.
And now there was  another doubt: the new element which Surere had introduced — contact with the ghost of the dead king — was not only the one which had triggered Huy's decision to tell Merymose all he knew; but also the one which might exempt Surere from any blame.
If the former administrator had gone mad, then the passion that possessed him had more to do with the re-establishment of the New Thinking in a new place, rather than any desire for vengeance.
Surere, however cunning and even ruthless his instinct for self preservation made him, might also be an innocent.
If he had not gone mad, but was really in touch with the ghost of the old king…
Well, there were precedents for such things; and if ever a monarch might not rest peacefully in the Fields of Aarru, that man was Akhenaten.
Huy conveyed this as best he could.
For most of the time he was talking, Merymose's expression remained set.
Huy found himself wishing that he were able to read some comment on the policeman's face — anger or disapproval might have been easier.
To his own distress, he realised that he was in danger of abandoning his self reliance, and making a friend of Merymose.
Coming to the end of his account, he remembered the fate of the mason-overseer, Khaemhet, held responsible for the security of the prisoners deputed to him for the journey from the granite quarries to the Southern Capital.
The obelisk was nearly completed, and a place had been prepared for it near the south pylon of the Temple of Ptah; the barge which had brought it had long since returned to the quarries upriver.
But what had become of Khaemhet?
‘He was executed,’ Merymose told him coldly, leaving Huy with an extra burden on his conscience; though in this case the burden was easier to bear, since Huy, given the choice, would never have put the interests of the prisoner below those of the jailer.
‘Would you recognise the house again?’ was all Merymose asked.
Huy shook his head.
‘It was a door like a thousand others in a wall like a thousand others.’
‘A man like you might have looked through the screens of the rickshaw; might have counted the time it took to reach the place, calculated the direction in which you were taken.’
Huy took the criticism in silence.
It was true that he was more than capable of all that; what was more, the measures Merymose described were ones which he would usually have taken instinctively.
He had deliberately laid them aside this time, though he had not been aware of any direct instruction from his heart to do so.
‘When I went to him, I had no idea that what he would say to me might bring him within the sphere of our investigation.’
‘Even though he is obsessed by an ideal of innocence?
Even though he sees the parents of these dead children as traitors to his cause?
Even though he has spoken to you of vengeance?’
‘I cannot associate what he said with the action of killing.
His obsession is to form a community loyal to the Aten, away from this city.
He rejects us and our values.’
Huy had spoken his last words quite automatically; but their utterance made him realise in what world he now lived.
‘We must find him,’ insisted Merymose.
‘I do not share your instincts.
It hasn't escaped anyone's notice that a former senior official of the Great Criminal goes on the run, and at the same time a series of murders begins of the children of other former officials of the Great Criminal.
Kenamun is baying for blood.’
‘Well, now you have some bones to throw him,’ countered Huy.
‘We know how the girls were killed; that they must have known or at least trusted their killer.
If it is no demon, we know that his motives are not robbery or sex.
Some strange ideal moves him.’
‘Some strange ideal moves Surere,’ said Merymose crisply.
‘My heart tells me we need look no further than him.’
Merymose did not involve Huy in the search that followed.
He did not explain why, and this placed a distance between them.
Huy knew that it was because the policeman could trust him only so far after his confession.
He wondered how much had been passed on to Kenamun, though it was unlikely that  Merymose had told the priest everything.
Merymose did not like Kenamun, neither did he trust him; and if the case were solved, Kenamun would take the credit.
But his confession to Merymose had a positive effect too, because permission was granted to the former scribe to talk to the bereaved families within the palace compound.
Huy took this to mean that Merymose still needed his help.
He might be able to elicit information from the families which the policeman had missed; but he had reckoned without the gulf between granting permission to interview, and the families' readiness to talk.
His own association with the court of the Great Criminal was not a secret, least of all to these people, and their attitude to him was one which Merymose had no power to influence.
‘Of course I'll help,’ said Taheb.
‘I have been ready to ever since you began this.’
‘Can you arrange for me to see the parents?’
‘That will not be difficult.
When?’
‘As soon as possible.
But they will object to seeing me.’
‘Not if you come with me.
And I will send letters ahead.
They will not refuse.
They remember favours owed to my father and to my father-in-law.
I will take you this evening.
In the cool of the day.
Let me write the letters now.
Then we will wait for their reply.’
Later, Taheb raised herself on one elbow and let her hand slide along his thigh.
They lay together in the same blue-white room, though this time their lovemaking had been gentler and more familiar, as warmth and exploration of each other 's bodies and hearts had succeeded the glorious frenzy of their first coupling.
This time, they had not needed the stimulus of an aphrodisiac.
Huy felt he could get drunk on the smell of Taheb, sinking his lips into the base of her neck where it joined the shoulder.
Now, re-aroused, he curled his body to hers and slid into her lazily, as they lay side by side.
They kept their eyes open, to see into one another 's hearts.
Afterwards, they were washed by Taheb's body servants, and dressed in visiting robes.
By dint of some speedy alterations by  Taheb's dressmaker, Huy was able to wear a kilt and shirt that had belonged to Taheb's late husband, his friend Amotju.
He ran his hand over the clothes.
It was a strange sensation to have them on — more intimate than sleeping with his widow.
They rode into town in her finest litter, crowded with cushions covered in a rich fabric from a country undreamed of, far to the north at the edge of the world, on the other side of the Great Green, and covered with a canopy of light linen cross-threaded with blue and gold.
The messenger sent ahead had ensured that there would be no difficulty in entering the palace compound, and the guards at the gate did no more than salute as the litter passed within the walls.
‘They are prepared for more than just a social call,’ Taheb said.
‘It will be interesting to see what excuses they offer for not having seen you before.’
‘I didn't get beyond the major domos,’ said Huy.
Mertseger's father, the general in command of cavalry, was a stocky man like Huy.
He was sixty, and the muscle on his chest and arms had gone to flab.
The gold bracelets he wore were too small, and bit into his forearms.
He was lavish in his grief, his eyes still red-rimmed from tears and sleeplessness, and although he was polite to Huy, he barely seemed aware of who the scribe was.
He spoke of nothing so much as his guilt at having depended only upon his own staff for security.
Old Mahu, the gatekeeper who had slept on the night of Mertseger's disappearance, had been dismissed without a pension, but that action had done nothing to mollify the general's conscience.
‘Had she been seeing anybody?’
Huy persisted.
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean a man — or any companion.’
‘She had her friends, but they met during the day.
They often went to the park to sit by that lake.’
‘Might someone she knew have made a date with her at night?’
The general looked at him uncomprehendingly.
‘Why would she go there?’
‘She was found there.’
‘That is what I cannot understand,’ the general had turned in upon himself again, hardly aware of the presence of his guests any more.
‘Perhaps it is a judgment on me.’
Huy exchanged a glance with Taheb.
‘Why?’
The large, wet eyes were full of suspicion and dislike.
‘Who are you, again?’
‘I am trying to find out what happened.
I am working for Kenamun’.
The look turned to triumph.
‘And do you have children?’
‘Yes, but not here.’
‘Distance will not save them, if you are as I am.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘We both served the Great Criminal.’
His eyes suddenly narrowed, and he came close.
‘I remember you, Huy, after all.
I was in charge of a chariot division in the north.
An important one.
We sat in Tanis and heard the news from the coast, but we never had any orders.
We were awaiting orders to move against the rebels from you, you scribes and administrators,’ he spat out the words, ‘in the capital.
But no word came.
Now we are paying the price.
Five years ago my son was drowned.
Now I have lost my daughter; you will lose your children, too.’
Huy felt the heat of fear.
But these deaths were not caused by an avenging spirit from beneath the sunset.
They could not be.
He made himself remember the teaching, bringing coolness into his heart: all things have a natural cause which can be discovered.
What seems supernatural is simply what is beyond present understanding.
The last thing Akhenaten ever taught was vengeance: the idea was so foreign to his nature that he would never have entertained the thought.
But, the general was possessed by it.
The acceptance of the idea provided him with a curious salve for his guilt.
Pity for his children was engulfed in pity for himself.
As for his wife, the healers had given her drugs; there was no talking to her.
She lay on a bed on the verandah by her daughter's door, asleep but for her eyes, which were open.
Taheb's litter carried them the short distance within the compound to the towering, dark house of the Controller of the Silver Mines.
Ipuky had no illusions about supernatural intervention.
A long, grey face and grey eyes reminded Huy of Kenamun, though the priest seemed ebullient by comparison with this sombre banker.
The room in which he received them was sparsely furnished, despite his wealth.
It looked like the chamber of an ascetic priest.
However, the stiff chairs and table were made of the expensive blackwood which grew to the south and was imported from Punt.
The one decoration was a finely-executed wall painting of the cobra-goddess, Wadjet, goddess of the town of Buto, in the Delta.
‘I hope you realise that it is only on account of the entreaty of Taheb that I see you, Huy,’ were his words of greeting.
‘You are persistent.
That is not necessarily a quality.’
‘I want to find out who killed Iritnefert.’
Ipuky did not blink.
‘I have my own men to do that.
I have told Merymose what I know.
Why inflict further pain on my family and myself by telling you again?’
‘Because of what you might have remembered since.’
‘That is the talk of one casting around in the dark,’ said Ipuky with a smile like the light covering of frost which, on hard nights in the middle of peret, fringes the rushes on the banks of the river.
He extended scant courtesy, even to Taheb, and despite his wealth his servants only brought in the minimum guest-offering of bread and beer.
‘You might have developed suspicions.
Perhaps your men have uncovered something.
I could help.’
‘We both know you are thinking about someone in particular, don't we, Huy?’
There was mockery in the man's voice.
‘I am thinking about no one.’
‘You are thinking about Surere,’ retorted Ipuky.
‘These killings started when he broke free; and he did not escape punishment for working under the Great Criminal, as we did.’
Huy would not share this burden of guilt.
‘Well?’ he insisted, as Ipuky fell silent.
The tall man fixed him with his cold eyes.
‘I do not see him  as a killer.
But when he is found it will be interesting to see what he has to say.’
‘Do you know where he is?’
Ipuky took his drink and sipped it.
‘No.’
There was a long silence.
Ipuky looked at neither of them.
He was waiting for them to leave.
‘Perhaps your wife has something to add; or your other children.’
Ipuky's eyes seemed sightless.
‘My children are young.
All are under seven years old.
My Chief Wife saw nothing, knows nothing.
Iritnefert was not her daughter.
If you want to find out about her character, you must ask her mother, and she is in the Delta.’
Huy glanced at the wall painting.
‘She was in the City of the Horizon with you?’
‘Of course,’ a hint of impatience in the voice now.
‘And when the city fell and she decided that my fate was no longer one she chose to share, she returned to Buto.
Do not draw any conclusions from the painting.
I had it done to remind me of a mistake from which I have learnt much, and of an ending which I have no cause to regret.’
‘What was Iritnefert's mother like?’ asked Huy.
Ipuky turned his gaze slowly to Taheb.
‘A fire that could burn in water, would you not say?’
Taheb lowered her eyes.
‘And only Paheri could control it,’ Huy spoke into the silence.
Ipuky was caught too off guard to conceal his reaction.
He glared at Taheb.
‘Did you tell him?’
‘It doesn't matter,’ said Huy.
‘I was in the City of the Horizon.
Taheb was not.
What happened to your sons?’
‘Clearly you know.’
‘I know that Paheri stayed with your first wife, and that your second son was lost when the northern empire collapsed.’
Ipuky looked grim.
‘That is true, and that is all there is to say.
They are both dead now.’
‘Are you sure?
They were loyal servants of the old king, but they were also your children.’
Ipuky looked at him with hatred.
‘They are dead to me.
I do not even acknowledge them as my own.’
‘What is in his heart?’
Huy asked as they left.
They had seen little of the house apart from a gloomy garden and a long corridor which led from the entrance hall to the room in which they had been received.
All the doors off it had been closed, and the only light came from the open archways at its beginning and end.
‘Nothing.
Stones,’ Taheb answered.
Her voice was weary.
‘It is a miracle a man like that has any children at all.’
Taheb smiled thinly.
‘You are wrong.
Look at how he described his wife.’
‘What?’
‘She didn't leave him because his star had fallen; she knew well enough that he was the kind of man who'd recover.
But the collapse of the City of the Horizon gave her the chance to escape.
He would never have let her go if he hadn't been distracted by his own interests.
His second marriage is a marriage of conformity.
Its children are the children of duty.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Ipuky's new Chief Wife is the daughter of a colleague of his.
She is fifteen years his junior, and little more than a housekeeper and unpaid bedslave.
She is a human letter of partnership between two businessmen.
Iritnefert's mother, if you can believe it, could make Ipuky burn.’
‘Why didn't Iritnefert live with her?’
‘That was Ipuky's way of punishing her.
And torturing himself, I think.
Iritnefert looked like her mother, had the same temperament.
She was also the price her mother had to pay for her freedom.’
Taheb paused.
‘He was lying about the painting on the wall.
That is a torture, too,’ she added.
‘Then why does he have it there?’
‘Ask the gods.
They made us this way.’
‘Do you think he loved his sons?’
‘He only loved Iritnefert's mother.
That was all the love he had to give.
To others, he would give something called love; but it was only a reward for loyalty.’
They were being carried along a man-made gorge — a yellow road of sandstone flags between two red cliffs of plastered wall which sloped inward at the top, towards the building they were encircling.
On them, giant painted images of the gods walked in a stately procession.
The stiff representations were new.
Harsh and impersonal, they had no life in them.
Huy looked at them.
These were not gods with whom you could speak.
At the house of the Chief Scribe, Reni's major domo was waiting at the gate to meet them.
He guided them through a broad passageway flanked with heavy half-columns surmounted with lotus blooms, and protected by the couched forms of rams, Amun's beast, in sculptures larger than life.
They entered a large garden, which was protected from the heat by the umbrella of a huge and ancient vine, the shadow of whose leaves dappled the paved floor.
From an intricate system of pipes, water flowed everywhere, in fountains and little artificial streams, irrigating a profusion of plants, set in the earth or clustered in countless pots, whose unaccustomed variety and colour dazzled the eye.
The gabbling of the water mitigated the noise of the crickets.
The cool of the garden greeted you as you went in with a breath as welcome as that of the north wind at the top of a house during the season of akhet.
As they approached, Reni rose from his seat at a table near the large rectangular pool which was the centrepiece of what — as Huy now saw it to be — was an unconventionally asymmetrical garden.
The scribe was dressed in the white garb of mourning, and his lined face looked worn.
His own hair was combed out  over his shoulders, and for make-up he had used only the faintest trace of kohl.
He was pale, but his careworn expression could not disguise the malice in his eyes.
There was cunning in the face, too.
Huy could not guess by what means Reni had saved himself and his family from the debacle that followed Akhenaten's fall; but he knew many  good men whose ruin had been the price the scribe had paid to be sitting here now, and the thought tempered his sympathy.
He looked around for Reni's wife — the mother of Neferukhebit wondering if she was the source of the girl's character.
If Reni remembered Huy from the past he made no reference to it, nor did his face betray the slightest sign of recognition.
He motioned to the chairs around the low table, standing and positioning Taheb's himself, as servants approached with wine jars and food: honey cakes, figs and heron's eggs.
Huy allowed a beaker to be filled so as not to transgress the etiquette of hospitality, but he did not propose to drink any wine.
Ipuky might have saved himself, but at no one else's expense.
What was on Reni's table was blood-food, and Huy would not touch it.
He tried not to let his feelings show in his eyes; but he sensed that the scribe knew them anyway.
Neither of them, however, gave any sign, and indeed Reni seemed too preoccupied by his grief to give other matters much thought.
But he was too intelligent not to have a conscience.
Whether he was intelligent enough not to pay heed to it was another matter.
‘I hope you don't think it strange of me to sit here,’ said Reni.
‘It was here that my middle daughter, Nephthys, found Nefi.
I feel close to her here, as if perhaps her Khou were hovering near me.’
He smiled sadly, taking Taheb's hand and squeezing it.
‘What do you think happened?’ asked Huy.
‘I don't follow.’
‘Surely my question was clear?’
Reni's brow darkened.
‘My daughter was killed, here, in my own garden.
No one can find out how, or why.
That is what happened.’
‘And that is all you can tell me?’
‘Do you think I have time to play games?
If there were more, I'd have told the Medjays.’
‘Do you remember me from the City of the Horizon?’
Huy asked.
‘Yes, I do.
You are working for Kenamun now?’ replied Reni, mildly.
‘In this matter.’
‘Kenamun and I know each other well, despite our differences in the past.
Nowadays, we visit each other 's houses,’ Reni continued, in the same mild tone.
Huy registered the threat, and Reni saw that he had, before turning to Taheb, stroking her hand as he spoke.
‘Nephthys found Nefi's body early, when she returned from the house of her husband-to-be.
My sons were not yet back.
The gates were still open, but there were servants about.’
‘Were there any in the garden?’ asked Taheb, wishing she could draw her hand away.
There was something reptilian about the old man's grip.
‘It is unlikely.
For most of them the day's duties were over.’
‘So it was unguarded.’
Reni shrugged slightly.
‘Taheb, my dear, I have a  gatekeeper , and this house is within the palace compound.
Besides, there had been one killing.
No one had any reason to suspect a second.’
‘But you knew that Surere had escaped.
That he was in the capital,’ said Huy.
Reni looked at Huy in contempt.
‘The Medjay captain asked me that too, and I give you the same answer: how would an escaped convict find his way into the compound?
All the gates are guarded.
Even you  and people like you have to have special permission to enter.’
He turned away with a dismissive, impatient gesture.
‘Do you have your own men working on this?’ asked Taheb.
Reni looked across at her.
‘Ipuky wanted me to join forces with him, but I decided to leave matters in the hands of the authorities.
I would not know what orders to give my men.
But my sons…
I cannot answer for them.’
‘How did they react?’ asked Huy, remembering what he already knew about this.
‘The older boy is angry — but then, Ankhu is a man of action.
He never learnt his letters properly, to my shame, and now he talks of the army.
He hunts with the young king, so no doubt some sort of career is assured him.’
Reni had not  changed, thought Huy, remembering the oily modesty with which, even in the old days, he had scored social points off colleagues who he knew could not compete.
‘Nebamun is more like me,’ continued the scribe complacently.
‘He controls his grief, turns it into a subject for contemplation.
But I would not say he was beyond revenge.’
‘And your daughters?’
Reni folded his hands.
‘They are women.’
Then he caught Taheb's eye and lowered his own with a slight cough.
He was saved further embarrassment by the rustling approach through the fecundity of his garden of his wife, accompanied by two of the children.
They came towards the seated group cautiously but without hesitation — almost as if their entrance had been prearranged.
‘May I present to you those members of my family who are at present— ah — available,’ said Reni.
‘Ankhu is at court, and my oldest girl will still be busy in the archive at the far end of the house.’
Huy wondered whether that eldest daughter, who worked as Reni's secretary, had helped him destroy the documents he drew up during Akhenaten's reign, which would have given such priceless ammunition to his enemies, before turning his attention to the newcomers.
Reni's Chief Wife surprised Huy.
She had a neutral, neglected look.
Her mourning white was not as dazzling as her husband's, and the downward turn of her mouth appeared to be the result of permanent, not recent, grief.
But her face was intelligent; out of her eyes gazed a heart which acknowledged a wasted lifetime.
She should have left him years ago.
Nebamun was probably seventeen, already a man, though his face was still bright and open.
Nephthys was dark, and her large features had an open attractiveness due to the personality which animated them.
Physically, her looks were like her mother's; her mother's face before hope had been dashed out of her life.
It was odd that there should be nothing of Reni in the features of either child.
They greeted Taheb with pleasure before turning to Huy with more guarded expressions.
He wondered if they had been primed to talk to him, and how far they had been told they  could go.
He longed for the chance to talk to each of them in private, but saw little hope of it.
Huy found himself unable to know where to begin.
Merymose had asked the questions of fact, at a time when they were all too stunned by the event to react other than practically.
The questions of theory and of hypothesis seemed wrong now, and looking from face to face, he wondered how much good the answers would do him.
To encourage himself as much as anything, he ventured a handful of general questions about Neferukhebit's activities on the days leading up to her death — questions which resulted in conventional answers, the activities of any rich young girl marking time between the end of her education and the arrival of her husband — for these girls were on the fringes of the royal household, and work such as Taheb did — was taboo to their class.
Ankhu and Nebamun would have it easier, but for the majority of privileged men work was a nominal activity as they laboured more or less intelligently in the upper ranks of the army, the civil service and the priesthood; most of the graft was done for them at a humbler level.
The boy was quieter than his sister, and gave tongue-tied answers.
His sister's death seemed to have affected him more deeply, though he bore himself with a kind of frightened dignity in front of his father.
Talking to Nephthys was a way of getting to know her dead sister by proxy, for she had plenty of spirit, and within her there was a streak of rebellion against her family, particularly her father, though there was no hint of it in any word she spoke.
Nephthys was younger than her brother, but seemed older, and more sure of herself.
Her independence was further underlined by an impending marriage, news of which she now shared with Taheb.
Marriage, though it was to be to a priest, and thus well within her world, represented an escape from her family.
Huy wondered what the husband was like.
Would Nephthys turn into her mother in time?
From what was being said, perhaps that was unlikely.
Though the marriage had been arranged, Nephthys would be the man's first wife, and he was near her own age.
Throughout the interview, Reni kept a Horus eye on proceedings, interrupting, when he felt an irrelevant question had been asked, with the speed and precision of a young judge.
It was a relief when a secretary appeared — sent by his oldest daughter — and summoned him away on business that had to be decided that night.
He left with reluctance; but his departure did not make conversation any easier.
Huy had the impression that a body servant was lurking somewhere within earshot, to report any indiscretions back to Reni, and that everybody knew this.
It had grown dark, and the night, for the season, was unpleasantly close.
After a short time, Reni's wife excused herself, and everyone stood, watching her wend her way through the small jungle, looking lonelier than ever as she went.
An awkward pause followed, and Huy, feeling that he had learnt all he could, made no attempt to continue the conversation.
He had one question left, and he wanted to put it to one or other of the children alone.
He hoped that only one of them would accompany Taheb and himself to the door, and he hoped that person would be Nephthys.
Whether Taheb had divined this, he did not know, but as she rose to leave, she linked arms with the girl, and turned towards the gate.
‘Good night,’ Huy said to the boy.
‘Don't worry.
I'm sure your sister can see us to the gate.
And thank your parents again.’
‘I will,’ replied Nebamun.
There was an appeal in his eyes which Huy could not read.
As he was leaving, the boy seized his elbow, bringing his face close.
‘Where can I find you?’
‘I live in the harbour district.
Taheb knows.’
‘All right.’
The strong hand let go of his arm, and Nebamun stepped back.
‘Goodbye,’ he said again, in a clear voice.
‘Goodbye.’
Huy watched him retreat and then followed Taheb and Nephthys, finding them talking softly at the gate.
Nephthys, her arms folded, leant on the jamb, her hair softened by a halo  of light from the gatekeeper's lamp.
Her clear face betrayed no grief or anxiety at all.
The door stood open and beyond it on the pavement was cast the shadow of the Medjay posted to keep watch.
‘Nephthys,’ said Huy, drawing her aside.
‘Where did your sister get the tattoo?’
The girl looked at him in wonder.
‘What tattoo?’ she asked.
‘She had a scorpion tattooed on her shoulder.’
The girl's eyes became even wider, then she suppressed a laugh.
‘That was just like her.
I'm sorry, you must think I have no feelings at all.
But I admired her.
She was the only one who stood up to him.’
She laughed again.
‘I can't believe it!
He'd have killed her if he'd known.’
‘But didn't he see the body?’
Nephthys looked at him.
‘I'm certain he hasn't seen one of us naked, ever.
I don't even know how we got to be born.
My poor mother has slept alone as long as I can remember.’
‘What about his other wives?’
‘He doesn't have any.
Nor any concubines.
He spends nearly all his time, day and night, with Iryt, my big sister.
They have an office at the far end of the south wing.’
‘Why didn't she join us tonight?’
Nephthys shrugged.
‘She's always busy.
Even we never see her.’
She looked at him.
‘You can draw what conclusions you like from that.
I just can't wait to get out of this house.’
‘Do you hate it so much?’
‘I'd have married a boatman to get out.’
‘Why?’
She was about to answer, but the gatekeeper approached, giving Huy a suspicious look.
‘Time to close up,’ he said sourly.
Nephthys smiled at Huy a little sadly.
‘I'm counting the days.
Goodnight.’
They did not talk much in the litter on the way back to Taheb's house.
Huy was wondering how much truth there had been in  what Ipuky had said about his sons.
Taheb's skin still crawled from the scribe's touch.
‘His poor wife,’ she said, finally.
‘It seems he prefers the company of his daughter Iryt.’
‘Sometimes neglect is worse than abuse.’
‘Then she should leave him.’
‘How can she?
What would she do?
Her only hope is widowhood.’
She was silent for a moment.
‘And now she's got to bear the death of her daughter.
Why do you think Reni said that no one had any reason to suspect a second killing?’
Huy looked thoughtfully out through the curtains of the litter at the night sky, bright in the silence with the light of a million stars.
EIGHT
The search for Surere, the first of its kind ever to be conducted by the Medjays, had been organised with precision by Merymose.
The Southern Capital had been divided into eight segments, like slices of the round, flat loaves the Semite guest workers baked, each segment's inner edge bisecting one of the main quarters of the town, into which it was split by the two main thoroughfares, one running north-to-south, and the other east-to-west, which met at the centre.
Most police were concentrated in the crowded districts of irregular streets, such as the harbour quarter, and special details were dispatched to the privately-run brothels which did not fall under the control of the priesthood.
Nubenehem, her peace made with him, complained of this bitterly to Huy; the attentions of the Medjays had cost her a day's profit, with the following day well below average on takings, as frightened clients stayed away.
Following an instinct based on Huy's description, for what it was worth, of the house where he'd met Surere, Merymose sent Medjays out of uniform — another innovation — to the good residential districts.
All of which led to nothing.
Not even the raids on the town's three gay brothels brought forth a whisper of information about Surere's whereabouts, and after four days of intensive hunting, over ground which included the Valley of the Great Tombs on the west bank of the river, Merymose began to think that perhaps, after all, the escaped political had done as he had told Huy he would, and left for the northern deserts to found his religious community.
The thought came as no relief to Merymose, for although the loss of his quarry might not mean his dismissal from the Medjays, he could expect demotion, or  at best to end his days in no higher rank than he held now.
He reflected gloomily on the price of his ambition, because he had gone out on a limb to persuade a mistrustful and increasingly hostile Kenamun to consent to the operation he had mounted, and then he had only achieved it by linking Surere to the serial killings.
If it were now fixed in Kenamun's mind that Surere was the killer, another murder would be all that would save Merymose's neck.
And yet he had been thorough, efficient, and ruthless in his investigation, not drawing the line at torture to extract information where he thought it might be withheld.
But a new thought struck him — another murder might lead his superior to assume that Surere was, after all, still hiding out in the Southern Capital, and that, too, would hardly be to Merymose's credit.
Merymose had not been left much by life apart from his career.
Now it looked as if that, too, were coming apart.
Surere could not disappear in the way that he had without powerful help.
Merymose had to find out where that help came from, but he told himself that he had no reason to suspect Huy of withholding any more information.
The risk would certainly not be worth it to the little ex-scribe.
The tail end of the search for Surere was still in progress when they found the fourth girl.
She was near the east bank of the River, five hundred paces south of the town, lying on a flat white rock where the crocodiles could not get her, though by the time she was discovered by a Medjay patrol at the sixth hour of day when the sun was at its highest, the vultures had eaten her eyes and part of her face, and the flies were so glutted that they could not leave the feast unless they were picked off.
As the season progressed, so had the heat, and Huy and Merymose stood over the body with their heads wrapped in linen cloths to protect them from the sun.
‘We had better get her away from here,’ said the Medjay healer, removing the last of the flies and quickly wrapping the corpse in a linen sheet before any more could settle.
‘That is, if you want her examined before she falls apart.’
He turned  away to supervise his two assistants, who manhandled the small bundle on to the back of a covered ox-cart.
As it drove slowly away towards the town, so the small knot of idlers and gawpers dispersed, back to the quays and the eating houses to tell about what they'd seen, and Huy and Merymose were left alone.
‘What do you think?’
Huy asked him, as they looked at the rock.
The flies had returned to cluster on two small lakes of dried blood, all that remained here to show where the girl had lain, apart from the lingering smell.
‘It's the same, isn't it?
Except that the body wasn't found soon enough.
I don't envy the embalmers.’
‘No.’
Huy was pensive.
He had told Merymose nothing of his thoughts about Ipuky and Reni — sensing the policeman's disappointment and mistrust when he told him that he had been able to find out no more than he had himself.
All his reservations were based on intuition, supposition.
He had nothing to give Merymose to take to Kenamun, and the priest-administrator would not thank him for information which cast suspicion on two of the most powerful men in the country.
At the same time, the more he delayed, the greater Surere's danger was.
The girl's body had been laid out just as the others, and it had been the work of a moment to discover the tiny stab wound under the soft left breast.
‘I've sent men into the palace compound to find out which household she was from.’
Merymose was tense.
‘The outcry will raise Set.
I must find the man who did this.’
Huy stooped to pick something off the ground, that lay three-quarters hidden in the rough yellow grass that grew around the sides of the stone.
It reflected the sunlight dully in his hands, dangling from a broken chain.
It was an amulet of Ishtar.
By the eighth hour, all the Medjays sent to the palace compound were back.
No one had been reported missing.
Not a servant-girl; not even a slave, though the enquiries themselves had stirred up panic.
‘Are they sure?’ asked Huy.
‘Certain.
I would not be mistaken over this,’ replied Merymose shortly.
‘One household overlooked would be enough.’
They had received the reports in the Place of Healing, where the body lay in the courtyard, protected from the flies and the heat by wet wrappings, waiting for someone to claim it and give permission for an examination to begin, before it was taken to the embalmers.
By the twelfth hour of day, as the sun sailed west and inclined towards the horizon, finally allowing the north wind to bring its cooling relief, still no one had come.
‘If we don't look at her now, we won't get a chance at all,’ said the Medjay healer, who had returned and partially unwrapped the body.
‘I've dressed the eye-wounds but the rot has started.
If no embalmers collect her tomorrow, she must go to the lime pit.’
‘Is it still light enough to work?’ asked Merymose, standing, and walking across to the doctor to look down at the body.
‘Yes.
It will be an hour before Nut swallows the sun.’
Merymose glanced at Huy.
‘Then I think we should begin.’
‘And if her relatives turn up?’ said the doctor.
‘Then I will explain,’ replied Merymose, with a confidence he did not feel.
However to take no action would be worse than to risk insulting the dead.
A faint noise, like sighing, was brought into the courtyard on the wind.
Merymose looked around the darkening corners, wondering if it was the girl's Ka.
Would it object to this treatment of its old dwelling before the proper rites had been observed?
The doctor, covering his nose and mouth with a cloth and summoning an assistant, carefully began to unwrap the body, supporting it in his arms like a mother or a lover.
H laid it back on the table and went over to another, producing a small leather bag from his kilt.
Laying it on the table he opened it, and took out a selection of fine flint knives.
‘Don't worry,’ he said wrily noticing Merymose's expression.
‘The spirits respect me; I have had to do with the dead for a long time.’
‘These dead are my responsibility,’ replied the policeman.
‘It might have been possible to prevent this.’
‘You did what you could.
The dead know us; they know what is within our power to achieve and to prevent.’
Huy bent over the body silently.
The damaged young face had been beautiful.
A high forehead curved back gently into a rich tangle of dark, curled hair; she had an aquiline nose, full, sensual lips and a proud chin.
The teeth were unusually white; strong and regular.
The assistant lit torches at her head and feet, and the light from these outlined the contours of her dark skin.
‘Would you say that this is her natural colour?’ he asked.
The doctor came over and looked.
‘It is sunburn,’ he said finally.
‘I had not noticed.’
Huy had taken one of her hands in his, running his thumb across it.
‘Feel this,’ he said to Merymose, who had come up in turn.
The policemen could see that the skin was rough, and the nails, though diligently polished, were chipped and broken.
‘Perhaps, in the struggle,’ suggested the doctor.
He held a slender knife aloft.
‘Now, if you would just give me room.’
What struggle, thought Huy and Merymose simultaneously.
There should have been no struggle.
‘Just a moment,’ said Huy.
Then he looked at Merymose.
‘Her feet.’
There was no need to touch them.
The soles were hard, and the edges of the big and little toes carried a rind.
‘Look at the anklet,’ said Merymose, suddenly.
Huy did so.
It was made of copper.
Huy grabbed one of the torches and brought it closer, careless of the wax dripping on to the dead skin.
The girl wore no other jewellery — now, at least; but he noticed that the long lobes of her ears were pierced, and that there was a slight graze on the side of her neck.
There were other, dark marks on her shoulders and sides.
He turned to the doctor questioningly.
‘Bruises, of course,’ said the healer.
‘I told you there had been a struggle.
She'd been badly beaten up, poor kid.
Three ribs are broken.
Now, if you'll let me get to work while there's  still light, I ought to be able to confirm what I suspected when I first saw her —’ He paused, bending over the body, a long hardwood implement in his hand.
Breathing through his mouth, he manipulated his probe between her legs.
After a minute, he straightened up.
‘What is it?’ asked Merymose.
‘She was raped.
In both the nether gates.
But she was no virgin before it happened, if that's of any interest to you.’
Huy produced the little amulet of Ishtar from the linen pouch at his belt.
He looked at Merymose.
‘This should have told me more, earlier.’
Merymose returned the scribe's gaze, telling himself once again that there was no reason, surely, to distrust him.
An hour later, standing in the darkness, so far from having the fourth murder in a series, they had a new killing: one which was superficially like the others, but whose only real resemblance lay in the infliction of one particular wound, and the manner and location in which the body was laid out after death.
The girl, whoever she was, despite the aristocratic looks and fine body which had at first misled them, would only have found houseroom within the palace compound as an under-servant.
‘It's much more likely that she was a whore,’ said the doctor, having washed his hands and arms, and rewrapped the body.
‘She wasn't clean enough to have been a harem girl.
But it's hard to imagine what she did to deserve a fate like this.’
Her sunburnt skin and her rough hands and feet made her poor.
The copper anklet was probably the only thing of value she had possessed, and it was curious that it had not been stolen, for all metal was valuable in the Black Land.
It was the little amulet which told them most about the girl.
The cult of the goddess Ishtar had come into the Black Land with settlers from the far north-east where the Twin Rivers flowed.
But the settlers had been courtiers, the sons and daughters of kings and dukes exchanged in marriages which formed part of peace treaties between the Black Land and the Nation of the North-East.
The cult had remained after those who had brought it had embraced the gods of the Black Land, the true  gods, the gods of the land in which they now lived, but it remained as no more than a fashion among the rich.
It was a fashion now past.
Only among the poor, the retainers who had accompanied their masters and later fallen from favour, or among the half-caste children brought up by superstitious mothers true to their old faith, did the little goddess of love and war retain a true following.
There would be few such people in the Black Land now.
Huy hoped that the discovery would ease the task of finding out who the girl had been.
‘Why do you think she was killed?’ asked Merymose as they made their way from the Place of Healing to Kenamun's office.
‘I don't know.
If we knew why she was killed in that way we would be closer to the truth.’
‘It's simple.
He's becoming violent.’
‘Did this girl struggle; make him lose his temper?’
Huy said, and then had another question.
‘But why change the kind of victim?
This girl was poor and sullied.’
‘Do you look for reason in madness?’ asked Merymose.
‘I thought we were dealing with an obsession.’
‘But why copy the method, if this time the killer is someone else?’
‘Who knows that there is a method to copy?’ said Huy quietly.
‘Only a very few people.’
‘Only a few that we know of,’ said Merymose.
They fell silent.
Then the policeman continued, ‘If the method was copied in order to make us believe that the crime was committed by the killer of the other girls, then our new killer is either clumsy, or stupid.’
‘Or clever.’
‘What?’
‘If the method was copied, whoever did it intended us to think that it had been copied clumsily and stupidly.
Perhaps there are not two killers, and this has been done by our man to confuse us.
In which case we may be doser to him than we think.’
Merymose shook his head.
‘You are burying yourself in too many thoughts.’
‘Yes,’ said Huy.
‘We must stay on one path, while being aware in our hearts where others may lead.
But I am not sure now that we seek Surere for this.’
Merymose's eyes became veiled.
‘How can you say that?’
‘You still think I am protecting him.
If I knew where he was, perhaps I would still try to.
I tell you this because I know that I cannot expect trust if I do not give it.
But Surere could never make love to a woman.
He could never penetrate, not even if his life depended on it, for he is sure that their nether mouths contain teeth, and that once his limb was inside them, they would bite it off.’
‘And that is why he prefers the company of men?’
‘Can you think of a more compelling reason?’
There was a speck of yellow phlegm on Kenamun's lower lip.
As he spoke, and this lip joined the upper, so the wet dot transferred allegiance, and then back again.
Huy found himself looking at the man's lips alone, and the spittle switching from one to the other, in horrified fascination and to the exclusion of everything else.
Kenamun was in a white rage.
Although he fought to control it, his voice trembled, and the knuckles of the hands which clutched the chair at whose back he stood were huge, the skin stretched tautly across them.
His dark eyes were glassy with fury, the pupils dilated, the whites bulging in their sockets.
A lock of hair had worked itself loose in his wig and now hung over his forehead.
He could not have been aware of it, for it was the only untidy thing in the room, a banner of disorder in the midst of the most rigid ranking.
His simple, expensive tunic hung straight, without the least sign of a crease or a sweat stain, despite the heat of the day and the advanced hour of morning.
The jewellery at wrist and neck shone as if it were still on display in the shop from which it came, and the odour from the man was simply — nothing.
A sense of freshness, perhaps, but no smell either personal nor scented.
‘I want Surere caught and brought here; and I want him tried and executed, and I want this before the next public rest day,’ he repeated.
‘There is no proof that he —’ said Merymose.
‘Do not speak to me of proof.
You have advanced nothing — nothing — to suggest that he is not guilty, apart from the theories and musings of Huy, whom I was ill-advised enough to allow you to engage as consultant.’
Froth bubbled at the corners of Kenamun's mouth.
He licked it away with a flick of his tongue, sucking and swallowing.
Huy knew better than to speak.
He remained where he was, standing behind Merymose and a little to one side, head bowed, but eyes surreptitiously up, on that obstinate morsel of spit, now stretching into a thin line of glutinous liquid string between the two lips.
‘One who was a colleague of the escaped criminal.
I do not now deny that I hoped he would lead us to him.
And now what do I learn?
That he met Surere and withheld knowledge of the meeting from us.
He is lucky that he confessed his action before we discovered it, for that is all that has saved his life.’
Huy darted a quick look at the back of Merymose's head.
The Medjay captain had no doubt been forced into the minor act of betrayal which consisted in breaking Huy's confidence to Kenamun, and there may have been political or strategic reasons for it; but the act had raised a wall between them.
There was no reason why Kenamun should ever have known about his meeting with Surere.
Perhaps now Merymose was beginning to share Kenamun's desire for an arrest at any price, so long as it was soon.
But if Surere was not the killer, then the murders would go on.
Huy could not believe that Merymose could not see that.
Kenamun clearly hoped to reap the rewards of a quick and flashy double solution, and to have moved on to other work before the murders recommenced.
‘This fourth murder confirms the escalating violence of the man's mind.
He is deranged.
He cannot have gone far.
I want him found, I want a confession extracted, and I want him executed!’
Kenamun repeated deliberately.
‘You have until the next rest day.
Bring him to me and I will make sure he talks.’
Merymose did not reply.
Huy looked at the black polished surface of the table behind which Kenamun stood.
The ink  holder; the leather pad for papyrus; the serried ranks of brush pens and rolls of paper, a cylindrical pot containing bronze pins and a paperknife.
From them his gaze travelled to the hands on the back of the chair, noticing a red mark the shape of a new moon on one of them, noticing the heavy turquoise-and-gold ring of office on the middle finger of the other.
Kenamun had come to the end of his tirade, and now as his expression relaxed Huy thought he could discern something behind the anger in the man's eyes: an expression so fleeting that he was not able to identify it, but one which left a disturbing impression on his heart.
But now Kenamun had begun to speak again.
‘There is of course no question of retaining the services of this man.
You say that he has contributed materially to the progress of your investigation.
I do not accept that he has contributed anything that we could not have found out without his help.
Your faith in his expertise was ill-founded, and does no credit to an officer of your rank and experience.’
Merymose started to say something.
‘You are forbidden to work in association with him any further.
Is that clear?’
Merymose was silent.
‘Is that clear?’
On his dignity, Kenamun was beginning to sound increasingly like the petty official made good which he was at heart.
Huy looked at the over-long face, the ridiculous beard, and realised with a sudden shock that the man was scared.
But of what?
Was Horemheb beginning to lean on him?
If so, he might well be frightened for the sake of his future ambitions.
‘River-horse dung,’ said Merymose, when they were outside.
The sun glared down, dazzling them.
Neither had slept, and both were shabby from the long night.
In addition to which, Kenamun had taken care to keep them waiting an hour in an unventilated antechamber before seeing them.
Huy said nothing, resisting the urge to ask Merymose why he had told Kenamun of his meeting with Surere, and wondering if the Medjay would give an explanation.
But none came.
They walked northwards, towards the town centre.
‘The man is river-horse dung, and deserves to be rolled into a ball for scarabs’ eggs.’
‘Perhaps his masters aren't pleased with him either.’
‘Then they should remove him.’
Merymose looked at Huy.
‘I threw you to the crocodiles to save my job.’
‘Then you are river-horse dung too.’
Merymose drew himself up.
‘You will be all right.
Your work will not suffer.’
‘And what do I get out of this?’
‘I will indent for a fee for you.’
‘To whom?
Kenamun?
Don't hide behind officialese.’
‘You don't know how lucky you are not to be part of the system.’
‘If it weren't for what you've been through, I'd break your jaw.’
Merymose stopped.
‘You don't believe I would have sold you short for no reason at all, do you?’
Huy looked at him.
‘Do you still think I am holding back on Surere?’
Merymose did not answer quickly enough.
Huy started to walk away, realising with bitterness how far away he still was from being accepted in this new society, and realising to his renewed surprise how much he wanted to be.
Was this engagement his ticket to respectability, and is that why he had accepted it?
How would Taheb react to this debacle?
But what irritated him above all was the jumble of loose ends he would be obliged to leave behind, just at the moment when he was beginning to see how to unravel them.
He heard the Medjay come up behind him.
‘Look,’ said Merymose.
‘I still need your help.
If you want an apology, you have it.
But don't let me down now.’
‘Do you mean you want me to track down Surere?’
‘I want to find the killer.
I don't want to hand a scapegoat over to Kenamun for him to torture into confession.’
Huy smiled guardedly.
‘But we can no longer work together.’
Merymose returned the smile.
‘Not openly.
But I am a match for Kenamun, and you are forgetting our mutual friend.’
Huy returned home to bathe and sleep.
He awoke towards evening, put on fresh clothes and took himself out to one of the modest eating houses that lined the bank of the river on either side of the harbour.
He ordered black beer and fig liquor, bread, pork and persea fruit, sitting outside under an awning and looking at the boats.
Most had already lit their fore-and-aft lamps, which twinkled like glow-worms in the gathering dusk.
A large cedar-barque rode at anchor, still loaded with its expensive cargo and guarded by two men armed with spears and swords.
Near it were two smaller barges, being made ready to make the short journey upriver to Edfu to collect another load of sandstone.
A handful of people crossed the harbour square, dawdling on their way home or to drink after work.
The city was clean, quiet and contented.
Around him in the eating house a few other diners sat, chatting quietly, and from the next table came the muted click of the pieces being moved by two players of twenty-squares.
Looking south, Huy could just make out the shape of the wall surrounding the palace compound, and remembered that quiet and contentment existed in reality for very few, and then only for a fraction of the time one spends under this sun.
Beneath the surface of this gentle evening a complex and never-ending game, which had something in it of a duel, was being played, the players swimming in their milieu like fish, at different levels which they would occasionally switch, to make an attack or to retreat, to seize prey or to threaten.
The dead sat around the edge of the game and watched, knowing the secrets.
Banking, despite his better judgment, on Merymose's promise, and unable to shelve the curiosity which had been awakened, Huy pushed relaxation aside with his stool and made his way from the eating house back through the harbour quarter towards the City of Dreams.
It occurred to him as he walked that he had not seen Taheb since their visit to the palace compound.
Might she be expecting him to visit her, or at least to send her a message?
It gave him a qualm to realise that a large part of his need to see her again stemmed from her usefulness to him as a go between.
He desired her too; but  she had not lit a fire inside him as Aset had.
He did not flatter himself that he might have had that effect on her, but he did wonder what course their liaison would take.
Nubenehem looked up as he pushed the door open.
She was not alone.
Standing by her table was a black-skinned girl from the far south, eyes and teeth dazzling white; breasts and buttocks mirroring orbs.
Apart from gold chains around her neck, waist and ankles she was naked.
So firm and perfect was her body that there was something unearthly, even unsexual about it.
She shone in the lamplight like the black wood from Punt, and might have been carved from it.
‘Tell me you've come to spend some money,’ said Nubenehem in greeting.
‘I'm still earning it.’
‘What about this one?’
The fat Nubian nodded at the little girl from the south, who primped and giggled.
There was a freshness and gaiety about her which lit up the brothel, making it appear dismal by comparison.
Huy smiled at the girl.
‘At any other time…
But now I need one more favour.’
‘You want to sell me the wig back?
No.’
‘A valuable wig like that?
Are you joking?’
The black girl laughed and skipped away behind the curtain which led to the interior of the City of Dreams.
She seemed possessed of an inviolable grace.
Huy wondered how long she had been in the capital, and how she had got there.
‘What favour?’
‘I'm looking for a girl.’
‘Another one?
What's wrong with the ones I've got?’
‘This girl's from the Land of the Twin Rivers.’
‘Oh,’ said Nubenehem sarcastically.
‘Easy.
You sure you only want one?’
‘She might have gone missing from wherever she works.’
Huy tried to pick his words carefully, but Nubenehem was on the defensive immediately.
‘A place like this?’
‘Yes.’
‘When?’
‘Two days ago.
Perhaps three.’
‘You still working for the Medjays?’
‘No,’ he told her truthfully.
‘Good.
Didn't seem like your style, somehow.’
‘Have you heard anything?’
‘How fast do you suppose news travels?’
Nubenehem remained cautious.
‘There aren't that many girls from there.’
‘I'll ask around.
See if anybody's lost one.’
‘Thank you.’
‘It'll cost you two silver pieces.’
Huy stepped out into the warm night, smelling the heavy, dusty odour of the air appreciatively.
Still rested, he was disinclined to return to his solitary house, and although the thought of visiting Taheb came to him, he rejected it.
He wanted tonight to himself, and the idea of the wealthy formality of her house oppressed him.
He returned to the quayside, content for a time to walk up and down, allowing his thoughts to marshal themselves.
His eyes wandered from object to object; the facades of the buildings with their dark, secretive entrances, the boats again, the glitter of the restless water, the fishermen's lights out in the middle of the stream, the faces of the other people taking their evening stroll.
Again he found himself wondering how much contentment there was behind any one among this sea of faces; but the pursuit of such reflection was vain.
For most of those around him, life was a simple matter ordered by the pharaoh and the gods, by the annual rise and fall of the River and the three seasons, by the narrow strip of green in the desert along which they existed.
Complexity was neither necessary nor desirable; it was of no practical use and it solved nothing in the end.
Someone touched his elbow so timidly that he thought it had been accidental, until the gesture was repeated with more insistence.
Now he turned and saw Nebamun walking beside him.
‘Hello,’ said the boy, looking at him with hollow eyes.
‘Hello,’ replied Huy, not slackening his pace.
They continued in silence for several paces, part of the crowd and lost in it.
Few people were talking and the silence of night cast its pall over the city.
The occasional cry of laughter, or a voice raised in anger, seemed shocking, like a violation.
But the silence was not complete; it never was, here, for there was always the insistent murmur of the river and the laborious, unending sawing of the crickets.
‘Do you have a message for me?’ said Huy finally, recognising that the boy looked to him to break the silence.
‘From whom?’
Huy spread his hands.
‘I don't know.
From your father?’
‘No.
What would he have to say to you?’
‘That is true.’
The thought of Reni sending any sort of word to him amused Huy; but the boy continued to look at him seriously.
‘Then what is it?’
Huy asked after a moment longer.
Nebamun hesitated before replying.
When he spoke he looked ahead, only occasionally glancing at Huy, though whether for approval or in anticipation of an interruption, Huy could not tell.
‘We heard today that Kenamun has sacked you.
We heard because Kenamun and my father are friends.
Business associates.
Colleagues.
You know.
A finger in every pie.’
‘Yes?’
Huy would not be drawn into criticising either Reni or Kenamun.
Life here had taught him that much caution, strongly as it ran against his nature.
‘I believe he was wrong to do so.’
‘Do you?’
‘Yes.
Aren't you angry?’
‘He wasn't satisfied with the work.’
‘Are you going to leave it — just like that?’
Huy looked at him, but there seemed to be nothing to read in the face, beyond a curious anxiety, and a curious devotion.
‘I have no choice.’
‘But can you bear to?’
There was an insistence in the voice which irritated Huy.
What need did he have to justify himself to this pampered  youth?
But then that thought was replaced by another: was not there agony in Nebamun's voice as well?
‘It is not a question of what I can bear, but of what I have to put up with.’
Nebamun licked his lips and swallowed.
‘If you cannot find out who killed my sister, no one can.’
‘What about your brother Ankhu?
I thought he had plans.’
‘Ankhu is good at starting game.
He is not good at stalking it.’
The crowd milled around them.
Huy took the boy's arm and guided him through it, to the edge of the quay, where a short, broad jetty jutted out into the water.
Resting a foot on the bollard, he faced Nebamun.
‘Now we can speak in more comfort.
What do you want?’
‘I want to help you.’
Huy smiled inwardly.
After so long alone, now he was surrounded by people eager either to enlist his help or offer theirs.
‘You cannot.’
‘Why?’
There was a touching air of innocence about the boy.
‘Your father would not approve.
Kenamun would not approve.
It would be bad for me.
In any case, I can have nothing more to do with the investigation.’
Nebamun looked at him defiantly.
‘I cannot believe that you are the kind of man who can just stop working on something, leaving it half-finished like this.’
‘What do you want from me?
I earn a living the way I have to, not the way I choose to.’
‘But don't you care about the people?
Don't you want to put an end to this?’
‘The Medjays will do that.’
‘The Medjays!
They are donkeys.’
‘No, they are not.’
‘I do not believe that you will simply drop this case.’
Nebamun spoke more quietly, but his tone was desperate.
‘Because you do not want me to.
But you must trust Merymose.
He knows what to do.’
‘Let me help you.’
‘I am sorry.
There is nothing to help me with.’
The boy fixed him with a final look, but said no more, and slipped away into the crowd, only turning back once more.
Huy wished that he could unravel the message in his eyes Might there have been a challenge there?
He waited impatiently for news of Surere's capture.
Kenamun's deadline came and went, but Taheb, with her ease of access to information, heard nothing to suggest that the Medjay captain had been either dismissed or taken off the case.
Huy assumed that he was still working on it.
He spent his nights with Taheb, but these days he had begun to notice the glances the servants gave him, and made excuses when she wanted him to join her dinner guests.
The role they were casting him in was clear, and he hated it.
Sensing this, Taheb sought to reassure him, but his own pride stood between them, and they both knew that their affair had more to do with simple pleasure than deep feelings.
Their lovemaking was still passionate, but the tree had lost its spring leaves, and under the summer foliage there was no sign of fruit.
A hint of duty had crept into their relationship.
At last Nubenehem had news for him.
Huy handed over the fee she had demanded.
‘I should have asked you for more,’ said Nubenehem.
‘You're getting some real stuff for your money.’
‘What is it?’
‘You'd better not tell anyone where you got this from, or I'll have to move my business to Napata,’ said Nubenehem seriously.
‘And if that happens, I'll see you fed to Sobek's children.’
‘I've no wish to be crocodile fodder.’
Nubenehem grinned.
‘She was called Isis.’
‘Original.’
‘Not her real name.
I don't know that.
But where she worked might interest you.’
‘Yes?’
‘At the Glory of Set.’
Nubenehem had named a specialised brothel for a clientele which enjoyed inflicting and receiving pain.
There was something else about it.
It was a place for the very rich, indirectly managed by the priesthood, within the walls of the palace compound.
For some time a rumour had persisted that Horemheb, in his moves to clear up the corruption which had flourished like rampant weed during the years in which the city had fallen into neglect, had more than once attempted to close it; but that the interests which protected it were still too powerful for him to dispense with.
Huy would need Merymose's help if he were to proceed in that direction.
He thanked the fat Nubian for her help — it had indeed been well worth the two pieces of silver she had demanded — and left.
He was at the end of his patience when a message came from Merymose.
‘I'm not sure that I enjoy being your go between,’ said Taheb, as she delivered it.
‘You aren't,’ said Huy, reading the note.
It was hurriedly written on a scrap of papyrus which had been used and scraped clean several times before.
Taheb watched him.
‘You can't wait, can you?’ she said, drily.
‘What?’
‘To be back in action.
You have changed, Huy.
You are a very different man from the frightened little scribe who arrived here a year ago.’
‘Have I offended you?’
‘Why?’
‘There is something in the way you speak.’
She clasped her hands, and took a few short paces.
‘I feel shut out.’
‘There is no reason for that.’
‘Can't you leave this alone?
Isn't it becoming dangerous?
What if Surere knows you're after him and decides to do something about it?’
‘What makes you mention him?’
Taheb made a gesture of impatience.
‘But he must be the man you're after.
Perhaps he is working for someone else.
You  suggested that he must have powerful friends.
In any case, the closer you get, the more likely you are to be killed.’
Huy smiled.
‘No one is going to kill me.’
‘That is a stupid remark.’
Huy spread his hands.
‘I cannot stop working on this just because it is dangerous.
You know that.’
‘You do it simply because the mystery fascinates you.’
‘That is part of it.
But also I want to stop a bad thing.’
‘To protect us from it?’
‘Yes.’
‘All of us, in the Southern Capital?’
‘Yes,’ Huy said, wondering what this was leading to.
Taheb's look was ironical.
‘But you do not care for us.
What do you care for this society?
It is corrupt; it has betrayed the ideals you worked for, and it has robbed you of any position.’
‘There are still good people in it.
As for the rest, if I am to survive myself I must adapt to what time brings.’
‘Why don't you leave this to the Medjays?’ she asked, suddenly changing tack.
‘It is they who asked my help.’
‘Look,’ she said, finally, exasperated.
‘I see this taking you away from me.
I do not want it and I do not understand it.
Leave it.
I have a boat ready and it will take us to the Delta.
Let Merymose deal with this.’
‘I cannot let him down.
What do you want me to do, ignore this?
If so, why did you let me have it?
You could have lied to me.’
‘Your heart is too like a maze.
It is as twisted as the entrance to a tomb.’
They looked unhappily away from each other.
‘Do you use this as a means to get away from me?’ she asked finally.
‘No,’ he said; but he was no longer sure, and he knew his voice betrayed his thoughts.
Taheb, however, only heard the tone that she wanted to hear.
‘But you will not come with me to the Delta?’
‘No.’
She sighed, her eyes bright, but her dignity intact.
‘Then I will  go alone.
I want to see my children.
Write to me when this thing is over.
Then perhaps you will know what you want to do.’
‘Do you know what you want to do?’
She relaxed, smiled.
‘I do not.
Come, we are grown and we talk like children bickering over gleanings.’
They embraced, but knew that it would go no further.
Not this moment, and perhaps not ever again, despite the time it would still take to confront that knowledge.
The heart loves security, at almost any price, and for most men it parts company reluctantly, slowly, and selfishly.
‘If you cannot find another way to be in touch in my absence,’ said Taheb, ‘use my steward.
He is my cousin, and can be trusted.’
Their spirits had parted, and though their bodies stayed together for a while longer, it was the first time since they had met that they found it difficult to talk.
As he left, though he did not like to admit it to himself, Huy felt his sadness tempered with relief.
There was little time left before his meeting with Merymose, so he did not return to his house, but took a circuitous route which would bring him to their rendezvous at the moment the sun touched the top of the western cliffs.
For a while as he walked, faster as the sun began to dip more quickly towards Nut's receiving mouth, he thought he caught a glimpse of someone following him; but it was no more than a glimpse, and the figure — a ghost in a dark robe — slipped out of sight behind a building's corner before he could even take in its size.
After that, his senses remained strained and alert for several hundred paces, but there was no more hint of a shadow, and as he moved away from the busier streets he became increasingly confident that he was alone.
As the sun began to set, so the darkness and the light divided into separate, intense pools.
The dusty streets, now that the traders had withdrawn from them, seemed to enjoy a silent life of their own.
At the end of a shaft of light streaming down an alley which led to the river, a scorpion dozed on a broken brick, though at Huy's approach the little brown statue bristled, pincers and sting instantly alert.
The sounds  he made fell into the embrace of a dead echo, and he felt that he might be the last man on earth.
He was walking past the barley granaries now, three rough structures of tamarisk planking.
A watchman squatted at the entrance of one, but he was asleep, and might as well have been a statue.
Near him two other guardians of the granaries, cats, lay curled at the perfect centre of twin outcrops of shade.
Another twenty paces along and around a corner, a fourth granary stood.
Its door, as expected, was ajar, and after checking the street Huy quickly slipped through it into the twilit interior.
The barn was not full, but in some of the stalls on either side of a broad central aisle he could see heaped mountains of grain as his eyes became accustomed to the dark.
There were the long-handled wooden shovels used for transferring the food into sacks, and at the end of the aisle there rose, like the bulk of a god's statue in a temple, a wooden hopper, its side bound with bronze.
It was a huge thing, hanging in the air from a beam, its duct turned to point down over one of the stalls.
As he approached, Huy could see that the duct had been opened, for the flax rope which controlled it was pulled down.
Smelling the fresh dust in the air he realised that the load of grain in the hopper had only recently been discharged into the stall.
The wide door of the stall, which the sackers would open outwards when the time came to make use of the grain within, was bolted shut.
As Huy came closer, he noticed something glinting in the half light, not quite halfway up the door and towards its centre.
Suddenly his heart beat faster and he quickened his pace, in the grip of dreadful panic.
The dull reflection came from a gold finger ring.
Four fingers were thrust, gripping, through a gap between the planks of the door.
Huy touched them.
They might have been made of stone.
He recognised the ring.
He turned round in an instant, but the silence of the granary mocked him: he was alone.
Pulling the heavy bolt of the door, he stood back to allow the weight of the grain to open it, then, working with frantic haste, swung it wider, and, grabbing one of the shovels, began to dig.
He seemed to be moving through  mud, his actions hampered as if in a dream.
He slipped and stumbled on the grain, sinking into it.
As fast as he dug, more tiny oval ears tumbled into the hole he had made, in their thousands.
But at last he reached the body.
Merymose lay on his back.
Barley filled his eyes, his nostrils and his mouth.
His fingernails were broken and bloody from when he had thrown himself at the door and torn at it, in the moment when he realised that he had been shut into the stall, and what was going to happen next.
NINE
‘Why?
Because Kenamun has lost his best man, and I have no faith in his ability to solve this on his own.
Nor, to judge from their efforts, do I see that I have much more to expect from my own people.
You will get all the help you want, though I suspect you will be better off working alone.
I will pay you in whatever goods you request, at the rate of half a deben of silver a day.
I will allow you twenty days.
If you have not solved this by then, you will be dismissed.
If you have, I will buy the house you live in and give it to you.’
Huy looked round the bleak room, unable to believe he was in it again.
He had spoken to no one about his discovery of Merymose's body, not even to Taheb, who was distracted by the preparations for her reluctant departure, and had not questioned him when he told her that Merymose had not appeared at their meeting place.
The news of the policeman's death came soon afterwards — the sleeping watchman had found the body when he made his evening rounds.
But by that time Taheb had already embarked.
Huy had returned to his house in order to work out a way of getting into the brothel known by the impious name of the Glory of Set — Nebamun had been right, he found that he simply could not let the whole thing drop, and now there was a friend's death to be avenged — when the message had come for him from the palace compound.
‘I am waiting,’ came sternly from the other side of the table.
But was there an unsteadiness in the voice?
Was Ipuky as sure of himself as he seemed?
Huy looked across at the Controller of the Silver Mines.
They were both sitting, this time, though the man's austerity had relaxed very little further than that.
What he was offering was something which Huy had hoped for, though the source was surprising.
He looked into the severe face again, noting details.
Lines at the corners of the mouth indicated that it might have smiled once, but there was no doubt that the eyes were anxious.
There was no sign of grief for his daughter, but then, the house was in a state of permanent mourning.
‘What made you approach me?’
Huy asked him.
‘Merymose was not a fool; and you made a good impression when we first met.
Now; your answer.’
‘I accept.’
‘Good.
Not that you could have refused.’
‘Oh?’
‘You need the work.
More importantly, you need Merymose's killer.
Thirdly, if you had refused, I would have told you I intended to point out to Kenamun that the door of the stall in which Merymose was found had been opened.
The significance of that doesn't seem to have occurred to him.’
Huy said nothing.
‘He's a clever man,’ continued Ipuky; ‘and as devious as a politician needs to be.
But he isn't a detective.’
‘There is something I must ask,’ said Huy.
‘Yes?’
‘I do not know if you will like it.’
Ipuky sat back, folded his hands, and looked at Huy questioningly.
‘I need to know more about you.’
Ipuky's face tightened.
‘How is that necessary?’
‘You want me to find Iritnefert's killer.’
‘You find that unnatural in her father?’
‘No.
But I imagine you know what is said about you.’
‘What is said about me,’ repeated Ipuky drily.
Huy could not tell the thoughts behind the words.
There was a long silence before Ipuky continued, ‘What is said about me should not concern you.
I am content to let you form your own judgment of my character.
Not that my motives should bother you.’
He made to rise, in order to conclude the interview.
Huy  knew at once that he was entering territory that was dangerous and interesting.
He kept his own voice even.
‘That isn't enough.’
His interlocutor raised his eyebrows a fraction, but remained seated.
‘I cannot proceed at all without your cooperation, and without your trust I will have no light in this darkness.’
Huy did not say that he was not prepared to exchange trust for trust with Ipuky.
Hiring Huy would be a very effective way of  keeping him under observation, and neutralising the effectiveness of his investigation.
But why would a man like Ipuky go to such lengths, when, if he felt that Huy was a threat, he could so easily have him killed?
‘You'd better ask your questions,’ said Ipuky sourly, after a pause.
‘I want to talk to you about your children.’
‘I have already told you, they are too young.’
But one runnel of sweat began to trickle down his forehead from under his headdress.
‘I mean Iritnefert's brothers.’
Ipuky sighed, flexing his hands as they lay at the edge of the table, and was silent for a long time.
‘They are dead.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then why are you so worried?’
At last Ipuky met his eye.
Now he made no attempt to banish his feelings from his face.
‘Because I am not sure,’ he said at last.
‘You obviously know about my sons.
I do not know how I can have fathered such children.
No one will believe this, and I know exactly what the town says about me, but I loved Iritnefert.
I am a man who destroys the women he lives with.
My first wife left me, and she was right to do so, but I kept the child I cared about from her.
Since I married again, I have had more children, but my second wife has turned into a shadow.’
He fell silent, looking into himself.
Huy waited.
‘To my little children I am a shadow also.
Even to myself I have become hollow.’
He spread his arms.
‘The blows life deals  you make you stronger; but there comes a time when, if the blows do not stop, they begin to weaken even the strongest.’
‘Your sons?’
‘They are my punishment; but I do not know what I am being punished for.
Why did Osiris have Set for a brother?
Is it possible to carry evil within us, like a disease we transmit but like to think we do not suffer from ourselves?’
Again he paused, wearily, but now that he had started to talk something like relief entered his eyes and his voice.
He wet his lips and swallowed before continuing.
‘I do not like to mention their names.
To speak them perpetuates them.
But I must.
Three years separated the boys.
Paheri was the older, poor Menna the younger.
I had such hopes for them, and was even pleased when, at the age of seven, Paheri asked to enter the priesthood.
Of course it was too early in his life to be certain that the gods had called him, but I could have wished for no better career for him than that of a priest-administrator.
His resolve did not falter.
But there were other things.
When he was ten, he caught his younger brother stealing dates.
For this transgression, he…’
Ipuky's voice faltered.
‘No, I will not tell you.
Menna was never well in his head or heart — Tawaret did not smile on his birth, and the torture he experienced at his brother's hands pushed him forever into a lonely land inside himself…’
Again the gaunt man broke off.
The room seemed to have become darker.
Huy did not move.
‘Paheri never once looked at a woman, though of course by thirteen we were hoping to match him.
At first we thought he would grow out of his phobia.
Two years later, he entered the priesthood, attached to Surere.
They stayed together throughout the reign of the Great Criminal, until the end.’
‘What happened?’
‘Paheri had a row with him.
Paheri was furiously jealous.
Of anyone.
Of anything.
Above all, his dislike of women developed into a hatred.
Woman had contaminated Man ever since Nut first bent over Geb.
That was the image that obsessed him: Nut, bent over across the sky, swallowing the sun, trapping Geb under her.
I believe Surere encouraged him in this.
His  mother was the only exception.
The woman who had let him out of the darkness of the birth-cave into the light.’
‘What happened to Menna?’
Huy spoke into the silence.
Ipuky looked up at him.
‘I think he is dead, now.
For a long time I was afraid that he had survived the raids of the Khabiris on our last outposts in the north; but an infantry captain who had known him managed to make his way back to the Southern Capital and contacted my steward.
He handed over a ring and an amulet that I recognised.
I had given them to Menna when he first left to take up his post.
He seemed to recover considerably after Paheri left home.
I had to try to give him a chance to be independent.
The job I found him was an undemanding clerical one.
The governor was an old acquaintance, who knew of my son's shortcomings.’
‘And Paheri?’
Ipuky's voice was calm.
‘He believed in the Aten ferociously.
When it was certain that the City of the Horizon would collapse, and all that it stood for, I wrote to him, to try to get him to save himself.
He returned my letter spattered with his own blood, and a reply.
In it he told me that the blood he had spilt over my traitor's proposal — his own blood — was nothing to the blood of the traitors that he would shed if the Aten fell, and it was his lot to take vengeance.’
‘There was nothing but love in the teaching of the Aten,’ said Huy quietly.
‘There are causes, and there are warriors for causes,’ replied Ipuky, his voice as empty as the desert.
‘Why do you think he is here?’
Ipuky looked at him again.
‘Because of the killings.
I want you to find him.’
‘But Iritnefert was his own sister.’
‘You do not know my son.’
There was a long silence, during which neither man looked at the other.
‘I will need free access to the palace compound.
I will need to be able to go anywhere without being stopped,’ said Huy at last.
‘See my quartermaster.
You may wear my livery.
That will  guarantee that the guards at the gates let you through.
I will tell my steward that I am taking you on to the staff as —’ he paused for thought for a moment' — as a tax consultant.
The assessors will be working on last autumn's crop soon enough, and the job will ensure that no one in the household asks any questions.
You will also be able to come and go without anyone feeling the need to see you receiving direct orders from me.’
He gathered his robe about him.
‘And now —’
‘There is one last thing,’ said Huy.
Ipuky returned to his seat.
‘Yes?’
‘I need access to the Glory of Set.’
‘What?’ said Ipuky, sharply.
‘To the brothel, the Glory of Set.’
Ipuky sat back.
‘I do not know what you are talking about.’
Huy was taken aback.
Why should Ipuky tell such a transparent lie?
Ipuky must have read his thought in his eyes, for he quickly qualified what he had said by adding, ‘I do not see how that can have any bearing on who killed Iritnefert.
Surely, after all I have told you, you must see that.’
‘Let me explain.’
The tall man leant forward, hands clasped, an expression of anxiety suddenly naked again on his face.
‘Surely you are not suggesting that my daughter —?
I know she was a wild spirit, but —’
‘No,’ Huy reassured him.
‘I do not think so.
But there may be a connection.’
He explained, briefly, about Isis.
‘I have never been there, and I do not know who does; but it is powerfully protected,’ Ipuky said wearily.
‘You must forgive me for not being more helpful.
For some years now I have not been much in society.
I have preferred books and silence for company.
In any case, what excuse could I possibly invent for you to go there?’
‘Nevertheless, I need to go.
There are questions I must ask there.’
Ipuky looked scornful.
‘And do you think they will answer them?’
‘If they are paid.’
Ipuky shook his grey head.
The dull gold in his headdress shimmered as it caught the light.
‘They will never tell you.
They are already paid, more than any bribe could tempt them, to be discreet.
The clients of that place are among the most powerful men and women in the Southern Capital.
Even Horemheb has failed to have it closed.’
‘Maybe I can find a lever for Horemheb to do so.
And if I can, then it would be a lever you could hand to him.’
‘I am no longer interested in politics,’ said Ipuky.
‘But I am interested to see where your cunning takes you, and you must do anything you think necessary to stop the horror that has begun.
Come back tomorrow at this time.’
Huy stood up, bowed briefly to his new master, and made for the doorway.
As he reached it Ipuky called to him once more.
‘You think I am as cold as stone,’ he said.
‘Many do.
That is my protection.
But I must know who killed my daughter.
Find him, Huy, and when you have, bring him to me.
Death would be too kind an end for a man who has done what he has, and I do not want him to escape into it.’
The Controller of the Silver Mines laid his arms on the table in front of him and clasped his hands together, sinking his head.
Huy looked down at him and fired a last question: ‘Have you seen Surere?’
Ipuky looked up, but his face remained rigid.
If anything was detectable there, it was surprise.
‘I had done with him years ago.’
‘Perhaps he has not done with you.’
‘Awaken us from this nightmare, Huy.
Soon.’
‘I will,’ said Huy.
Ipuky's confession had lit a bright torch in the dark labyrinth of his investigation.
Since Merymose's death, Huy had carried a dagger.
It was an old thing he had had for years but only recently learnt to use, taught by one of the boatswains in Taheb's fleet.
Its blade was two-edged, and made of heavy bronze, the grooves chased like lotus stems.
It was fitted into an antelope-horn hilt carved at the top with the Beast's head.
That night, when he  awoke in the full certainty that someone else was in the room, he reached for it, where it usually lay by his headrest; but he had barely moved before he felt its point at his throat.
‘You have a lot to learn,’ said Surere's voice in the darkness.
Huy could feel his breath, and smell the mint he chewed to sweeten it.
‘And you have learnt much,’ replied Huy.
‘In prison, if you do not learn stealth, you die.’
‘Why are you still here?
What has happened to your mission?’
The pressure of the knife at his throat relaxed.
‘The king will not let me go.’
‘Is it he who is keeping you safe?’
‘No.’
‘Who is?’
Surere laughed softly.
‘Light a lamp.
But keep the wick low.’
Huy struck a flint and the lamp spread a tight circle of yellow light, so deep that it drew objects into it.
Surere's face was sucked forwards.
It was thinner, and the eyes were sunken; but they were alert, and burned brightly.
‘Why have you come here again?
You risk much.’
‘I need to talk.
There is no one but you in this city.’
‘There is your protector.’
Surere laughed drily.
‘How else can I think you have survived here untraced so long?’
Huy persisted.
‘The search for me has died down.
They think I have gone.’
‘Well, it is none of my business now.’
Surere's eyes darted over his face.
‘What do you mean?’
‘I was never your hunter, Surere.’
‘You think I killed the girls?’
‘Did you?’
‘I wouldn't tell you.
But perhaps I desire to make my peace with the man who did.’
Surere laughed again.
‘Under our laws, you can die for killing a hawk, a cat, or any other of the Sacred Animals.
But why not kill a child if it is for the  child's good?
Tell me, Huy.
I am confused by what the king tells me in dreams, and I need your help.
The Aten was clear; but now I no longer know.
I am confused between vengeance and salvation.’
Huy raised himself on one elbow.
‘What are you saying?’
He wanted to turn the lamp up, to see the man's eyes better.
Jailed shadows flickered on the walls.
Above all, he wanted to get up, but Surere still held the knife close to his throat, and every muscle in the man's body was taut.
He truly had the supernatural alertness of the hunted.
‘The age is evil.
After the light, there is darkness.
What is the use of continuing our race if it is to go on in darkness?’
‘Is there any other way to bring us back to the light?
I thought that was the purpose of your mission.’
Surere's eyes wavered, unsure.
‘Perhaps the way is lost.’
‘Who has told you that?’
‘No one.’
‘Has the king spoken to you of this?’
‘Stop it!’
A dry sob broke from the man's lips before he brought himself back under control.
‘Forgive me.
I have tried all my life to live in Truth.
Now I no longer know where I am.’
‘Who is the king?
Who is it that you really see?’
Huy asked softly, after a pause.
‘I have told you!
Our king!
Akhenaten!’
‘You have seen him again?’
‘Oh, yes.’
‘Where do you see him?’
Huy saw that he had pressed too hard, too fast.
The cunning was back in Surere's face.
‘Why?
Do you want to take him from me?
You are working for them now.’
‘I work for no one.’
‘Do you think I don't recognise Ipuky's livery?
What's your game?’
‘I have to eat.’
‘So you compromise,’ rejoined Surere scornfully.
‘At least you have chosen a good man.’
‘But he abandoned the Aten to save himself, like the others.’
‘And what have you done?’ said Surere.
‘I have been thinking.
I have been too quick to condemn, where in time I might redeem.
You did not know Ipuky before?’
‘No.’
‘He was much in love with his wife.
She ran rings round him, but he loved her all the same.
And when she left, he clung to her shadow in their daughter.’
‘And maltreated her?’
Huy was still not sure how he would have answered his own question.
‘I cannot believe that.’
Surere's eyes had changed again, cloudy in remembering.
‘You talk of redeeming,’ said Huy, gently.
The point of the dagger drooped towards the floor.
Huy looked at Surere.
He was taller than Huy, and labour had made him sinewy; but he was older, and his guard had dropped.
Now was the time to take him.
But if Huy overpowered him, what then?
He would have forfeited the fragile trust Surere had put in him, and if he turned him over to Kenamun, he would lose all trace of the delicate thread that seemed, somehow, to link Surere with the girls' deaths.
Kenamun would use pliers and the needle to destroy what was left of balance in Surere's confused mind, and then extort a confession.
‘Then you cannot have killed,’ Huy continued.
‘But it would not matter if I have.
Death is a redemption, too, if it saves the innocent from corruption.’
Huy felt the world close in on him.
He seemed to be sitting at his own centre, in the innermost room of his heart, as he heard the words.
The two men, forced by their fate into this intimacy that was not intimacy at all, sat in silence, the words used up.
In the end Surere stood up.
‘Do not follow me, Huy,’ he said with his old authority.
‘Tell me who is protecting you.’
Surere smiled.
‘Someone who owes property to the king.’
Huy looked troubled.
‘You are going, and I do not know if I have helped you.
I do not even know if I should.’
‘You should turn me in; but then where would you be?
Do not attempt to follow me.’
Surere put down the knife, turned his back, and made for  the steps.
Huy listened to him descending them, then the soft creak and click of the door.
After that, night wrapped him in silence.
Getting Huy into the Glory of Set had forced Ipuky to take his steward into his confidence.
The simplest method was to send Huy as a client.
He would wear private clothes and say that he was a merchant from the Northern Capital.
Expensive jewellery and make-up completed the display of wealth, though it made Huy self-conscious and uneasy.
The place was constructed on the same plan as the City of Dreams, though its decoration and furniture were richer.
No one had questioned him or seemed suspicious.
He was led from the neutral entrance hall by a quiet, equally neutral young man, who might have been a civil servant, into a room in which the walls carried friezes that depicted the perversions which the brothel traded in.
As his eye travelled over them, the trepidation which Huy had felt turned to contempt, and then to pity, for here were nothing but sorry fragments of imagination.
‘Please choose,’ said the young man, indicating the walls.
‘Choose?’
‘What you would like to do.
Or would you like to watch?
Some do, at first, to get them in the mood.
One of our best customers only watches.’
The young man managed to combine collusion with the antiseptic disinterest of a nurse.
He stood too close to Huy for comfort, invading his space.
Huy could smell the sweet perfume of the oil he used on his hair and face.
He looked at the walls again.
People were depicted in neat rows, engaged in activities which belied the formal expressions on their faces.
The first scene showed a pair of children whipping a tied girl, perhaps their nurse.
In another, an elderly woman forced a pronged implement into the anus of a muscular man wearing the mask of Horus.
Further on, a young couple, tied back to back, were threatened by three creatures carrying torches.
A little girl was shown twisting fish-hooks into the penis of a man suspended from his wrists by bronze wire, and in a fifth scene a man and a woman on all  fours were yolked together, drawing a miniature cart, whipped by a dwarf charioteer.
‘I'm looking for a particular girl,’ said Huy.
‘Aren't we all?’ replied the young man with a crispness bordering on impatience.
Huy felt anger rise into his mouth, but he made himself remain calm as he described the dead girl from the land of the Twin Rivers.
‘Never seen one like that,’ said the man promptly.
‘What did she do?
Hurt or get hurt?
Or maybe you like a bit of both.
Now —’
He did not finish the sentence.
Huy had grabbed him by the throat, lifted him from his seat, and slammed the back of his head against the wall with a force that cracked the plaster.
A small portion of the scene showing the couple with the cart flaked away and broke on the floor.
Blood dribbled from the man's mouth.
‘Just tell me when she left,’ said Huy.
The man spat in his face.
Huy held on to the thin throat until the face above it turned blue and tears appeared.
When the neck started to stretch, and the eyes gaped, he relaxed the pressure.
‘Tell me.’
The young man, no longer so neutral, his wig awry, gasped and coughed for air.
‘…doing my job…’ he managed to get out.
‘What job?’
Huy tightened his grip.
‘No.’
‘Then tell me.’
Limply, the young man did so.
The girl had arrived from somewhere in the north early in the season.
She seemed, in his words, to have some experience of what they required, and they put her through her paces.
Huy found that, during much of what he had to listen to over the next few minutes, his only defence against the temptation to break the young man over his knee was to invoke the Horus within him.
‘And when she left?’
‘It was unusual.
There's very little goes on here that is true.
Some of them really enjoy it, but mostly it's acted.
So it wasn't as if she was being maltreated.’
He looked at Huy  half-apologetically, cringing, as if he feared another blow.
‘But then we heard that she'd been killed.’
‘Beaten, raped and stabbed.’
‘That didn't happen here.’
‘Who were her clients?’
The young man's face froze.
‘Who are you?’
‘Vengeance,’ said Huy, meaning it, but speaking the word before he realised how theatrical it must sound.
He had reckoned without the effect of his anger and his appearance on the man, who trembled.
For a moment there was silence, punctuated, from somewhere deeper inside the building, by one long, isolated scream of pain.
‘Did Horemheb send you?’ asked the young man, finally.
‘Yes.’
‘I don't understand.
The people who come here are powerful.
Their delights hurt no one.
Why shouldn't they indulge them?’
‘Horemheb understands that he cannot touch you — yet.
But he would not want you to think that he had forgotten you.
Who were her clients?’
An unpleasant expression slunk on to the young man's face.
‘I do not believe you are from Horemheb.
My masters and he understand one another now.’
He gave a curt signal with his head.
Huy realised too late that the man's eyes had switched direction to focus on someone behind him.
He did not see his assailants.
He was taken from behind by two men who pinioned his arms and pitched forward into the room, the young man darting out of the way to allow his saviours to smash Huy against the wall in his turn.
He felt his teeth scrape against the plaster, then someone caught hold of his hair and pulled his head back.
He had a close view of one of the pictures painted on the wall that he had not noticed before.
Now, in a moment of crisis, he took it in with startling clarity.
Two elderly men were crouched over a naked girl who was strapped face down to some form of wooden rack.
Using sharp needles and ink, they were in the act of tattooing something on the girl's back.
One worked while the other watched, clutching his grotesquely enlarged erection.
The work was almost complete and the result was clearly visible: curled around the apex of the left scapula was a small, crudely-executed scorpion.
‘Not the wall,’ he heard the young man's voice say.
‘There's been enough damage done as it is.’
They pulled him round and beat his head against a stool until his brain boiled.
Then blood swam before his eyes and there was blackness.
TEN
On the eve of her wedding, they found Nephthys dead.
It was unusual for her to have been alone then, but she had asked for time to herself.
Although the ceremony itself was a simple one — a private exchange of shared intentions in which the most important formal element was the document which laid down precisely who got what in the case of divorce — it was nevertheless going to be used by both sets of parents as an excuse to throw a party, during which they would vie with each other in largesse, showing off their wealth as well as arranging useful introductions for their unmarried children.
Huy, recovering from the wounds he had received, and cursing the broken left forearm which the doctor at the Place of Healing had put in a splint and then bound too tightly, heard about the killing from Nebamun, who awakened him early in the morning — about the eleventh hour of night — with a furious hammering at his door.
Although his eyes were red, the young man seemed calm — until Huy handed him a cup of beer.
His hands trembled so violently that he was unable to bring it to his lips.
It took him several minutes before he could talk.
The plump girl, who had been so full of life, was killed in the same way as the earlier victims.
She had been found lying on her back, hands folded, naked.
There were no marks or signs of a struggle, and the body was without a blemish.
‘I have lost two sisters now.
I know you are working for Ipuky, but you must let me work with you.
I have a right.
I seek vengeance.’
‘And Ankhu?’
‘He is organising his own hunt.’
‘Why do you not join him?’
‘Because I think you know what you are doing.’
The reason, as Nebamun gave it, fell too pat.
‘Won't you tell me how much you have found out?’ continued the youth.
‘I am older than the king; and grief has made me a man.’
Huy thought about Reni.
What was the old scribe's reaction?
Where would his philosophical attitude be now?
Would he continue to be prepared to leave the matter of investigation to the Medjays?
And what would his heart tell him about the gods, who had singled him out for this fate?
Whom would he blame, and to whom would he turn for protection and comfort?
His youngest daughter was almost ready for burial, her body emptied, dried out, repacked, decked out for the long night, bandaged in the finest linen with the scarab placed over her heart, and laid in her case of painted cedarwood.
Soon her mouth would be opened by the lector-priest and her purification ministered by the Sem-priest.
Horus would restore her five senses for the Fields of Aarru.
She would descend to the Hall of the Two Truths, and go before the Forty-Two Judges.
Then Nephthys would follow her, and instead of standing, as a new wife, before Renenutet and Tawaret, would go as a shadow to meet Anubis and Osiris.
Would Reni seek consolation in the arms of his last daughter, or would he lose himself in wine?
Perhaps there was another route he would choose — after meeting the scribe again, Huy had little doubt who the rich client at the City of Dreams had been, and knew why his profile, fleetingly glimpsed, had seemed familiar.
He thought of the bruise on Kafy's shoulder.
Did the rest of his family know of his predilections?
Nephthys had not.
How might Ankhu react if he knew?
The new death showed that the killer and his motivations had not changed.
The death of Isis may have been an aberration, or it may have had nothing to do with the others.
That Merymose had died because he had discovered something important enough to threaten the killer was clear, and Huy knew that his own reluctance to take the policeman into his confidence had been one indirect reason for his death.
One detail needed confirmation, and Huy knew that he would not be able to perform the task himself.
Even Ipuky could not arrange for him to see this body, and he no longer had the cachet of officialdom with which to browbeat the embalmer.
Could he expect Nebamun to do it for him?
And yet the best form of relief for this boy whom grief had made a man would be in action.
He made his decision quickly.
‘I accept your help,’ he said.
Hope came into Nebamun's eyes, and with it eagerness and desperation.
Fear too.
What secrets were there in Reni's family?
Would involving Nebamun put him in any danger?
But it was too late to retract.
‘I need to know how Nephthys died.
There is no trace on the body of a wound?
Just as Neferukhebit?
It will be difficult.
You will have to look carefully at her body.’
He decided not to tell the young man where to search.
Nebamun looked at him.
‘I have already done that.
I knew that there had to be a wound: she had not been drowned or strangled or poisoned.
There is a little mark, only just larger than a needle might have made, under her left breast.’
‘I see.’
‘Is that how the others were killed?’
‘Yes.’
‘What happens now?’
‘Go home.
Comfort your parents.
Find out all you can about what Ankhu intends to do.
Our quarry needs very careful stalking.’
Nebamun left.
Huy watched him cross the little square in front of his house and disappear around the corner on the way back to the palace compound.
He thought of the forsaken wedding preparations, of the thoughts running through the head of the betrothed man, whose name he did not even know, of the decorations which were now mockeries.
We establish order and think we are in control; then Nu throws over the table and breaks what we have taken a lifetime to construct.
Perhaps one day he will even manage to destroy the pyramids we have built in defiance of his chaos.
But however solidly we build, our lives remain huts of straw and mud, at the mercy of the River and the Sun, thought Huy.