

Chapter 8
Maxim settled down for a gloomy evening.
He daren't yet tell George — or anybody — that he was being followed.
It was an Unmentionable Disease, and he'd caught it because he'd been to an Unmentionable Place and so it served him right, but that didn't make it any less sore.
If they were still with him at the end of tomorrow, he could complain, but not until then.
There was nothing he wanted to see at any of the nearby cinemas, he'd be irritable company in the local pub where he was a contender in a small bar-billiards school, so there was nothing for it but to spend the time watching television with the other sinners.
The phone rang at just after seven.
A youngish, roughish voice asked: ‘Is that Mr Maxim?’
‘It is.’
‘Me name's Dave.
Dave Tanner.
Er — I heard you was looking for Ron.
You know — Ron.
Er — am I right?’
He sounded nervous, but it could just have been his telephone manner.
‘Yes.
Are you the chap that has his bike?’
‘Er, yes, that's right.
He had me Yam.’
‘Thanks for calling.
Can you get him to call me?— or meet me?’
‘Er.
Yeah.
No, I mean — could you come up here?
I mean we could have a talk.’
‘Of course.
You mean to Rotherhithe?’
Yeah.
Er — you know a pub, the Golden Hind?
‘I can find it.
It shouldn't take me much more than half an hour.
How will I know you?’
A pause…
‘Er — I'll be in the Public.
I got on me jeans and DMs and me leather.’
Black leather jacket, fat Doc Marten boots and jeans.
As distinctive as ninety per cent of Rotherhithe's young men, and a fair number of its girls, most likely.
‘I'll ask for you at the bar,’ Maxim said.
‘Half an hour —; okay?’
In practice, it was a bit more.
He took the car and the warm evening seemed to have brought out hordes of motorists who were just strolling, and he chose a zigzag route to throw off any fan club.
The Golden Hind was smaller and a lot more cheerful than the Lord Howe, a busy little place with an obvious hard core of regulars wedged into their favourite corners.
Maxim stopped just inside the door to the public bar and looked around.
As he'd expected, there were four young men dressed as Dave Tanner, but only one of them was interested in who might be coming in.
Maxim stared at him, in a friendly way, until he slid off the bar stool and came over.
‘Dave Tanner?’
‘Yes.
Er — it's Major Maxim, innit?’
‘Harry.
Can I get you a refill?’
‘Er, yes.’
They moved to the bar.
Tanner was drinking lager, and Maxim wanted one as well, after the warm sticky cross-town journey, but he didn't want a long, bulky drink in his stomach.
Dave Tanner was a bit too nervous for a man on his own territory.
Well, all right, technically he was concealing information about a deserter — although nothing like the scale on which Maj or Maxim was doing it — but civilians don't take desertion seriously.
If you can afford to walk out of your job, walk out, why not?
He ordered a single vodka with ice, no tonic.
‘Were you at school with Ronnie Blagg?’
‘Er, yes, that's right.’
‘Did you box as well?’
‘Me?— never.’
Tanner seemed amused.
He had a long pale face, fashionably spiky fair hair and a pleasant smile.
He was probably Blagg's own age — twenty-five — and he had a gold signet ring on a hand that was already worn and scarred by  work at some machinery.
‘I was never into boxing, but Ron, he always wanted to be fighting something.
No, we just sort of hung about together.
He stayed with us, sometimes, when he come on leave.
He was having it off with me sister at one time.
You know -just when they hadn't got nothing better going.’
‘Can you put me in touch with him now?’
‘Er…
I mean look, what I can do…’
Tanner seemed even more nervous, taking a sudden gulp at his lager.
Maxim took a casual look around.
They were jammed in a pack at the bar, having to talk loudly at eight inches' range.
They certainly couldn't be overheard, but in that crowd anybody could be watching them.
‘What I'll do,’ Tanner said again, then asked: ‘You haven't got no idea of where he is yourself?’
‘Of course I haven't.
I thought you knew.’
‘Yes…look, there's somebody wants to talk to you, right?’
‘Somebody who knows where he is?’
‘Er, could be.
He just wants to talk.’
‘All right.’
Maxim finished his vodka and sat waiting.
He was fairly certain now that he was walking into a trap, and wished he'd come armed.
That way, nobody need get hurt.
Now there's confidence for you, assuming that if anybody gets hurt it won't be you.
No, it wasn't really that: it was being trained to get hurt, knowing he could stand it.
Tanner quickly swallowed the last of his lager and led the way.
Outside, the sky was still a brilliant clear blue, but the side streets were full of long shadows.
Maybe there was half an hour of daylight left.
They turned away from the main street, towards the river and the closed docks.
The road was a narrow canyon turning between high walls that protected the now-derelict ware-houses, and by its nature must be a dead end.
Tanner walked at a hurried, unnatural pace.
‘I thought you didn't go to the bike shop except on Saturday?’
Maxim asked pleasantly.
‘The bike shop?
No, I don't.
What d'you mean, the bike shop?’
‘Where you got my name and phone number.’
‘The bike shop?
Oh yeah, the bike shop.’
Tanner pretended to remember.
So where had he got the number?
Maxim took off his silk scarf, wiped his brow and put the scarf in his pocket.
In a fight, it could become a noose.
They passed an elderly Cortina II parked half on the pavement.
There were people in it.
He was several paces past when he heard the car doors open and realised just how outnumbered he was.
He hit Tanner in the stomach, a short punch to wind him, then snapped him around in a half-nelson and throat-hold.
There were five others, four whites and a black, and he thought he recognised a face from the Lord Howe gym.
They were the right age, anyway, and they moved like athletes.
‘The first thing I do is break his arm,’ he announced.
‘Break both,’ one of the fighters suggested.
They came steadily on.
Tanner gasped: ‘You bastards,’ and Maxim chopped him under the ear and dropped him.
He got his back to the wall as they swept over him.
Maxim tried a roundhouse kick that missed, turning with it to launch a back kick that dropped one of them.
But the others were too close.
He grabbed one forearm and broke it, then a blow on the forehead knocked his eyesight out of kilter, another thumped his ribs and he gave up, sliding hunched down the wall trying to keep his groin and kidneys safe.
There was no point in getting hurt any more.
They tied Maxim to a wooden chair -just like the scene they'd watched a dozen times at the cinema — in the loading bay of a deserted warehouse.
There was no light except hard bars of sunlight shafting almost horizontally through the broken windows, and the concrete floor gave the place a gloomy chill even on that evening.
The boy with the broken arm had fainted once; now he was sitting against a wall, crying.
The black, who had stopped the back-kick, sat beside him with grey lips, holding his stomach and only semi-conscious.
The other three seemed uncertain what to do next; Dave Tanner hadn't come with him, though he had been on his feet again when Maxim last saw him.
‘Christ,’ said one of the others.
‘You really buggered them up.
‘Did you break his arm?’ another asked.
‘What do you fucking think?’ moaned the boy most likely to know.
‘It's broken,’ Maxim said.
‘Hospital job.
And him, too.’
He nodded at the black boy, who wasn't listening.
‘Now,’ one of them said, ‘we're going to talk to you.
I mean you're going to talk to us.
We want to know where Ron Blagg is, see?’
Another slapped Maxim across the face, but not very hard.
‘We can keep doing that'til you tell us.’
Maxim goggled at them.
‘Bloody hell!
I came down here to try and find him.
If I knew where he was I wouldn't have come.
I thought you were hiding him.’
‘Don't give us that shit.’
‘If I knew where he was why would I come here?’
He was slapped again, still without much conviction.
‘You just tell us where he is.’
‘I don't know.
You had him at the Lord Howe, that's the last I know.
I'm an Army officer and all I want to do is persuade him to go back to the Army.’
‘Well, if you don't know where he is, where is he?’
Maxim stared back wearily.
‘We're going to torture you,’ one of them decided.
‘I mean like stick cigarettes in your face until you talk.’
Maxim did his best to shrug inside the ropes wrapping him to the chair.
‘Go ahead.
It's a police job already so why not give them some solid evidence like burn marks?’
‘Stuff the police.’
‘They're involved, from the moment you get those two to hospital.
Unless you just leave us all here to die.’
The black boy suddenly keeled over and his head hit the concrete with a startling crack.
‘Oh Christ,’ the torturer wavered.
‘Is he going to be all right?’
A door banged, echoing across the empty bay, and footsteps clattered towards them.
The boys stepped back, looked hastily around, then just resigned themselves.
Maxim tried to turn his  head to see, but Billy Dann had already begun to talk before he came into view, with Dave Tanner limping behind.
‘Jesus,’ he said softly.
‘I have seen some fuck-ups in my time, but you lot, and this…’
Billy Dann's office was long and narrow, almost as narrow as the desk placed across it just in front of the window, but very high because it had been partitioned out of a much bigger room.
The walls were lined with old fights posters and photographs of boxers in stiff, ferocious poses, and it had a musty, faded feel to it, contrasting with the bright cleanliness of the gym just up the hall.
By now it was dark, with just two small desk lamps throwing clear-cut areas of light: one at a typist's table halfway down the room where Maxim had finally met up with a pint of cold lager, one at the desk where Dann was listening on the telephone and sipping a small glass of neat gin.
The rest of the room was lit only by the dim bluish light from a street lamp below the uncurtained window.
Dann put down the phone.
‘One busted forearm, one ruptured spleen.
They have to remove that.
They say they'll be all right.
Might even fight again.
It's the arm that worries me.
If you remember what it felt like, broken, every time you throw a punch…
I don't much like you, Major.’
Maxim just nodded.
‘What about the police?’
‘They've been there.
I don't know what they asked, I didn't get to talk to the boys…maybe they'll think they filled each other in, I don't know.
If nobody makes a complaint…
What are you going to say?’
‘Nothing if nobody else does.’
Maxim had a sore forearm and stomach, a slight headache and a torn seam in his light-weight jacket.
‘I'll send you the tailor's bill.’
‘You do that, Major,’ Dann said heavily.
‘You do that.’
‘And I still want to know where Ronnie Blagg is.’
‘So do I. I'm not arsing you around, I just don't know.
When we got him out of here, a couple of the boys had a cuppa with him at a caff down the road.
An hour later, he rings in, he says he thinks somebody's following him.
That's all.
Nobody's seen him.
I said something to the lads, I don't know  what, like your people had caught up with him…
They must've got the idea from that, called Dave Tanner and got him to set you up…
I mean it was stupid, just plain wet nappy stupid.’
‘D'you have any idea where he might have gone?’
‘He had a mate in the country.
Kent, I think.’
‘I know that one.
He's not there.’
‘Was it your people?
I mean the Military Police — what's the Army call them: the Redcaps?’
‘Actually the Army calls them ‘those fucking MPs’.
No, they wouldn't have followed him, they'd have grabbed him.
He belongs to them, now.
I don't know who it was.’
He took a drink.
‘You can't think of anybody else he might go to?’
‘Tanner, he'd be the only one.’
There was a silence.
Dann looked at Maxim's glass, then took a bottle of gin from a desk drawer and refilled his own.
He wasn't a drinking man.
At fifty-five his stomach was as flat as an ironing board.
He took a big swallow and sighed.
Maxim asked carefully: ‘Did he see you before he went to the country, when he first came back from Germany?’
Dann considered.
‘just a minute or two.’
‘Did he say anything why he deserted?’
‘He said…
This is unofficial?— I really mean that.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, he said he might've killed somebody.’
‘He told me he had, quite sure.’
Dann looked relieved, then curious.
‘And you didn't tell nobody?’
‘Not officially.’
‘I'm buggered if I understand that Army of yours.’
‘Me too.
But you were never in the services yourself?’
Dann was certainly the age for National Service, if not the war itself.
He tapped his left ear.
‘I've got about twenty per cent hearing in this one, that's what they said last time.
That happened in the ring, we didn't have head-guards in those days.
When I was just seventeen.
That's why I took up PE, training.
Another punch and I could've lost the lot.’
‘Could you have been a contender?’
Dann thought for a moment.
‘You have to say yes.
You have to believe it.
But how much does anybody else know about…about Ron and this business?’
‘I've read the German papers and there's nothing been said, so we don't think they've made the connection.
So if you see Ron, tell him if he goes back and keeps shut-up, he'll only have the AWOL to answer for.
But I'd still rather talk to him myself.’
Dann nodded slowly, then asked: ‘Who d'you mean by ‘we’?’
Maxim grinned suddenly at the idea of dragging George openly into this.
‘Nobody's who going public on it.
So if he does get in touch…’
He stood up and wriggled carefully.
‘I'm stiffening up.
I'd do better to jog home than drive.’
Dann stood up, too.
You did better against those…those twats than I'd've expected.
Some of them must be near half your age.
I still don't like you much, Major, but I don't say I've liked most of the best fighters I've trained.
In a way, I won't say I like Ron too much, and he could have been a contender.’
‘In its small way, the Army also contends.
You've still got my number in case anything comes up?
It could be important.
And still unofficial.’
He walked slowly towards the hall, stretching at each step like a newly awakened cat.
He had an early appointment the next day.
Chapter 9
Agnes Algar had dressed with particular care on Friday morning.
She chose a slightly flared skirt of fawn flannel, plain white silk shirt with a demurely high neckline, a jacket in soft pastel-brown tweed with a standing collar, absolutely plain but very expensive Italian court shoes and a matching handbag that was small enough to be ladylike but not so small as to seem frivolous.
Around her neck she put a thin early Victorian gold chain, on her right hand a fire opal she had recently had reset in a simple gold ring, on her left wrist the gold Baume & Mercier watch.
Agnes thought of her clothes and jewellery in such terms, just as she thought of her car as a two-year-old 3-door Chevette ES in Regatta Blue with wing mirrors and two radio aerials.
She lived in a world of detail and precision, of getting the names right and the appearances correct, and had done ever since she joined the Security Service straight from Oxford fourteen years before.
She would have described herself quite objectively as aged 35 and looking neither older nor younger, height 5 feet 4 and usually just under nine stone with a figure that was well kept rather than dramatic.
Her hair was light ginger and she had long ago given up trying to curl it; she had a snub nose and blue eyes in an oval face that was cheerful but perhaps forgettable.
But being forgettable was part of her job; a jigsaw piece that fitted invisibly into any puzzle.
However, that morning Agnes intended to be neither forgettable nor invisible.
Only a few hours earlier an unexpected Meeting Notice had been issued, the agenda being simply ‘To consider the conduct of Major H. R. Maxim’.
Since her job was to maintain liaison with Number 10, which made Maxim technically a colleague, she was to represent the Security Service at the meeting.
She had no idea what that  ‘conduct’ had been — a few early morning phone calls had produced more bad language than information — but she knew what ‘to consider’meant in Whitehall, and frankly Harry had had it coming.
Not that she had anything against him.
She had no prejudice against any of the Army's trigger-happy desperadoes — not in the right place.
Number 10 just wasn't that place, and she didn't mind who heard her say so.
But what concerned her even more was that the Notice had shown the meeting would include two members of the Secret Intelligence Service.
That sounded bad.
Long ago, the legend said, the security (or spy-catching) service and the espionage (or spy-hiring) service had been born next door to each other in rooms 5 and 6 of the corridor where Military Intelligence first nested in Whitehall.
Nostalgically, the old door numbers still stuck among the mass of code and jargon names slapped on the services since then.
Thus the Intelligence Service could be MI6, just Six, or The Firm, The Friends (said with a knowing, slightly twisted, smile) or, if you were one of Agnes's mob, the Other Mob.
That is, unless you happened to be about to meet them across a conference table.
Then you reminded yourself that they were a bunch of gilded pederasts who spent what little time they could spare from betraying the country's secrets in stealing the Security Service's territory, influence and share of the Secret Funds.
If it had ever existed, the cosy Whitehall corridor was long gone, though Agnes sometimes wondered what it would be like to concern herself with frustrating only other countries' spies.
But she always dropped the thought as frivolous speculation.
‘The room was swept just three days ago,’ the uniformed messenger said, and Sir Anthony Sladen thanked him automatically, although everybody knew the remark was meaningless.
Listening devices didn't grow like bacteria: they had to be planted.
The room might have been ‘swept’ three minutes or three months ago, but what mattered was what had happened since then.
Three minutes is a lifetime to a good wire man.
The complete absence of windows gave the room a sense of  being right out of time and place, abetted by the bland neon lighting and acoustics which made everyone's voices sound flat and small.
The walls were covered in oatmeal-covered sackcloth, and in the centre two heavy tables had been pushed together to form a single one that looked absurdly big for the eight tweed-covered office chairs around it.
‘Lock the door when you go out,’ Sladen added.
‘And tell the coffee ladies that we'd like ours in, say, three-quarters of an hour?’
He looked around for support and everybody nodded, but the messenger became doubtful.
‘I expect they'll be here when they get here, sir.’
Sladen sighed.
‘Far easier to change our entire defence policy than alter the timing of one coffee-trolley.
Very well, then.’
The messenger ambled out and for no good reason everybody stopped talking until they heard the lock click.
‘How is the PM, do you hear?’
Sladen asked George.
‘It's been almost a week, now.’
He lowered himself very carefully into the chair at the head of the table.
He was a stiff man by nature and now his back had seized up on him.
The Assistant Secretary from the Cabinet Office, a motherly woman with very neat grey hair and fashionable spectacles, clucked around him, adjusting the embroidered cushion she had brought along.
‘Quite chirpy on the phone,’ George said.
‘Probably the worst thing wrong with him is Frank Hardacre.’
Sir Frank, who had earned his knighthood by making house calls only at houses where there might be photographers waiting outside, had once told George he drank too much.
‘If he survives that he should be back in town next week.’
‘In the House?
Taking Questions?’ the Foreign Office asked.
He got Mummy's Chair at the opposite end, the natural place for Sladen to look first when asking for comment.
George shrugged.
‘Tired Tim's quite happy playing Sorcerer's Apprentice.
Why close a show that's taking money?’
He had to settle for the seat at Sladen's right hand, opposite the Assistant Secretary.
Agnes came next to him and Major-General Sir Bruce Drewery next to her.
Across the  table, the younger of the two men from Six had already torn up his place card and put it in his pocket as a gesture of security.
The Assistant Secretary gave Agnes an all-girls-together smile and flipped open her notebook.
‘Ladies and gentlemen, I must apologise for dragging you in here at such short notice, but as you will have guessed from the Meeting Notice the urgency…’
Urgent or not, Sladen was experienced enough to give them thirty seconds of plati-tudes while they kicked their briefcases under the table, tugged at their waistcoats — both MI6 men wore them even on a hot June day — and shuffled their papers, although few of them were prepared to put much paperwork on view.
One of two Second Permanent Secretaries to the Cabinet, Sladen's whole life was committees, conferences, meetings.
He was a thin, thin-faced man and a bad back suited his dignity.
His one concession to the heat was a grey suit in place of the usual Cabinet Office blue, with a Trinity 1st & 3rd tie.
‘Chairman — the first off the mark was Guy Husband from Six ‘— I'm sorry to be singing the school song so early, but the Meeting Notice was classified merely as ‘Secret,.
Could my service assume that any minutes would only be distributed as ‘Top Secret’?’
Sladen glanced down the table.
‘Concur,’ the Foreign Office said cheerfully.
That was Scott-Scobie, a swinger from their harmlessly-named ‘Research Department’; forty-fiveish, healthily plump, curly dark hair and wearing a rumpled linen suit.
George nodded.
‘Agreed.
But does this mean that our friends from Dixieland — the Intelligence Service lived south of the river ‘— are going to give us a hint of what they're up to these days?’
‘We hope everybody will be giving hints of what they're up to,’ Husband said smoothly.
His voice was pleasant but characterless, as if he were mostly concerned with avoiding mistakes; a provincial schooling or all the years in the spy business?
‘Sir Bruce?’
‘By all means.
Classify it any way you prefer.’
He was a big Scottish pussycat with a contented purr of a voice.
‘Splendid.’
Then Sladen remembered Agnes; she gave him a happy smile.
‘Splendid, then.
You'll make a note?’
The Assistant Secretary already had.
‘Good.
Now, I think we all know that the matter before us concerns Major Maxim, currently attached to the Private Office at Number 10.
Guy, perhaps you'd like to…?’
‘Yes, Chairman.
But first…’
Husband had the good looks of a schoolboy football star who had reached forty with one mighty bound: a strong nose, high forehead, brown hair set in tousled wiry waves.
Even in a service which had a reputation for snappy dressing, he was an exquisite.
His Italian suit was a little too shaped, too light in colour and probably too expensive.
He adjusted his blue-tinted pilot-style glasses with a hand that wore a broad gold ring backed up by a gold cufflink in the shape of a reef-knot.
Agnes disliked rings on men, although to be fair to Husband — which she had no intention of being — she had little trouble in finding something to dislike about everybody from Six.
‘But first,’ Husband said again, glancing quickly at Agnes; ‘may I ask why our sister service is represented here?— no matter how prettily.
I ask only because of the need-to-know principle.’
You bastard, Agnes thought.
You peacock's prick.
She waited for George to answer, but he sat hunched beside her, turning a gold pencil in his fingers.
She realised she was on her own; George must be expecting a true Conflict Situation if he was already saving his last bullet for himself.
Our Harry has trodden on some Very Important Toes, she thought.
She became the bright helpful little girl, friendly but perhaps just a little out of her depth among all these clever men.
‘I only know that the Meeting Notice was sent out according to a list drawn up by the Prime Minister.’
‘Deputy Prime Minister,’ Husband corrected.
‘I really don't know.
My Director-General asked me to come along because I usually handle the lower-level liaison with Number 10.
But —
‘Lower-level,’ Husband said quickly.
‘That, Chairman, is precisely my point,’ although it hadn't been to start with.
Her voice stayed steady, despite feeling sick with anger and humiliation; ‘— but I imagine the Cabinet Office must have had some idea as to whether this is going to touch on security within this country.’
Sladen cleared his throat.
‘I think we can take it that a representative of the Security Service was regarded as, ahh, fundamental.’
‘I was solely concerned with the need to know,’ Husband said with deep sincerity.
Now there I believe you, Agnes thought.
There is something my service needs to know which you don't want us to.
‘If there are no other objections,’ Sladen was carefully not looking for any, ‘then I think we can proceed with the meeting as it is currently constituted.
Now could we —
‘If it comes to that,’ Sir Bruce rumbled, ‘I've no clear idea why I'm here myself.
Nor,’ he added, ‘why that young man is.’
He smiled lazily across at the second man from Six, directly opposite.
Sladen sighed.
‘We hope, Sir Bruce, that you might keep a watching brief on behalf of Major Maxim, and indeed the Army as a whole…
Mr Sims, also from the Intelligence Service, has specialised knowledge which could help us when we get into more detailed matters.’
Mr Sims, if that was his real name, dressed not so much snappily as very cleanly.
His dark blue blazer looked as if it was brand new, as did the white shirt with a very faint grey stripe and the steel blue tie.
He was in his middle thirties, his square tanned face set in a permanent appreciative smile, dark hair cut neat and fairly short.
Although he chain-smoked menthol cigarettes, his hands — remarkably small hands — were un-stained and well manicured.
‘Now,’ Sladen pleaded, ‘could we please get on?’
Husband had been filling a curved briar from a silver pocket box.
He struck a match and breathed a haze of bright blue smoke.
‘As you probably know, Major Maxim is attached to Number 10 for duties that appear not to be precisely defined but touch on security matters.
He works, as Sir Anthony said, directly to the Private Office.
This whole matter began when my service became aware of Major Maxim at the scene of a  surveillance operation that had been mounted.’
‘In London?’
George asked.
‘Yes, in London.
Initially our agents had no idea of who he was, but as I'm sure you know it's standard procedure to take photographs, and as soon as we compared them and a descrip-tion with our files, we were in no doubt as to who he was.’
‘So you stopped tailing him,’ Agnes suggested helpfully.
George made a little annoyed grunt.
She ignored it; I've been wounded already in this battle, brother.
That makes a difference.
‘No, not entirely.
A full-scale round-the-clock watch obviously wasn't either necessary or appropriate, but we did something to monitor his movements.’
Sir Bruce asked: ‘Did he notice what you were up to?’
Oh, I love that notice.
Agnes smiled at the old warrior, and then at Husband: by now, her anger at him had distilled to the warming spirit of pure hatred.
‘I believe he was lost from time to time, but that of course is inevitable in a down-market operation.
We had no positive indication that he was aware of our interest until yesterday morning.’
He paused to relight his pipe.
Everybody waited patiently.
The Assistant Secretary put a large floppy handbag on the table and took out a small handkerchief.
Her security pass was clipped to the strap of the bag, like a paddock pass on a racecourse.
‘Major Maxim lives alone.
His life seems to have no particular routine apart from his work.
That night we had two watchmen outside, just in case.
He came out very early, as soon as it was light — about half past five — and drove off to Acton.
Acton.
You may or may not be familiar with Acton, one gets a glimpse of it from the train, but it largely consists of railway yards, goods depots, great piles of broken-up cars.
All rather like a battlefield.’
Agnes felt Sir Bruce stir beside her.
‘With hindsight, we now see that our soldier friend was in fact leading our agents into his own sort of country.
The two watchmen were in a van, radio-equipped of course, but unfortunately the particular area was under some overhead  power cables which badly affect radio for some distance around.’
Sir Bruce nodded contentedly.
‘In short, Major Maxim lured our watchers into this place and then ambushed them.
The driver was pistol whipped, as I believe our Big Brothers call it, and left dazed and with the radio smashed — beyond repair.
The other was kidnapped.
He was held at gunpoint, handcuffed, blindfolded and forced into the boot of Major Maxim's car.
I can understand soldiers being allowed to play with guns, but I would like to know where he got those handcuffs.’
Nobody could think where until Scott-Scobie said cheerily: ‘Buy'em all over, gun shops and so on.
Big item in the FD market.’
‘The what?’
George asked.
‘Female domination.
Whips and bonds.’
‘Good God.’
Scott-Scobie grinned.
‘Do get on, Guy.’
‘Yes…then he was driven for, he estimates, about half an hour.
He was taken out, in some quiet place, out of doors, and questioned.
Or rather, tortured.
He was told to say just who he was working for, or he would have ammonia poured onto the blindfold.
I assume you all know what raw ammonia does to the eyesight?
Bank robbers used to use it quite freely, I believe.
You can go blind.’
The room was quiet except for a hidden fan that suddenly interrupted its humming with a series of squeaks like somebody rubbing his shoes together.
Sladen bent carefully back in his chair and frowned at the ceiling.
‘Our man could smell the ammonia,’ Husband said slowly.
‘He described quite graphically — to me personally — how he felt with it seeping through the blindfold and beginning to sting and then burn at his eyes so that he was finally forced to open them in order to blink.
I do not want to hear anything like that again.
Major Maxim then told him that there was no special hurry and that he was to take his time and make his statement complete.
I understand that he made it complete.’
He paused deliberately.
‘As soon as we got him to a doctor — which took some  time — it was discovered that Major Maxim must have held the ammonia under our man's nose while pouring some odourless spirit — quite possibly strong vodka — onto the blindfold in order to produce the stinging sensation.’
‘At school,’ Sir Bruce said reminiscently, ‘they taught me you could go blind from masturbation, never mind ammonia.’
How fascinating.
I hate to think what Major Maxim got taught in school — or would it have been the Army?’
‘Couldn't say, dear boy, but we do encourage young officers to think creatively.’
Husband sat back in his chair and began lighting his pipe for the third time.
Sladen looked at George, who reluctantly sat up a bit straighter, and said: ‘Until your chap did talk, I imagine Major Maxim thought he was being followed by a bunch of Kremlin cowboys.’
‘I don't see why,’ Husband said.
‘Any man with access to sensitive information, such as Major Maxim, should expect to be put under surveillance purely as a matter of routine.
By Special Branch, or by a positive vetting team from Defence, or even Miss Algar's own service could quite legitimately decide to check up on his private life.
I'm sure she wouldn't have taken the matter lightly if it had been her own colleagues who had been beaten up and tortured.
Nor do I imagine that Number 10 would have been overjoyed if it had been some young detective constable.’
‘I agree he acted hastily —
‘He acted very deliberately and to a plan.
The ammonia proves it.’
‘Let's say that he should have come to me first,’ George said in a heavy, measured tone, ‘and let me sort the whole thing out.
I assume that your service would immediately have acknowledged responsibility?’
‘Of course.’
Liar, Agnes thought.
But George had to accept it.
‘Very well.
But what do you want now?— for me to send him round to say sorry?’
‘We'd certainly like him sent round, but to say a little more than sorry.’
‘Such as what?’
‘We would like to know what connection he has or had with the target of the original surveillance.’
Sir Bruce leant forward so that he could see past Agnes to George, but didn't say anything.
George said: ‘Major Maxim is still working to the private Office.’
‘If he was working for the Private Office in South London on the afternoon in question I should be very surprised indeed.’
‘Whereabouts in South London?’
‘Rotherhithe.’
Sladen was looking from George to Husband and back again, twitching his head from side to side like a tennis umpire.
There was a ball being knocked back and forth, all right, but only Husband and, Agnes now realised, George knew what it was.
‘Who is your target?’
George asked.
Husband paused, cocked his head slightly and peered at George as if he were assessing his artistic value.
‘Are you quite certain you don't know?’
The room tensed, but George shrugged and let it go past, perhaps admitting that was a ball he couldn't reach.
Sladen waited nervously for somebody to say something, then asked tentatively: ‘Well…if we aren't to discover who, is it possible to find out something about why?’
Why so nervous?
Agnes wondered, then suddenly realised.
As a number two to the Cabinet Secretary, who was the most powerful of all civil servants, Sladen's career was almost in orbit.
One final boost and he would be up among the true stars, all guidance systems go for a seat in the House of Lords upon retirement.
But final-stage rockets had misfired before, and at a time when people were whispering about a change of prime Minister and the shake-out that would bring, the very last thing Sladen must want was to be caught up in a brawl between Number 10, the Foreign Office, Defence and the secret services.
That way lay nothing but the chairmanship of a minor merchant bank.
‘I think Guy might fill in some of the background,’ Scott-Scobie agreed.
But then there was a knock on the door, the messenger unlocked it and stuck his head in, asking: ‘Is it all right for coffee now, sir?’
Sladen nodded, maybe a little relieved.
‘Since it would be now or never, yes, it's all right now.’
The meeting collapsed into muttering groups.
The coffee lady, in a green nylon uniform, pushed in her trolley and began handing out ready-filled cups.
Agnes got hers with the pale coffee already slopped over into the two sugar lumps and two hard little biscuits in the saucer.
Luckily, she took neither sugar nor biscuits.
‘May I have mine black, please?’
Sladen called.
Sims wanted his black, too.
The coffee lady sighed loudly.
Sir Bruce sipped, made a face, and whispered to Agnes: ‘And I thought we suffered at MoD.
Have you any idea of what we're talking about?’
‘Not a thing.
We've heard nothing about this.’
He grunted.
‘Do they often set up surveillance operations in this country?’
‘I didn't think so.
My own service was under the impression that it had the huntin' and shootin' rights in this country.
It didn't seem too much to expect, when they have all the rest of the world.’
She was wearing a brave but sad little smile.
Outnumbered three to one — if you counted swinging S-S as One Of Them — she might need all the allies available.
Sir Bruce made another Highland noise.
‘I never could get on with those people; they appear entirely obsessed with sex.
They will not get it into their heads that what the military wants is military information, not the phone number of some general's girlfriend.
I don't believe there's a one of them could tell the difference between a T-72 and a kiddie's tricycle.’
Agnes nodded sympathetically.
As the coffee lady trundled out, the messenger poked his head in.
‘Shall I lock up now, sir, or wait until she's collected the cups?’
‘Oh Good God!’
Sladen almost lost his temper.
‘It doesn't matter about the cups.
She can get them when we've finished, if we ever have the chance.
Just leave us alone.’
Husband whacked out his pipe in a big glass ashtray, making a sound like a gong, then walked around the Assistant Secretary to mutter into Sladen's ear.
Agnes flashed a smile at  Sims and leant across after it.
‘Look — the next time you want to set up a surveillance in London, do remember that we're here to help.
We have an awful lot of experience in these things, and we can do you quite a big show at very short notice.’
Sims smiled back.
His teeth were very even and, of course, very clean.
‘Thank you, but I think we can do all right.’
He had a faint German accent.
‘I'm talking about a dozen sets of wheels, thirty or forty bods.
Not just two old men in a van.’
Sims stayed impeccably grateful.
‘You are very kind, but I do assure you we can manage.’
‘You really are getting that section organised,’ Agnes said admiringly.
Scott-Scobie suddenly woke up from behind his Financial Times and asked: What was that?
What did you say?
Agnes smiled at him.
‘Just a little liaising at the lower levels.’
S-S stared suspiciously at Sims, who lit another cigarette.
Husband came back, also distributing suspicious looks, and sat down.
Sladen tapped his papers together into a squared-off pile, spread them out again, and said: ‘Miss Algar, gentlemen, can we get back down the mineshaft?
I believe Mr Husband was going to…?’
Agnes interrupted.
‘Could I sort out one little problem first?
I gather that the Rotherhithe operation was a full-scale affair, lots of wheels, thirty or forty personnel.
Can I assume that it was cleared through the Cabinet Office?
Obviously one can check, but…’
Sladen's eyes searched for comfort.
A few doors down from his own room sat a Co-ordinator of Intelligence whose task it was to try and keep MI6, 5 and the true military organisations from duplicating each other 's efforts and spitting in each other 's beer.
His main control was money, since he turned the taps of the Secret Funds, but that was rather long-term.
When relations grew particularly bad he became the child go-between in a household of warring parents: ‘Ask your father if it would break his heart to change channels so I can watch the news.’
By the unwritten laws of an unadmitted game, Six  should never have sent a war-party into Five's tribal land without at least telling the Co-ordinator.
‘Or perhaps,’ Agnes added, ‘they went through the Yard?’
Everybody knew they hadn't.
Nobody told Scotland Yard anything they would mind seeing as next day's headlines.
Husband wriggled himself comfortable and reached for his pipe.
‘Dieter?’ he said to Sims.
‘I arranged for the surveillance,’ Sims said evenly.
‘It was done from my section and I am afraid I did not ask for sufficient permission.
I am sorry.’
The can is carried here, Agnes thought.
‘I think Dieter's been a bit naughty,’ Husband puffed, ‘but it was a direct follow-up to an incident abroad, so you might say it came under the doctrine of ‘hot pursuit’.’
‘But if my Director-General asks what happened to the agreement that no operation of anything approaching this scale was to be mounted in this country without our knowledge…?’
‘You don't know what scale it was, but you can tell him Dieter says he's sorry.’
Husband waved his pipe, making brief smoke trails.
George muttered: ‘Drop it.
Leave it lay.’
Agnes stared at him, amazed.
This was just the sort of thing — a secret service playing God — that usually had George registering y on the Richter Scale.
But then it came to her just how much of George's power flowed from the Prime Minister in person.
Now that the PM was on his Scottish sickbed, George was a near-flat battery, hoarding his last sparks for really crucial issues.
Scott-Scobie's strength was that of the Foreign Office, faceless but continuous while PM's came and went like lantern slides.
‘I'm sorry for the interruption, Chairman,’ she said bleakly.
‘You can also say,’ Husband added, ‘that the surveillance has been discontinued — hasn't it, Dieter?’
‘Oh yes.’
Sladen said: ‘Now we've got that settled, perhaps Mr Husband, you'd like to…’
‘It's Dieter's section that's been handling this, so I'll let him fill in the background.’
Sims ground out his cigarette and began.
‘You will all be aware of the changes in the Politbureau in the GDR since the railway strike.
Especially one of the new members of the Secretariat of the Central Committee, Gustav Eismark.’
Sir Bruce wasn't sure he'd read that issue of The Economist.
‘He is widely regarded in the West as the token liberal,’ Sims explained.
‘Just as there must be a token Jew and a woman.
We believe he could be more than this.
His background is with shipping, first in the yards at Rostock, then with the national shipping line.
He stopped the seamen and dock workers joining the strike, but he did not take too hard a line.
We prefer to see him as we think he sees himself: a pragmatist.’
‘The great thing to be in East Germany right now,’ Scott-Scobie announced.
‘It marks you as one of the techno-crats — what a ghastly word — and they're the class that counts.
The politicians may say Blah but the computers go on saying 0110100 or whatever it is, and it's the people who can make sense of that who'll be in the top bunk when the dam breaks.
Also Eismark's only sixty-odd and that's a mere youth in the GDR.
Ulbricht died in office when he was gone eighty, didn't he?’
‘That is so,’ Sims said, smiling — apparently grateful for S-S's help.
‘Filling in the background’, Agnes saw, didn't include delivering the punch lines.
‘We believe he may be, in the long term, a very important man.
And we also know of his early life something more than the official biography, since, thirty years ago, his sister defected to here.
She was a pianist, and used her mother's name, Linnarz.
Wilhelmina Linnarz.’
‘I remember her,’ Sladen pounced, thankful for something he recognised at last.
She used to play a lot of Schumann.
I didn't always agree with her Chopin, and her Liszt was a disaster area, but I'd listen to her for a long time if it's Schumann.
What happened to her?— is she dead?’
‘We do not know.
She left this country twenty years ago, and we have no trace.’
There was a moment while everybody thought about that, probably for no good reason except that they didn't like to see twenty years go by without offering up a few seconds' respect-ful silence, then Sir Bruce asked: ‘So she didn't go back to the GDR?’
Husband said: ‘We're very inclined to doubt it.
They'd have put her in the freak show, confessing how misled she was by capitalist gold.
One defector that repenteth is better prop-aganda than nine-and-ninety loyal party workers, isn't that so, Dieter?’
But of course, Agnes realised, Sims — or whoever he'd been born — must once have been on the far side of The Wall, too.
She'd been slow to see that, and tried to make up for it by saying quickly: ‘Her jumping over can't have helped Eismark's career.’
Sims nodded, thanking her.
‘That is so.
But he was only young then, about thirty, and he did not have so far to fall.
And also his background was very good.
His father had been killed in the Rostock riots of 1931, and it seems that Gustav himself had for certain been a Worker Youth.’
‘In 1945,’ Husband said, ‘they were trading cigarettes-which were better than gold in those days — for party cards and affidavits that they'd always been true Worker Youths-once they found themselves in the Russian Zone.
There were — are still, I'm sure — plenty of overnight heroes of the Resistance with Hitler Youth uniforms buried in their cellars.’
‘Yes, yes, yes,’ Scott-Scobie said with cheery impatience.
‘But we can accept that our Gustav wasn't one of those.
Apart from anything else, he wasn't even in the Russian Zone to begin with.
He actually went East soon after the war ended, if Guy's files mean anything.
So his wicked sister's vanished and now he's big man on campus.
Let's read on.’
‘In the war,’ Sims said, ‘Gustav had married.
He had a son, that is now Manfred, who is a colonel in the SSD.
But Gustav's wife was killed at the end of the war.
His sister then helped to bring up the child while Gustav was in Moscow for two years, at the university and taking the political indoctri-nation.
He did not marry again until much later, when he was coming back to political life after the economic changes of 1962, which made the shipping more important.
Politically, it  is important to be married.
It is normal, and the Democratic Republic is very modest.’
‘An absolute hotbed of puritanism,’ Scott-Scobie cut in.
‘Rife with morality.
When Frau Ulbricht was den mother she ran the Politbureau like a convent school.’
‘So when Gustav Eismark came to the Secretariat,’ Sims went on, ‘naturally we looked in the files about him.
There was not much; we do not have the money to research every politician in the Republic.
But now, we said to our people, if anybody has something about Eismark that they had not the money to explore, now we can unlock the money.’
‘Standard operating procedure,’ Husband said, quickly smoothing over Sim's full-frontal use of the word ‘money’, even though there was nobody there from the Treasury to hear it.
‘And one person said yes, she thought she had something.’
‘Something interesting or something dirty?’
Sir Bruce asked.
Scott-Scobie grinned at him.
‘Both, we hoped.
It's the dirty bits that make the world go round, don't you find, General?
‘Please…’ from Sladen.
‘So we said to go on, to investigate.
She reported that she was sure she would be able to prove something, but it needed just one operation, with more money.
It was to be in a small town called Bad Schwarzendom.’
‘Do you know the place, George?’
Scott-Scobie called.
‘A spa with a Gradierwerk down near Paderborn.
I toddled through it when I was with Rhine Army.
What happened then?’
Husband said: ‘It went wrong, badly wrong,’ then lit a match and Sims found he was holding the ball again.
There was a shooting.
Our agent was killed, so was the town registrar.
If you read the German papers, it was in there.
We lost the money, we did not get the proof.’
‘Oh dear,’ Agnes said brightly.
Sim's smile stayed as bright and unchipped as his teeth.
‘But the identity of our agent was not discovered and the police seem to think it was a crime of passion without any third person involved.
We do not expect any blowback.’
‘Ah, that is lucky,’ Agnes helped.
Husband glared at her.
Scott-Scobie also gave her a look, then past her at George.
‘I have to say that we in The Office put the highest, the very highest priority on acquiring this proof — if it still exists.’
George asked: ‘Knowledge of what?
And in what form?’
‘That,’ Husband said, ‘is what we would like your Major Maxim to toddle round and tell us.’
Chapter 10
The cricket ground was wide and shapeless, surrounded mostly by the back gardens of houses, but one stretch gave onto the main road, where the taxi from Littlehampton station dropped Agnes off.
She walked up a gravel drive crowded with large cars, past an old-fashioned wooden pavilion and two clay tennis courts, ignored the adult game going on in front of her and started around the boundary to the second and much smaller game in the far corner.
Maxim was sitting on a wooden bench in the uncertain shade of a row of poplars and chatting to two small schoolboys in fresh whites.
He stood up as she got near, taking off his sunglasses politely, and they shook hands.
He wore a loose cotton blouson buttoned at the waist over a blue tee-shirt and faded khaki slacks.
The bench was cluttered with cricket gear; Maxim asked the boys: ‘Could you find us a couple of chairs, do you think?’
They rushed away with competitive enthusiasm.
‘The word of command,’ Agnes said admiringly.
‘An Army training has its uses after all.’
‘For finding a place to sit down, consult us first.’
‘Was one of those your boy?’
‘No, he's batting now.’
‘Oh.
Which one?’
She put on her own sunglasses and looked out across the worn pitch.
The umpires looked very big and the ten- and eleven-year-old schoolboys very small, like squat white fleas that stayed still or suddenly hopped about and often fell over.
‘The bowler's end.
Not taking strike.’
The other two boys hurried back, each with a folding wooden chair that was probably less comfortable than the  bench but certainly newer.
Maxim had them set up a few yards away, thanked the boys gravely, and they sat down.
‘It s a very nice rig,’ Maxim said, ‘but you didn't really need to get into your Number Ones.’
‘Thank you, kind sir, but I didn't dress for you.
I dressed for a meeting whose minutes will be classified Top Secret.’
‘Ah.
Sorry.’
‘You were one of the main items on the meeting paper.
Afterwards, George asked me to come down and see if I could talk some sense into you.
From what I learned at the meeting I can't see why he thinks I'm up to such a task, but maybe la bête a ses raisons que la belle ne connaît pas.
Do you think you can have some sense talked into you?’
Maxim frowned out at the cricket.
‘You can always try.
What did he say?’
‘Do you want it with or without the four-letter words?
Let me warn you that without them, it's very short.’
‘I think I got most of those yesterday.
Go on.’
‘Do you have any information — I imagine it would be in documentary form — concerning a certain East German poli-tician?’
‘What?’
Maxim looked convincingly blank.
Agnes sighed.
‘I should have known it wouldn't be that simple.’
She took off her pastel jacket and hung it on the back of the chair.
‘Aren't you rather hot in that blouson?’
‘I'm fine.’
But he did look a little overheated, so why didn't he at least unbutton it?
Because he had a shoulder holster on underneath, of course.
Having the hounds from Six on his trail had made him wary — perhaps especially so around his only child.
But, she realised, there was a pleasant incongruity about watching cricket, of all things, next to a man with a concealed pistol.
‘How much did your unwilling informant from Six tell you about Plainsong?’
‘About which?’
‘He didn't tell you much.
Plainsong: that's their codename for the whole operation.’
‘All he told me was that he was working for the Sovbloc desk at Six, and they were looking for a deserter, but he didn't  even have Blagg's name.
He knew who I was, and that's about all.
He wasn't likely to run Sherlock Holmes out of business.’
‘No…’
She sat silent for a while, making a decision.
‘As I say, this is supposed to be Top Secret, but you'd better know if you're to be any help.
You'd know anyway, if you'd got what they think you've got, whatever that is.
Have you ever heard of Gustav Eismark?’
‘New man in the East German Secretariat.
Supposed to be a moderate, but has a lot of support from the not-very-political new managers and so on.’
Maxim had read that issue of The Economist.
‘Correct.’
Agnes began to explain what little she had gleaned from the meeting.
Maxim listened carefully, but with his eyes on the game.
Untypically for his age, Chris preferred to play most of his shots to the off rather than drag everything round to leg.
But the opposing school couldn't adjust to his rarity and left plenty of useful gaps in the offside field.
So he made 32, including two perfect drives that stayed on the ground all the way to the boundary rope.
Then, over-confident, he tried a late cut: there was a click, a squeal of joy, and first slip was doing a war-dance.
Chris trailed back, dragging his bat in disgust, but loudly clapped by his team and the little group of parents around the scorer's shack in the corner of the field.
In a prep school match, a score of 32 rates with a Test century.
When he had smiled uneasily through the congratulations, and taken off his pads, Chris came down to them.
He looked at Agnes with cautious curiosity, and Maxim introduced them.
‘Miss Algar works for the Home Office and liaises with Number 10.’
Chris shook her hand.
He had the natural compactness of a good ball player and a Celtic paleness of skin and darkness of hair, with big golden-brown eyes that saw everything as wildly funny or desperately serious.
His mother must have been a smasher, Agnes thought; he doesn't get those looks from our Harry.
She glanced covertly at Maxim, who was watching Chris with his usual quiet self-protective smile.
She said: ‘A very good innings.’
Chris shook his head.
‘I should never have got out like that.’
‘You know what they say in Yorkshire,’ Maxim offered.
‘Never make a late cut until September and then only on alternate Tuesdays.’
‘You've said that before, Daddy.’
‘I'll say it every time I see you contributing to the Slips’ Benevolent Fund.’
Chris looked back at Agnes.
‘Are you talking work?’
‘Just a spot,’ Maxim said quickly.
‘We'll come over for tea.
In front of the hut, several mothers were setting a trestle table with crockery and unwrapping polite little sandwiches.
Who said we ll go for tea?
Agnes thought, briefly annoyed.
Chris smiled at her and walked away.
When he was out of earshot, Maxim asked: ‘Did Six actually admit they were involved in that shooting in Germany?’
‘Yes, but only on the grounds that it wasn't their fault.
Even that surprised me until I found out afterwards that George had known about it all along; I suppose they didn't want to risk him bringing it up first.
And of course the woman wasn't really one of theirs, just some distant freelance, and the back-up with her was some nutty amateur they'd had to use at the last moment —
‘D'you mean Blagg?
Did he get mentioned?’
‘Not by name, rank or number; I got him out of George afterwards, as well.
They said he'd lost his head and started shooting —
‘Blagg?
They're claiming he started it?’
‘Oh yes.
George said you'd got a different version.’
‘Damned right I have.
I've read the German accounts of it all, too.
Blagg isn't the type to go off at half cock —
Agnes held up a placatory hand.
‘I know, he's SAS trained.
But don't waste it on me in any case: I wouldn't believe Six even if they told me they were lying.
So then Sir Bruce got hopping mad because nobody would tell him who they were talking about, and asked why they were so certain you were involved, and Six — it was that luminous dong Guy Husband and some new pin-up boy who runs the East German section-said they had their reasons and George could explain more.
George just sat there looking like a State Secret.
And Sladen didn't know what was going on, either, but I don't think he wanted to; he was just scared that somebody would start throwing coffee cups and he'd get the blame.
The FO chap knew all about it, of course, and any time things looked like coming off the boil he dived in and assured us this could be the biggest coup since the Zimmerman telegram.
Oh, it was the merriest morning I've spent in a cow's age, and all the work of little you.’
She beamed happily at Maxim.
A batsman in the distant adult match clouted a ball that sailed right into the middle of the school pitch.
There was a flurry of yelps and scurryings but nobody managed to field it and it rolled almost up to Maxim's feet.
He collected and threw it back to the pursuing fielder with an easy gesture-then suddenly clutched at his left side.
For a moment Agnes thought he must have pulled a muscle, then giggled as she, and she alone, realised he had come close to spilling his holstered pistol.
He sat down again.
‘So what in the end got decided?’
‘Oh, nothing got decided, we just provisionally concurred with each other.
Except Sir Bruce agreed Six could search your flat —
Maxim sat up straight.
‘Did he buggery!’
‘They'd have done it anyway.
This way, he could send an officer along from the SIB to make sure they didn't nick your spoons.
And George had to agree to go through your files at Number 10.’
Maxim wondered why he wasn't more shocked at the instinctive distrust implied by that decision, and sighed as he realised it was because he'd been nearly six months in the atmosphere of Whitehall.
‘Does George — or Sir Bruce-want me back in London now?’
‘At the moment, I think it would suit George just fine if you caught a slow boat to Yokohama.
He told Husband he'd have to consult with the rest of the private Office and maybe even the PM before he could agree to them interrogating you; he may actually be doing that, for all I know, though I think it's more likely he's been waiting for his temper to cool before he briefs you.
He's had a rough week.
‘Well, what's happened to Blagg, then?’
‘They lost him, in Rotherhithe, the day they picked up you.
‘They lost him?’
‘They blame you for that, too.
They'd already split their team to cover both the gym and some other place, and then split it again to follow you, so Blagg only got the leftovers, spotted them, and took to the hills.’
Maxim chewed that over.
‘They said all that at the meet-ing?’
‘All that except his name and the fact that he was a deserter.
I suppose they were scared of what Sir Bruce might say.
What does the Army do about deserters these days?’
‘Gets very uptight and doesn't want to talk about them.
We're an all-volunteer force now so you shouldn't have any reason to run away.
Mostly it's woman trouble, though there's a few went to Sweden rather than Northern Ireland.
Poor bastards.’
Perhaps they had adjusted to the sanitised neutralism of a Stockholm commune, but it seemed an odd life for men who had chosen to become soldiers.
The cricket stopped.
The boys headed for the tea-table, not quite hurrying, with the two umpires strolling behind and a frigid few paces apart.
Each a master from one of the schools, they had obviously totally disagreed on some decision.
‘Good for Blagg,’ Maxim added thoughtfully.
‘Giving them the slip.’
‘He also did it without use of grievous bodily harm.’
‘I meant in spotting them at all.
I hadn't thought he'd be all that bright at the bogeyman stuff.’
‘I don't suppose the team was exactly a thousand-candle-power.
You spotted them as well.’
Agnes clearly wasn't going to take Maxim any more seriously as a spotter of fan clubs than she took Six as an organiser of them.
‘So the position is,’ Maxim summed up, ‘that they assume the dead man, Hochhauser, had some document or other, they assume Blagg picked it up, and now they're assuming he gave it to me.’
‘Intelligence is mostly assumptions.
Tea, however, is fact.’
Agnes stood up purposefully.
The tea was handed round by a posse of mothers who greeted Agnes in a friendly but appraising way which infuriated her.
She knew she was overdressed for the occasion but hadn't realised it would make her look both predatory and incom-petently so, since one of the main adult sports at Chris's school was trying to get that nice Major Maxim remarried.
That, and trying to recruit him to the parents' Association committee (which was almost the same thing, as the most active women members were divorcees).
‘We only meet about three times a term,’ one drastically lean lady was telling him; ‘and the dates are always fixed well in advance so all you have to do is arrange to be free on that evening.’
‘The trouble with my job at the moment is that I can't guarantee to be free at any given time.’
‘Surely it's just a matter of arrangement.
My brother works for the Department of Health and he can always arrange to get away if he knows the date far enough in advance.’
‘My job just isn't that predictable.’
‘My brother is very high in the Department of Health,’ she said warningly.
‘That's just the trouble,’ Agnes chipped in.
‘When you're more junior your life simply isn't your own.
If somebody sends you off to — say — Acton or Rotherhithe, you don't have a choice.
You just have to go.’
‘Acton?
Rotherhithe?’
The lady looked mystified.
‘Who'd want to go to those places?’
‘Nobody in his right mind,’ Agnes agreed.
‘They were just random examples.
But I do know the difficulty the Major has in getting away to do his own things.
It can be very frustrating.’
She could feel Maxim's steady glare.
‘Well,’ the lean lady said, ‘I still feel that something could be arranged.
My brother has always found the civil service most accommodating…’
She drifted away, trailing aromatic dissatisfaction.
‘Thank you,’ Maxim said in a sort of growl.
‘Anytime.’
Chris appeared with a handful of rather sweaty egg-and-cress  sandwiches and a smaller boy who wore spectacles and had a problem.
Chris explained: ‘James here is our scorer and Mr Marshall signalled four wides when there was a wide and the ball went to the boundary, but the other side's scorer says you can't have four wides at once, only one, and the other three must count as byes.
What do you say, Daddy?’
Maxim was still wondering what to say when Agnes said: ‘Certainly you can have four wides off one ball.
Look it up.
‘All runs that are from a ‘Wide Ball’ shall be scored ‘Wide Balls’, or if no runs be made one run shall be scored.’
It doesn't mention the boundary, but it must be implicit.
It's Rule 29, isn't it?’
James dropped his pen, adjusted his spectacles and fumbled through the back of the score-book.
‘Gosh, yes, 29: ‘The ball does not become ‘Dead’ on the call of ‘Wide Ball’’…
Do you know all the rules by heart?’
‘Most of them, yes.’
The two boys gazed at her with such blazing admiration that she came close to blushing.
‘When I was your age I spent almost every summer weekend scoring for my father's village team.
And pouring jugs of beer and passing bowls of pickles at the ‘tea’ intervals.’
‘It must be very useful,’ James said with utter sincerity, ‘to know all the rules of cricket by heart.’
‘Not quite as much as it used to be.
I don't do much scoring nowadays.’
‘Don't you?’
Maxim asked.
‘We don't get pickles,’ Chris said, staring at his crumpled handful of sandwich.
‘Have you finished talking work?’
Maxim and Agnes looked at each other.
‘Not quite,’ she said in a small serious voice.
‘Are you in a rush to get back?’
Maxim asked.
‘No-o.
I'm just the messenger.
I'll have to ring George and my office anyway…’
‘Why don't you stay on and have dinner with us?— at my parents’ place?’
There were a lot of reasons why she didn't want to get involved in Maxim's domestic life, particularly when he seemed to be intent on jumping from the tenth storey of his career structure — but in the end, why not?
Curiosity was one  of her best-developed talents.
‘You're sure it'll be all right?’
She glanced quickly at Chris, but tie was grinning broadly.
‘My mother keeps an open-house policy.
Chris is always bringing somebody home.’
‘Then I'd love to.
I'll go and ring George now.
The message is, you don't know nuffin' — right?’
‘I could ring a couple of people, or go and see them, about trying to find you-know-who, but…’
He shrugged.
‘I don't think George wants you doing any more on your own initiative.’
‘Then he can bloody well tell me so himself.’
‘I was under the impression that he had.’
She grinned suddenly.
Her smiles were light, acted expressions, but her grin was wide and uninhibited.
‘But I'll pass the thought on.’
She picked up her jacket and handbag and headed for the distant clubhouse.
Behind, she heard another parent swoop on Maxim.
‘Oh, Major, did you get the message about our little wine and cheese party for…’
Chapter 11
Corporal Blagg had spent his childhood — those parts of it the local authority hadn't been able to control — in the courts, alleyways and concrete ‘gardens’ of Rotherhithe's blocks of flats.
He had learned to fight there, to ride there, to play football there, and at last how to get his hand inside Betty Tanner's jeans there.
He knew those courts and gardens, not just as places and secret short cuts, but as a whole pattern of life and behaviour.
And he knew immediately that the two men walking towards him didn't belong, were wrong.
They couldn't have been more wrong if they'd worn Father Christmas suits.
But they'd seen him the moment he saw them, so he kept on walking towards them.
They might not know him by sight, or might not be looking for him at all.
They weren't police; one of them had a rather foreign look.
He put his hand casually into his jacket and touched the butt of the Spanish copy of the Colt.38.
They were about five yards apart and he was just deciding they weren't anything to do with him when they both took out pistols.
He shot one twice, in the middle, and he collapsed against the other, blocking Blagg's aim.
The second man brought up his gun and fired from the cover of his wounded companion.
Blagg tried for a head shot and missed, felt a punch in the chest that made his knees fold, but he fired again and saw the pistol fall loose.
Then the man was running, and Blagg could have shot him in the back but he had only one round left.
The first man lay there, moaning.
Blagg started to run, too, in the other direction.
He moved fast and confidently, but when he had gone only three hundred yards he began to feel breathless, long before he should have done, and realised what  that one shot might have done.
He started desperately to think of a place to hide.
Something in the sea air must act as a mind-blowing drug on English architects, Agnes decided.
Mining towns, garrison towns, purpose-built New Towns — all those were fairly hideous in their own ways, but they offered no contest to the English seaside.
There, an impregnable first line of defence against any invader with visual taste, stood hundreds of miles of small houses that could have been assembled by retarded monkeys dipping randomly into a box of building styles.
The little semi-det that Maxim's parents had bought when they retired to the outskirts of Littlehampton sported a Geor-gian bow window, timber cladding above the garage — which had a metal door — and tile-hung patches around the first-floor windows, whose balconies were just big enough for a seagull to stand on.
And that was restrained compared with the green pantiles, Spanish ironwork, provençal shutters and stained-glass leaded windows spattered along the rest of the road.
Or maybe they just didn't have architects within three miles of the sea.
Maybe it was all done by builders' baby daughters: ‘Draw Daddy a nice house and Daddy will build it.’
Maxim's mother was a cheerful, bustling little woman; his father wore a moustache, smoked a pipe and said very little but, Agnes guessed, listened a lot.
She learned that Maxim had an elder sister — oddly, she'd always assumed he must have been the first child — who had married a Quaker school-master and lived up North, had three children and didn't work, ‘Except at disapproving of the Army,’ Maxim added.
They were just finishing the apple pie when the phone rang.
Everybody looked at Maxim.
Probably his parents didn't get more than half a dozen calls a week, Agnes realised.
Maxim answered it, then said: ‘Speaking,’ and mouthed to Agnes: ‘It's the Fun palace,’and took the phone into the hallway, out of hearing.
Nobody else said anything, and Agnes suddenly saw that Chris was pale and rigid with apprehension as he sensed his weekend turning lonely.
But his face said nothing; a soldier's face.
You poor little bugger, she thought.
Maxim came back and beckoned Agnes out.
They stood just outside the front door.
‘A gun battle in Rotherhithe.
One badly wounded, police looking for two more, at least one of them thought to be wounded.
As much as anything, I think George was just wanting to make sure I was still here.’
‘I'll give you an alibi.
What do you think it is?’
‘The same as George thinks it is.
I don't know how often Rotherhithe goes in for gunfights, but this could be one of ours.’
Agnes nodded gloomily.
‘It's a bit late for bank hold-ups and a bit early for night-club ructions.’
‘I'd better get back.’
‘Can you give me a lift?’
She let him go in alone to break the news to Chris.
Across the street a lace curtain twitched.
The neighbours would be interested in whom that nice Major Maxim was talking to on the doorstep, too.
After driving in silence for ten minutes, Maxim said suddenly:.
‘I was a bloody fool.
Blagg told me he'd thrown away the revolver that woman gave him.
Soldiers don't throw away guns.
They join the Army to get guns, and they're always in trouble for possessing one illegally or swiping a few rounds of ammunition.
It's crooks who throw away guns.
I've been thinking like a crook.’
‘Six months at Number 10 would do that to anybody,’ Agnes sympathised.
‘Are you a gun nut as well?’
‘You can't be a soldier — not an infantryman, anyway-without liking weapons.
And liking some more than others.
It's like a pilot having opinions about aeroplanes, nobody thinks that's odd.
Don't you get any firearms training in your mob?’
‘Oh, we're supposed to know something about handguns, and fire off a few rounds every so often.
I usually manage to dodge that.
I've only had to carry a pistol once, just a few hours.
And I've never used one.’
Maxim nodded.
They had passed through Arundel and were coming over the ridge at Whiteways Lodge roundabout, heading for Petworth and then the A3 at Milford.
It was far the best route into London from the South.
He was driving fast but safely and, Agnes noted, not as well as she could have done.
Still, she had the training and he didn't.
Being able to handle a car was for her far more important than playing Annie Get Your Gun.
‘If it is your wandering corporal in hospital, what were you planning?’ she asked.
‘Oh, I wasn't thinking it would be him.’
‘Really?’
Without glancing at her, he knew she had her eyebrows at full stretch.
‘I'd back Blagg at any fun and games of that sort.
He could be hurt, but he wouldn't be the one left behind.’
‘I forgot, he's one of your Hereford Superstars.
But even so ‘I assume whoever-it-was wanted to capture him, not kill him.
If they'd got him badly wounded, they'd have taken him away, wouldn't they?’
‘Much in what you say,’ she agreed reluctantly.
‘So do you have any ideas where Blagg could be?’
‘None.
I'll just have to go looking.’
‘Of course.
I suppose that would be the one way to make things worse.
I should have had more faith in you.’
This time Maxim did glance at her; she was staring straight ahead, nodding gently to herself.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Harry, do you have any conception of the strife you have caused so far?’
‘By thumping those two gits from Six?’
‘Not just that.
If that were all, I'd applaud it as a wise and public-spirited action and I hope it starts a trend.
But it was very far from all, wasn't it?
Until you came along, Century House was right out on a limb.
One of their sections had gone hog barmy and set up an operation that turned into a shoot-out in a friendly country with an apparently innocent citizen getting killed.
They'd followed that up by mounting a major surveillance job in London without clearing it with us or the Co-ordinator or anybody.
Their private parts were firmly jammed in the wringer and all it needed was for somebody to  to the rescue.
You concealed knowledge of a deserter, you actually helped him stay deserted, and They can make out a case for saying you still are.
You messed up their surveillance, you beat up their agents, you went in for exactly the same unauthorised adventurism as they had — and so let them off the hook.
Now if they pull it off everybody'll heave a sigh of relief and their methods will be forgiven, and if they don't then it'll all be Number 10's fault and that would probably suit their book just as much as coming good on Plainsong itself.’
Maxim took a deep breath and said reluctantly: ‘I suppose…
I do see most of what you say.
I just thought Blagg was getting a raw deal.
And now it seems they're loading the whole blame for Germany on him, and he's only a corporal and the Army's his whole —
‘Forget Corporal Blagg!’
Agnes shouted.
‘Forget all the bloody corporals in all the bloody Army!
Just get it through your tiny 1914-pattern mind that you have started a constitutional crisis!
Have you Rot that, or should I send it in cipher?’
There was nothing to cause an echo in the car, already full of engine and wind noise, so it was probably only in their minds that her voice seemed to fade in throbbing waves, as across a vast canyon.
Both of them were rather shaken; Maxim slowed abruptly and sat up straighter in the seat.
‘I haven't lost my temper with anybody in years.’
Agnes was speaking through teeth clenched against any further emotion, and fumbling in her handbag.
‘In my job you're not supposed to.
Does that dashboard lighter work?’
‘I think so.
I didn't know you smoked.’
‘I don't often.
I want to now.’
She rammed the lighter knob viciously, and lit her cigarette with trembling fingers.
‘I understand you also told George that you had a rehearsal in Rotherhithe the night before you tried to reform the Intelligence Service by force majeure.
What was the score there?— one busted arm, one ruptured spleen.
Had you thought about how that might look in the public prints?
Thank God Husband doesn't know about that, not yet, anyway.’
Her voice was small and hurried.
‘Stop at the next phone box, would you?’
They drove in total silence for five minutes until they found one.
Agnes got back into the car shaking her head.
‘Nothing new, but I've asked our people to bend an ear that way.’
She lit another cigarette, but now her hands were steady; Maxim drove off, changing gears very precisely.
There was still perhaps three-quarters of an hour of daylight left, but the sun was just glimpses of coppery gold between vast castles of cloud stacking up on the horizon.
It was only the breeze when the car was moving that made the warm air breathable.
Agnes watched the clouds, the incredible im-permanent detail of the cumulo-nimbus that had fascinated all the English landscape — and seascape — artists.
‘I don't get out of London enough,’ she said.
‘You have to get out to see what the job's really about.
London doesn't give you enough reasons.’
‘Were you country?’
‘Worcestershire.
My father kept a small flat in London and commuted for the week.
It made it a weekend marriage, but it seemed to work.
I remember loving Friday nights, when he came home…
I suppose that's usually your set-up, too.’
‘Usually.’
But this Friday he was driving back to London.
‘What would you be doing now if you hadn't come down?’
‘Cooking.’
‘Sorry.
Did I get your evening wrecked?’
‘No, it was only going to be me and Mozart.
If I can get three or four dishes into the freezer I can do a dinner party without worrying about being home in time to cook.’
Realis-ing she'd never invited him, she moved the topic on quickly.
‘Do you cook?’
‘I'm learning.’
‘Don't they teach you cooking in the Army?’
‘A bit, but it mostly seems to be with rats and hedgehogs and seaweed.’
‘You're joking.’
‘No.
The only cookery I got taught was survival training in the SAS.’
‘Lord.
Do you get used to it?’
‘I hope I never know.’
He took a deep breath.
‘You mentioned a constitutional crisis.
Did you mean that?’
Agnes threw the last of her cigarette out of the window.
‘So much for preserving the beauty of the countryside…
I don't think you quite realise how much money's being bet on plainsong.
If they can really get a hook into this Eismark, a member of the Secretariat and likely to be there for years, it'll be quite a coup in its very quiet way.
Something the West Germans or Uncle's boys or the French couldn't do.
For once there could be enough credit for everybody who wants it.
Scott-Scobie, he's one of the most ambitious young men at the Forbidden City.
I don't know what he wants, it could be the Permanent Under-Secretary's Department, it might be the next Director-General of Six…
And Guy Husband, he's new to the Sovbloc desk; if he pulls this offin his first few months, he could become a living legend.’
‘Does he want to be one?’
‘Oh yes.
It's their top word.
What else can they want if they're in these behind-the-arras jobs?
They're never going to get rich or famous, but they love thinking they'll one day be legendary to Those Who Really I now.
As for Dieter Sims, I don't know much about him except that he's been building up the East German unit under Husband's wing.
Maybe he'll have to be content with merely doing all the work, but there's compensations in being indispensable, too.’
She looked at the few cigarettes left in her pack and then impulsively threw them all out of the window.
‘The hell with the countryside…
The whole of what's usually called the Intelligence Community's feeling a bit frisky at the moment.
I imagine you've noticed that our dear prime Minister doesn't exactly go a bundle on us, on any of us?’
‘That was why he invented my job, wasn't it?’
An all-too-nearly-public scandal caused, that time, by Agnes's service had prompted the PM to appoint an Army officer to Number 10, although it hadn't prompted him to decide exactly what Maxim should do once there.
‘That's right.
He's always been paranoid about intelligence, seeing plots and hidden microphones and leaks to the media…he kept the money tight, too.
Now it seems he won't be  with us for ever.
He's not a well man.’
‘Did George say that?’
Agnes thought long enough for Maxim to glance at her making sure she'd heard.
‘No-o, not in so many words.
But we have sources of our own.
We're supposed to know what goes on in this country, and the PM's health is a national asset, so…
But he isn't responding to treatment.’
‘I thought it was just bronchitis.’
‘By now it's pneumonia.
It's probably only that old quack Hardacre feeding him the wrong antibiotics — Agnes shared George's view of Sir Frank ‘— but if each course takes five days before they decide it isn't working, it can run on.
He's over sixty and he's had chest trouble before.
And every day he spends in bed wastes away a little more of his authority: parliament doesn't like sick leaders, it casts them out to die on the cold, cold slopes of the House of Lords.
Quite right too, of course.
But that makes now a good time for a little discreet character assassination, suggest the old boy can't even control his own Private Office.
That's you.’
‘They're using me to try and bring him down?’
‘They're using anything they can find.
Yes, they're using you.’
Maxim was silent for a while.
‘And there's nothing I can do about it.’
‘You could give up consorting with deserters and street fighting in all its forms…
I realise it'll be tough, trying to cut it down, but just say to yourself —
‘None of this was planned, was it?’
‘Oh Lordy me, no.
You leave the conspiracy theory of history to the professors, and keep your eye on the opportun-ists.
A sense of timing's always been more important than mere dishonesty.’
They were on the choppy, wavelike hills before Milford, a narrow road with too much Friday evening traffic heading south, against them, for Maxim to risk trying to overtake an elderly truck in front.
He resigned himself and let the car drift back to a comfortable fifty-yard gap.
A fat Jaguar promptly swerved past him, closed up on the truck and started weaving in and out, forced back every time.
‘Everybody's a contender,’ Maxim said, so softly that Agnes had to think for a moment to be sure what she'd heard.
‘Aren't you?’ she asked sharply.
‘Don't you want to run the Army?
Or even a battalion?’
‘I think I did once,’ Maxim said slowly.
‘But now…now I just don't know…’
Agnes let it go at that.
He might go on to talking about his dead wife, Jenny, and she didn't want to hear about her.
She wanted to know, she just didn't want to hear.
Chapter 12
During the week — and weekends when he was the duty Private Secretary — George and his wife Annette lived in the family set of rooms in Albany, just a few quiet yards from the snarling traffic of piccadilly.
The porter was expecting them and let Maxim park in an awkward position on the forecourt pavement.
It was dark now, but warmer than when they had left the coast nearly two hours before, and the air tasted like something breathed through a hot towel.
The weather was going to break, and noisily.
As they walked through the lamplight of the Ropewalk, Maxim noticed a small incised plaque to Lord Macaulay, who had lived there in the 1840s.
‘That's the bastard who loused up my promotion chances.’
‘What?’
Agnes stopped and peered.
‘He once wrote: ‘Nothing is so useless as a general maxim.’’
She chuckled.
‘Did you run across that yourself?’
‘Oh no.
There've always been plenty of kindly brother officers to bring it to my attention.
We're a very well-read Army these days.’
George's rooms were on the first floor; they had the traditional stolidity of a steak and kidney pie and were much the same colour.
Annette had never dared touch the dark panelling that George's family had put in eighty years before, nor even most of the ponderous mahogany furniture and the lovingly detailed pictures of dead hares and partridges surrounded by dewy vegetables.
She had counter-attacked with bright lampshades and curtains, but she hadn't won.
Agnes knew the room and went straight for the telephone.
George was sitting at one end of a vast empty dining table, with a little oasis of bottles, coffee pot and cheeseboard at his elbow.
‘Ah,’ he greeted Maxim; ‘do I see you refreshed by two days of country air?
Revived?
Refulgent?
More to the point, do I see you repentant?
Your lad's really done it this time.
Port or brandy?’
‘Just coffee, please.
Who got shot?’
‘The man in hospital hasn't been named, but he isn't your Corporal.
It happened around seven o'clock, at a place called Neptune Court.
Do you know it?
No?
I thought you knew Rotherhithe like your own back garden.’
‘I don't have a back garden.’
‘Neither does Neptune Court.
It's a block of council flats, probably one of those redbrick Edwardian things, with a court in the middle and a service road down the back.
Front doors open onto long balconies with iron railings covered in damp washing and snotty little kids dribbling on your head through the bars.’
Maxim grinned, surprised less by George's attitude than by his knowledge of such parts of London.
They were certainly Rotherhithe blocks he was describing; Maxim had seen them.
‘It happened in the service road.
Five or six shots.
Neighbours saw one man drive away and it looked as if he was hurt.
Another one running in the opposite direction.’
‘Running?’
‘They said so, but from the blood marks the fuzz think he could be wounded.’
‘What about the guns?’
‘I do not know about the guns, Harry.
I can't be ringing up Rotherhithe nick asking for details.
That would just establish the very connection I'm hoping — despite your assistance — to avoid.
All I'm giving you is from the radio and the PA tape.
But six shots and a man in intensive care,’ he added, ‘makes it reasonably certain that some friend of yours was involved.’
Agnes came over and George handed her a gin and tonic.
‘Thanks.
Our people have been in touch with the police, just checking to see if there could be a terrorist element.
That would be quite normal.
They've got the one in hospital down as Hans-Heinz Lemke, but they aren't entirely convinced.
They're checking him out.
He's about thirty-five, dark, five foot eleven, eleven and a half stone.
Shoes made in Germany-West.’
‘Did they say anything about the guns?’
Maxim asked.
George gave a heavy sigh.
‘There were two left at the scene.’
She glanced at a piece of paper.
‘A Sauer of 7.65 millimetre calibre and a Walther of short 9 millimetre or .380.
Is that right?’
Maxim nodded.
‘The Sauer had been fired, probably twice.
The other one wasn't fired.
And they've picked a .38 Special out of Lemke's liver.’
‘That could be Blagg,’ Maxim said.
‘It was a .38 Special he had at Bad Schwarzendorn.’
‘Oh hooray,’ George said mournfully.
A vivid light flared outside, bright enough to penetrate the heavy curtains.
Everybody waited, but when the tearing bang of thunder came it was still loud enough to make Agnes jump.
She didn't like thunder; it was over-dramatic and showy, like tropical plants.
Maxim finished his coffee.
‘I'd better get going.’
Agnes waited for George, but when he stayed quiet, she said: ‘Harry, Neptune Court and its purlieus will be absolutely crawling with cops.
This is the sort of thing they really go to town on: an armed man, probably wounded, probably hiding out nearby.
They'll smother that place.’
‘I know.’
She was about to ask How do you know? and then remembered his tours in Northern Ireland.
She looked at George, but he was just pouring himself another glass of port.
‘Will you be here?’
Maxim asked.
‘For a while — if George doesn't mind.’
‘Be my guest.’
When Maxim had gone, Agnes said: ‘You didn't even try to talk him out of it.’
George nuzzled his nose into a glass of port.
‘You haven't been in the Army.’
‘I'm glad you've noticed.’
‘There's a wounded soldier out there, or he thinks there is.
I  couldn't have stopped him with an anti-tank gun.
It's the most common form of heroism, risking your life to rescue one of your men.
The fact that he's only risking his career — and mine, and the government's — doesn't really make any difference.
Not to him, anyway.’
He gulped his port.
Agnes looked disapprovingly at George's glass.
‘You're going to have to watch that stuff.
We could be in for a long night.’
‘Why does everybody tell me I ought to watch my drinking when they're all so busy watching it for me?
Somebody in Whitehall has to be looking at something else, and it might as well be me.’
‘Cheer up.
Blagg may be dead.’
‘With our luck, he's probably shot a couple of coppers as well by now.’
He reached for the decanter.
Beyond the curtains, the rain came down with a sudden clatter on the roof of the Ropewalk below.
The pain wasn't so bad, it was the breathlessness, using all his energy to suck another few seconds of life from a chest that seemed to be wrapped in rusty iron bands.
He knew he had a hole in one lung, leaking air and blood that put pressure on the other lung.
They had taught him that much in the Army.
They had also taught him that the first thing to do with a wounded man was clear his breathing.
But how did you do it yourself, and clear something deep in your chest?
And by now he was far too weak to move, even to sit up.
Unless somebody found him soon…
Until then, the only thing to do was endure.
Endurance is a soldier's job.
A few may turn out to be heroes as well, but a few is all you need; for the rest, what matters is biting down and holding on.
The Army had taught him that, too, and the SAS acceptance tests had rammed the lesson home by sending him out over the damp Brecon Beacons with a 55-lb Bergen rucksack knowing he had to cover a certain distance in a certain time but not knowing that when he had done it, there wouldn't be the trucks they had promised but a vague assur-ance of a cup of tea if he kept on marching a few more miles in  that direction.
That was the real test, what they called the sickener' factor.
‘Fuck you lot,’ Blagg had snarled at the officer in charge, and set out to march to the end of the world.
Now, it seemed he was almost there.
His senses were fading as his whole existence concentrated on taking in the next breath.
He had long since stopped noticing the foul smell inside the little concrete box, or the damp grittiness of the floor against his cheek, and he heard only distantly the rolling crash of thunder.
But a few minutes later he heard the rattle of heavy rain on the loose corrugated iron sheet hiding the way in, felt the first trickle of water crawling down the floor, and then remembered how long this place took to drain.
He realised that he was quite likely going to drown.
For the first time, the first time in his life, he was horribly and totally afraid.
The rain was smashing itself into a two-foot-high mist above the roadway as Maxim pulled up outside Billy Dann's house.
It was semi-detached and mock Tudor, in a quiet suburban street lined with acacia trees and unbroken street lamps.
In his slow crawl from the corner as he peered for the right number through the flooding windscreen, it had seemed an odd neigh-bourhood for the Fight Game: well-weeded drives, well-painted houses, the cars as recommended by Which? and Ratepayers' Association posters in several windows.
Maybe he was just wrong about the Fight Game.
Perhaps there had been a hint of the rain slackening; anyway, it did in the minute he waited in the car.
He wrapped a short raincoat around himself and ran up the front path.
Dann opened the door himself, looking warm and sticky in a pink short-sleeved shirt and bright green slacks.
Maxim hadn't been entirely wrong about the Fight Game.
‘Bloody hell,’ Dann said, ‘it's you again.
Don't they teach you in the Army how to use the telephone?’
‘I just wanted a private word.
Are you alone?’
‘Well, right now, yes, but the wife's —
‘Hop in my car.
We'll drive around a bit.’
Dann stared.
‘Are you totally barmy?
I mean you had noticed there's a hurricane going on out here?’
Feeling rather like a flasher, Maxim opened his raincoat to show the revolver pointing vaguely at Dann's crotch.
‘I'll explain in the car.’
Dann went wide-eyed and said: ‘Fucking arseholes,’ in a reverential sort of voice.
Maxim reached around him to pull the front door shut and ushered him down to the car.
In the movies they always seemed to make the kidnapped party drive, but Maxim thought about Dann driving his — Maxim's — car into the first acacia while he watched the gun, which seemed to have hypnotised him.
It was safer and cheaper to drive one-handed, letting the car steer itself when he changed gear.
Why didn't kidnappers choose automatic gearboxes?
When he had turned two corners and gone about a quarter of a mile, he gave Dann the pistol.
‘Sorry about that: I just wanted to get you out of the house.
Be careful with it, it's loaded.’
Dann turned the gun in his hands, still staring at it in the passing flares of street lighting.
Maxim went on: ‘I'm pretty sure your phone's tapped, your house could be wired, and somebody'll be watching it.
Are you listening?’
Dann woke up and handed the gun back.
‘Here, you take the bloody thing, I don't know anything about guns…
Did you mean all that?
Why?’
‘Oh yes.’
Maxim tucked the gun away.
‘Did you hear the news tonight?’
‘No, I only listen to the sport.
I've got no time for —
‘There's been a shooting in Rotherhithe.’
Dann hesitated, then asked: ‘You mean Ron.’
‘It's not him in hospital.
But he could be on the run.
He could be wounded.’
He let the car drift to the kerb and stopped with the lights off, watching the rear-view and wing mirrors.
‘Where did he get a gun?’
Dann asked.
‘If it is him, he had it all along.
Now: do you have any idea where he might have gone?’
‘He might've gone to the gym —
‘I doubt it.
That was being watched when I was there.
They picked him up there but he shook them off.’
‘Look, who are these buggers?
Did you say they'd got my phone tapped?’
‘I said probably.
They're Our Side, the Good Guys.
Not the police, the ones you're not supposed to talk about.
Our Ronnie's mixed up in more things than he knows about.’
Dann's outrage was mounting.
‘Isn't there any bleeding law in this country any more?’
‘Yes.
There's the one that says you can get up to two years for ‘incitement to disaffection’.
Hiding a deserter, that means.’
‘Then what about you, Major?’
‘Oh, I'm not threatening anybody.
I'm so far up the creek myself that when they throw the book at me it'll be the whole library.
The point is, we're neither of us in a position to complain.
Now — anywhere you can think of?
Could he have gone to Dave Tanner?’
‘He might have done, if there was nowhere else,’ Dann said grudgingly.
‘Where does he live, d'you know?’
‘Place called Neptune Court.’
‘Damn!’
Maxim slammed the steering wheel with both hands, nearly hard enough to break it, certainly hard enough to make both palms sting.
‘The shooting was there.
He must have been hiding out with Tanner, or gone round to scrounge a meal.’
Why, he thought, why couldn't Blagg have gone out of town, to some place he knew, like Hereford or…
Of course not.
The only other places somebody who'd joined the Army at sixteen would know were Army places.
And as a deserter those were just where he daren't go.
‘Anywhere else, at all?’
His voice sounded tired and de-feated, even to himself.
‘We could just drive around Rotherhithe,’ Dann suggested without enthusiasm.
‘A couple of hundred police have already had that idea.
I came through and it was blue lights from wall to wall…
We'd better ask Tanner.’
‘Hold on.
If you said the cops are all over, they'll be all over Dave Tanner.’
Maxim switched on the car lights.
‘Not necessarily.
I don't think they know it's Blagg they're looking for, and if they don't know that, they won't know about Tanner.
They probably talked to him already, they'd have talked to everybody in that block, just asking if they saw or heard anything.
Routine.’
A fresh gust of rain bounced off the bonnet as he pulled away from the kerb.
The police had stationed their Major Incident Vehicle, a glorified caravan with radio aerials, temporary telephone lines and a flashing blue light on a small mast, in a small crescent at the end of Neptune Court.
There were several other police vehicles parked around, and a small group of men working under floodlights and umbrellas at the back of the court itself, but that was all.
If you're trying to catch somebody immediately after a crime, you grab every man you can and smother the area.
But after two or three hours and nil results, you have to accept that the trail is cold and you can't justify that level of manpower.
Out there on the unpoliced streets beyond the floodlights, other people are getting stabbed, mugged, raped, burgled, sometimes even just run over.
A death by gunshot is only one item on the programme of a Friday night.
And with luck, it could turn out to be a bit of gang warfare which nobody is — unofficially, of course—; going to bust a gut trying to solve.
Maxim drove past and parked a little further on, and Dann said suddenly: ‘What am I doing here?’
‘You can wait in the car.’
Dann changed his mind back.
‘No-o.
The kid knows me.
I'll come in.’
It was quite likely that, after Wednesday night, Tanner wouldn't want to be alone with Maxim.
Tanner was distinctly unhappy to see Maxim again.
He lived with his wife, a thin and rather nervous girl with ragged blonde hair, in a second-floor flat that belonged to her widowed mother.
The rooms were small, warm and smelt  damp, filled with brightly varnished furniture that looked well made but nevertheless home-made.
A motorcycle jacket and a vivid red helmet lay on one end of the small dining table.
After a couple of minutes' polite talk and the offer of a cup of tea, Mrs Tanner went away to talk to mother.
‘We're looking for Blagg,’ Maxim said abruptly.
Tanner swallowed and nodded.
He had seemed pale and jittery ever since they had come in.
‘It's for his own good,’ Dann put in.
‘The Major thinks he could be hurt.’
Tanner nodded again.
‘Yes.
The coppers said he — whoever it was — could be.’
‘They don't know it's him?’
Maxim asked.
‘No, they didn't seem to.’
‘But he was staying here?’
‘Yes.
He come round last night.
Said could he sleep on the sofa a couple've nights.
I mean, he's an old mate.
I didn't think anythink like this was going to happen.’
He shuddered.
‘I mean, what could happen to me?’
‘Nothing, if we reach him first.
Now —
‘I mean he's left his gear here, hasn't he?
That's his bag in the corner, innit?
And the cops standing there asking me if I knew anything and all the time it's his gear they're looking at.
I mean —
‘I'll take it away,’ Maxim soothed him.
‘Now, any idea where he might go?’
Tanner thought for a moment and shook his head.
‘Think.
We're assuming he's wounded and had to hide nearby.
When you're hurt, you regress.
I mean, you want to run home to mother.
Okay, so he hasn't got a mother.
But he might go back to some part of his childhood.’
‘I don't see him going back to the Council,’ Dann said banteringly.
Maxim shot him a furious look.
‘He might not be hurt,’ Tanner temporised.
‘If he's not, he's probably in Norwich by now and still running.
But we have to look at the worst possible case.
Is there anywhere round here?’
There was a long silence.
Then Tanner said slowly: ‘We had this sort've a gang, once.
Just when we was kids.
I mean, we  had this sort of hideout, meeting place.
It was an old air-raid shelter, I think.
Only they'd blocked up the way in, like, and you could only get in through…
I dunno, maybe it was some sort of ventilation thing.
If you kept that covered up, most people didn't even know it was there.’
‘Showus.’
Chapter 13
George had switched to drinking coffee laced with cognac —; ‘The complete cycle, the disease and the cure in one simple package,’ and Agnes had muttered something about vitamin C and gone across the big room to play a Mozart piano concerto on the stereo.
She felt drained.
It had been a long day at the end of a busy week, but that wasn't all of it.
At dinner in Littlehampton she had acted perfectly, had been friendly but not familiar, always cheerful, talking enough but not too much — but always acting.
There were so few homes where she could relax and, without talking about the hidden things, not be consciously hiding them.
It was that, the holding of your thoughts like holding your breath, that broke so many of them in their forties.
She had seen it far too often: the self-inflicted divorces, the ones you had to talk to before lunch because the rest of their day was an alcoholic marsh, those shunted to a not-too-responsible job in the Registry or an early pension —; Peace hath its victims no less renowned than war.
I have perhaps ten more years.
Will it all have been worth it?
Suddenly Mozart seemed too busy and clever, and she started sorting in the cupboard under the turntable until she found a record of Papillons, and lay back surrounded by Schumann's fluttering primary colours.
George looked around.
‘If I'm not to be allowed Mozart, why not somebody with an appropriate gloom quotient like Mahler?
What are we doing back in the nursery?’
‘I suppose it was that meeting.
You remember Sladen talking about Wilhelmina Linnarz, the pianist defector?
I'd been wondering what made me think of Schumann.’
He grunted.
‘You're regressing, young Algar…
There must be a file on that woman.’
‘I'll dig it out tomorrow.
Late tomorrow.’
‘Why the hell hasn't Harry rung in?’
‘He's probably been arrested.’
George glared and said provocatively: ‘How did you get on with him today?
He likes piano music too, I recall.’
‘Count Basie.’
‘Pure race prejudice.’
Agnes closed her eyes.
‘George, you're not going to get me as bad-tempered as you are.’
‘Me?
Balls!’
But I wonder if Harry has ever listened to Schumann? she thought.
And maybe I should try that Basie trio he was going on about.
Maybe we…
Maybe we nothing, she told herself angrily.
You stay away from that man; he is bad news.
Of all the people you do not want to get mixed up with he is the first and the last.
Losing your temper with him was unforgivable.
The phone rang and her heart gave a jerk.
She got up quickly, since she was nearest.
‘If it's Harry,’ George called, ‘and he's got any good news, just throw a fit and I'll get the general idea.’
Agnes said: ‘Speaking,’ and listened for a minute, then put the phone down.
‘The one in hospital: dead.’
The dock was fenced off, but not the way it had been as a real dock, with real cargoes to steal.
This one was bodged together from old planks and doors from wrecked houses, intended as little more than a defence in court for the demolition company when some child got through and broke his neck amongst the rubble.
There were several places kids obviously did get through; Maxim widened one by yanking loose another plank and ducked in.
The other two followed, Dann reluctantly.
He was wearing Maxim's car coat over his thin shirt, but his shoes were still canvas and the ground beyond the fence was a mudpond laced with sharp lumps of concrete and old ironwork.
Maxim had a torch which he used very cautiously, but at least they didn't have to whisper in the steady drone of rain.
‘'Ell,’ Tanner said, looking around.
‘It all looks sort of different, now.’
Indeed it did, to anybody who remembered or could visual-ise it as a busy dock.
Level, as all docks must be, it was a soggy  wasteland stretching to the edge of the river.
Cranes, ware-houses, offices — all had been stripped away, leaving just a small site office and an abandoned bulldozer outlined against the damp glow on the far bank.
‘I think it was over here…’
They followed him.
He stooped a couple of times to shift a sheet of corrugated iron or warped plasterboard, but didn't find anything.
He straightened up, shaking his head and wiping rain out of his ryes.
‘I just dunno.
I mean, they could've filled it in.
I mean…’
Maxim looked around.
There were no flashing blue lights —; the police would have walked over this ground, but hours ago — and they were well away from any inhabited buildings.
‘Blagg!’ he shouted.
‘Corporal Blagg!’
They listened but heard only the steady rain.
‘Blagg!’
He had just taken breath to shout again when there was a muffled bang.
‘It came from there,’ Tanner said.
‘Over there.’
Dann suggested another direction.
Maxim wasn't sure himself, but he was sure he had a lot more experience than they in locating the origins of gunshots.
He stumbled away in the direction of his own idea; they followed.
When they found him, the water had just reached his nostrils.
Maxim lifted him very gently to a sitting position.
The dragging breath and the bullet holes at front and back gave him an easy diagnosis.
Thank God there were two, and not too low down.
Blagg had tried a brief smile when Maxim flashed the torch on himself for identification, but didn't speak.
The Spanish pistol was still clutched in his right hand; Maxim took it away and dropped it in his own pocket.
It took all three of them to lift him out of the reeking waterlogged shelter through an opening just big enough for one of them at a time.
It was easy to see why the police would have missed it: from outside, it was just a concrete hardstand, perhaps the foundation for an old shed, and the opening led  through a shallow pit that was usually jammed with rubbish and covered by a corrugated iron sheet.
But at last, panting steam, they had Blagg propped almost upright in the rain.
‘Fireman's chair,’ Maxim said.
‘Grip your own wrist, then mine, under his arse.’
But Dann knew all about that.
Tanner was half his age, but Maxim turned instinctively to the trainer for important work.
‘Dave, you support his back.
Don't let his head fall forward.’
They staggered and slithered the hundred yards or miles to the fence, sweating into clothes already soaked, swearing breathlessly.
So now Maxim had to bring the car up.
It would have been suspiciously obvious parked near nothing but a gap in the fence, so he had left it by the nearest flats.
The three of them stayed just inside the fence while he went for it.
By now the rain was easing.
There was just a few yards walk to the main road, a careful look around, then across it, instinctively choosing the potential cover of a derelict warehouse on that side rather than the dockyard fence on this.
Walk a hundred yards, then turn down a side street.
He had almost reached that turn when a police car came around another corner three hundred yards ahead.
They had to have seen him.
The road was empty and most of the street lamps still lit, outlining him against the shining pavement.
And when they reached him, they would have to stop.
A lone man at nearly midnight, wearing a thin jacket in a storm that had been blowing for over an hour…
And when they stopped, they would see the mud on him…
He took four strides to the corner, turned it and ran.
Behind, he thought he heard the car surge forward.
It hadn't been a little panda, either, but a Rover 2600, an ‘Area car’.
A trouble-hunter.
There was still the warehouse on his left, and a derelict site beyond that, with occupied flats coming up on the right…
He could dodge two coppers in a car easily.
Probably he could dodge the twenty coppers in ten cars that would be there in five minutes, and get clear away.
But he didn't want to get clear away.
He had to spend those five minutes here.
His own car was a few yards ahead, and he could be in and started before they turned the corner — but not out of sight.
And once they saw him, they'd have him.
Even if the cars were evenly matched, he knew he couldn't out-drive the police.
He unlocked the boot, scrambled in, and slammed the lid on himself.
Inside, it was utterly dark.
Rain pattered gently on the unlined metal above, and he hoped it drowned his panting breath.
He heard the Rover roar around the corner, accelerate past, then squeal to a stop and whine back in reverse.
The motor noise dropped to a rumble and feet clattered around his car.
He couldn't see the torch being flashed underneath and through the windows, but he felt the car sway as one of the coppers tugged at the driver s handle and the boot.
Then more feet, the slam of a door, the surge of power as the Rover shot away to look at the next corner.
He turned on his own torch and started wondering how he was going to get out.
One look at the inside of the lock put him off trying that.
The bolt was a hook of thick metal that snapped shut around a U-shaped rod the thickness of a pen.
He could never get the leverage to force that open, and there was no inside keyhole, of course.
He struggled painfully around into a new foetal position and started work on the back of the back seat.
It wasn't, blast it, one of those back seats that turn into a double bed or a discotheque just by twiddling a few knobs and wrenching your spine out of joint.
This was just a back seat and very determined to stay that way.
He could get it loose in time, but he didn't have any time.
If only he had some tools…
Then he realised that all those knobbly things sticking into his kidneys and buttocks were tools.
Thirty seconds later, he had the whole U-rod assembly unbolted from the car and stepped back out the way he'd come in.
‘What took the time?’
Dann demanded, his voice shivery with cold and anxiety.
‘Dodging coppers.
Get him in the back seat.
You go with him.
Dave in the front.’
He left them to it while he roughly bolted the U-rod back on again; driving with a flapping-open boot lid was asking for attention.
He pressed it gently shut and it held; loosely and with a slight gap, but it held.
‘What were you doing that for?’
Dann asked as they pulled cautiously away.
‘Long story.
What happens if I go left?’
Left was away from the place the Mobile had last seen him, away from Neptune Court.
‘Sooner or later you hit the Lower Road.
Where are we going to take him?
He looks pretty bad.’
‘I just want to get out of the area and reach a phone.’
‘You can't take him to my place,’ Dave Tanner said abruptly.
‘I wasn't going to.’
Maxim's thinking had just begun to catch up with why two armed watchmen — the ones outside his own flat hadn't been armed — had suddenly turned up in the service road of Neptune Court.
It would be no place to watch from.
They must have been coming to collect Blagg, and very certain they would find him.
‘D'you work, Dave?’ he asked.
‘Course I do.
I'm a wood machinist, in't I?’
‘And your wife?’
‘No, not now.
She had this job at the checkout in the Co-op, but…
I mean, what's this all about?’
‘Nothing.’
‘I mean if you think Ron and my wife, well, you can bleedin' well —
‘I wasn't thinking — hold it.’
Headlights blazed in his rear-view mirror, topped by a flashing blue light.
The Rover closed right up, blatantly harassing him into making one mistake that would give them the excuse to stop him.
Maxim began driving like a saint on the way to beatification, but with very sub-saintly feelings in his heart.
It couldn't be the same Rover, because they'd have recognised the car, although he hoped they hadn't stopped long enough to get the number.
All he could do now was keep steady despite his growing anger.
‘What do we do?’
Tanner asked fearfully.
‘Keep going.
Those bastards.’
‘Hang on, Major,’ Dann said from the back.
‘We are carrying a deserter who's shot somebody.’
‘They don't know that!
If they stop me now…’
He took his own pistol from a pocket and jammed it down between his thighs.
Tanner's voice became a squeal.
‘Here, you can't start using that thing!’
‘You can't, Major,’ Dann chimed in.
‘You can't start any more shooting.’
Maxim never knew what he might have done.
The Rover abruptly swung out and roared past, the passenger cop giving them a suspicious but mostly supercilious glare.
It turned right at the next street.
A few minutes later they came out onto the bright and still busy Lower Road.
It was like sailing into Harwich harbour after a winter crossing on the ferry; you just didn't believe how smooth and easy life could be.
Maxim stopped at the first phone box; Tanner was out of the car well before him.
‘I'll get me own way home, thanks…’
And he was gone.
‘I know just how he feels,’ Dann said.
Agness covered the phone mouthpiece with her hand.
‘Harry's found him.
He's wounded.
Can we supply a doctor who knows about bullets and keeps his mouth shut?’
George rubbed his eyes.
‘Do we know such a person?’
She nodded.
‘I was afraid we might…’
‘George, he's got us over a barrel.
If we let Blagg go to hospital the cops get him, and he could be up on a murder charge.
There's no way he's going to keep his mouth shut throughout that.
We just have to go along.’
She thought for a moment.
‘The only realistic alternative is to let the boy die, and I can't see our Harry wearing that.’
‘Nor would I,’ George said instinctively.
‘All right.’
Agnes lifted the phone.
‘Go ahead.’
Maxim said: ‘Tell the doc it's through the chest, in at the eighth rib, definite exit wound at the ninth.
Small calibre.
There must be bleeding and air in the pleural cavity that's collapsing the other lung.
He should be prepared to tap it.
I don't think the bleeding's bad in itself.
Okay?’
On the phone he sounded crisp and efficient.
But if soldiers can't do that, what can they do?’
‘Got it.
Where are you?’
Inside four minutes she had a doctor, a plain van and a rendezvous.
She could be crisp and efficient herself when the heat was on; it wasn't only soldiers who made the world go round.
It was barely dawn when Maxim reached Albany but it was Annette Harbinger who opened the door to him.
She was shortish and had an attractive way of cocking her head on one side and looking up with big dark eyes and a wryly amused smile.
‘Come on in, Saturday seems to have started rather early this week.’
She wore a belted Japanese kimono that emphasised her cottage-loaf figure and had a warm, rumpled, half-awake look that made Maxim just want to curl up beside her and sleep for a week.
He sagged past into the smell of frying bacon, and she closed the door.
‘How d'you like your eggs, Harry?’
‘Nothing but tea or juice, thanks.’
Mrs Caswell had fed them all poached eggs and toast once they had got Blagg bedded down.
‘D'you mind if I start with the cocktail hour?
It rather got lost in the rush.’
Her head went even more on one side.
‘A whisky breakfast?
Don't tell George: he'll be jealous he hadn't thought of it for himself.
You know where it all is.’
George was asleep in a big leather chair, making wuffling noises through his open mouth.
Carefully not clinking the bottles, Maxim mixed himself a whisky and water, drank it in three gulps, then poured another and began sipping.
The lamps were out and the curtains open, letting in an aquarium light that showed up the room for what it really was: a cold, colourless tomb.
Maxim shivered and took his drink away to the kitchen.
Agnes was sitting at the table munching bacon and eggs under a bright neon light.
‘'Ello, ahr 'Arry.
Have you got planning permission to carry that much valuable agricultural land around on your person?’
She giggled into her coffee.
Maxim's clothes were still sticky-wet, he was splashed to  the knees with mud, and as for his shoes…
With his fair hair, the stubble on his chin showed only as a slight blurring of the normally sharp jawline, but the rest of his face was a bruise of tiredness and strain.
‘Don't you taunt the poor man, Agnes,’ Annette said severely.
‘Now, would you like to borrow some stuff of George's?’
The idea was briefly attractive, but the difference between George's waistline and his own…
‘I'll manage, thanks.’
He slumped down opposite Agnes, who herself had changed her delicate jacket for one of Annette's cardigans, and kicked off her shoes somewhere.
Annette put down a cup of tea and a glass of orange juice.
‘It is lemon and sugar, isn't it?
Now you two'll want to talk Top Secrets so I'll go and get dressed.’
She bustled tactfully away.
‘Went the night well?’
Agnes asked.
‘Pretty well, if he doesn't get pneumonia, but he's full of antibiotics just as a prophylactic…
It was close.
Lucky he was young and fit and all.’
He took a sip of whisky, then juice, then tea.
‘He wouldn't have got mixed up in all this if he wasn't young and fit.
Is that your normal breakfast?’
‘Not exactly.
What happened on the home front?’
‘You heard it could be murder?— yes, I told you on the phone.
Nothing more from that angle except that the police have asked us to check him out, so they're pretty dubious about who he was.’
‘We know who he was working for, anyway.’
‘If you mean Six, it really isn't likely,’ Agnes said.
‘And I'm not saying that as any friend of theirs.’
Unconvinced, Maxim gave a little shrug, then took Blagg's Spanish revolver from his pocket.
It was still wet and choked with gritty mud.
He emptied out the fired cartridge cases, went across to the sink and washed the gun under the hot tap.
‘Where did you take him?’
Agnes asked.
‘The doc offered one of your safe houses, but I didn't think you'd want to be that much involved.
In the end, we went down to a chum in the country.’
At first, Mrs Caswell hadn't been all that keen, probably because she didn't want anybody  dying on the premises.
But Jim, bless him, had taken it with as little fuss as if he'd been asked to feed the cat for a couple of days.
‘The doc's going again today, and I'll get down this evening.’
The door clattered open and George, barely awake, stumbled in.
He edged Maxim away from the sink, ran the tap until it was really cold, and mixed a foaming cocktail of Alka-Seltzer and lemon-flavoured Redoxon tablets.
Agnes watched, fascinated; George's stomach must be a constant series of coups and counter-coups.
Then he sat down with a cup of coffee.
‘How's Corporal Blagg?’
Maxim took a handful of kitchen paper and began to dismantle and dry the revolver.
‘Coming along.
It must have been only a 7.65 that got him.
It nicked a lung and probably cracked a rib, but it didn't open the abdomen.
The doc drained air and blood from his pleural cavity and…’
‘Harry!’
George held up a wavering hand.
‘For God's sake, I didn't ask for all that.
Pleural cavities.
At breakfast.
Jesus.’
He slopped coffee into his mouth.
‘The important thing is, he didn't lose enough blood to need a transfusion, so no hospital.’
‘Good.
I'm sure you'd have related it to me drop by drop.
Did you get anything out of him about…about anything?’
‘No.
He was hardly conscious most of the time, and I didn't want to put any more strain on him.
I'll try him this evening.’
George got up and put bits of breakfast onto a plate.
‘Is that his gun you're field-stripping?— and if so, hadn't it better really be thrown away now?
They've already got at least one bullet from Rotherhithe they could match to it.’
Maxim looked at the clutter of parts in front of him and realised how right he'd been in saying soldiers hate to throw away guns, even cheap Spanish ones.
‘I suppose…but half that stuff about matching bullets to guns is scientific malarkey.
Juries only believe it because it always happens in TV cop shows.
Anyway, you could scratch up the rifling with a file and steel wool so that it would never give the same markings on a bullet again.’
‘It's still an unlicensed weapon,’ George said, sitting  down.
‘And while you're still working at Number 10, a touch of Caesar's wife might be appropriate.’
Agnes gave a snort of laughter.
‘After all he's been up to?
You have to be joking.’
‘He could get stopped and searched for some quite other reason.
It would still be a scandal even if it was quite a separate scandal.’
Maxim had been reassembling the cleaned and dried gun.
He stopped and thought for a moment.
‘Okay.
Should I leave it here with you?’
‘All right.’
George nodded amiably.
‘Nobody'll search this place.’
‘Get some sewing-machine oil off Annette to —
‘You're both just little boys!’
Agnes wailed.
Chapter 14
Maxim woke slowly, sweaty and dry-mouthed and with no idea of what day or time it was.
Then fragments of memory floated slowly to the surface like debris from a sunken ship, and along with them the aches and twinges of a busy night.
By the time he climbed stiffly out of bed he knew it was just past noon and had the events of Rotherhithe roughed out in his mind like a draft report.
It had also occurred to him that if he wrote that report it would be the last thing he ever did in the Army.
The day was cooler and still fresh after the night of rain.
He cobbled together a brunch of cold remains from the fridge, with lemon tea.
Living by himself, he had stopped taking milk: he never got through half a bottle before it went sour, since he drank coffee black and seldom ate cereals.
But he'd have to drop the lemon tea lark when he went back to the Battalion; it would be like turning up wearing a frock.
Or maybe he'd deliberately keep it on, as the endearing-eccen-tricity of a senior major.
But then he knew he wouldn't, because he would be doing it for just that reason even if he really preferred tea with lemon.
Why do I have to think like that? he wondered.
I know dozens of officers with their own quirks of taste, dress and behaviour and they're just real people who'd be incomplete without such little fads.
Why do I have to conform, to feel real only when I'm being normal?
You conforming? he could hear George and Agnes shout in disbelief.
But that's not what I mean, he would reply; why can't I just be myself?
But who am I?
I used to be Harry Maxim, then I was me and Jenny, and now I just don't know and it'll take more than lemon tea and a pink silk handkerchief in my sleeve and reading Goethe over breakfast to tell me.
George rang.
‘Get your conscience clean, bright and slightly oiled: it's when-did-you-last-see-your-father time.’
‘Them?’
‘Them.
It had to happen.’
They met in an undistinguished office block just off the Euston Road, two floors ofwhich were used as secure neutral territory for committees and meetings between Government depart-ments who would lose face by visiting the other fellow's wigwam.
George didn't bother to explain the process by which he had deflected the first demand — that Maxim go round to Century House by himself — by a counter-offer of Number 10 (‘As it's a Saturday, we could use the Cabinet Room; think how that would look in your memoirs’)— or one of his clubs, naming the one that had been effectively the HQ of the Intelligence Service in the heady days of World War II, and finally agreeing on this no-man's-land.
Somewhere in the hassle he had got what he really wanted: to go along himself.
‘You took your time,’ he grumped at Maxim.
‘I stopped to make a phone call, and I thought I'd better drop off some clothes at the dry-cleaner's.’
He was wearing his green blazer again.
George, usually a sloppy dresser at weekends — in an expensive sort of way — had on a weekday suit in his usual Prince-of-Wales check and a Dragoon Guards tie.
That meant he was expecting trouble.
‘Any news of our patient?’
‘Had a good night, barely any temperature, eating a drop of soup.’
They began filling in forms for security passes at the little reception desk while a faded old man in a messenger's uniform rang number after number to find out where the meeting was being held.
He couldn't.
‘It's because it's Saturday, see,’ he said.
‘They could have fixed it while I was out at lunch and they never tell you, not if it's Saturday.’
‘Perhaps it's secret,’ Maxim suggested.
‘Oh yes, sir, it's all secret, but the trouble is they don't tell you about it.’
‘Where does the Intelligence Service usually meet?’
George demanded.
‘The gentlemen attached to the Foreign Office,’ the old man corrected him, ‘usually use interview rooms 23C or 23D.
But they haven't got phones, see.’
They found them in 23C.
It was a square plain room, painted pale green below the cream above, in gloss, which showed up every unevenness in the plaster.
The lower half of the window was frosted glass, and the furniture could have been hauled out of store five minutes before.
A small gravy-coloured carpet, a trestle table in front of the window and five folding chairs, three of them behind the table and occupied.
It was all very deliberate, keeping the interrogators' faces dark against the bright window, and it made Maxim grin.
George kicked one of the spare chairs across against the wall and sat heavily on it.
‘I thought we were only playing two a side, but never mind.
Do you all know Major Maxim?’
Maxim had met Guy Husband before, once.
The younger man smoking a cigarette, and whose ashtray was already half full, turned out to be Dieter Sims.
The woman with a wide face and carefully frizzed hair was Miss Milward from the Foreign Office.
Nobody shook hands.
Husband shot his crisp pink cuffs and laid his forearms fastidiously on the scarred tabletop, bracketing a small heap of files.
This time, all the home team had paperwork with them.
‘We are agreed that there shall be no minutes, that this is all off the record?’ he asked, just for the record.
‘Oh, I can't promise that,’ George said.
‘'If the Headmaster wants to know what's going on, it's my job to tell him.
I don't necessarily have to get him over-excited, mind, but the decision has to be mine.’
Husband and Miss Milward swapped what might, in that light, have been surprised looks.
The very idea of being ‘off the record’ was nonsense, since the room was almost certainly wired, but George should still have stuck to protocol and said something polite like Oh yes, of course.
Maxim stopped trying to peer at the shadowed faces in front of him and put on a pair of sunglasses.
‘Is the light troubling you, Major?’
Husband asked.
‘Perhaps you had a late night?’
Maxim just kept on smiling deferentially.
‘I believe,’ Husband went on, ‘that Rotherhithe is particularly beautiful at this time of year.
Especially when viewed in a midnight rainstorm.
You were seen down there, Major, has the cat got your tongue?— or was it the Private Office?’
‘Yes,’ Maxim said.
‘It was, but not now.’
‘What?’
‘The light.
Troubling me.’
Husband paused, then said in a silky tone: ‘Thank you, Major.
I'm so glad we've got that point cleared up.’
‘Mr Harbinger,’ Miss Milward cut in smoothly, ‘could you help us in this matter?
I'm sure you know how vital The Office considers this whole business.
Can you prevail on Major Maxim to give us some straight answers?’
She had a musical voice, deep and patient.
‘My prevailing power with Harry seems to be rather limited, but perhaps you could try him with some straight questions.’
‘All right,’ Husband said, ‘where's Corporal Blagg?’
Straight enough, Maxim thought ruefully.
He kept his face polite.
‘Why should I know?’
‘The man is a deserter.
Last night he killed somebody; you might call it murder.
More important to all of us, he has information of national importance.
Now where is he?’
‘If I knew where a deserter was it would be my duty, not as a military man but as a citizen, to report him if I couldn't persuade him to give himself up.
Your duty's exactly the same.
Did you report him when you spotted him at Rotherhithe?’
‘This is just playing with bent paperclips.
Are we going to get Blagg or do we go over your head?
And yours,’ Husband snapped a look at George.
‘And explain why you sent armed men down to pick up Blagg yesterday?’
Maxim asked.
‘We?
We didn't send them.
Are you trying to make out that we started that shooting?’
‘Why else?
You were covering Rotherhithe last night.
You knew Blagg could be armed.’
‘We called off the surveillance after we knew Blagg had spotted us.’
Husband glanced at Sims, who nodded.
‘We put men in there again last night when we heard about the shooting.
It was obvious Blagg could have been involved.’
George asked pleasantly: ‘Did you clear that through the Co-ordinator?’
‘And have his decision delayed for weeks by Agnes Algar's mob screaming Rape because we're trespassing on their terri-tory?
Blagg would have been dead of old age before we got clearance.’
‘He might have preferred that to a bullet wound,’ Maxim said.
Miss Milward pounced.
‘So you do know where he is?’
Bugger it, Maxim thought.
Oh well, they were certain I did anyway.
Sims asked: ‘Will he live?’
‘Yes.’
‘How are you sure?’
‘I've seen bullet wounds before.’
There was a short silence.
George cleared his throat and asked: ‘Then just who was Blagg shooting it out with?’
‘I would have thought that was obvious,’ Husband said.
‘One of the Sovbloc services.
The dead man was German, wasn't he?’
He glanced the question at Sims, who kept his appreciative smile fixed on Maxim.
‘He had West German papers, but they are not real, we understand.
Perhaps he was HVA, one of a travelling circus.’
The Hauptvertwaltung Abwehr was the espionage arm of the East German SSD.
Maxim asked: ‘How did they know Blagg was involved at all?’
Husband leant back, realised how uncomfortable that was on the wooden chair and rather self-consciously unleaned himself.
‘We've been doing some serious thinking about that.
But in the end, there are just too many possibilities.’
‘I knew,’ Maxim said, ‘and you knew, and Blagg himself and your Mrs Howard, only she's dead.’
‘Blagg himself told you,’ Sims pointed out politely.
‘Can you be sure he did not tell anybody else as well?’
There was Jim Caswell, of course, but Jim wouldn't chatter…
Blagg wasn't fool enough to tell Tanner, but just how much he'd told Billy Dann…
‘I knew,’ George said.
‘And I told Agnes Algar after the meeting.’
‘In my Department,’ Miss Milward put in, ‘at least three people know the basic facts — if they are facts — behind plainsong.’
Maxim felt as if he had baked (if that was what you did) a perfect soufflé of evidence, all crisp and firm, and then floop: it was swimming off the plate and dripping on his shoes.
Husband said sympathetically: ‘Security, Major, security.
So often interpreted in this country as merely not telling anybody who's actually got a hammer and sickle embroidered on his tie.
But don't think I'm being complacent about this.
I'm quite willing to accept the possibility of a leak within my own service, and I'm sure Dieter accepts that also.’
Sims did, nodding gently.
‘It would be foolish to forget that it's happened before.
But that only adds a new dimension of urgency to the business.
If the Other Side knows enough to be looking for Blagg, it could know enough to destroy or neutralise the information, whatever it may be, in his possession.’
It was difficult to argue back.
Maxim knew that George was looking across at him, on the brink of surrender.
‘It was your people who got him into this,’ he persisted.
Husband took off his blue-tinted glasses and polished them on a silk handkerchief chosen to pick up the colours of both his suit and his tie.
‘When Mrs Howard asked for an escort, I naturally assumed we would assign her one of our own people.
Apparently she said she'd prefer somebody she had worked with before, and she knew Blagg's battalion was in Germany, and Dieter — rashly, we now agree — left the decision to her.
I think the German end was indeed mishandled.’
‘That's very reassuring,’ Maxim said coldly.
‘That boy could have been in my company or squadron.
He was lied to, conned into believing that the Bad Schwarzendorn operation had been approved by the Army.
He thought your freelance  Mrs Howard represented the same thing that he thinks he represents himself: the defence of this country.
He could have wound up dead.
Okay, that's something a soldier has to accept, in an abstract sort of way.
But instead, he ended up a deserter and being chased by the police for a killing that was forced on him, and that's something he does not have to accept — and neither do I.’
Miss Milward said ‘You're getting emotional, Major.’
‘Good.
I didn't think I was getting anywhere.’
Husband said: ‘I have agreed that Dieter was at fault in that, gravely at fault.
But…’
Sims's smile had gone a little rueful and he was looking down at his hands, turning a gold-tipped cigarette in his small fingers.
Momentarily, Maxim felt sorry for him.
Whatever his sins, he was being forced to pay for them in public— well, as public as the Secret Service ever wanted to get.
‘But,’ Husband went on, ‘we have to deal with matters as they now stand.
And with Corporal Blagg.’
‘What are you offering?’
And when the three figures stiffened in surprise, Maxim added: ‘What are you offering him?’
‘You mean money?’ asked Husband.
Miss Milward was quicker, or more sensitive.
‘Can we put Humpty Dumpty together again as a Corporal with a clean record?— I assume that's what he wants.
Well, we certainly ought to try, and if we can't then there'll be a very good case for generous compensation out of the secret funds.’
‘Quite,’ Husband nodded.
‘Quite so.
Does that satisfy you, Major?’
‘It's the best you can do at the moment.
I'll talk to him.’
There was a moment of shocked silence, then Husband said: ‘You will talk to him?
Our whole agreement was that we should do —
‘We've got no agreement worth a damn to Blagg.
I'll talk to him and see what he knows, if anything.’
‘Mr Harbinger,’ Miss Milward turned to him, ‘do you think you should intervene now?’
George shrugged and nearly slid himself off the chair in which he was slumped.
‘You can see what I'm up against.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, as I often do, Harry still goes and does whatever he wants.
Perhaps I lack charity.
Why don't you wait a few hours and see if he gets what you need from Blagg?’
The three of them looked at each other, and Husband said cautiously: ‘If you say a matter of hours, you do mean tonight?’
‘I'll do my best,’ Maxim said.
‘Is there anything I should know in order to ask the right questions?’
They went into a huddle, with Miss Milward murmuring behind her hand at Husband and Sims shaking his head in a jittery movement.
Finally Husband said: ‘I assume, security being what it is, that you know our ultimate target is Gustav Eismark?
Quite.
Well, according to the late Mrs Howard, we got this much from her at least, there is some doubt about the validity of his second marriage.
His first wife was supposed to have died at the end of the war.
There is, it seems, a strong possibility that he abandoned her in the West and took their baby son over to the Russian zone.
In the confusion of 1945 and ‘46, there would have been no means for her to trace him.
Once there, he could claim she was dead; in the West, she might build a new life.
But if she were still alive at the time of his second marriage, nearly twenty years later, then it was bigamous.’
‘Is that bad?’
Maxim asked, a little surprised.
‘Perhaps not in every Sovbloc country.
But the GDR, as Dieter will confirm, I'm sure, happens still to have the morality of Salem when they are putting little old ladies to the torch — at least at the highest political level.
And bear in mind that's what we're talking about, Major: the highest level.
Nothing to do with public morality; the public doesn't come into this.
Somehow a Sovbloc politician can corner ninety-nine per cent of the vote without everybody having to know the name of his dog and which football team he supports.’
Husband smiled contentedly at his own wit.
‘It does keep things tidy: you don't suddenly lose your best men because of an unexpected scandal.
I'm sure George would be delighted to see it introduced over here.’
George ignored the sly threat and just grunted.
Miss  Milward chipped in: ‘Of course, if the first wife turned out to be still alive and willing to testify, that would be even better.’
‘And somewhere,’ Husband said, ‘Mrs Howard must have been keeping a file on Gustav Eismark.
She reported very little to us, I mean to Dieter.
I believe that's right?’
Ever-smiling, Sims acknowledged that it was.
Maxim said: ‘Her luggage got dumped in the river.
There weren't any papers among it.
I was told.’
The three behind the table exchanged looks.
Sims said: ‘It would not be likely to be just in her cases, like clothes.
Perhaps in the lining…’
Maxim doubted Blagg had bothered to rip open the suitcase linings; he just wouldn't be thinking in those terms.
‘It sounds,’ Husband said, ‘as if our soldier friend has probably destroyed anything that we might have to show for months of expensive —
‘Then get expensive enough to hire people who can put one foot in front of another without the Army having to tell them how!’
Husband was on his feet shouting, George saying: ‘Harry!’ and Miss Milward: ‘Gentlemen, now please — Sims just sat there, but momentarily without his smile.
Maxim said: ‘Your mother's moustache.’
Everybody took a deep breath.
Miss Milward said calmly: ‘I think the only other thing you may need to know, Major, is the first Frau Eismark's name.
It was Brigitte Krone.
So if you do happen across any documents relating to her…’
‘You don't know where Mrs Howard got the first clue about this?’
‘Major, we are not asking you to start the investigation again from scratch.
Please.
If you'd confine yourself to finding out what Corporal Blagg knows, we'd be very grateful.’
George said: ‘Surprised, too, I imagine.’
He stood up.
‘If that's it, then…are we fit?’
Maxim said: ‘I don't want to be followed again.’
‘Harry…’
‘No, if there's somebody behind me, I want to be sure that it's One Of Theirs.’
‘What earthly difference would that make,’ Husband asked  in a voice that still trembled slightly, ‘to your normal standard of conduct?’
That effectively ended the meeting.
George drove, not going anywhere, and for a few minutes he said nothing, then: ‘Ecology.
That's it.
You're going to have to develop a more ecological outlook.
Tell yourself that, like the dung beetle and the greater horned toad, secret intelligence personnel are also God's creatures.
It'll make life less exciting, but easier on the blood pressure.
Do you think you can get anything for them?’
‘If Blagg's got anything.
This time he's going to tell the whole truth and nothing but.’
‘Good.
We're running out of time.’
‘I'd like to be able to convince him that it wasn't that mob that took a shot at him.’
George shook his head emphatically.
‘Husband would never authorise gunplay in London.
In fact, I don't know how he could authorise it — he hasn't got the men.
They just don't exist, not here.
The Firm uses a few muscle-brains in the Middle East and so on, but they're employed at several removes and a lot's done to make sure they stay overseas.
You can spend your whole life in The Firm without once meeting a pistol by way of business — in fact, you'd better, if you ever hope to be considered for Best of Breed.’
Maxim made what might have been an agreeing noise.
‘All right, but what about Sims?’
‘He's more vulnerable than Husband.
If he makes a cock-up of this, anything approaching a scandal, he's finished in a very final way.’
‘Where did they get him from?’
‘East Germany, via West Germany.
He Saw The Light seven or eight years ago, and went to work for the Verfassung-schutz at Ehrenfeld.
Counter-espionage.
Given his background, he built up a very effective little unit, then he offered the whole thing to us after the Flying Doctor business.
Did you hear anything about that?— probably you were out of the country.’
‘I know the one you mean.’
Maxim had picked up the story from friends in the Intelligence Corps.
A youngish doctor employed full-time to look after the health of the Verfassung-schutz's agents had been caught, by pure chance, passing on the details of those agents' medical histories and personal problems to the Other Side.
He had, of course, been security checked and re-checked, and every time found to be clean.
He was faithful to his wife — except for an occasional nurse, which she had to agree didn't count — and wasn't into drugs or gambling or politics.
The security men had missed only one thing: the doctor didn't want to be a doctor, he wanted to be an airline pilot.
They knew he spent his weekends at the flying club, but hadn't got around to totting up how many hours of blind flying instruction in a twin-engined Cessna he was buying, nor how much each such hour cost.
And since the good doctor was a lousy pilot, it was a lot of hours and a lot of money, nearly half his government salary, and almost all paid for by sympathetic friends in East Berlin.
‘It just goes to show,’ Maxim's confidant from Int Corps had summed up, ‘that sex and drugs and gambling aren't everything.
One shouldn't be narrow-minded when looking for a man's weakness.’
The doctor wasn't the only security failure in West German intelligence, but he had been the last straw for Sims.
Rather than see his unit rotted away by the disillusionment of constant betrayal, he had approached MI6 with an offer they didn't want to refuse.
‘Of course, it isn't the Done Thing to poach people — let alone a whole unit — from an Ally,’ George went on, ‘but our East German operations had completely fallen apart, the place had become a total black hole as far as The Firm knew, and they were desperate.
Anyway, we weren't feeling too chuffed towards West Germany at that point: something to do with Common Market fishing policy, they kept sending their trawlers into the Hampstead ponds or somewhere.
So the Foreign Office turned a bland eye — nobody was exactly complaining out loud — and we took on the whole Sims organisation as a going concern.
From desk bods right down to people in the field.
Mrs Howard was one of his.’
‘Her?
I thought she was supposed to be a sort of part-timer, an amateur.’
‘That's the story when something goes wrong: ‘Not our normal standard, just somebody we picked off the street, don't judge us by her blah blah.’
But she was one of his, all right.
And overall, they seem to be doing pretty well.
If Plainsong actually comes off it'll be a big boost for the whole Sovbloc desk.
Then they can go back to asking each other where they got their blow-drys and leave the rest of us in peace.’
After a minute or so, Maxim said: ‘Mrs Howard had a gun.
Two, in fact.’
‘And look what a power of good that did us all.’
Chapter 15
The doctor had been and gone by the time Maxim reached the little cottage on the hillside above Caswell's father-in-law's garage.
Maxim suspected that the cottage belonged to the old man, too, and went with the job.
He wondered how long Jim would stand that.
‘Said he's doing very well,’ Caswell reported.
‘Gave him some more shots, his temperature's well down.
Told me to keep him still for a couple of days.’
‘Is he awake now?’
‘Yes, he's listening to the radio.
I'll shift the telly in there for him tomorrow, that might keep him quiet.’
‘Has he heard about the one in the hospital?’
‘Yes.
It doesn't seem to bother him.’
‘Well…’
But did they want it to bother him?
Blagg's touching faith that Maxim would save him from murder charges in two countries might at least mean that he would stay where he was and do nothing — for once.
Caswell led the way.
Blagg was lying flat on his back but bulging out of a small single bed that itself crowded the tiny room.
It was all very cottagey, the uneven walls papered with a tiny flower pattern and all filled with an odd green light reflected in from the hillside that sloped up just outside the window.
Blagg pulled out the radio earpiece and struggled to sit up.
‘Lie still, you stupid little man!’
Caswell thundered, all sergeant again.
Blagg relaxed sheepishly.
For a couple of minutes they made sickbed small talk while Maxim tried to decide just how Blagg was.
The right side of his face was a mass of scratches, there was a sticking plaster on his ear, and his chest was heavily bandaged, but even in that sickly light he seemed bright-eyed and calm.
Best of all, he  was talking long sentences without a hint of breathlessness.
Maxim was fit enough himself but, he thought wistfully, there's no medicine like being only twenty-five.
‘Is this the first time you've copped one?’ he asked.
‘Nah, I got one in Armagh.
Smack in the arse, but it was probably just about spent.
Bloody funny that was, for everybody else.
Have you, sir?’
‘Years back, out in the Gulf.’
Maxim touched the outside of his right thigh; through the thin cotton trousers he could trace the hard-edged crater that had come close to killing him, out in the desert hours from real medical aid.
Instead, it had only taken away six months of his life — at a critical point that just might have foreclosed on his promotion hopes.
If, of course, he still had any.
Well, as they said, why did you join the Army if you can't take a joke?
‘One thing,’ Blagg said; ‘I'm lucky I don't smoke.’
He grinned slyly at Caswell, who had already twice taken out and then put away his cigarettes.
‘Right, then,’ Maxim called the meeting to order.
‘I've talked to Six, and somebody in the Foreign Office.
I'm sorry it took all this to get them out into the open — as far as they've come.
They've said they'll do what they can for you, and I believe them.
That wound might help with some fairy story…
But you've got to tell me everything now.
You hadn't remembered you had that gun, last time.’
‘Lucky I had, though, wasn't it?’
Blagg said aggressively.
‘Who was they, those two at Dave's place?’
‘Supposed to be East German.
They're involved, anyway.’
‘How did they know where I was?’
Maxim thought for a moment.
‘My guess — it's no more than that — is that somebody came around earlier and told Mrs Tanner that there'd be a couple of hundred quid in it for her if you showed up.
She's out of work, and I don't suppose Dave makes a fortune…’
‘That little scrubber,’ Blagg breathed.
‘I didn't think she liked me much, but I'm one of Dave's oldest mates and…when I get up, I'll bloody —
‘You'll do nothing.
She can still tell the police you were in that shooting and once they get you, you can forget you ever  had any friends or were ever in the Army.
All right?
Why did you go back to London in the first place?— why didn't you stay here?’
‘Dave rang me, see, and he said there'd been some blokes asking around about me and he didn't think they were coppers at all, and I thought well, that could be The Firm —
‘It was.’
‘— and I wanted to get in touch with them, anyway, and…well…’
‘And I didn't seem to be doing much that was any use.
Go on.’
‘I thought I might get just to chat to one of them, but instead I suddenly found a whole bleeding pack of them behind me.
Just following, but still…’
Sadly, Maxim remembered how long — and how much luck — it had taken for him to spot his own pack.
‘So I thought bugger this for a lark and got rid of them, and the next couple of days I tried to ring you, but…’
The two days Maxim spent ambushing his own followers and then kicked into exile by George.
‘All right,’ he said.
‘Problems all round us.
But now let's hear the rest about Bad Schwarzendorn.’
He sat down on a tiny painted nursery chair beside the bed.
Blagg hesitated, or perhaps was trying to remember, and Caswell said in a firm voice: ‘The shooting was just after ten, you said.
You left the car at Dortmund and caught an early morning train for Ostend — you said.
Dortmund's less than a hundred miles, mostly by Autobahn, so you could have been there by midnight.
And the first boat train's at half past six.
Now don't tell me you spent the night sitting on the station, because they wouldn't let you, or parked in a stolen car, because you're not that stupid, not quite.
Now…’
Caswell hadn't only been doing some thinking, he'd been looking up maps and timetables.
‘Well,’ Blagg said slowly, ‘what it was, see…’
George belonged to things.
He liked to boast that, in central London, he was never more than a couple of hundred yards from some club, institution or association of which he was a  member and which could provide, at the very least, a roof in a rainstorm.
‘You can't lose a club, the way you can an umbrella,’ he once told Agnes.
She had replied that it still seemed an expensive policy compared with even the dearest of umbrellas, and George had thought about that and said: ‘You can't piss into an umbrella, either.
Not without attracting unfavourable comment anyway.’
This particular club faced across Green Park, which on that evening looked very green and crisp, the trees standing tall and full against the restless sky.
It was probably something to do with the view that had convinced George he ought to be drinking a very large glass of dry sherry from the wood.
Agnes had taken a smaller one; she had just got back from her service's registry.
‘You do appreciate,’ she was saying, ‘that all our material on Eismark is about thirty years out of date?
We don't try to keep up with people like that.
Really all we've got is what his sister told us when she came over.’
‘We're supposed to be interested in his first marriage and that's more than thirty years ago, isn't it?
What did she have to say about that?’
‘Well…’
She was sitting in a very old overstuffed leather sofa and hiding a notebook behind her large handbag because she wasn't sure notebooks were allowed in the club; not much was.
‘Gustav's the younger by just over two years…he was nine when his father died…they moved away from Rostock, went to stay with relatives in the Harz mountains…mother married again and rather faded away, they were brought up mostly by grandparents and aunts.
They don't seem to have been poor: she had all her piano lessons, Gustav had a racing bicycle when he was still at school.
Did you know he had a glass eye?’
‘Can't say I did.
Why should — Ah, I see: no war service for young Gustav.
Was that the bicycle?’
‘Yes, he got his face mixed up with the spokes of —
‘Please: I get enough of that sort of thing from Harry.
Go on with the non-bloody bits.’
‘He did well at school — Mina thought he was a genius-and actually got a year in college.
At Bremen; he wanted to be  a naval architect in those days.
Then Hitler invaded Russia, everybody remembered old man Eismark had been a pinko, and Gustav was hove into the night.’
‘He was lucky not to be in a concentration camp or the Todt Organisation.’
‘He was lucky to have a talented sister.
She'd already made a bit of a name for herself, only locally but you know what the Germans are about music, and the district party bosses liked romantic pieces so she became the star turn at their more respectable booze-ups.
That was when she started using her mother's name, Linnarz, to get away from the Eismark stig-ma.
And they tolerated Gustav — gave him a job on the land — as long as it kept Mina happy and she kept them happy.
There must have been a lot of that sort of thing, when you come to think about it: tolerating ideological undesirables as long as it suited your own book — not that National Socialism had much ideology beyond being first at the trough.
It couldn't last, of course.’
‘What went wrong?’
‘The party got a new Kreisleiter who didn't dig music and wasn't going to have any damned Commie subverting his cabbages, so he blew the whistle.
Mina got the tip-off just in time and they became U-boats, went underground.
Just who did it for them she didn't seem to know, it was all contacts of Gustav's.
Probably he made some useful friends in Bremen; Mina said he was always asking her if she'd heard any interesting gossip at her musical soirées.
But one way or another, somebody came up with the full table d'hôte: safe havens, roadnames and the paperwork to back them up.
Even money from time to time.
This was November ‘43.’
George made a long thinking, grumbling noise, then said, mostly to himself: ‘The paperwork must have been good…if they were living on it for eighteen months…they weren't escaped prisoners of war trying to reach Switzerland on a hand-copied Fremdenpass…
Could they have been in with the real Communist underground?’
Agnes lifted her eyebrows in a facial shrug; George knew far more about that period of history than she did.
‘Could have been.
I thought it was pretty badly penetrated, but…’
‘Oh, it was.
The Gestapo was just about running the Communist party by 1944, but to do that they'd have to let some small fry run free, and from their point of view the Eismarks would be very small indeed.
They didn't actually go in for sabotage or anything, did they?’
‘No, according to her they just stayed undercover — separ-ately — in small villages and so on until the end of the war.
George grunted and finished his sherry.
‘Thank God: now I can have a real drink.
What about you?
Same again?’
He pressed a bellpush.
‘Come along, young Algar: what about this marriage?— when do we get to that?’
‘Very soon,’ Agnes said patiently.
‘Brigitte Krone: she was living with one of the families Gustav hid up with that winter.
Parents had been killed in the Hamburg bombing, so perhaps she was feeling lonely.
Anyway, all the other young men were away at the war, Gustav must have been spending just about all his time indoors, young love wove its spell and…‘ow's yer father?’
Agnes lapsed into stage cockney.
George frowned, absent-mindedly gave their order to the servant who had appeared, and said: ‘I don't know…marriage seems a public sort of affair.
I'd've thought that would be adding enormously to the risk…’
‘There was a growing need for marriage lines.’
He looked puzzled.
‘Oh, for heaven's sake.
The girl was in the club, knocked up, a bun in the oven —‘ow's yer father?’
George stiffened into the Compleat Civil Servant.
‘If you intend me to infer that she was pregnant, then for the life of me I can see no reason why you don't actually say so.
I don't find all two-syllable words either incomprehensible or, when com-prehended, necessarily shocking.’
‘She was pregnant,’ Agnes said, staring at the low coffee-table, not at George.
‘And marriage itself might have been a useful bit of insurance for Gustav: her relatives or guardians would have been less likely to inform on her husband than on some passing stranger who could get his trousers open in Olympic time.’
‘Is there something,’ George asked icily, ‘about the atmosphere of this place that causes you to come up with such  expressions?
If so, we can easily adjourn to Fred's Caff in Brixton where you might react by trying to speak the Queen's English.’
Agnes looked up.
From over George's shoulder stared the portrait of a general whose handling of an attack in the South African war had caused so many casualties to his own brigade that he had immediately been promoted away to see if he could do the same thing with divisions and corps.
In 1915 and ‘16 he had proved he hadn't lost his old touch, and so died in bed at a great age, garnished with colourful honours, many of them from grateful countries whose soldiers he hadn't got killed even on purpose.
He was looking at Agnes with exactly the expression he would have chosen had he lived to see a woman in his club.
‘It must be something about the place,’ she agreed meekly.
‘Must try harder.
Where were we?’
‘Gustav was just getting married.’
‘Yes.
That happened in May 1944.
The boy, Manfred, was born in the October.’
George did mental arithmetic on his fingers.
‘That means around January…
Gustav didn't waste much time about…’
Agnes didn't say a word.
She looked very much like somebody not saying a word.
‘And the wife, Brigitte: when did she die, or was supposed to have died?’
‘April 1945, just before the end of the war.
Mina said Gustav said she'd been killed by Allied planes.
She hadn't been around herself at the time and said Gustav didn't like talking about it much.
Fair enough, I suppose.’
‘Where did this happen?’
‘She didn't say.’
‘Isn't that odd?’
‘She wasn't hiding anything.
If our people had asked her, she'd have had to answer.
It was her applying for asylum, not us inviting her.
But they can't have asked: why should they?
They weren't interested in her war story, they'd heard a million war stories.
They just wanted to know what was going on in East Germany there and then.
She only mentioned  one place after they'd gone underground and that was where Gustav got married: Sangerhausen.
In East Germany, now.’
‘So we can't get at the marriage certificate,’ George brooded.
There was a burst of male laughter from the bar, which had suddenly filled up with men wearing MCC ties; the day's play at Lord's would have ended just about twenty minutes ago.
The servant fought his way clear and delivered their drinks; George grunted, Agnes smiled and shifted carefully on the sofa.
There was no way to be comfortable on it, and even movement was risky because the old leather was cracking like dry parchment.
‘Mind you,’ George said abruptly, ‘that certificate must be sheer balls because he'd have to use his roadname on it.
Not Eismark at all.’
Agnes sipped and shrugged.
‘They did the best they could in the circumstances.
It showed willing.’
‘It also showed the baby was started before the marriage.
Is there any leverage in that?’
‘No, not even in the GDR.
It wasn't adultery, he Did The Right Thing by a girl who had only months to live, Hitler's hounds baying at their heels…
They weep over muck like that on their side, too.’
George nodded.
‘The baby was only five months, still in arms.
Why didn't he get killed, too?’
‘A good question, and one widely asked in East Germany, I imagine.
Manfred's a big boy now and a full colonel in the SSD.
Old Gustav may still have some old-time socialist ideals about the rights of man, but the general feeling is that Manfred would have done well on the faculty at Belsen.’
‘So I'd heard.
But anyway, that's all she had to say?’
‘That's only one page of what she said.
There's at least another thirty about life in the GDR in the fifties, how they treat musicians, how she brought up baby Manfred while Gustav was off in Moscow learning to run a shipyard and getting booster shots of dialectical materialism.
It read as if having to play auntie instead of Schumann first gave her the idea of coming over — Here's our hunter home from the hill.’
The junior hall porter was guiding Maxim through the crowd by the bar.
George waved and Maxim was released to  make the last few yards by himself.
He sat down beside Agnes, who said: ‘Don't wriggle or you'll collapse a hundred years of military history.’
‘How is he?’
George demanded.
‘Better than I expected.
He's tough.’
‘And talkative, I trust?’
‘I think I've got everything, at last.’
‘What is it?’
‘I didn't say I'd got any thing, but —
‘Harry…’
‘Let him say his piece,’ Agnes said.
‘We know Blagg picked up the money and the car keys.
Now he says he also took a batch of papers and a bit of film, negative film.
He thought the papers were all death certificates or copies; he remembers a word like Sterberrkunde —
‘That is death certificate,’ Agnes said.
‘It was when I learned German, too.’
‘Children, children,’ George said warningly.
‘Go on, Harry.’
‘About thirty or forty of them, all from April 1945.
Seems a bit odd, but…
All this was mixed up with the newspapers and the money.
Something that wasn't there was a magazine she'd asked him to get: a back copy of a thing called Focus on Germany.
It's a sort of goodwill thing that Bonn puts out for the Allied forces; it doesn't outsell Playboy.
He just pinched it from the Services Liaison Officer's files in Soltau.
I've got the date.’
‘Fine, fine,’ George said.
‘But you've got all the rest?’
‘No, it's —
‘For God's sake —
‘He left it with a woman in Germany.’
After a time, Agnes said thoughtfully: ‘That boy's no fool, keeping a nice big ace in the hole in case Six won't play ball.
No fool at all.’
‘His mother abandoned him before he could crawl,’ Maxim said.
‘He didn't quite grow up with a happy trusting nature like you and George.’
‘Quite,’ George said.
‘But is he prepared to trust you now?’
‘I've got her name and address.’
‘Good.
Well, we give her to Six.
It's all we can do, and perhaps we'll really finally be out of it.’
‘Hold on,’ Agnes warned; she had been watching Maxim's expression.
‘Something tells me it isn't going to be that easy.’
Maxim flashed his quick defensive smile.
‘Blagg told her not to hand them over to anybody but himself or somebody with a letter from him.
I've got the letter.
It names me as the messenger boy.’
There was a moment of silence, then George erupted.
‘You arranged that.
We had our chance to get Number 10 clear of this whole…whole catastrophe, but not you, no, you want a front seat for the opening night of Armageddon, you do…’
‘I didn't arrange it, but I didn't dodge it,’ Maxim said doggedly.
‘Blagg just doesn't trust Six any more.
They screwed him at least once and he knows it.
And so do you.’
A member, passing with both hands full of glasses, stopped suddenly.
‘George!
We hardly ever see you.
Do tell, how's the Prime Minister really?’
‘Dead, if he's got any sense,’ George snapped.
The member stiffened, then edged away in a fading mum-ble: ‘Well, I suppose things must be rather trying for you, what with…’
George's short tempers were at least short.
Suddenly he was Organisation Man, and Agnes could see why  politicians liked having him around.
‘All right, you be in Germany tomorrow some time.
You'll need some money.
I'll ask Sir Bruce to send a signal to Rhine Army and then you tell him what you want: a room somewhere, I'll leave that to you.
Don't go armed, for God's sake.
And I'll have to tell Six.
They'll probably get somebody to contact you over there and you just hand over the material and come quietly home without blowing any bridges behind you.
If you think you can manage that, we'll get over to Number 10 and start the wheels turning.’
Chapter 16
Hannover station was like a greenhouse and bustling with tanned young men and women hunchbacked by huge colourful rucksacks.
Maxim had an hour and a half to wait for a train to Osnabrück, and half changed his mind about hiring a car, but that meant lots of signatures, and might be difficult to hand back if he flew home on a trooping flight from RAF Gütersloh.
So he made a couple of phone calls to Osnabrück-he found he'd been given a room with an Engineer regiment-then sipped a lager until train time.
With the flat, disciplined North German plain rattling past, he suddenly remembered when he had first been posted to Germany how surprised and even unnerved he had been to find that all the buildings seemed familiar.
It had been a couple of days before it dawned on him: they were the full-size versions of the houses and station buildings he and his father had made up for their never-quite-finished model railway layout.
Like the locos and the rolling stock, the best plastic building kits — Arnolds and Heljans and Rikos — all came from West Germany and were based on West German orig-inals.
But for Maxim it was still the other way around: the landscape beyond the train window was just for show; secretly he knew those buildings were mere façades, without interior floors, furniture or live people.
The only person he'd told about his odd vision had been Jenny, and she had laughed delightedly and understood.
From the station he took a taxi straight to Blumenthalstrasse.
He knew Osnabrück fairly well, as he knew most towns in 1st British Corps area, although he'd never been stationed there.
It had taken a bad beating from the RAF and been widely rebuilt, much of it as copies of the original high-pitched  medieval buildings.
They looked phoney, but only because they looked new; once they had cracked and weathered and slumped a little, nobody would ever credit that they might just as well have been built as concrete and glass shoe-boxes.
The Blumenthalstrasse address turned out to be one of the shoeboxes, a five-storey block of flats with the staircase and lift-shaft stuck on at the side of a column of frosted-glass bricks.
Maxim pressed the entryphone bell for Winkelmann and waited until a man's voice rasped: ‘Bitte?’
Speaking rather rusty German, Maxim said carefully: ‘I am Harry Maxim.
I rang Fraulein Winkelmann from Hannover.
I have a message from Corporal Ron Blagg.
‘Ja, ja.
I remember.
It is the third floor.’
Maxim looked round at his taxi-driver, who had parked two wheels on the pavement with the usual German disregard for the tyres, and got a nod and a rather strange smile in return.
Then the driver hunched down with a magazine, the door buzzed open and Maxim went in.
A man was waiting in the doorway of the Winkelmann flat; he was shortish, stubby, strong-looking and probably around forty.
He had a face that was both sensuous and battered — his nose had been broken at some time — with deep pouches under his dark eyes.
He smiled widely and held out a hand, but the way he looked Maxim over gave him a little pang of disquiet.
He felt that if he'd been wearing a gun, this man would have known.
‘I am Bruno.
Please come in.’
The scent was the first thing: it was like walking into a peach-canning factory.
The furniture came with the smell: soft, shiny, billowy and over-decorated like great banks of flowers; the little lampshades around the walls were all tassels and fringes, the ornaments were fiddly coloured glass and the not-quite-velvet curtains draped artistically and bound with golden cords.
It was a very feminine room if you happened to like your femininity in ton lots.
Oh damn it, Maxim thought.
I know what profession she's in, and no wonder that taxi driver was giving me the big smirk.
But I should have guessed: what other sort of woman with a permanent address would Blagg know?
Bruno was offering him a sticky-looking liqueur from a tall thin bottle.
Maxim smiled and shook his head.
I know what business you're in, too, mate, and I shouldn't wonder if the conversation came around to money before long.
After the room, Fraulein Winkelmann herself was hardly a surprise.
Built like one of her own sofas, topped with crisp golden curls, she had big blue eyes, a vivid red mouth and three chins to do the work of one.
The unexpected thing was that she made no attempt to hide her age, which was around sixty.
Instead, she made up to it, becoming a perfectly painted and exquisitely detailed matron in a fur-trimmed green satin housecoat.
She let Maxim hold her hand for a moment, then swept regally past and merged herself carefully with one of the big chairs.
‘It is very warm,’ she said in English, fluttering at the air with a Japanese fan.
Bruno handed her a glass.
‘You are not drinking?’
‘Not at the moment.’
‘Have you come all the way from England?
How is dear Ronald?’
‘He's fine.’
Maxim sat carefully on the least-soft chair he could find.
Bruno stayed standing, watching him with a small fixed smile.
‘And you have a letter from him?’
Her English had an unmistakable accent, but flowed easily.
And why not?— the British Army had been in Osnabrück since 1945.
Maxim offered the sealed envelope, Bruno took it, broke it open and passed it to her.
She blinked at it, said: ‘Ah yes,’ and gave it to Bruno to read properly.
Halfway through the letter, Bruno said in German: ‘Ah, he is a major in their Army,’ and then smiled hastily at Maxim because he had forgotten they had been speaking German earlier.
Fraulein Winkelmann just nodded pleasantly.
Bruno read the letter twice, then folded it up, licking his lips as if uncertain how to begin.
‘Corporal Blagg is…quite all right?’
‘Oh yes.’
‘But you have come instead.’
‘He can't get away at the moment.’
‘He is not…in trouble?’
Maxim shrugged and waved at the letter.
‘What does he say?
‘Yes, yes.
What did he say to you?
‘Just that Fraulein Winkelmann was keeping some papers for him.’
‘Has he said what papers?’
Maxim looked curiously at Bruno, using the time to mask his own indecision.
He didn't want to sound too eager and knowledgeable, but Bruno wouldn't believe him as a country bumpkin.
‘Some photographic negatives and a collection of certificates.’
When Bruno didn't say anything, Maxim turned to Fraulein Winkelmann.
‘Do you still have these things?’
‘I let Bruno do all my business work.’
She surged upright.
‘Business?’
‘I will leave you.’
She touched Maxim's hand and went away.
Bruno indicated the bottle.
‘You are sure you do not…?’
Maxim just looked stolid.
Bruno squared his shoulders inside his tight-fitting shirt.
‘What photographs were those?’
‘Some very small ones.’
Maxim hoped it sounded as if he were hiding something more than the fact that Blagg hadn't been able to tell what they were.
Bruno licked his lips.
‘There is a problem with the certificates.’
‘Really?’
‘They are Sterbeurkunden, certificates of death, and they are from the Standesaint of Bad Schwarzendorn.’
Maxim went on looking stolid.
‘The night that Corporal Blagg brought them here, the Standesbeamte at Bad Schwarzendorn — he was killed.’
Maxim still didn't react.
Bruno licked his lips again.
‘There was also a woman killed.’
‘Really?
Can I have the negatives and the certificates now, please?’
‘I think you do not see the problem —
‘Just get them, please.’
‘They are, naturally, in the bank.
But —
‘I see.’
Maxim got up and walked through the inner door.
Beyond, the muttering of a TV set led him to another door.
Fraulein Winkelmann was sitting at one end of a small kitchen table, separated from a big colour set at the other end by a cup of coffee and a plate of cream cakes.
She snatched off a pair of gold-rimmed glasses and looked up at Maxim with myopic surprise.
When in doubt, à l'outrance — and a good lie or two, as well.
‘Fraulein, I understand from Bruno that you are prepared to swear to a document that Corporal Blagg brought you some death certificates on the night when Herr Hochhauser —(thank God he had remembered the name)‘— the Standesbeamte from Bad Schwarzendorn was murdered.
I am sorry that I had to deceive you just now; I am from the Military Police Special Investigation Branch.’
He held out his ID; it showed nothing of what unit or corps he belonged to.
‘The Staatsen-walt at Paderborn would like to have those death certificates.
If I can give them to him, then perhaps he will leave you out of all this.
I cannot promise, of course; we are dealing with a murder.
And Corporal Blagg is in a lot of trouble.
But if he cannot show you have the papers any longer, then he cannot prove he was here on the night of the murder.
But I have no authority here; I have to go through the police.’
She stood up slowly, taking time to understand — if she ever did understand it, which was more than he did himself.
He was just firing a smokescreen of emotive words and phrases.
But she was just about to say something when her eyes moved and something touched the middle of his back.
It didn't feel particularly like a gun, but with Bruno it would have to be.
Maxim lifted his arms carefully and sighed.
‘Bruno?’
A hand began feeling at him in the places he might carry a gun, so Maxim said to Fraulein Winkelmann: ‘It would be compli-cated if he shoots me.
I have come from London to see you, a lot of people know that, and I have a taxi waiting outside with my luggage in it.’
Bruno had taken his wallet; now he snorted.
Maxim went on: ‘Take a look outside.
A grey Mercedes, parked on the pavement about twenty metres up the road.
He won't go away until he's been paid.
And what are you going to do with my body, Fraulein?
Cut it up in the  bath — that's the best place — and then what?— eat me?
It would take a long —
She suddenly started screeching at Bruno, so abruptly that Maxim felt a jab in his spine and knew he'd come very close to being shot.
But then the pressure from the gun went away, and very carefully he twisted his head around and saw Bruno clutching a worn old Luger by his waist, shaking it with impatience as he waited for Fraulein Winkelmann to stop yelling.
Maxim couldn't catch half of what she was saying, but it seemed mostly on his side.
Bruno turned and stalked out of the room, then came back and pointed the Luger at Maxim once more and said Yes, there was a taxi waiting.
Fraulein Winkelmann told him for the Good God's sake to get the papers fast, and Bruno went away and came back and pointed the Luger yet again.
It was a farce, a terrible play, but still a real play because these two were acting out a charade of fright and face-saving and if he did anything to break the illusion that they were still taking decisions for themselves then he was going to get himself shot.
But finally he had an envelope of papers in one hand and his wallet in the other and Bruno was clutching a wad of Deutsch-marks and challenging Maxim with a twisted leer to say something about that.
That was part of the play, too, to give Bruno a final victory but not an easy or total victory because that would be unrealistic.
He tried.
‘Blagg said he'd promised the Fraulein some money.
But you can't take all of it.’
‘How much money?’
‘He said 300 marks.’
Blagg had said 250.
‘Then I take 400.’
Maxim knew he'd had about 650 in the wallet.
Bruno handed him the difference, note by note, grinning.
Then he swatted himself across the nose with the 400, and walked out jauntily.
They waited until the front door of the flat slammed.
Fraulein Winkelmann sat down again, staring at the TV.
There was a zooming motor race on and Maxim simply hadn't even heard it until then.
‘You are not very brave,’ she said.
‘I paid 400 marks not to get shot.
It seemed worth it to me.
Did he give me all the papers?’
‘I expect so.
Now he will drink your money and come back and beat me.’
‘Do you know where he hides the gun?
I could…make it so that it will not shoot, but he won't know until he tries.’
‘I don't care.
Now he sniffs cocaine, too.
Let him shoot somebody and the police can have him.’
She started eating a cream cake.
Maxim fingered the envelope of certificates: there seemed to be a lot of them.
‘Did he do anything with these?
Copy them?— anything?’
‘I don't know.
He could have done anything.’
Maxim put 100 marks on the table; it was all he could afford, with the taxi meter ticking over.
‘I don't want anybody to get into trouble.
So if you remember anything, call me at the Allenby barracks.
I shall have some more money when I've changed some travellers’ cheques.’
‘I take them,’ she said, startling him.
But why not?
And why not credit cards?— no, he couldn't quite see American Express listing her.
‘Major Maxim,’ he reminded her.
‘At the Engineers barracks.’
She scooped in the money and he let himself out.
Chapter 17
The barracks known as Allenby — though not to the locals —; were pre-1939 Wehrmacht buildings, very solid and spacious but a little worn by now.
Looking round his room, Maxim realised how spoiled he had become by married quarters and flats.
Here there was no soap, no towel, no water-glass or coat-hangers, not even the traditional ashtray made out of a tin lid.
Just the plain furniture from Accommodation Stores and a prominent list of what that should comprise.
Somebody had pinched the ‘Bin, Waste Paper, Metal…
I’
He unpacked what little he needed and changed his shirt, then reopened the envelope from the Blumenthalstrasse.
It seemed to hold just what Blagg had described: a wad of old death certificates, or Sterbeurkunden, and two minute strips of colour negative film in a transparent packet.
These were really tiny, the special film made for Minox ‘spy’ cameras, and Maxim was a little surprised that real spies actually used it.
But the negatives, each no bigger than his little fingernail, were totally meaningless to the naked eye.
Altogether there were thirty-eight certificates, each for somebody who had died in the parish of Bad Schwarzendorn on April 15 1945.
The times of death seemed to span the whole day, but he couldn't be sure the thirty-eight covered everybody who died that day because the numbers of each certificate didn't add up to a complete sequence.
Some had been signed as much as three days later.
But that was less surprising than that somebody had still been issuing such certificates in the chaos that had been Germany, just three weeks before the final surrender.
The results weren't impressive: Maxim had collected parking fines that looked far grander.
Each was on cheap, discol-oured A5 paper, about the size of pages from a novel, the  individual details clumpingly typed into the spaces provided in the print, and attested by the totally illegible signature of the then Standesbeamte.
Each had a 30-Pfennig stamp cancelled by the eagle-and-swastika symbol, but with the swastika roughly scraped away.
Perhaps Bad Schwarzendorn had been in Allied hands by then.
He settled down to sort through them.
Half an hour later, he was back downstairs asking for the duty officer.
The mess was almost empty except for an Education Corps captain who was also using the place as an hotel, and three unmarried young officers who'd been playing tennis and shouldn't have been in the ante-room dressed like that.
When found, the duty officer obviously knew enough about Maxim's sponsors not to ask for more.
He showed him the mess library and the official telephone, then discreetly vanished.
‘All quiet on the Western Front?’
George was civil servant enough not to ask a simple question if a fancy one would do.
‘Did you get the paperwork?’
‘I think I got it all.’
He gave George the details.
‘There's one for a Brigitte Schickert, née Krone, who was living in Dornhausen.
That's a small farming village a few kilometres out of Bad Schwarzendorn.
She died there at 11.30.
Husband's name Rainer Schickert: I'm assuming that's Gustav Eismark.’
‘Sounds like it.
What was the cause of death?’
‘It doesn't give one.
None of them do, there's no space for it, but there were twelve other people who died at that same time at Dornhausen, and four more from Dornhausen who died in the Karls Hospital at Bad Schwarzendorn at times later in the day.’
Over the telephone, George's grunt became an electronic honk.
‘Thirteen deaths at the same time, four later — that sounds like a bomb.
She was supposed to have died from Allied bombing, so that ties up.
Doesn't it?’
‘The only odd thing is that according to the military history, the place had been overrun by American First Army, either the 3rd or 9th Division, I can't quite make out their boundary line, nearly two weeks before.’
George enjoyed military detail and Maxim had got lucky with the library.
‘Well…
Gustav needn't have been telling the truth about the Allies — though it sounds as if he might have been telling it about his wife.
You say you can't make anything of the photographs?’
‘I could ask if anybody in the barracks has an enlarger.
There might be a camera club —
‘Better not.
You've got a new thrill on the way: Sims himself is coming over.
You remember him?
You're at Allenby Barracks?
Good, he'll contact you there, it might even be tonight.’
‘Isn't he taking a bit of a risk coming to Germany?
I thought he'd be in strife with the Verfassungschutz.’
‘That's his problem.
I don't suppose he's travelling under his own name.
He just wants to keep it all within his own unit.
Anyway, you simply hand over everything you've got and try to be polite with it, by which I mean don't tell him how to do his own job.
Buy him eine kleine Knackwurst and toddle home without a stain on your character.
Is there any chance of your doing that?’
When George had rung off, Maxim reached for the First British Corps telephone directory which sat just beside the phone.
He hadn't, after all, promised not to look up the name and home number of the divisional security officer, and one small stain wouldn't really count and might not even show.
Captain Brian Apgood was a slight, very young-looking man with pale skin and wispy blond hair.
In his Sunday dress of jeans and a fresh white shirt, he looked as if he'd get mugged the moment he set foot in a town with more cars than horses.
He sat on the foot of Maxim's bed and lit a small cigar.
‘I'm not being inhospitable,’ he explained, ‘but we have to assume the chance of them having my house and office both wired, and I imagine Number 10 wouldn't like that.
I know I shouldn't ask this, but —
‘That's right, you shouldn't,’ Maxim said politely.
On the phone he had mentioned nothing but his name and rank.
Apgood smiled back.
‘Okay.
Let's see what we've got.’
He held up the packet of film against the light and made non-committal noises.
‘It's infra-red, funny colours like this.
Doesn't look like much, but I can print them up for you.
Only black-and-white if you want them tonight…?’
‘Please.’
Apgood pocketed the film and sat down to browse through the stack of fragile old certificates.
After that, he said: ‘I suppose it would be a silly question to ask how you got these?’
‘A…roundabout way.
Am I right in thinking I shouldn't have them?’
‘They're not secret, nothing like that.
But they shouldn't be floating around loose.
They aren't copies, they're the origin-als.
They should still be in the files at the Standesamt.
Unless they've microfilmed them, of course, and these are just waste paper.
They are microfilming a lot of old stuff now…
Does any particular one mean anything to you?’
‘The top one.’
Apgood skimmed through Brigitte Schickert's certificate, her husband's name, parents' names, place and date of birth, and the address of the Leistritz farmhouse, Dornhausen.
‘I hope some of these names mean something to you; they don't ring any bells with me.’
‘That's all right.
I just wondered what else you could tell me.’
‘Like what?’
‘Well…’ by now Maxim was far from sure himself; ‘…perhaps why so many of them?’
‘Did these get pinched from the Standesamt?’
‘Ah…in a sort of way, yes.’
‘The simplest explanation would be that by pinching a whole day's deaths you help conceal an interest in just one of them.
And you couldn't ask for copies of all these, you'd have to ask for just one, and that would give away your interest, too.
Still, it seems a bit drastic to go and start looting the place.’
‘But these can't be the only versions?’
Apgood looked up at him curiously.
‘As a matter of fact, they most probably are.
How much did you get taught about German documents at Ashford?— or Hereford?’
The Army grapevine hadn't lost its bloom in the early heatwave: Apgood  had a very good rundown on Maxim's background.
‘Assume it's nothing.’
‘Fair enough.
Well…the thing to cling to is that everything like this is still decentralised.
Births, marriages, deaths —; all the routine stuff is still kept at the local Standesamt where it was first registered, and only there.
No copies to central government or anywhere like that.
And since there's something like seven thousand Standesamter in West Germany alone, you can have quite a job looking somebody up if you don't know where to start.
I imagine it's a legacy of the war: centralised personal data sounds too much like the Gestapo-though mind you, it would be a hell of a storage problem if you hid start collecting copies of all these.
We'll see how long the libertarian principles last once everything's on microfilm.’
‘If you destroyed these, would it destroy evidence of the deaths?’
‘No-o…these things are numbered and they'll be cross-indexed to some sort of register of names.
But you'd destroy the detail: time of day, exact place and so on.
Unless, as I say, it's all been microfilmed and these are just garbage.
You could easily find out: just ring up the Standesamt at…ah, Bad Schwarzendorn, and — Hold on a minute!
The Standesbeamte there got killed the other day.
Shot.’
‘I was in the UK at the time,’ Maxim reassured him.
Apgood pinched his nose like an airline passenger trying to clear his eardrums, and looked Maxim over carefully.
Then he let out his breath in a puff.
‘We-ell…
Has all that been cleared up?
I seem to recall some mystery woman…’
‘I think the police are treating the case as closed.’
‘Look — my first responsibility is to Division —
‘Of course.
I just wanted an opinion.
And I won't quote you.
Still looking wary, Apgood walked over to the washbasin, tapped the ash from his cigar and washed it away.
‘I can see why you might not want to go near Bad Schwarzendorn.
Shall I ring up?’
‘If you can do it without…’ then Maxim remembered that Apgood's whole life was devoted to doing things ‘without’.
He changed tack.
‘So you don't think there's any chance  of anybody having put a fake certificate into the files?— years after the event?’
Apgood instinctively picked up a certificate and glanced through it, then shook his head.
‘No.
I don't mean just the forgery, and that's a hell of a job, trying to fake something that's aged as badly as these — it's the numbering.
It wouldn't fit into the sequence, it wouldn't match up with the ledger.
Anyway, why should somebody want to do that?’
He really looked so absurdly young and guileless, so like a starry-eyed subaltern about to go over the top into the machine-guns of the Somme, that Maxim almost answered.
Just in time, he remembered he was talking to a thirty-year-old Captain from Int Corps who was deeply interested in anything that might be happening on his patch.
‘I really wouldn't know,’ he said carefully.
‘Okay.
But I can take some of these back to the office and have a look at them under the funny lights — ultra-violet, infra-red — to see if anything shows up.
Having a whole batch together should make an odd one stick out like a sore thumb.
That's another reason why you wouldn't try forging one.’
‘Thanks, but…if you could just print up the photos for me…’
‘Will do.
And you aren't asking for help to get the other stuff back into the files at Bad Schwarzendorn.’
Thankfully, Maxim reflected that that was entirely Sims's problem.
‘I suppose they do belong there.’
‘If anybody wants them to prove anything, they do.
Floating about loose, all they prove is that whoever's got them is more or less of a crook.
Present company excepted, of course.’
‘Thank you.
Do you want me to come and hold the stopwatch?’
‘No need.
You stay and have lovely din-dins with the Sappers and I'll be back before lights-out.’
Maxim didn't argue.
In barracks he was where Sims could find him and while he didn't expect much from Sunday dinner in a near-deserted mess, just being back with the Army was sauce enough for the moment.
The dinner, Maxim decided, would be best remembered as ‘nourishing’, and he went back to the ante-room to do something about the taste of it.
A few more officers were drifting in from their various weekends, and the chatter turned to the likelihood of their being called out on an ‘Agile Blade’ exercise in the next few days.
This was a test of how fast the regiment could pack up and move out to its battle positions, and was supposed to come as a big surprise, but Maxim knew how easy it was to predict.
Most units were usually too busy to go to war: dispersed on training schemes, preparing for some grand parade, absorbing new equipment, training for a tour of Northern Ireland or retraining back from it.
So on the rare occasions they did report themselves in a State of Readiness they knew an Agile Blade was likely.
To the younger officers, Maxim's presence proved that tomorrow would be The Day and — by reverse logic — that he must be a spy from Allied Command Europe come to report on their morale and even sobriety.
It became a joke to ply him with half-pints of beer and fantasies about each other 's unfitness for battle.
The mess sergeant arrived with a brief respite: Captain Apgood was at the back door.
They sat on stubby pillars at the bottom of a short flight of steps leading to the parade square.
The security officer handed over a bunch of small prints and lit a cigar.
‘Not very exciting, I'm afraid.
Looks like just a test strip.
It's flash, you can tell by the shadows.
Must be infra-red, the thing you don't notice unless you're looking straight at it.’
The pictures showed various angles of a small room that was furnished with little more than a big couch, a hi-fi and a table of drinks.
‘Like going to the pictures, isn't it?’
Apgood said.
‘Always seems there's something better coming next week.
Oh, by the way, I ran off copies for myself, I hope you don't mind.
It's just conceivable that room might pop up in some other picture some day.’
Maxim didn't mind, although he had a vague sense Apgood was seeing something he'd missed himself.
Then he remembered the magazine, Focus on Germany.
‘If you could dig up a back copy — he gave the date, nine  years before; ‘— If the worst comes to the worst, just lift one from the Liaison Officer's back room.’
‘Dear me.
What strange morality one learns in high places.’
Chapter 18
Maxim woke with a slightly tender head — those blasted lieutenants and their silly jokes — and the sombre feeling that he must be getting truly old if he could no longer sleep through a normal wakey-wakey in barracks.
He lay for some minutes listening to the clatter of boots, slamming of doors and distant shouts before the snorts and squeals of armoured personnel carriers below his window made him realise this was far from normal and was, in fact, an Agile Blade.
He was just wrapping himself in a garish Hong Kong dressing-gown when the door burst open and a hulking first lieutenant in combat dress, his helmet stuffed with leaves and his face already smeared with camouflage cream, stood staring at him.
Maxim was about to explain when the lieutenant obviously came to a snap judgment on his military value and slammed out again.
So he stood for ten minutes at the window watching soldiers tossing bundles of equipment into the gurg-ling FV 432s parked around the parade ground and feeling the deep contentment of seeing other people working very hard very early in the day.
Then he dressed and went down for what would now be a vulture's breakfast.
At nine o'clock he and the transient education officer were still sitting in the ante-room reading old copies of Country Life when the mess sergeant came in to say Mr Sims was on the phone.
He was all business.
‘I think you have all the papers?—; good.
Can you meet me at the parking place outside the cathedral in half an hour?
I will come past in a dark blue Audi 100.
Is that all right?’
‘Make it a quarter to ten.
I don't know how quickly I can get into town.’
‘Okay then, 0945.’
Maxim got the film and certificates from his room, then stood for a moment at the top of the front steps, looking across the parade ground.
It was another hot windless day, and they were living in a bowl of milky haze and smog, so that the blue only began perhaps twenty degrees above the horizon.
It would be murder out in the field, digging in, and the soldiers knew it.
They were all slumped in the shade of the vehicles, blurred by patches of cigarette smoke.
Then whistles started blowing and the scene shattered into movement.
The mess sergeant appeared at Maxim's elbow, offering a key.
‘I don't know how long we'll be out, sir, but this is for the drinks cupboard.
Write out a chit for whatever you use, as usual.
And there'll be a sort of lunch in the cookhouse, nothing here.’
‘Thank you, Sergeant.’
The sergeant saluted and then, because Maxim wasn't wearing uniform, couldn't resist asking: ‘Are you really from Command, sir?’
Slightly surprised at a mess sergeant who didn't know all about every officer, Maxim was about to deny it when he realised that, by chance, he had found a great cover story.
So he just smiled as enigmatically as he knew how, and pocketed the drinks key.
The first personnel carriers rumbled out of the main gate, blocking the workday traffic, and he watched them now with envy because they were off to play soldiers and he hadn't been invited.
Sims stopped the car on a wooded road just across the A64 Autobahn, lit one of his menthol cigarettes and opened the envelope.
‘Is this everything?’
‘Everything I got.
It's what Blagg said.’
‘Please tell me how you got it.’
Maxim ran through a brief version of the Blumenthalstrasse meeting while Sims counted the death certificates.
‘You are sure the man Bruno gave you everything?
He could perhaps have changed something.’
Sims took out a jeweller's eyeglass and peered at the tiny negatives.
‘He could have.
But he only had about a couple of hours to do it in — after I'd rung from Hannover.
Until then he'd been  expecting Blagg, and he might know exactly what he'd left.’
Maxim had decided to play this bland and straight — well, fairly straight.
Captain Apgood and the prints he had made weren't even going to get a mention-in-despatches.
‘I understand.
But perhaps you think he would have changed something if he could?’
‘Out of pure habit, yes.’
Sims smiled at him.
‘Yes.
Now, you have seen the certificates of death?’
He had gone back to those.
‘I had a look through.’
‘And it seems that something happened at Dornhausen at 11.30 hours on April 15 1945.
A bomb, do you think?’
‘Probably.
The place had been occupied by the Americans for ten days or more, but 9th Air Force was flying missions down to the south and Czechoslovakia until the end of the month.
And not every bomb falls in the right place.’
‘That is very true, Major.
But you have looked up some history for me?
I am very grateful.’
Maxim shrugged.
‘The rest of the news doesn't look too good.
I mean, there's a death certificate for her and I don't see how it could be faked.
You'd have a problem trying to fit it into the sequence, wouldn't you?
There'd be a number in a ledger — or something…’
‘You are quite right, Major.
You know something about these matters.’
‘Not really.’
‘Oh yes.’
He brooded for a moment.
‘You know I have a problem being in Germany.
If I am recognised…
I must be careful.
Please, will you come to Bad Schwarzendorn to help me?’
‘I can tell you want to go,’ George said.
‘And in the end I had to say you could.
Co-operation, that's the word.
Show willing — but not too much.
I just wish The Firm would find somebody else to delegate to…and Harry, for God's sake remember Number 10 when it comes to the crunch.
And don't let it come to the crunch, either.’
He rang off and stared gloomily at the phone.
He should have been saying No, Never, Not Again.
Yet while he didn't  much care about the outcome of Plainsong, except in a generally patriotic sense, he cared very much that it shouldn't fail in any way that would leave a vindictive Foreign Office with a load of blame to distribute.
Anything to keep Plainsong alive and Scott-Scobie and co. quiet until the news from Scotland got better.
Or perhaps much worse.
Well, by to-morrow we should know…
But of course we won't, he told himself.
We go through life saying Well, tomorrow we shall know, one way or the other.
Whether we've passed the exam, got the job, if she's pregnant or not.
And tomorrow comes and we don't know.
Oh, it brings plenty of its own unique disappointment and despair, but nothing to solve the dilemma of today.
He picked up the phone again and asked for Agnes at the Mount Row number.
She was out.
Chapter 19
The house was part of a terrace, narrow and rising four stories from the level of the semi-private road running alongside Kensington High Street.
Victorian, of course, but if you spend sixty-four years on the throne then a lot of building styles are going to be named after you.
There was no entryphone, just a column of assorted bellpushes and their faded name-cards.
It would be a long walk down for whoever had the top flat.
Agnes found a card lettered neatly PFAFFINGER and pushed the bell.
She had just pressed it a second time when she heard a faint voice above the High Street traffic.
A small head was poking out of the topmost window.
‘I'm Algar!’ she yelled up.
‘I rang you!’
The head ducked back and out again, and a crumpled piece of paper fell fast to the pavement.
It was a brown envelope with a Yale key inside.
Certainly cheaper than an entryphone.
Leni was waiting at the foot of the last flight of stairs, which was partitioned off to give her a flimsy front door of her own.
Despite the thick skirt and cardigan, Agnes was surprised at the delicate frailness of her, like one of those rather coy Parian ware figurines, and with much the same over-large blue eyes.
They went on up.
‘Would you like some coffee?
It will only be a moment.’
‘Very much.
Thank you.’
Agnes sat down gingerly on a worn green velvet wing chair.
The room was low-ceilinged, comfortable, long-lived in.
Sagging plank bookshelves covered most of the walls, with papers and magazines scattered over all the flat surfaces.
From atop one pile on the desk under the window, a very fat long-haired black cat gazed impassively at Agnes.
Leni came back with the coffee and poured it into two  non-matching teacups.
It was real and freshly made.
‘Are you really from the Security Service?
A young girl like you?’
‘Of course.’
Agnes reached for her bag.
‘No, no.
I believe you.
But why?
Can you tell me why?’
‘It's a living.’
No, that was too flip for this shrewd little old lady.
‘I like it and I'm good at it.’
Leni smiled quickly, then just sat, very upright as if setting a good example, and seemed to be thinking something out.
‘Two other men came: were they from your service?
They said they were attached to the Ministry of Defence — that's what you usually say, isn't it?’
‘We have a card that says that.
Do you want to…’
‘No, they didn't show me their cards.
But is it still true you only recruit people who are born British?’
Forty years of political broadcasting and handling refugees had probably given Leni as good a sense of how the twilight world worked as Agnes had herself.
‘That's broadly true, yes.’
‘These men were German.
At times we spoke German, it was easier for them.’
‘What did they want?’
‘The same as you: to talk about Mina.’
‘Did they know she was alive, in this country?’
Leni hesitated.
‘Are you sure she is?’
‘Oh yes.
She came to visit you a week ago, at Bush House.
She was issued with a security pass in the name of Linnarz.’
That was true, and if it suggested they had been alerted by the security pass and not by a friend in the underpaid BBC World Service, then so much the better.
‘Look,’ Agnes went on, ‘these people were not from my service.
I'd like you to be quite sure that I'm who I say I am.
I can get anybody you name at the BBC to talk to my office and then vouch for me.’
‘I believe you.
But who were the men?’
‘I hope they were from our Intelligence Service, playing silly tricks.
If not, then God help us.
And Mina.’
‘You're saying that just to frighten me.’
Agnes waited, sipping her coffee.
‘I'm sorry,’ Leni said.
‘That was silly, like a radio play.’
For her, radio was too serious for plays.
‘When did they come?’
‘On…on Friday.’
‘What did you tell them?’
‘They knew I had seen Mina, too.
How did they know?’
Agnes shook her head helplessly, but knew that Guy Husband would also have his contacts at Bush House.
Most likely the SSD had a friend in need, too.
‘Did you tell them where Mina lives now?’
‘Oh no.
She didn't tell me.’
Agnes smiled and put her cup carefully down on an uneven surface of Der Spiegels and Encounters.
‘Good.
Can you tell me something about Mina! -just talk about her.
How you met her, how she got on when she first came over here…’
‘You must have it all in your files.’
‘We have a lot of paper in our files.
I rather prefer people.’
They had met a few days after Mina had stood up at the end of a recital in the Usher Hall at Edinburgh to announce that she would very much like to stay here in England (a tiny mistake the Scots reporters had kindly ignored) rather than return to East Germany.
In the early 1950s every defection by either side was exploited like a battle won.
The Home Office granted her political asylum with uncharacteristic haste and from then on she was interviewed constantly by every newspaper and radio network represented in Britain — including, of course, the BBC's German language service, which was aimed directly at the East Zone.
Leni had taken pity — more than pity — on the young woman who was so grateful for a friendly German voice and so bemused by the political carnival she had unleashed.
Leni soon realised that Mina had defected simply to join the Holly-wood dream that the East Berlin loudspeakers were always denouncing.
She merely wanted to be whisked from luxury hotel to draught-free concert hall in a big limousine, there to play to an attentive, elegant audience and be driven away again surrounded by encores and orchids.
This wasn't selfishness or greed, just a feeling that it was due.
She had no idea, Leni was certain, that she had even harmed her brother's career, let alone collapsed it.
He had his ships and politics, she had her piano which she had practised for over twenty years, so now let the dream come true.
And for a few years it had just about done so.
Looking back, nobody could now say how much of her success was due to her defection and how much to her playing.
She had made only one recording for posterity to judge her by, and that was of Chopin, never her strongest point.
She toured Britain and West Europe, she broadcast constantly — but she preferred recitals to the teamwork of symphonies, so never got taken up by one conductor, and in the long run that can be very important.
Her agent — perhaps he wasn't the best in the world — never got her an American tour which, again, might have made all the difference.
But probably the biggest shock, Leni thought, was the unexpected competitiveness of the top musicians in the West.
In the East you worked, you were paid, there was no need to compete and no reward for it.
In London, some of the stories about what pianists would do to secure a tour, a recording contract, a broadcast, had left Mina shattered.
The Dream was real, but so were some of the things the Berlin loudspeakers had said about it.
Her career dwindled gently.
She took to spending more time at Bush House, playing for very little except the chance to gossip in her native language.
Oddly, she had never shown much interest in touring in West Germany — perhaps she was scared to go that close to the border — and had not even taken out a West German passport, to which she was automatically entitled.
She lived day to day, as dear Mina always had — or rather, year to year, on a British Certificate of Identity renewed annually.
Agnes knew that already.
‘She never married?’
She knew that, too, but preferred to imply that she hadn't seen the files.
‘She went out with some men, yes, when she was here.
She was not…not abnormal.
But she talked about a boy she had loved in the war and who had been killed.
That happened often enough, God knows.
And then looking after Gustav's boy, I think after that she wanted a life for herself.
Then she went to South Africa.
No, she went on a Commonwealth tour, but it was in South Africa that she had her new success, and she  stayed on there.
She wrote to us about it, it was like the first days in Britain except the weather was much better.
She sent us some notices of her recitals…’
Leni smiled wistfully; ‘…and then we heard nothing.
I thought…perhaps I thought she was dead.’
‘Did she marry out there?’
Leni didn't answer, didn't look at Agnes, just sat with her hands held primly in her lap.
The big cat climbed stiffly down off the desk and squatted on a box of cat-sand under a corner table, staring straight ahead with a sublime conviction that it was invisible.
Agnes said: ‘She must have got some new identity.
Her British certificate hasn't been renewed for twenty years.’
Leni got up briskly and sprayed around the cat-box with an air-freshener.
‘Oh yes, she did get married.’
That was all it took.
Given a new name, she got a new nationality, new passport — a new life that was far more fundamental a change than she had managed just by defecting.
It is much easier to vanish than most people realise, particularly if you're a woman and ready to cut yourself off from family and friends — most of which Mina had already done by coming West.
‘She told you this last week?’
‘Yes…’
Leni hesitated; ‘…yes, she told me then.’
‘Was he British?’
‘I…
I suppose he must have been, to bring her back here.’
That ‘suppose’ seemed a bit odd.
‘Can you tell me his name?’
The delicate face was lined with anguish.
‘But why do you want to know?’
‘Because others want to know.
I suppose that's the best answer.
And merely because you didn't tell them her new name and address doesn't mean to say they'll stop looking.’
‘She didn't tell me.’
There was one last hope of invisibility, as dignified as the cat's, although this time for her friend.
And maybe a little shame that Agnes had to dispel.
‘I know that,’ she said gently.
‘But somebody who cares as much as you do, you'd want to know.’
She waited, but  Leni stayed obstinately silent.
‘She played the piano for you, one last time.
The men who came to see you, they wouldn't think of somebody having to empty their pockets before they play the piano — but that's really what a woman does, isn't it?
She puts her bag down, somewhere aside, not on top of a grand piano, with her new name and address inside…’
Chapter 20
Until they had got out of the car to phone, Maxim had never seen Sims standing up.
He turned out to be a couple of inches shorter than Maxim himself, but slightly heavier in build, the figure of a boxer rather than a sprinter — except for those tiny hands.
Now it seemed as if his arms tapered all the way down to his fingertips where they lay lightly on the wheel of the Audi.
The cuffs of his cream silk shirt were still linked, the discreet but expensive tie still knotted at his neck; his only concession to the sun was that his light blue blazer was carefully laid out along the back seat.
Maxim wondered if he dressed that way only because he worked for The Firm, and decided probably not.
As a nation, the Germans were far more formal dressers than the British: the only people around the centre of Osnabrück not wearing ties were obviously foreigners by the rest of their dress.
Maxim had a tie with him, but at the moment it was in his pocket.
‘Will you be able to get those photographs blown up?’ he asked casually.
Now that he was going to be with Sims for most of the day, knowing what was on the photographs was an uncomfortable burden.
‘I will arrange it in Paderborn.’
It was just about a hundred kilometres to Bad Schwarzendorn, with Paderborn — another town with a British garrison — shortly before it.
‘What are we going to do at Bad Schwarzendorn?’
‘You will look.
Go to the place, Dornhausen.
On the map it is a very small place.
Somebody will remember.’
‘Do the Germans — I mean in the West — know Gustav Eismark was Rainer Schickert?’
‘No.
It is what Guy told you: a politician in the GDR has no public past.
The official history is that he was in the  Communist resistance.
That is all, the whole war, for him.
And of course everybody was in the Communist resistance — now.’
‘Wouldn't somebody in West Germany recognise him?’
‘He was Rainer Schickert for only a year and a few months — and mostly in hiding.
How many saw him then?
And then he was, I think, twenty-three.
By the time he is becoming a politician, his picture in the paper, he is fifty.
It is a long time, a lot of change.’
‘How did you know?’
Sims took a long time to think about answering that.
He was driving well, perhaps too well, as if there was one perfect speed for every individual metre of road and he had to slow down or speed up to reach it.
It wasn't jerky, just a little unsettling, and Maxim might not have been asking so many questions if he'd been able to sit back and watch the countryside flow past.
At last Sims said: ‘It was Mrs Howard who came to know that.
It was the first thing we had…
Do you know the island of Hiddensee, near to Rügen?
Ah — of course you must know Rügen.’
And ‘of course’ Maxim did, because it was the island — little more than a peninsula really — in the Baltic where the East German version of the Special Air Service did its training.
He had studied the snatched photos of their Jeeps and Land-Rovers, their NATO uniforms, that proved their wartime mission was just the same as the SAS's.
It could have been Sims's unit who supplied those photos.
‘I don't know Hiddensee.’
‘It is a place for Freikultur, not what you call nudism but…a liberation of the body, a going back to natural things…
It was very strong with the old Weimar Republic.
People go there to holiday, to lose all their problems, and also their ranks.
The Democratic Republic is very bureaucratic, very much full of class distinctions.
But at Hiddensee, you become anybody…or nobody.
Somebody will sit down beside you on the sandhills and just talk.
They will tell you anything, things they would never say to anybody anywhere else.
Things they would get arrested for.’
‘Sounds a good place to plant a few informers.’
‘It is not easy to be  disguised without clothes,’ Sims said dryly.
‘The Republic needs that place, places like that.
It is a safety valve, you might say a brothel of the mind.
But yes — there are some informers, too.
There was one who was sitting beside Gustav Eismark, many years ago, just when he was about to be married the second time.
He talked about getting married — of course he did not know the man recognised him, although it is not far from Rostock, where he lived then.
Eismark said he felt guilty because his first marriage had never ended, he said it could never end — das wird nie vorüber sein — and it would always be a secret he must keep from his new wife.
‘So of course the informer — he worked for himself, not the state — tried to find some proof of this.
But all he could discover was that Gustav's roadname had been Schickert, and the marriage certificate at Sangerhausen.’
‘It wasn't the marriage that was in question.’
‘No, but all the other proof was in West Germany so he could not do anything more.
Then one time when he was doing some other business with the woman we called Mrs Howard, he sold her the story for a few marks.
She did nothing much about it — Eismark was still just somebody in shipping, not a politician — and it was only when he came onto the Secretariat that she asked for money to do some more work about it.’
‘It doesn't seem much, just a few remarks made at a Freikultur camp twenty years ago.’
Sims glanced a smile at him.
‘In our work we live on whispers.
In your work perhaps you control a thousand tanks.
In one way — please understand me — that is easy: they are there.
They can do many things, but they cannot destroy a man's reputation.
One whisper may do that.
Our work is to find that whisper, to control it.’
Maxim had been long enough in Whitehall to know what Sims was talking about.
They cruised in silence for a while, then Sims asked abruptly: ‘Have you got a camera?’
‘No.’
‘You should buy one at Paderborn, there may be something  to photograph.
And hire a car also; I must take the photographs for printing.
We will meet late in the afternoon.’
So in the end it would be Maxim's name on the pieces of paper, not whatever Sims was calling himself on this trip.
And it must be a nice life to be able to decide I need a camera and buy a camera, just like that.
He wished…
Oh, come off it, Harry, he told himself.
You've said ‘Fire!’ and seen the price of a dozen cameras blow away in a few seconds' worth of flash and bang, with nothing left at the end to stick in the family album.
Every profession has its own little extravagances.
The village of Dornhausen lay about eight kilometres out of Bad Schwarzendorn itself, and the final road to it was a narrow concrete track that even in June was still covered in flaking mud and cow dung.
It ran straight up a wide shallow valley, with tilled fields on both sides, to a huddle of buildings.
Beyond, a slightly steeper slope of pasture rose to a low skyline with a toupeé of trees.
Maxim drove it slowly, en-joying the first real countryside he had been in since the hot weather began.
When he reached it, the village was little more than six huge farm buildings in the classic German style: each wall a grid of brown-painted timbers, filled in with rough-plastered brickwork.
And each building could be a farm in itself, housing animals and machinery on the ground floor, humans above that, wine and vegetables in the cellar and hay in the loft under the steep-pitched tile roof.
You could never believe just how big such places were until you got up close.
Beside them, the modern tractor sheds and dairies looked ready to collapse in the first breeze.
And the villagers would have the same massive unity as their houses.
Maxim had run into that before, on exercises, when he wanted to dig his troops in among the growing vegetables, and probably Hitler's soldiers had been no more welcome.
A small farming community would be a good place to hide out a war.
The tap-room of the tiny inn was down a deep step and he nearly sprawled on the tiled floor, coming abruptly into the cool darkness.
When he had got his balance back, a woman in a  dowdy black dress was looking at him with tired amusement.
There was nobody else in the room.
‘Are you open?’ he asked.
‘We are never closed.
Did you want to eat.
‘No, thank you.
Just a Pils.’
It came in a stone mug, deliciously cold and wiping out in one mouthful the heat of the morning and the traces of last night's headache (he wondered briefly how the Engineer regiment was getting on in its battle positions; by now they should be dug in and pausing for sips of lukewarm water or barely warmer tea.
Even war games are hell).
He finished the beer and asked for another.
The woman was probably in her middle forties, with a body that looked strong rather than fat under the shapeless clothes, and a long lined face that had already done all the ageing it was likely to.
‘Were you here in the war?’
Maxim asked; he'd never feel comfortable trying to start conversations like this.
‘Yes.’
‘Can you help me?
It's about somebody who was killed here.
I think there was a bomb…’
‘Yes.
The Bomber.
There's a memorial, up by the church.’
‘The church?’
He hadn't seen anything that could be a church.
‘The old one.
Up the road.’
Her expression hadn't changed by a fraction throughout.
A little perplexed, he left the second mug of Pils on the table.
Not noticing the church hadn't been quite as crass as he'd feared, because whatever else the bomb had done, it had blown the church apart.
Hardly any part of it stood more than waist high now, much was covered in grass or blackthorn bushes, and it could never have been more than a chapel anyway.
The road ended just there, in a long concrete hardstand where a cart and some rusting old farm machinery were parked.
Beyond, the pastureland sloped up to the skyline.
Beside the ruin, the grass had been scythed to rough ankle-length around a handful of old gravestones and an incon-gruously clean slab of veined grey marble that lay glinting in  the sun.
It was carved with very competent lettering, but all it said was 15 April 1945 and a list of names.
There were seventeen in all, three recurring — Scholz, Leistritz and Bren-ner; probably the main families in the village.
The Schickerts' address had been the Leistritz farmhouse.
Brigitte Schickert's name was there, too.
Maxim wrote down the names, then took out the new camera and fiddled with it; presumably the gravestone was evidence of a sort.
‘Are you looking for something?’
The old man must have moved very softly to get within twenty yards of him unheard, although the quiet afternoon was in fact a steady rumble and distant clatter of farm machinery.
‘Er…
I was interested in a name.’
‘One of those?’
The old man jabbed his stick towards the marble.
He had a face like a leather potato, all bumps and creases, and wore a thick cloth jacket over-shirt buttoned to the neck, all grey and brown and far too hot for the day.
But he was well past seventy, when the blood runs thin even in June.
‘Brigitte Schickert.’
‘Oh, her.
Did he send you?’
He?
Which he?
Of course, the presumably-still-alive Rainer Schickert.
Now we find out if they really don't know what became of him.
‘No, not her husband.
Just a London lawyer wanting to know where she's buried.
They don't tell you what it's all about, but they pay you for it.’
He took a second picture and pocketed the camera.
‘I have an unfinished beer at the Wirtshaus.
Would you like to join me?’
The solid old barrel of a body moved stiffly but not very carefully, like a heavy vehicle in low gear.
Seeing the village again, from a new angle, Maxim could see other scars of the blast and its debris.
The great linden tree, the traditional place for a village parliament, was lopsided even now from missing branches, and the nearest farmhouse was patched with un-matching brickwork and some of the window frames were too square to be old.
But the signs of prosperity far outweighed those of damage: the new BMWs and Mercedes, freshly painted woodwork and the constant noise of machinery from the outhouses.
‘A nice village,’ Maxim commented.
‘How many farms is it?’
‘It used to be three, now it's two.
The Leistritz family packed up and sold out, just after the war.
Two of the boys were killed in Russia, then their father was killed by The Bomber.
The last boy couldn't keep it going.’
‘You lost more in the war than we did,’ Maxim said, and instantly felt he'd pitched it too strong.
But the old man nodded emphatically.
‘Yes, we did that.
You're right.
War is a terrible thing.’
‘What happened about the Leistritz farm?’
‘That's it.’
The stick waggled at a great building nesting among its outhouses at the bottom of the village.
‘Karl Scholz bought most of the land and my father bought the house and the rest and gave it to me to run.
It was a terrible business.’
Maxim said nothing more until they were back at the inn.
The old man's name was Brenner and he chose a Dunkel and a Korn — a very dark beer plus a chaser of the local heart-stopper that tasted somewhere between very young whisky and vodka.
Purely out of tact, Maxim braced his brain cells for a kamikaze mission and opted to drink in parallel.
For a quarter of an hour, Brenner talked about the weather, the Common Market and taxes.
When he had finished the first beer, Maxim asked: ‘Did you know the Schickerts well?’
‘Not well, no.
They only came in the last winter of the war, just a few months.
Old Leistritz took them in — he got paid, naturally.
Everybody was taking in women and children from the cities, away from the bombing, or storing their furniture for them.
My father said he'd never known a season before when chairs and commodes were the best crops.’
He chuckled, and finished his Korn as well.
‘After 1941 the village was full of strangers.
They even sent us some French and Belgians, people like that, to work the land.
Our own lads were getting killed in Russia, so they sent us Belgians to play with their widows.
War isn't just terrible, it's ridiculous.’
‘But you did know them?’
Maxim persisted.
Brenner looked at him.
‘Him, yes, a bit.
He had a glass eye.
Something of a scholar, and Leistritz said he'd done farm work before.
He liked him.’
‘And her?’
‘Ach.’
Brenner banged his right hand on the head of his stick as if to knock some feeling back into it.
‘I hardly saw her.
It was winter, she stayed indoors with the baby.’
‘Of course.
Would you like another drink?’
While the woman was bringing more beer and the bottle of Korn, three other men came in.
One wore a city suit but was carrying the jacket; the other two were in farm clothes.
Brenner called the one in the suit over and introduced him as Rolf Scholz.
‘This young Englishman wants to know something about Frau Schickert — do you remember her?
What was her first name?’
‘Brigitte,’ Scholz said.
‘That's right.’
Maxim asked what Scholz would drink.
He was a hulk of a man in his middle fifties, inches taller than Maxim and instinctively stooping under the low beams of the tap-room.
He moved with a delicacy that emphasised his power, and he had a slow smile and a gentle handshake.
They drank and Scholz asked bluntly: ‘What did you want to know about her?’
‘Nothing much…just that she was killed by the bomb.’
‘The Bomber.’
It was said just the way the woman and Brenner had said it, Das Kampflugzeug, like The Event, and Scholz saw Maxim's puzzlement.
‘It wasn't just a bomb, but a whole bomber.
An American, a B-26.
I don't know what was wrong with it, but it still had all its bombs on board when it came down there, behind the church.’
Maxim had wondered about that: the blast effect had seemed pretty widespread for just a bomb.
Now they were talking about perhaps four tons of bombs toppling out of the sky one morning when Dornhausen thought the war had passed it by.
And not even an air raid warning to send them into the cellars.
Maxim thought of asking if the bomber's crew had bailed out, but decided it might be tactless.
‘She didn't actually get killed by The Bomber,’ Scholz went on.
‘She died later.
Oh, there would be seven or eight who died later, in hospital.’
Maxim sat for a while, absorbing that thought.
‘She didn't die here then?’
‘That's what he said.’
Brenner sounded testy.
‘You didn't help take her to hospital, or anything?’
Scholz took out a meerschaum pipe that was burned to a dark orange and blew through it.
‘The Americans did that.
They were quick with it, too.
Their medical service was probably the best thing about their Army.’
Maxim glanced at him sharply and Scholz smiled a slow smile back.
‘I was in the Army then.
Field engineers.
But I picked up glandular fever and liver trouble in Italy that winter and I was still at home on sick leave when the whole thing finished.
So…
I just privately discharged myself and let the Americans think I'd been here all along.’
Maxim instinctively smiled at him, then despised himself for the silly band-of-brother-soldiers stuff.
Anyway, they didn't know he was a soldier.
‘Do you know how badly she was hurt?’
Brenner burst out: ‘No, we don't!
D'you think when The Bomber came down it just killed twenty people and left the rest of us drinking Korn and singing fal-lal-lal?
It blew the whole village upside down.
They took another twenty people to hospital and I had the dairy roof down on my back and it took them two hours to dig me out.
I was in bed for a week with concussion and the doctor said at first he thought I'd got a broken pelvis.
And my leg's never been properly better since.
No, I don't know how badly she was hurt.
Just badly enough to die, I imagine.’
Scholz listened gravely, taking pinches of tobacco and pressing each gently into the pipe with his thumb, then sucking noisily to make sure it wasn't too tight.
‘I think I remember seeing her.
She got it in the back of the neck.
With neck wounds you can't tell, it could be nothing or everything.
Her husband, Rainer, he wasn't hit but he went in with them.
He spoke the best English.
Then he came back the next day — I think it was the next day — and told us who'd died.
Then he  came again a couple of days after and took the baby.’
‘He just took it away?’
Maxim was surprised.
‘It was only five months, wasn't it?’
Scholz lit his pipe and puffed quickly.
‘What else should he do?
We couldn't look after it forever.
He said he was going off to find his sister.
It wasn't easy, travelling, in those days, but it wasn't as if he belonged here anyway.’
‘Who arranged things like the death certificates?’
Brenner said: ‘How should we remember who arranged them?
I was in bed the whole week.
You may say the Americans were wonderful with their ambulances but they didn't pay for the dairy and half the animals were dead already or had to be slaughtered.
It was an American bomber.
But the English would have been worse.’
‘It was Rainer who did that,’ Scholz said unperturbed, as if Brenner had never spoken.
‘I remember him going about the village, collecting the details, the birth certificates and things.
He was good with forms, dealing with the bureaucrats.’
‘He was a scholar,’ Brenner said, banging his hand on the stick again.
‘And you never saw him after that?’
‘Why should we?’
Brenner wanted to know.
‘He wasn't one of the village.’
Scholz was wearing that wise, reflective look that pipe-smokers get or act on the few occasions their pipes are working well.
‘There was somebody else asking about him, or her.
A few weeks ago.’
‘I didn't meet them.’
Brenner sounded offended.
‘Neither did I. I forget who told me; probably somebody in town.
Would you know who it was?’
Maxim tried for an expression of indifference — tried desperately.
Of course Mrs Howard must have been asking around.
You know, the one whose driving-licence picture was in the paper, she'd been shot, wasn't she asking about the Schickerts?
And now there's this Englishman asking about them: will you ring the police or shall I?
He should have thought of that risk; he wondered if Sims had thought of it.
‘I haven't heard of anybody,’ he said casually, ‘but if the  lawyers asked me they might have asked somebody else before…
You said a few weeks ago?’
‘About a month, I think it was.’
‘I've got to get back to town,’ Maxim said, ‘but can I get you another drink?’
Brenner was willing; Scholz had to go into town himself.
Maxim waited nervously while the woman brought one more Dunkel and Korn.
Trying to change the subject, he asked: ‘And nobody did anything about the church?
I mean rebuild it.’
‘It's still church land,’ Scholz said.
‘Nobody's stopping them building it up.
But the pastor only came for one service every two weeks even then, in the war.’
‘It wasn't much good as a sanctuary, either,’ Brenner said with an odd cackle.
‘It was a Sunday,’ Scholz explained.
‘April 15.
The Bomber came down in the middle of morning service.’
Outside, the sun lashed him across the forehead with a warning of another headache to come, and he wished he hadn't had a drink with lunch at paderborn.
No wonder plainclothes coppers ended up able to conduct surveillances from behind the cover of their own stomachs.
The easiest way to turn the car was to drive on up to the hardstand by the church, and as he swung about he realised it was in fact the old foundations of small cottages, completely gone with The Bomber.
He paused, working out that a shallow dent in the pasture was the remnant of a huge crater, and then got out to take another look at the marble.
Seventeen names.
Seven or eight had died in hospital, yes, and some of those would have lingered for a day or two; fair enough or even blond genug, as the Army usually put it.
But the death certificates had shown thirteen people dying in Dornhausen itself.
Thirteen plus seven or eight…
The woman came out of the inn and saw him, hesitated, then walked up.
He waited.
‘Did they tell you what you wanted to know?’ she asked.
‘I think so.
Did you know Frau Schickert?’
‘Yes.
I was young at the time, a little girl.
Sometimes I'd go  in and she'd let me give the baby his bottle.’
A smile rippled across her wrinkled face and was gone.
‘A hussy from the city who peroxided her hair to look like a good Aryan.’
‘Did she?’
‘I suppose so.
It was something my mother said.
To me, she just seemed kind.
But sad.’
‘What about?’
‘Nobody was happy, that winter.
The Americans were coming.
I thought that must be a good thing.
I didn't understand.’
‘Were you here when The Bomber came down?’
‘Down in the cellar, getting some vegetables for lunch.
The whole earth went schunk and all the dust and bits fell out of the ceiling.
I thought I was going to be buried.’
‘Did you see her?— after she was hurt?’
She folded her arms and frowned briefly at the memory.
‘There was blood all over her shoulders.
He — Herr Schickert — was holding a towel to her neck.
Why do you want to know?’
‘Some lawyer wanted to know where she was buried.
I don't know why.
But now I've got a photograph…’
She gave a little snort of laughter.
‘She isn't buried here.’
Maxim looked from her to the marble and back.
‘Not? -not there?’
‘Not all the ones named are buried here, and some are here who aren't named.
It's just a memorial, really.’
‘Some are buried here who aren't named?’
‘Three Belgians, labourers.
They were in the cottages.’
She nodded at the hardstand.
‘By the time they put this up, nobody could remember their names, and they didn't belong here, of course.’
Death, the great leveller.
Except in Dornhausen.
But it explained the numbers that didn't add up — though not why Brigitte Schickert was shown on her certificate as having died in Dornhausen when everybody seemed to know she had been taken to hospital.
‘Do you know where she is buried?’
‘No.
It isn't in the Evangelical cemetery, with the others who died in hospital.
None of them came back, you see: the  Americans couldn't spare the trucks and the farms weren't allowed to use their petrol for anything but getting food to market.
Later, months later when I was taken into town for the first time since The Bomber, I wanted to put some flowers on her grave.
I couldn't find it.
Nobody seemed to know.
They just said she didn't belong here really.’
For strangers, death in Dornhausen seemed to be oblivion of a peculiarly total sort.