

SECTION II Social, Political and Personal Issues
Introduction
Although class teachers have considerable personal autonomy over their classes with regard to both the mathematical content and the manner in which this is encountered, they are far from free of the social world which they, and, as importantly, their pupils inhabit.
There are numerous pressures on them which manifest themselves in a variety of ways within the classroom setting.
The majority of the articles in this section move on from accounts of what it can be like ‘being there’, to ‘looking out’ at some of the external issues which impinge on the teaching of mathematics in schools.
The last four articles in this section reverse this direction of gaze, where the accounts are ‘looking in’ instead and describing some of the personal struggles with regard to teaching and change — change either imposed from outside or desired from within.
Helen Jenner looks at what might be meant by ‘multicultural mathematics’, as well as examining some of the issues arising from the cultural and ethnic diversity of the pupils in many of our schools.
Her discussion is amplified by the account of Valerie Emblen of her visit to examine the traditions and practices of education in Bangladesh (the cultural origin of many of her pupils) and how this might inform and influence her community's educational practices (not least with regard to parental involvement).
Zelda Isaacson examines some of the ‘facts’ about differential achievement between girls and boys in mathematics and takes a considered look at the types and depth of some of the varied explanations put forward to account for them.
But hers is not a detached examination — she writes of her belief that ‘action makes a difference’ and outlines some of the possible practical steps that can be taken as a result of her (and others') analysis.
Liz Trickett and Frankie Sulke report on the effects of the LAMP (Low Attainers in Mathematics) and RAMP (Raising Achievement in Mathematics) projects on both the teachers and pupils who participated, providing a challenge to all teachers to examine their views about both what their pupils are capable of and what mathematics is and should be about.
Jenny Maxwell and Dawn Gill both take up the challenge of the presumed cultural and political neutrality of mathematics and, by means of an examination of the common (and therefore frequently invisible) setting for mathematical problems, bring to light many (contentious) presumptions about acceptable, appropriate and valued uses for mathematics.
In Looking for relevance: can we let them decide?
Barbara Edmonds and Derek Ball pose the question ‘what is relevance?’ from the point of view of the pupils themselves.
Brenda Denvir takes up one of the most pressing contemporary issues, that of the multiple roles of assessment in schools, by looking at the intimately-related questions of ‘what are we assessing?’ and, ‘what are we assessing for?’
Eric Deeson explores ways in which the future, in the guise of developments in information technology, may shape the teaching of mathematics.
The last four articles (17–20) deal with teachers as individuals and look at the forces and pressures on them.
Anne Watson offers experience and advice about some of the personal preparation a teacher may need to undertake when moving to a more ‘investigative’ style of teaching.
Her  title, Opening-up, can be seen as referring to teachers becoming more responsive and accessible to their pupils (but also hence more personally vulnerable).
Responding to change by Rita Nolder gives a detailed account of three teachers undertaking personal change and some of the successes and stresses they encountered along the way.
John Mason in Tensions vividly describes some of the (necessarily) conflicting forces on teachers and suggests ways in which they can be seen as productive.
In the final article in this section, Rosemary Clarke compares the activities of teaching and Gestalt therapy, drawing parallels and pointing up interesting distinctions, as well as offering some of what she has learned in the course of being both a teacher and, subsequently, a therapist.
Mathematics for a multicultural society
Why do we need multicultural mathematics?
For many of us who work in urban schools, multicultural education has felt like the correct response to our growing awareness of the multiracial nature of our schools.
There has also been an increased recognition of the need for a multicultural curriculum in all schools to enable pupils to recognise diversity in societal and global issues more than a limited ethnocentric approach might permit.
This is embodied in the Swann Report principle of ‘Education For All’ to develop a fair and harmonious society.
The range of books on this area of education has steadily grown and most local education authorities have some kind of equal opportunities policies which include a commitment to multicultural education.
But there have been warnings against this — both from black parents and from the conservative popular press — and these are helping teachers to re-evaluate multicultural education and to consider much more fully why it is of benefit for all children and should lead to increased achievement and awareness amongst our pupils.
Mathematics is a central aspect of the curriculum in our schools.
It is essential, therefore, that a clear theoretical basis for multicultural mathematics be developed if we wish to demonstrate the value of a multicultural approach to education.
If a sound basis cannot be found for multicultural mathematics, then we may need to reconsider the value of this approach in other areas of the curriculum.
When considering why mathematics should reflect our multicultural society, a wide range of reasons can be identified.
I have found it helpful to categorise these into two areas — those which relate to the nature of mathematics and those which relate to the nature of mathematics education.
Of course, there is considerable overlap between these and both are intrinsically linked to the nature of society.
Reasons relating to the nature of mathematics
Some mathematics teachers express the view that there is no need to reconsider how we teach mathematics since, as it deals with universals, it is bound to be multicultural in that its abstract nature reaches across cultural divides.
Mathematics is viewed as socially neutral and its content is held to  be independent of the material world.
This perspective puts mathematics educators in a very comfortable position, until we recognise that it is not uncontentious and, in any case, is rarely made explicit to children, which would involve them in a detailed consideration of how mathematics has developed and the relations between abstract mathematics and reality.
When examining the mathematics curriculum we need to keep in mind that any curriculum consists of choices and selections from what is available, based on decisions made about what is valuable.
Paul Ernest examines the ways in which societal values pervade the British mathematics curriculum and Munir Fasheh explores the influence of four different authorities on the mathematics syllabus of the West Bank of Jordan.
In her article ‘Hidden Messages’, Jenny Maxwell demonstrates how problems set for children learning mathematics in different countries reflect the dominant political ideologies of those countries.
Whilst the examples used avoid questioning the assumptions on which these ideologies are based, mathematics is said to be neutral and divorced from social issues.
As soon as mathematics teachers address issues which are contentious, such as the 1986 CSE question related to arms spending, the question is seen as political not mathematical; this reinforces an image of mathematics as having nothing to do with explaining society.
If we really want to help children develop an awareness of which aspects of mathematics are universal, then it is essential that we extend the range of examples we use to illustrate abstract points, demonstrating more clearly how generalisations have been formed from examining patterns across individual instances.
These examples must be multicultural, if they are intended to show the universal nature of mathematics, and should also demonstrate how we move from reality to abstraction and back again.
We could also extend to all pupils the advantage bilingual pupils have in recognising language as a symbolic system, which helps with understanding mathematics as communication, by utilising the different languages in our society.
For example, through examining number systems in a variety of languages, a much clearer vision of how place value works as a simple way to communicate information about large numbers can be developed.
Martin Hughes discusses this in his book Children and Number.
Part of our understanding of the nature of mathematics must also involve a recognition of the fact that the symbolic representation used in any society is simply a particular convention.
Mathematics is a powerful tool for communication using culturally-defined conventions.
The fine definitions used in mathematics may differ from the general use of particular words.
The Cockcroft Report uses the example of the word ‘difference’ to illustrate a particular convention in British mathematics teaching.
As the language of mathematics is so tightly defined, the ability to use mathematics to communicate in a particular language may take longer to develop than we would expect, and this may lead us to underestimate pupils' grasp of ideas, particularly since language is so closely related to culture.
We also need to recognise that in our highly industrialised, extremely complex society, the dominant rationality is based on scientific determinism.
This is the ideology which validates decisions on what is considered valuable knowledge, leading to assumptions which Keddie sees as fostering the myth of cultural deprivation.
Syer discusses how deterministic  thinking is one of the aspects of institutional racism, affecting all subject areas.
Scientific rationality is reflected in the perception of mathematics in our society as being either right or wrong.
We are beginning to recognise the limitations of this approach in encouraging pupils to think mathematically, recognising the value of considering different approaches as well as logical determinism.
When mathematics is divorced from its social context, and becomes more abstract, the tendency to focus on scientific reasoning is increased.
A more multicultural approach might help expand pupils' mathematical experiences beyond a simple deterministic approach to a more realistic exploration of mathematics in life, which would also promote a more positive attitude towards diversity.
Reasons relating to the nature of mathematics education
Fundamental to British education is the aim to help all children achieve their full potential, and this is generally seen as involving building on the strengths children bring with them to schools.
As our society becomes more multicultural it is more essential for teachers to recognise the variety of skills children bring with them.
Part of our role as mathematics educators is to ensure that children know that the skills and background they bring to school are valued.
Valerie Emblen describes how important a knowledge of the children's mathematical background is when planning the mathematics curriculum for Bangladeshi children in London.
Success in mathematics is one of the critical filters in British society.
As mathematics educators, we may need to face our responsibility in encouraging pupils to have high expectations of their ability to succeed in mathematics.
Increasing the range and diversity of role models children meet in mathematical textbooks and building on the knowledge they have already acquired are two of the ways we can contribute to building the self-esteem shown in many Government reports to be crucial for success.
We also need to ensure that all children are educated beyond an assumption that mathematics has one correct form.
The tendency to assume that there are only right and wrong answers in mathematics may be limiting children's ability to cope with the diversity of problems they meet.
We have to help children to recognise the power of mathematics as a tool to solve problems, and that the tools are constantly evolving.
An historical, multicultural perspective, such as that employed by Hughes, may help children use and develop more versatile mathematical skills.
All adults need to be able to cope with diversity and to expect variety as we live in a highly varied world.
Ensuring a multicultural approach in schools is one way we can make sure children are aware of and respond positively to diversity.
Our society is multicultural and one particular group is undeniably underachieving — black children.
Reasons for this seem to be many and varied, but certainly the implication that only white boys participate in mathematics, as shown in many materials, cannot help.
Over recent years much work has been done to promote more positive images of women in mathematics, but this does not seem to have developed into a comparable awareness concerning race or class.
Mathematics has become  dehumanised, rather than developing as a means to explore patterns and relationships in the real world.
Western society places the highest value on the most abstract, thus creating an elitism which means many people feel alienated from mathematics, and, apart from small groups, feel it has little to do with their lives.
In mathematics education, we need to re-examine our approaches to ensure pupils see mathematics as for, and about, everyone, thus promoting recognition of mathematics as an activity we can all engage in.
As teacher expectation has been shown to influence achievement, we may also need to examine how teachers are socialised into expecting some groups to fail.
Twenty years ago Estelle Fuchs discussed the implications of the following statement made by an enthusiastic teacher in an urban school:
You have to remember that in a school such as ours the children are not as ready and willing to learn as in schools in middle-class neighbourhoods.
Similar views are still expressed in many staffrooms.
They are rarely challenged, nor are the implications of such statements examined, despite the effects they are likely to have on educational success.
It is also possible that as teachers we assess bilingual children's mathematical ability without reference to their first language, again creating lower expectations and failing to recognise the pupils' full abilities by confusing fluency in English with mathematical competence.
John Hyland's research suggests that teaching and testing in children's home languages reveals a much greater understanding than is shown when asking them to work in English only.
Until we recognise the particular skills bilingual children bring to mathematics lessons, we are likely to continue to underestimate their abilities.
What can teachers do to promote mathematics for a multicultural society?
A first step is to try to raise our own awareness of the issues involved in multicultural education generally.
Books such as Multicultural Education: Towards Good Practice by Arora and Duncan or Multicultural Education: Views from the Classroom by Twitchen and Demuth are good starting points as they provide some theoretical background as well as practical suggestions.
Another invaluable resource is the ILEA book Everyone Counts.
This book is an excellent guide for ensuring that the materials you are using do not portray racist or sexist stereotypes, and do reflect the range of cultures in society.
Reviewing current materials is a good first step for any re-evaluation of approaches to education.
If we are planning on providing quality education then we must build on what we know are good basic principles, as listed below.
Multicultural mathematics should start from the children in our classes and the rich variety of cultures that they bring to our school with them.
Mathematics for a multicultural society must recognise the skills children already have as well as those we want to enable them to develop.
Valerie Emblen's article explores this more fully.
We know that children develop mathematical concepts through manipulating objects and talking about what they are doing.
Any activities we introduce should build on these principles.
A wide range of activities will stimulate wide-ranging discussion.
We also need to ensure that we do not ignore the importance of talk for bilingual pupils because of our own inability to speak a particular language.
It is crucial that we provide as many opportunities as possible for children to discuss what they are doing in the language with which they feel most comfortable.
We need to provide a range of starting points which can be developed in any language, and to consider introducing some pupils' home languages.
If one of our aims is to increase pupils' understanding of the universal nature of mathematics, then we need to widen the range of examples from which generalisations are drawn.
The range of bilingual materials available is gradually increasing.
One example is the number stamps from Philip and Tacey.
Books and charts in a variety of languages provide good starting points for discussions.
We need to take advantage of the books which are available which provide ideas from non-European countries, such as Claudia Zaslavsky's books Africa Counts, Count on your Fingers African Style and Tic Tac Toe.
Most schools have a selection of resources based upon a white, ethnocentric curriculum, and publishers and producers still feel there is little market for anything else.
It is important that we ensure that the materials we use are a reflection of attitudes and expectations more suited to a diverse society, so many teachers may feel they need to collect a more multicultural range of resources.
Several local education authorities have resource centres that may be able to help, e.g. ILEA, Brent, Bedford, Coventry.
If we are aiming to help children to be aware of the relationship between mathematics and society, several approaches are possible.
We need to look more closely at the applications of mathematics and to consider using mathematics to challenge racist assumptions.
We need to be more sensitive to the messages underlying what are seen as politically neutral questions.
Dawn Gill's article looks at examples of ‘neutral’ questions from secondary mathematics textbooks.
We can re-examine the choices of data we make in demonstrating statistics as a tool.
Howson and Mellin-Olsen comment on this and the role of mathematics teachers:
Can maths teachers be entrusted with drawing inferences, trends etc. from significant data, or must they automatically stick to anodyne data which will offend no one but will automatically remove true significance from their work and lead to many students being bereft of motivation?
There are many opportunities to use more socially relevant data and to employ statistics to challenge myths presented as facts.
We can look at the history of how maths developed and the cultural presumptions of maths historians.
George Joseph's article ‘Foundations of Eurocentrism in Mathematics’ explores the weaknesses of the classical, eurocentric view of how mathematics developed.
We can use mathematics to help us examine differences between countries using games such as The World Feast Game or The Paper Bag Game.
By changing the contexts in which we use mathematics, we develop a more multicultural perspective and can help pupils to see how powerful mathematics can be as a tool for examining society.
Some issues to consider
Tokenism
Any initial work in multicultural mathematics may be seen to be tokenistic, especially if the only obvious reason for its inclusion is that it represents other cultures.
Colouring a few faces brown and celebrating a couple of extra festivals does not constitute multicultural education.
There are many teachers, however, who feel daunted by the possibility of the work they are doing being ‘tokenistic’ and therefore feel unable to do anything.
Avoiding tokenism certainly is not easy, but any developments we make must improve the quality of mathematics education, as well as introducing different cultures.
Detailed consideration of all aspects of multicultural mathematics can help ensure ideas are introduced from a theoretical rather than a random basis.
A recognition that education is an area where racism has become institutionalised, and that this needs to be changed, is perhaps the starting point for this.
The status of knowledge
It is important that we recognise that not all knowledge carries the same status.
As Kelly says:
Not only is the value element in education crucial, it is also highly problematic and it is this that creates particular problems for curriculum planning.
As the school curriculum is usually determined by the dominant ideology in society at present, a multicultural approach has low status.
This means that we have to be doubly careful to ensure that multicultural mathematics does not become a second-class mathematics curriculum for multiracial urban schools.
Maureen Stone's arguments that multicultural education is based on a deprivation model of black children explain how multiracial education may actually be placing them at a disadvantage.
It is crucial, therefore, that mathematics be recognised as being of less value if it is not based on a multicultural approach.
Multicultural mathematics is unlikely to be tokenistic if it can be justified in terms of mathematical purposes, linguistic purposes and anti-racist purposes.
If any of these criteria are not being met then there is a danger that the ideas being introduced are tokenistic.
A project-based approach
In some schools, there is a tendency for any work to be justified on the grounds that it is ‘part of a project’ rather than because of its educational value.
It is crucial that this does not happen with aspects of multicultural mathematics.
Learning to draw Islamic patterns at Eid, or Rangoli patterns at Diwali cannot be considered to be mathematics unless the mathematical ideas embedded in the patterns are fully explored — considering rotation, reflection and translation can turn this investigation into one where the place of mathematics in different cultures is clear rather than leaving one feeling that examples of important geometric ideas are somehow ‘outside’ the real world of mathematics.
A project-based approach can provide interesting and meaningful links between mathematics and other subject areas, but only if the curriculum aspects are considered in sufficient depth, and the actual mathematics involved is made explicit.
The involvement of parents
It is very easy for those of us in schools to decide on what is ‘good’ multicultural education for the children we teach, without ever consulting their parents.
This means that we deprive ourselves of their expertise and the valuable contributions they can make as well as failing to challenge the implications of statements such as Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's claim, ‘Children who need to be able to count and multiply are learning anti-racist mathematics — whatever that may be.’
All parents are rightly concerned about the quality of education their children receive, and an important aspect of multicultural education must be discussing its value with parents.
An interesting introduction to this area can be found in A.G. Davey's article ‘Giving Parents a Voice in Multicultural Education’.
Bilingual pupils
Research into the progress of bilingual pupils has demonstrated that support for, and recognition of the value of pupils' first languages are crucial for achievement.
If we consider the World Bank research, which demonstrates the need for some pupils to be educated in their home language if they are to reach their full potential, we must face the implications of this for mathematics education.
The SMILE (Secondary Mathematics Individualised Learning Experiment) team have addressed this issue and suggest ways in which their own materials may be amended to make them more appropriate for bilingual pupils.
These include content review, vocabulary explanations, pictorial support and checking for cultural assumptions.
These steps are needed but do not actually take advantage of the skills of bilingual pupils.
We should aim to build on bilingual pupils' increased potential for divergent thinking, and their abilities for concept transferral between languages.
We should also consider how far our mathematics curriculum can respond to linguistic diversity, and whether, for some of our pupils, new concepts might be more  appropriately introduced through their home languages.
Dawe's research demonstrating the importance of pupils' first language competence to mathematics, as well as the need for pupils to understand mathematical ideas in English, highlights the importance of both languages for children's progress.
Considering the links between mathematical development and language should be an important aspect of any curriculum which recognises our multicultural society.
Whose culture is it anyway?
The children in our schools come from many cultures and as teachers we try to introduce materials into the classroom that reflect their backgrounds.
We need to be aware that many of the ideas we introduce on an assumption that they are reflecting the children's backgrounds may have little or no meaning or relevance for the children.
To assume that a study of Islamic pattern will have particular meaning for all Moslem children is imposing an idealised view of others' cultures, rather than starting from the children's real community.
Mathematics materials need to offer images of a world which pupils recognise and feel part of, not unrealistic, ill-informed views of their pupils' cultures.
Moving forward
It should be clear from this article that a more multicultural approach would improve the quality of mathematics education, and that there is much that can be done to ensure that the mathematics we teach prepares children for our multicultural society.
As with all curriculum development there are many questions to be raised and pitfalls to try to avoid.
Many teachers will have already tried ideas presented here and there are many more to be worked on.
An essential part of developing an effective multicultural curriculum will be the willingness of individuals to work within the field whilst being prepared to recognise that the mistakes they make will be the lessons for future teachers.
Asian children in schools
Part One
This is the first of two articles written to discuss some aspects of the mathematical education of young children from the Indian sub-continent.
It is written after a trip of some five months to Pakistan, Northern India and Bangladesh.
The purpose of the trip was to study the education of young children in these countries.
During my stay I visited schools, homes and families.
My school, Thomas Buxton, is in the East End of London.
95 per cent of the children are from families of Asian origin, with more than 90 per cent from Bangladeshi backgrounds.
The staff has worked for some years to create links with the community and has worked to develop the curriculum, giving special attention to the learning needs of bilingual children.
The learning of mathematics has been a particular focus of attention.
Education and the family
These articles are written primarily to discuss the mathematical education of young children, but it is necessary, firstly, to see education in a wider social context.
In many of the places that I visited, universal primary education is not yet established.
A child's access to schooling varies greatly from place to place.
For instance, in the relatively prosperous city of New Delhi, in India, the municipal council provides free school clothing and a midday meal for poor children.
In Bangladesh, schooling is government organised and is free.
A recent survey showed that in a rural area only two-fifths of the child population between the ages of 6 and 14 was enrolled in school.
The average literacy rate in India is about 34 per cent.
This includes a 98 per cent literacy rate in the Southern Indian state of Kerala.
In Bangladesh the literacy rate is probably between 22 per cent and 25 per cent.
The 1981 census gives these figures: literacy amongst men 32.9 per cent; amongst women 14.8 per cent .
In all three countries the town child's access to schooling is better than that of the rural child.
Boys' education is seen as likely to bring direct economic benefit to the family and so is given priority over girls' education.
The tables below show the number of children on the rolls of two schools in rural districts of Bangladesh.
The tables show the relatively short school careers of some children.
For many it is not long enough to become literate or numerate in any real sense.
They also show that in all classes fewer girls attend than boys.:
Schooling is sometimes seen as yet another burden on scarce family resources.
A child in school is not a productive member of the family.
A father explained to me that he would put one of his three sons through primary and secondary education.
He explained, ‘We need two boys to help in the fields.
Shuel, the youngest, will be a doctor or an engineer, then we will all be better off’.
Resources may be organised to support the family as a whole, rather than be geared to the needs of the individual.
The distinction between education and schooling becomes clear in a rural society.
A child's education may consist largely of the mastery of traditional skills to be done in a traditional way.
The authority for doing things this way lies in the fact that they have always been done this way and so questioning is not encouraged.
The child is also subject to the authority of the joint family system, which puts the making of decisions in the hands of one or two senior male members of the family.
This authority is reflected both in the school teaching methods and the children's learning.
Learning is almost entirely by rote.
The child is required to memorise the next lesson in the centrally-prepared text-book, sufficiently to pass the next weekly, monthly or yearly test.
The next passage is quoted from Cenbose, an education magazine published in New Delhi, India.
Educators advocate a mental flexibility and independence, while teaching practice aims at transmission of knowledge and culture, traditions that are certified by authorities and not to be questioned…these factors result in a very great weakness of the exclusive reliance on text books and other such authoritative sources of information.
The mathematics curriculum
In Pakistan and Bangladesh the curriculum for all subjects is created by government-appointed textbook boards.
In India each state provides the curriculum.
These are four reasons for a centrally-controlled curriculum given by officials of the textbook board in Islamabad (Pakistan).
1
Ideological reasons: the intention is that the curriculum will support the building of a united country and an Islamic society.
2
Economic reasons: textbooks produced on a large scale are cheaper.
3
Teachers, up till now, have lacked professional expertise and so need the support of a well structured teaching programme.
4
The middle classes, especially those in government service, have to move from place to place and so need continuity of curriculum.
The memorisation of the textbook is often seen as an end in itself.
I rarely saw the learning supported by the practical work the textbooks themselves suggest.
Yet the children show a great deal of ingenuity and imagination in finding objects for their play.
They make boats from leaves and dolls from sticks and play games with stones.
The teachers themselves sometimes feel untrained to cope with the syllabuses.
This is particularly true of the mathematics syllabus.
A teacher in Pakistan told me, confidentially, ‘We miss out the chapter on sets’.
Because of economic and other pressures, schools in South Asia may place too great a reliance on a curriculum trapped between the covers of a book.
This curriculum is learnt almost entirely by rote, and mathematical knowledge and skills are acquired by teacher exposition, followed by repetition and practice.
The advantage of this is that teacher and child both know what the task is and what must be done to achieve success.
However, the content is far removed from the children's lives.
It also puts little stress on those problem-solving skills that are vital to the development of village life.
When Asian parents, particularly those from rural backgrounds, emigrate to Britain they enter a society with different expectations of schooling.
Teachers should not be surprised that many such parents find difficulties in understanding the aims of the curriculum and the teaching methods used in United Kingdom schools.
The onus is on  each school to communicate its aims and justify its procedures to all parents.
Mathematics in Asian schools
There is growing pressure for schooling in many parts of South Asia.
Schools are often bursting at the seams.
Where the climate is dry a yard, a garden or the corner of a field can become a school.
Mats are spread, a blackboard set up and a school is in session (see below).
The smallest children bring a slate or a tathi.
A tathi is a wooden board, whitened with a chalky substance on which the child writes with a wooden pen dipped in black ink.
It is taken home every night to be re-whitened.
In this way parents can see the lessons for the day.
In one tiny school in rural Bangladesh I saw the children practising their numbers on cut pieces of banana leaf.
The little girl opposite is copying her numbers carefully from the blackboard onto her slate.
She will learn to manipulate numbers through practice and repetition.
Her first task will be to learn to write and say the numbers.
She will move on to simple arithmetic, addition then subtraction.
Later, she will tackle tens and units, multiplication and division.
She will learn to chant addition and multiplication facts and her mathematics will be  almost entirely ‘sum’ based.
For instance, she will learn about weights and measures by tackling tasks in a work book (see diagram on p.88), such as those Bangladeshi children use.
I saw almost no practical work in school.
The children, of course, use their fingers as a counting aid.
The thumb on the right hand is used as a pointer to the other fingers on the same hand.
By pointing to the three sections of each finger, plus the tip, sixteen can be counted on the right hand.
I visited a government school in the Lahore district of Pakistan.
The fourth class was tackling a problem to do with the Muslim Inheritance laws.
This is in line with the Islamisation of the curriculum.
The teacher copied the problem onto the blackboard.
If a man who owns so much land dies and his sons are entitled to such a percentage, how much do his four sons each have, how much do three daughters each have, how much does the widow own?
The teacher went through each step and the children answered in unison.
The children then copied it into their books.
In this school mathematics and science were taught in English, social sciences in Punjabi.
This is the pattern in many schools in Pakistan and India: science and mathematics taught in English, social sciences in the local language.
In Bangladesh, Bengali is the teaching medium; English is taught as a subject from the first class.
A village school in Sylhet
My school is in the Spitalfields area of East London.
The community we serve is largely made up of families who have come to England from a rural district of Bangladesh called Sylhet.
Some sub-divisions of Sylhet are areas in which nearly every family has relatives in London, and so my visit there was of special significance to me.
I was invited to the school in the village of Atgor.
From the main road I took a bicycle rickshaw along the banana and coconut fringed lanes.
Before I saw the school I heard children's voices: one class was chanting its tables, another counting together, another reading out loud.
The school is a long low building.
It is ‘semi-pacca’; that is with white-washed brick walls and a roof thatched with banana leaves.
Inside, the headmaster's room is partitioned off at one end  of the building.
The rest of the building comprises one long room divided by woven screens.
The youngest children sit on mats on the floor; older children sit on benches, balancing their books on their knees.
I was taken to visit the classes.
The first was tackling simple arithmetic.
The teacher was demonstrating on the blackboard, the children copying onto slates.
The second class was reading in unison from the reading book.
When I came to the third class, the head introduced me as the ‘expert from London’.
Would I show them how to teach today's lesson?
Today's lesson proved to be 10 x 10 = 100.
The headmaster handed me the chalk.
To me, it seemed that those teachers were more likely to be experts in their own system than I would be.
However, the head persisted and so I quickly racked my brains and said I would do the sort of thing I do in my classroom at home.
I looked round for some small objects to work with.
The men produced matches from their pockets.
I asked for some children to work with me.
Six boys from the front bench were selected.
Children are ranged in order of their performance in the last test.
These were the most successful.
I put a handful of matches on the floor.
‘How many matches do you think there are?’
I asked.
I got no response.
I asked for my question to be translated into Bengali.
Still I got no response.
I knew the children were not usually encouraged to guess so I asked one boy directly.
He looked anxious, but answered, ‘Thirty’.
Another child counted them one-by-one and found twenty-one.
More children joined the circle.
I put a few more matches down.
There were more guesses, e.g. fifteen, twenty.
The first boy was obviously thinking hard.
‘No, more.
Thirty.’
It was twenty-nine.
Girls were at the back, looking on, but not joining in.
I moved some girls into the middle and asked them for their guesses.
Now the children were talking to their friends.
Although I did not understand I could see that they were discussing the problem.
The guesses became more realistic.
They took into account whether I had put matches down or taken them away.
Now I suggested that they might find a quicker way to count the sticks.
After a moment a girl shyly took them and began counting in twos.
The next time they were counted they were put in piles of four.
This proved difficult as the children did not readily count in fours.
A boy opposite me was obviously working something out in his head.
Suddenly he announced, ‘Forty-four.’
‘How did you know?’
I asked.
He answered in Bengali.
His teacher translated.
‘Eleven piles and eleven times four is forty-four.’
Now we got on apace.
We tried grouping in different numbers and decided that ten was ‘best’, because as one little girl said ‘Is counting easy, ten, twenty.’
I enjoyed working with the children.
They were alert, and bright and co-operative.
They were working in a foreign language with a teacher who was making far from usual demands.
It interested me to note that, before the children understood the task they had trouble in understanding what I was saying.
When they understood what was expected we had few communication problems.
‘Understanding’ depended at least as much on understanding the situation as on the words used in it.
It also seemed that those who were successful were those who were confident and willing to take risks.
My particular interest has been in the learning of mathematics by children of Asian backgrounds in English schools.
In the next part  I will discuss some of the ways my trip has helped to improve our teaching in London.
Part Two
This is the second of a set of two articles, written after a trip of some five months to Northern India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
In this article I will look at some of the ways we can support the mathematical learning of children from Asian backgrounds.
Most children come to school speaking little or no English; many are recently arrived in the country.
The discussion will focus on the youngest children, but I feel much will be relevant to the education of children of all ages.
Children of Asian families in English schools
It is said that ‘travel broadens the mind’.
Unfortunately, it can also be true that previously-held prejudices can be reinforced.
Soon after arriving in Pakistan, I met a very wise woman.
She was the headmistress of a girls' school.
She warned me against noticing only the differences between life in the Indian sub-continent and in England and she warned me about being seduced by the apparent ‘exoticness’ of it all.
‘After all,’ she said to me, ‘people here don't find themselves strange or exotic.
They find their lives very ordinary.’
A parallel can be drawn between this and the way we view the children in our care.
We must see all our children as potential learners.
Whether they have just arrived in this country, or speak little English or have difficult home circumstances, unless we see them as competent learners we will soon find reasons why they cannot learn.
In my first article I wrote of the ingenuity and imagination I saw in children's play in Asia.
I also referred to the child's role as a productive member of the family; children often take on real responsibility at an early age.
A child may work with father or mother; s/he may look after a younger brother or sister; s/he may be responsible for the family cow or goats or for selling the family produce in the market.
In my own school, the nursery teacher drew attention to a four year old girl who showed remarkable judgement in handling quantities of water.
We made enquiries and found that she had helped her mother to carry water every day in Bangladesh.
If you want to carry the smallest possible quantity of water or get the best possible price in the market, the judgements you make are important in a way those made in a water tray or school shop can never be.
In any class the children will bring a wide variety of experience to school.
Whether this has been in Bangladesh or Bradford or East London, the teacher must learn to accept the children as they are as the starting point of her teaching.
Rather than seeing the children as ‘deprived’ she can identify each child's strengths and build on these.
I am fortunate to work in a school where all the children are seen as people with questions to ask, ideas to share and problems to solve.
Under these circumstances, children are able to use all their skill to develop and share their thinking.
I remember many instances of children finding ways to share their thinking.
Abdul Shahid, a Bengali-speaking five year old and a beginner in English, wanted to show off his three sand pies lined up in order of size.
He pointed and said proudly, ‘Father Bear, Mother Bear, Baby Bear’.
At this time Syeduz was nearly six and in his second term in the infant school.
He was tackling a problem, to find the heaviest of three parcels.
He had used a balance to find the answer and declared: ‘This one big one, this one little one, this one nothing.’
Factors affecting the teaching approach
Having acknowledged that all children need the intellectual stimulation provided by the school curriculum, the question is, how do we, as teachers, devise a teaching scheme which focuses on each child's strengths rather than on ‘deficiencies’?
This is, of course, not a question only for teachers of children from ethnic minority groups, and is particularly relevant when considering all aspects of underachievement.
At Thomas Buxton school developing our mathematics curriculum is a continuing process.
The insights I gained from my trip to Asia have supported this process.
We want to provide for the children's cognitive development, yet do not wish to assess them by something they are not fully competent in: the English language.
This has forced us to look closely  at what we want the children to achieve and our ways of teaching.
These are some of the things we have considered.
1
It seems important that children should not be confronted by unfamiliar ideas and unfamiliar language at the same time.
New mathematical ideas are set firmly in a known context.
I am reminded of the lesson I took in a school in Sylhet which I described in my first article and the way the understanding of the task helped the children to understand the English I was using.
stories, outings and practical experience all provide starting points for mathematical exploration.
In this way very soon every child can join in the work of the class.
Mumith was, at the time I am thinking of, just six years old.
He had come from Bangladesh about three months previously and had been in school about two months.
We had been working on ideas of time and speed.
The children had run races, pushed cars, made clocks, etc.
Today we were talking about animals.
‘Do you know an animal that moves quickly?’
I asked Mumith.
‘Tiger, Miss,’ he answered.
‘Why do you think tigers have to go quickly?’
I asked him.
There was a long pause.
I began to get anxious.
Had I asked too much of him?
Then he stretched out his hands and made pouncing movements.
‘Tiger hungry, Miss.’
He had been able to join in mathematical discussion with the English he had at that time.
2
This anecdote also illustrates the next point I will make; the importance of accepting the meaning and intention of a communication, without criticising the form it takes.
Communication is vital if we are to see the quality of a child's thinking and assess the support it needs.
The children must feel confident to use any means they have to pass the message.
A child who is new to using English will inevitably use more non-verbal means of communication than a native English speaker, in an English school.
More time may be needed for the child to devise a way to make the meaning.
3
Our teachers have also found that the mathematics curriculum provides many opportunities for the children to develop their language skills.
The learning context demands that the children express prediction and uncertainties; they must make and test guesses and share them with those they are working with.
We have become aware of the interdependence of mathematical and language learning.
4
Children whose families have come from other countries may have a whole range of skills that are not normally recognised in English schools.
In Asia, I became far more aware than I had been in London of the very rich tradition of songs, stories and games.
Parents and children can share these skills with the school.
Some of our children were writing the number symbols used in Pakistan and Bangladesh.
This led us to wonder how many number names and symbols we could collect.
Parents, friends and relations joined in and wrote, or counted onto a tape recorder, the numbers one to ten.
Aziz was, at that time, the only Arabic speaker in the school.
He brought his uncle to write the Arabic numerals.
Aziz became the ‘expert’ and enjoyed showing off ‘his’numbers, Shahid, a Bengali speaker, and Javed, a Punjabi speaker, were seen comparing the Bengali and Urdu symbols.
Shilpi, counting in Bengali, looked up and she said, ‘We better 'an you, Miss.’
‘Oh, yes.
Why?’
I asked.
‘Cos we know English and Bengali.
You know English.’
Many benefits derive from involving parents and from giving value to home languages.
This was on top of the mathematical work generated.
It involved a great deal of counting, sorting, matching, etc.
For example, Nobinul noticed that in all the notations we had collected, two digits were used to express ten.
This lead to valuable work on the way the number system works and on ‘tens and units’.
5
Many parents find difficulty in understanding the aims and methods of mathematics teaching.
In my first article I explained why there might be special difficulties for parents educated in Asia, as expectations differ.
It is the school's duty to articulate its practices in a way that parents can understand.
Formal links, such as parents' evenings, can be useful but more informal occasions often provide a relaxed atmosphere in which parents can ask their own questions.
For this reason, parents are always welcome to see their children at work in our school.
The school has various other ways to encourage parents to join in the work of the school.
One of these is a regular weekly games afternoon in which parents are invited to share games and equipment with the children.
Whenever possible, speakers of mother tongues are available so that questions can be asked and answered.
This contact with parents has brought many benefits to the school; not least are the many new games we have learned.
6
Teachers need to record the things that the child has learned; they need to see how thinking is developing and the best way to support it.
We feel that assessments should take place as part of the normal learning activity.
Our teachers try to be aware of what the children are saying and doing and to record significant instances which tell how thinking is developing.
For instance, Parvin and Sabina had been given the task of measuring each other with bricks.
The teacher had given them bricks of different widths.
Parvin had measured her friend and was waiting to be measured.
Her teacher noted that she said, ‘I got big bricks.
She got little ones.
She want more ‘an me.’
This told us a lot about Parvin's ability to predict outcomes, to make and express judgements and to engage with a task, as well as her knowledge of concepts of size and measuring.
Also, we can often see that children can use concepts that they cannot yet express in English.
I have learned that there are no special practices or techniques we must learn in order to teach mathematics to our bilingual children.
I feel that everything I have mentioned in this article is part of good mathematical teaching practice, e.g. that all young children should be allowed to formulate mathematical ideas in familiar language, that all children should be regarded as potential learners and that parents should be helped to understand what the school is trying to achieve.
Asian children, like all the children in our schools, deserve the very best mathematical teaching that we can give.
The marginalisation of girls in mathematics: some causes and some remedies
Introduction
In the last few years the volume of literature concerned with gender and mathematics has grown apace, both at home and abroad.
The same can be said of literature in the broader field of gender and science, where there is much which is of interest to mathematics educators.
During this period there has also grown up an international community of people interested in gender in mathematics and/or science and/or technology.
Organisations have been formed and conferences held.
This broad and international perspective is extremely valuable in enabling us to move forward — in knowledge, in interpretation, and in strategies for change.
So, although the focus of my discussion here is the experiences of girls in mathematics in the UK, I shall also refer to other work where appropriate.
This article is organised into four main sections.
What are the ‘facts’?
Why does it matter?
What might some of the reasons be?
What can we do about it?
As will become clear, I do not see these questions as independent of each other, but I think it is helpful to try and consider them separately as well as in interaction.
In the course of discussion, I shall also consider two further key questions.
(a)
Can we identify processes which exclude or marginalise girls in mathematics'?
(b)
Can we place the marginalisation of girls in mathematics within a broader canvas and see it as a particular case of deeply-rooted social forces which affect many other groups in society?
What are the ‘facts’?
What do we actually know about the achievements of girls in mathematics?
How do these compare with the achievements of boys?
What are the  experiences of girls as learners of mathematics?
Are girls treated equally with boys in mixed mathematics classrooms?
These are the sorts of questions to which we have at least partial answers, and which I shall look at in this section.
Data which go toward answering the first two of these questions derive from a number of sources.
One large-scale source is the public examination statistics for England and Wales, which are published each year.
These show that there has been a gradual improvement in girls' performance in mathematics relative to that of boys.
For the majority of pupils, it is probably the case that girls now do as well as boys.
However, at the higher levels of attainment, boys are still achieving proportionally far better results than girls and are participating more.
For example, in the old 16+ system, despite a gradual improvement in girls' achievements (see, for example , the table below), each year more boys than girls were entered for O level mathematics, and of those who entered, a higher proportion of boys than girls obtained grade A. At CSE, the entry (and pass) rate of girls has in recent years been higher than that of boys — but boys have obtained the most grade I passes.
In GCSE, assuming the existing pattern continues, we can predict that more boys than girls will be entered at the top level, and proportionally more boys will gain grade A.
At A level, nearly three times as many boys as girls enter, and as at 16+, a greater proportion of the boys who enter gain the top grades.
In 1975 the A level pass rate was two girls to every seven boys and in 1985 it was two to every five — undoubtedly an improvement, but still far from approximate equity.
If one presumes that girls are innately as capable as boys of learning mathematics, then these figures suggest that girls are underachieving relative to boys, for whatever reason (or that boys are overachieving).
Alternatively, girls would have to be presumed to have a lower ability to learn mathematics than boys.
These possibilities are discussed in the section entitled ‘What might some of the reasons be?’.
The work of the Assessment of Performance Unit (APU, 1985) provides another large-scale source of data in this country.
The APU surveys, carried out over the five-year period 1978–1982, monitored the attainment and attitudes of large numbers of 11 and 15 year old pupils.
Writing about gender differences in their data, Lynn Joffe and Derek Foxman of the APU mathematics team concluded that their findings show deteriorating confidence of girls compared with boys.
(That is, comparing the results of the 11 year old pupils' surveys with those of the 15 year olds.)
They also found that at age 15:
The differences in performance are minimal — except in the top attainment bands.
and that
The proportion of boys to girls among 15-year-old pupils obtaining the highest 10 per cent of scores on APU concepts and skills tests is 61 per cent to 39 per cent.
(Joffe and Foxman, 1984)
There is an interesting parallel between these figures and the O level pass rate statistics of 60% to 40% in 1984.
To add to this gloomy picture of girls lagging behind boys at the top attainment levels in this country are the results of national mathematics competitions, where year after year boys overwhelmingly gain the top scores.
Internationally, the situation is less clear-cut.
At an IOWME (International Organisation of Women and Mathematics Education) discussion group in 1986 (see Isaacson, Rogers and Dekker, 1986), Gila Hanna reported on a gender analysis she and Erika Kuendiger had carried out on data from the Second International Mathematics Study (SIMS).
The SIMS data, gathered during 1982 in twenty countries, provide information on the mathematics achievement of pupils aged 13 and 17.
Hanna and Kuendiger found that differences in mathematics achievement between countries are much greater than differences between girls and boys.
There were five countries (of the twenty involved in the study) where there was no difference between girls and boys, five where girls did better and ten where boys did better.
However, these are global figures.
I do not know whether the pattern which we see in this country — of significant differences between girls and boys appearing only at the higher levels of achievement — would also apply to the SIMS data.
But at what stage does this difference appear, and why?
In the article on the APU data cited above, Joffe and Foxman claim that ‘the main differences in performance are already established by age 11’.
This statement is in direct contradiction to the view of other researchers that at least up to age eleven, girls do as well as boys in mathematics.
Indeed, this is an area of heated debate and it is quite difficult to tease out what is actually going on.
I shall refer to those who believe that differences in attainment appear during adolescence as the A group, and those who argue that these differences are evident during (or at least by the end of) the primary years as the P group.
The argument goes something like this:
As: When the 11+ tests were widely held, every year girls as a group did better than boys as a group on all three tests, including the one for arithmetic.
Ps: That may be true, but the 11+ arithmetic test was very limited in scope.
It only really tested computational ability.
As: The primary mathematics curriculum was arithmetic.
The 11 + examination tested what teachers believed it was important for children to know before going on to secondary school.
Girls learned these crucially important skills extremely well — and continue to do so!
Ps: That's so, but these are only computational skills.
As: You're saying girls failed because they did well at what was taught and tested!
Ps: No, we're saying that once pupils get into the secondary school, additional skills are needed for learning mathematics.
The 11+ didn't test for those, and as they become more important — spatial skills  and problem-solving ability, for instance— so girls' performance in mathematics tends to deteriorate.
The argument then divides up.
One lot of As holds that not only do girls succeed in primary school, they continue to succeed in secondary school.
What goes wrong for girls, they claim, is that teachers do not appropriately value the good work which girls do in mathematics.
This point of view is exemplified by the work of Rosie Walden and Valerie Walkerdine (1985).
Another A group perspective is that girls do succeed at what primary schools ask them to do, but that primary schools and teachers fail to prepare them adequately for more advanced mathematics.
The mathematics curriculum is much broader now than it was at the time of the 11+.
Primary teachers, however, often continue to restrict the curriculum they offer to one which is mainly arithmetic.
One group of Ps ends up at a very similar position to this.
The differences are there at primary school, they would say, but this is largely because of the educational experiences of the children (in and out of the classroom).
More extreme Ps would hold that the differences are necessarily there.
Most people do not make their position explicit, partly at least because this is still one of the many questions to which we have uncertain answers.
All we can say is that girls do as well as boys at the mathematical skills which primary teachers value, such as computation, but that the APU surveys, and the analysis of other researchers such as Hilary Shuard (1986), have picked up differences in the performance of girls and boys which mathematics educators regard as significant.
In the main, Shuard focuses on differences in achievement in specific areas of the curriculum — boys doing better in questions involving understanding of place value, spatial visualisation and problem solving, for example , while girls, as ever, do better on straight computational questions.
The APU surveys confirm these findings with the added perspective that such differences are only apparent at the top attainment levels.
Whether these differences would remain if primary teachers emphasised different aspects of mathematics and different ways of approaching mathematics is unknown.
Shuard comments that:
It would be mischievous to suggest that pupils who pay attention to the teacher's traditional emphases in primary mathematics give themselves a positive disadvantage for future success in mathematics, but the evidence seems to point in this direction.
(Shuard, 1986)
This debate is important because it points up that ‘the facts’ are not necessarily as simple and straightforward as they might at first sight seem.
And how one interprets ‘facts’ has a significant effect on the actions one might then take in response to them.
Interpretation of the facts is very closely bound up with the question raised in the third section —‘what might some of the reasons be?’— and I consider this further there.
Also in that section, I examine the possible answers to the other questions posed previously — that is, ‘what are the experiences of girls as learners of mathematics?’ and ‘are girls treated fairly in mixed-sex mathematics classrooms?’.
First, however, I diverge from these to address the question ‘why does it matter?’.
If differential achievement is of no importance after  all, then subtleties of interpretation need not be seriously debated and girls' experiences would hardly be worth exploring.
Why does it matter?
There are several different kinds of answer to this question, to some extent bound up with one's understanding of the reasons for and interpretation of ‘the facts’.
One has to do with justice.
If the reason girls achieve less than boys is because of remediable educational or social conditions which disadvantage them, then it is clearly unjust that girls should get a less fair deal than boys.
Attainment and confidence in mathematics are crucially important for many further and higher education courses, and for jobs in the future.
Even if only part of the reason for the discrepancy we see is because of factors under our control, natural justice would demand that we strive to put these right.
Schools, at least, should not discriminate against any group of pupils and should strive to counter discriminatory ‘social’ factors.
The parallel with anti-racist education is clear.
Leaving justice aside, however, there are good pragmatic reasons for concern.
These can be summed up in the words of the Royal Society's working party on Girls and Mathematics:
…without a much increased output of mathematics graduates moving into a range of jobs, the UK faces considerable problems….
(The Royal Society, 1986)
And these problems, of course, are not confined to the UK.
The shortage of people with adequate training in mathematics is world-wide.
Presently, the talents of large numbers of girls and women who might have the potential to work in jobs which require mathematics, are being lost.
After all, amongst the girls who do not obtain the top 16+ grades, or who do not go on to do A level mathematics, are some very able pupils.
The examination statistics as a whole show girls ahead of boys in numbers of subjects taken and passed, and grades obtained at 16+, and almost on a par at A level.
It is only in certain subjects — notably mathematics, technical subjects and physics — that boys do better than girls.
In other areas of the curriculum, such as in early language work and later in modern languages, history and biology, girls are ahead of boys.
However, there are significant differences in the way the education system responds to discrepancies in achievement.
When boys have difficulty learning to read in the primary school, people do not say ‘Oh, well, never mind, boys just aren't very good at reading’.
Instead, great efforts are made to ensure that boys do keep up, through, for example, remedial classes which continue into secondary schooling.
It has often struck me that remedial classes everywhere in the school system are heavily populated with boys needing help with their language development, yet when able girls slide down in mathematics, that is generally considered as something ‘natural’ about which no active steps need be taken.
Similarly, to revert to the question of the 11+, the fact that girls as a group consistently did better than boys did not result in more grammar  school places for girls.
Instead, the pass mark was set higher for girls!
It was argued, and firmly believed, that boys were ‘really’ intellectually more able than girls and therefore more likely to benefit from a grammar school education.
The reason girls appeared to do better than boys at age eleven was due to the earlier onset of puberty in females, with its accompanying accelerated maturation.
‘Positive discrimination’ in favour of boys was operated in that context for many years, yet such ‘discrimination’in favour of girls — such as by providing them with extra help in their mathematics, or the opportunity to make up lost ground in CDT — is generally frowned upon.
I would therefore argue that even if the discrepancy between girls' and boys' performance at the top levels of achievement in mathematics was entirely due to differences in ability (which I do not believe, but nevertheless should stay as a possible hypothesis), there is a strong case for saying that we should act to try to alter the situation.
As stated above, there are close parallels here with anti-racist work in education.
In both cases, regardless of the reasons for measured differences in attainment between groups of pupils, both justice and need demand that we act to alter an inequitable status quo.
It matters that girls are getting a less fair deal than boys if, as is the case, fewer of them leave school with qualifications which are useful for employment.
Some years ago Lucy Sells (1978) talked about mathematics as ‘the critical filter’ that determined which careers people might enter.
This is still very much the case today.
It also matters that society is losing out on a great deal of badly-needed potential mathematical talent.
But how best to direct our efforts for improvement is bound up with our perceptions of the reasons for the differences.
What might some of the reasons be?
Over the years, many types of explanation have been put forward to account for ‘the facts’.
These range widely, encompassing such disparate hypotheses as: genetic differences in mathematics ability; parental expectations; the mathematics curriculum and methods of classroom organisation; and girls' ‘fear of success’ in mathematics.
There are so many ‘explanations’ that I find it helpful to subdivide them into categories.
There are different ways of doing this.
One set of categories I have used is:(a) cognitive,(b) educational, and (c) a group which I call the affective/attitudinal/social category.
According to this grouping, genetic or innate differences in ability would go into the ‘cognitive’ basket, as would another hypothesis, namely, that the reason for girls' lower achievement in mathematics is their poorer spatial visualisation ability.
Parental expectations and girls' ‘fear of success’ would go into the affective/attitudinal/social group together with such factors as lack of confidence, differences in the perceived importance of mathematics, peer group pressures and so on.
Classroom organisation, teacher behaviour, and the influence of single-sex vs mixed-sex teaching of mathematics would be classed as ‘educational’, and so would sexism in the curriculum or in classroom materials.
There are far too many for me  to examine them all properly in this article.
I shall select just a few for analysis, and readers are directed to the reading list for additional sources of information.
There is, however, a different way of analysing these many hypotheses.
That is, by asking about each one where its proponents place the responsibility for the relative lack of success in mathematics of females who are, in a general educational sense, able pupils.
In other words, by asking about each how it answers the question —‘do girls fail, or do we fail them?’
In many instances, the same ‘explanation’ can fall into either of these camps.
Reverting again to the 11+, it would have been possible to respond to the results of the tests by saying, ‘boys are less able at age 11 — they are failing to make proper use of their primary school education’ or, as in fact happened, by removing the responsibility from individual boys and situating it elsewhere, in this instance in biology.
A paradigm example of this is the vexed question of spatial visualisation.
It has been argued, for a long time now, that the reason girls do not do so well at mathematics is that females, from at least adolescence onwards, have poorer spatial visualisation ability than males.
Tests of spatial visualisation have indeed seemed to confirm that this is the case.
(See, for example, Maccoby and Jacklin, 1974.)
Now, there are a number of ways of responding to this ‘fact’.
The simple one is to say, ‘here we have our answer, and we need look no further — males just are naturally better at spatial visualisation, and hence at mathematics’.
Another is to say, ‘yes, females are lacking in this respect’, but then deny that spatial visualisation is an important factor in the learning of mathematics.
A third response is to agree that as things are presently constituted females do end up with poorer spatial visualisation skills by adolescence (which may or may not affect the learning of mathematics), but then claim that the reason for this outcome is differential male-female learning experiences.
(See, for example, Fennema, 1979.)
These differential learning experiences (and/or social influences which discriminate against girls in this respect), it may then be argued, also independently affect the learning of mathematics.
Often cited in this context is the fact that young boys, far more often than girls, play with Lego and other constructional toys, thus building up their spatial concepts and skills gradually over time.
(See, for example, Taylor, 19–36.)
Differences in spatial visualisation ability and mathematics attainment may thus be different outcomes of the same basic cause or may themselves be cause and effect.
The difficulty is that we do not have enough evidence to come to a sure conclusion.
We do know that at present males perform better than females at spatial visualisation tests.
We also have some evidence (see, for example, Whyte, 1986) that this may be a learned difference which can be altered through appropriate educational experiences.
The extent to which this can be done, and, further, whether or not attainment in mathematics is significantly affected by this difference, is unknown.
We are forced to conclude that our present knowledge is too limited to cope with these complexities.
Individual teachers and researchers will, of course, form their own conclusions from the available evidence, backed up by their own experience; conclusions which could put this particular ‘explanation’ into either of the two groups I described above.
Similar problems arise if we look at ‘the facts’ about girls' experiences as learners of mathematics, where the single/mixed-sex debate, the question of teacher behaviour and the debate on classroom organisation and curriculum materials must be considered.
Here, too, there are great areas of uncertainty.
There is some evidence that in mixed-sex classrooms teachers give more attention to boys, to the detriment of girls' learning.
There is also some evidence, but very limited indeed, that girls may prefer a less competitive and more collaborative style of working, so that classrooms which are resource based and organised for group working tend to be classrooms where girls thrive.
To take the single/mixed-sex question: there is some evidence, mainly based on one school (Smith, 1986) that when pupils in a mixed school are taught in single-sex classes for mathematics for some years, girls' performance improves.
It is essential, however, to be very cautious about all such evidence.
For one thing, conclusions drawn from a very limited sample may not be reliable.
For another, there may be other factors at work giving rise to the outcome noted.
In this instance, the very fact that a school cares enough about the success of its female pupils to try an experiment in single-sex teaching may be sufficient to account for their improved performance.
Many significant messages will have been conveyed to both teachers and pupils.
For instance, teachers involved in this scheme would know that the success of their female pupils would be very carefully monitored, and that senior people in the school would be looking at the girls' test results.
In those circumstances, teachers would be likely to offer girls a great deal of encouragement, perhaps more than they previously had done.
Similarly, the girls in the scheme could hardly fail to be aware of eyes on them, and of their success in mathematics being of importance to significant others.
In other words, it could be these unspoken messages which altered the classroom climate sufficiently for girls to do better, rather than the simple fact of them being in a single-sex environment.
Another kind of explanation is offered by Rosalinde Scott-Hodgetts (1986).
She applies Pask's notion of two distinct learning strategies — serialist and holist — to the gender and mathematics issue and suggests that girls may tend towards serialist strategies, which are also emphasised by primary teachers and thus reinforced.
Boys, on the other hand, tend towards holist strategies, and get training in serialist strategies from their teachers, thus providing the opportunity for them to become versatile learners.
As ‘the most successful mathematics students will generally be versatile learners’, this, if it is true, could make a significant contribution to our understanding of the processes by which girls are gradually marginalised in mathematics.
As this is quite a difficult idea, which I have no space to elaborate here, readers are recommended to read Scott-Hodgetts' paper cited above.
She offers a persuasive and very interesting hypothesis, as yet unsubstantiated, to which classroom research could usefully be directed.
And, indeed, if we look closely at any of the explanations which have been offered, we are forced to admit that we actually know very little beyond the bare statistics of attainment in public examinations or national surveys.
Where does this uncertainty leave us?
How can we act when so much is unknown?
It is in this context of agnosticism that I shall look at my fourth question, ‘what can we do about it?’
What can we do about it?
For a start, I begin with the premise that action makes a difference.
My second premise is that in such a complex area, where social, cognitive pedagogic, affective, inter-personal and indeed ethical factors interact as they do in all aspects of education — there is unlikely to be a simple or single answer.
From my perspective, then, our lack of certainty should lead, not to inaction but to action on a multitude of fronts simultaneously.
Where changing something could make a difference, and seems unlikely to do harm, we should go ahead and do it.
Into this category I put such obvious improvements as eliminating sexism from textbooks, other curriculum materials and examinations.
For instance, if examples in which females play an active role appear as often as those in which the active person is male, this may help counteract the prevailing view in society that mathematics is primarily an activity for males.
Similarly, where changing something seems commendable anyway, for ethical or social reasons, for example, and may incidentally benefit girls, we should do that.
Changing classrooms from solely competitive places to ones where all pupils can learn the vital skills of co-operation and collaboration is such an instance.
The ability to work well as a member of a team is a life skill and one which is increasingly valued in the world of work.
If this also makes mathematics classrooms places where girls feel more comfortable and therefore encourages them to stay with mathematics longer, that is all to the good.
Extending the curriculum to include a range of applications which more adequately than at present represents the kinds of human endeavour where mathematics is used would be another such change, with fewer examples involving ballistics and war, for instance, and more involving such activities as working with fabrics, designing appliances for the disabled or looking at the school canteen's queuing problems.
Also, examples which reflect everyday human interests — e.g. going on holiday, buying household goods, holding a raffle — rather than ones which focus on male-dominated activities such as football and motor car racing, may help girls (and boys) become aware of the general usefulness of mathematical skills in everyday life.
This would be good in itself as well as helping to decrease sexism in mathematics classroom materials.
Into this category of changes which are good in themselves also fall such strategies as encouraging girls as well as boys to play with constructional toys and engage in CDT activities as they move through the education system from nursery to secondary school.
This could have the effect of improving girls' spatial visualisation skills — and may also, directly or indirectly, favourably affect their learning of mathematics.
It could also have the effect of suggesting to girls that activities society regards as ‘male’ are pleasurable and rewarding, and therefore encourage them to stay with the male-dominated subjects — science, technology and mathematics throughout secondary schooling.
If, alongside this, boys are allowed to develop e.g. their caring faculties and to contemplate traditionally female careers such as nursing and social work, we might also see fewer boys taking A level mathematics and finding it unsatisfying for them, as Sheila Russell's research (1983) indicated is all too frequently the case.
Russell  interviewed sixth form pupils in the Bradford area during 1982, and amongst other things commented that ‘it was disturbing to discover the number of boys who were reluctantly studying the subject mathematics at A level, and were not enjoying it’.
Other changes, such as experimenting with the creation of single-sex mathematics classes in a mixed school, are less straightforward and would depend for their success on the particular context of each individual school, and especially the reasons for employing this strategy.
As a way of focusing the attention of school staff on the importance of encouraging girls to work at their mathematics, it is an excellent strategy.
It also, by the simple fact of providing a space in the school day where girls are separated from boys, can relieve the stresses for girls who may be suffering harassment from their male peers — in or out of the classroom.
(See, for example, Mahony, 1985.)
Some mature women who had returned to study mathematics and science described their memories of learning mathematics at school.
Many commented on the effect on their learning of having boys in their class.
For example:
Especially in maths I couldn't stand the competitiveness of seeing the ‘clever boy’(there's always one in every class!) do the exercises miles before everyone else and understanding things quicker than everybody which just reinforced the idea that I didn't have a ‘mathematical brain'.
I was encouraged to do A level maths at school, but didn't fancy being in a group full of nasty adolescent boys (as I then saw it) and so opted for English and languages.
Single-sex setting can, however, backfire.
If the staff of a school are required to ‘do something about equal opportunities’ and have read that a single-sex environment improves girls' performance in mathematics and science, there may well be the belief that once they have reorganised their classes in this way, they have done all that is necessary.
And in a social context of too few well-trained and experienced mathematics teachers, where the parents of boys are more likely to complain if their children are badly taught, the girls' classes may well be assigned the less competent or less experienced teachers.
The justification given could be that it is easier to control girls than boys, and therefore the ‘stronger’ teachers should be given the more difficult classes, i.e. the boys' classes.
If this happens, the simple fact of shifting to single-sex classes is unlikely to benefit girls.
Conclusions and future directions
The previous section starts with a premise — that action makes a difference.
This section too starts with a premise, which is that individual pupils are active participants in their own education.
This may seem so obvious as not to need stating, but I believe that it can be overlooked.
It is easy to fall into the trap of looking for causal relations between what we (the education community) do and what pupils achieve, and forget to take into  account our pupils' own efforts, perceptions and experiences.
I believe that there is a very complex social dynamic operating in this (and other) areas of education and that therefore simple cause-and-effect hypotheses are unlikely to be adequate.
The title of this article may suggest that I am claiming that all girls are marginalised in mathematics, but I hope that I have indicated that the situation we actually see is far more complicated than this.
The examination statistics, for example, depressing though they are, do not convey a uniform picture of low achievement in or exclusion from mathematics learning for girls.
There are indeed significant differences in the achievements of boys and girls, but nonetheless, many girls do succeed.
Further, there is such a large overlap between girls' and boys' test or examination results that it is true to say that a great many girls do better at mathematics than the majority of boys.
Another way to put this is to point out that it is interesting and significant that many females are not alienated from mathematics.
Further, many females who are alienated or marginalised at one stage of their lives are included at another, and vice versa.
The statements written by two of the women on the HITECC course cited above are illustrative of the latter claim.
I therefore see the processes by which these shifts come about as crucially important to our understanding of the interrelationship of gender and mathematics.
In a recent paper (Isaacson, 1988) I put forward two theoretical constructs, coercive inducements and double conformity, which ‘individually and even more so together offer powerful explanations and far-reaching insights’.
Coercive inducements are inducements which are so powerful, and so difficult to refuse, that they come to act as a kind of coercion.
The rewards and approval granted girls for appropriately ‘feminine’ behaviour — dates, pretty clothes, marriage and children — are an example, as are the rewards for appropriately ‘masculine’behaviour, such as money and power, offered to boys.
Double conformity describes a situation where a person has to conform, at the same time, to two, mutually-inconsistent sets of standards.
Women in ‘male’ occupations often experience just this — there is conflict between, for example, ‘behaving like a proper woman’and behaving in a manner appropriate to an engineer or scientist.
There is, regretfully, no space in this article to spell out in greater detail just what I mean by these dynamic explanatory constructs.
I can do no more here than say that I believe that they illuminate some of the processes whereby females come to wish to disassociate themselves from mathematics and other scientific and/or technical activities.
Males, also, can especially be affected by coercive inducements, usually in the opposite direction.
That is, boys can be coercively induced into careers which are traditionally male, while girls are being coercively induced into adopting traditionally female choices and modes of behaviour.
Further, the operation of these processes is not restricted to the male-female dimension.
I believe that these (and not only these) deeply-rooted social-dynamic forces act on other groups in society in such a way as to make it relatively more difficult for some groups than others to enter particular occupations.
Here, yet again, there is a parallel with anti-racist education.
An understanding of the processes involved in ‘choice’ and  participation is essential if we are to include more girls, and members of other disadvantaged groups, and alienate fewer.
The marginalisation of girls in mathematics is an exemplar of many parallel trends and I believe that the way forward here, as in others, is through a study of the dynamic processes involved.
Low attainers can do mathematics!
Why can children handle money situations in town on Saturday and fail to do the ‘sums’ in school on Monday?
I don't know.
I just put the title ‘Division’ on the board and they immediately wail that they can't do it.
But they've got to know ‘the basics’ so they can survive.
How can I get them doing any more interesting work if they can't concentrate for more than ten minutes at a time?
Such comments are familiar in any school environment.
The Low Attainers in Mathematics Project (LAMP, 1983–6) was concerned about the issues underlying comments like these.
The Project set out to develop and encourage ‘good practice’ in the teaching of mathematics to low-attaining pupils, but it became clear at an early stage that low attainment was not limited to pupils in the ‘bottom 40 per cent’attainment range.
Many teachers express concern that even their more able pupils do not fulfil their potential in the subject.
Teachers involved in LAMP found the changes they were making in their teaching approaches were encouraging all their pupils to become more involved in their mathematics and to surpass traditional expectations at every level.
The problem became one of underachievement across the whole age and ability range.
This general concern of underachievement became the focus for LAMP's successor, the Raising Achievement in Mathematics Project (RAMP, 1986–9) which involves teachers from 34 LEAs nationally.
This article reflects the ongoing, personal classroom-based research of teachers involved in the projects.
It is an invitation to all those concerned with raising achievement in mathematics to experiment, discuss and debate as a result of their own experiences.
Mathematics seems to be viewed by most people as a body of established knowledge and procedures — facts and rules.
This describes the forms in which we observe mathematics in calculations, proofs and standard methods.
However, most mathematicians would see this as a very narrow view of their subject.
It denies the value of mathematics as an activity in which to engage.
Decision making, experimenting, hypothesising, generalising, modelling, communicating, interpreting, proving, symbolising and pattern finding are all integral parts of that activity.
Without engaging in processes such as these, nobody would have been able to create the procedures and systems mentioned above in the first place.
When teachers involved with LAMP began to allow their pupils to engage in mathematics in this broader way they found their  pupils better able and more willing to question, to transfer and apply their mathematics and to sort out even quite difficult problems.
They found their pupils thriving on a kind of learning which requires a minimum of factual knowledge, a large element of challenge and a great deal of experience in dealing with situations using particular kinds of thinking and practical skills.
Although children of all ages and abilities, including those in MLD schools, were benefiting from such experiences and teaching approaches, there has been a resistance within the special needs sector to allow pupils to engage in a broader-based mathematics curriculum.
It is often the case that the mathematical diet for these lower attaining pupils consists of little more than basic arithmetic, presented in simple step-by-step learning sequences, and repeated frequently.
This is usually because it is felt that they cannot cope with anything at a higher level or with more demanding work — they ‘cannot concentrate’, ‘cannot transfer knowledge from one situation to another’, ‘cannot remember from one day to the next’, ‘cannot cope with sequential tasks’, ‘get confused by experiencing more than one way of doing something’, and most definitely ‘cannot do fractions’.
These beliefs about what low attainers cannot do dictate and reflect the kind of learning experience these pupils have.
If teachers do not believe that their pupils are able to be more responsible for their own mathematical learning, then they are not likely to give them the opportunity to be so.
Such teacher perceptions about how children learn have enormous implications for actions taken in classrooms.
Consider the contrasting lists opposite.
The caricature of teacher beliefs in List A would give rise to a correspondingly narrow set of teacher actions, whereas a teacher characterised by List B may well have a wider, more enabling, range of teaching strategies available.
The commonly-held view that good teachers are ones who can pass on their expertise through clear explanations so as to avoid confusing their pupils has some interesting implications.
The view implies that the teacher is the holder of answers in a classroom, one who knows the answers to all of the pupils' questions.
In a classroom where such an answer-orientated atmosphere exists, it is difficult to imagine much exploration into unknown territory taking place, as pupils will find it difficult to believe that there are areas where their teacher does not know ‘the answer’.
This leads to a marked lack of independence on behalf of pupils as is evidenced by their constant cries of ‘Is this right, Miss?’
This atmosphere also helps to perpetuate the view of mathematics where the only problems are those with a right or wrong answer, or a right or wrong method.
Teachers have found that the more solutions and strategies pupils see and discuss, the more likely they are to develop a real appreciation of mathematics at their own level.
The view also implies that the teacher is seen by pupils as having total responsibility for leading and controlling the work that is going on in the classroom.
LAMP and RAMP have found that because pupils rarely get the chance to use their own initiative, they become even more dependent on their teacher for direction.
Staffroom complaints about fifth years still having to be ‘spoon fed’ are therefore not really surprising.
This ‘teacher authority’ can lead to pupils being stifled by their teachers' expectations.
LIST A
Pupils dislike mathematics and will avoid it if they can.
Pupils want to be told what to do and be directed towards appropriate tasks.
Pupils are mainly motivated by teacher approval, or a desire to succeed at examinations or achieve ‘tokens of merit’.
Most pupils have little creativity or imagination, except when it comes to thinking of excuses for not having done their homework.
There are identifiable skills which the teacher knows and which need to be explained to the children and practised so that they are well equipped for life.
Pupils need clear step-by-step explanations in order to avoid confusion.
Pupils are empty vessels waiting to be filled from the teacher's stock of expert knowledge.
LIST B
Children freely engage in activities that are essentially mathematical.
Away from the classroom they make up complex games, work on puzzle books and generally succeed in finding their way around their environment.
Pupils are able to identify and direct themselves towards appropriate tasks.
Pupils can become fascinated by mathematical contradictions and absurdities and are motivated by mathematical activity itself.
Creativity and ingenuity are widely distributed and evident in the natural activities of children outside school.
The mastery of skills is of little use if they cannot be applied.
The skills pupils need are the strategies of problem solving; interpreting mathematical forms and statements; representing situations mathematically.
These must be developed in context, through experiences.
A state of temporary confusion or puzzlement is at the heart of all learning.
Pupils bring their own knowledge and experience and need to be actively involved in their mathematical development.
This teacher highlights the problem:
In developing work in the classroom one's own expectations and experiences often interfere with a child's progress and it is important to be aware of this and exercise self control.
My main aim is to direct their work as little as possible, letting them find their own system and choose their own path to follow.
I am not advocating no guidance though, since a teacher's role in this respect is a vital one, but it can easily be overdone and destroy a sense of personal achievement.
This requires cutting the instructions to a bare minimum, so that you are, in effect, just providing them with the seed of an idea, and allowing them to culture it.
In a climate of teacher expertise, teachers frequently pre-empt pupils' decisions because they do not want them to ‘get into a mess’.
However, this enthusiasm to convey solutions to pupils often ends up by precluding the pupils' own ideas and can not only be inhibiting but also take away the pupils' enjoyment of getting there themselves.
In our efforts to make things easier for our pupils we often act in other inhibiting ways.
Four common classroom actions that restrict pupils' mathematical development are outlined below.
1
The subject is broken down into ‘easily digestible topics’.
Teachers often lament that pupils do not see and use links between different areas of the subject.
When it is considered that in the ‘real world’ mathematics does not come in the small, fragmented packages that so frequently exist on our syllabuses (e.g. ‘Fractions’and ‘Decimals’, ‘Addition’and ‘Multiplication’, ‘Perimeter’and ‘Area’), it is not surprising that pupils are unable to get a useful overview, or see relationships.
2
There is an over-concern to simplify, by breaking general ideas into seemingly unrelated stages.
The point of the overall task in hand is often obscured when step-by-step instructions are provided: for example, when a pupil neatly sets out a multiplication sum in order to multiply by 10.
The development of flexible mental mathematical skills is also inhibited by such an approach.
3
Difficulties are smoothed out for pupils by, for example, ensuring that awkward cases do not occur or that the numbers cancel or that the answer is not a fraction.
This presents a false view of the subject and can lead to the situation where unusual extensions of these easier cases are not recognised.
It also restricts opportunities for pupils' own interesting mathematical questions like:
‘Is 0 a number?’
‘What does this ‘-’ mean on my calculator?’
4
It is often assumed that techniques must be learned and practised before problems are mentioned.
This can lead to a lack of motivation, as well as to a lack of understanding and meaning.
When pupils complain that they ‘don't see the point of doing all these’, they are often given a remote justification —‘you'll need it when you buy a carpet’.
Remarkable results have been achieved with children from mainstream and special schools when the teaching of mathematics has been opened up  in order to allow pupils to find their own strategies and solutions to problems.
Teachers have found their pupils well able to cope with the frustrations and floundering inherent in mathematical challenge provided it is in a supportive atmosphere or environment, where the process of struggle is viewed as successful in itself.
The following teacher's writing illustrates how his pupils have gained in confidence and initiative.
The group is a non-examination class who have become used to engaging in mathematics in an enquiring way.
The teacher had been sent some worksheets to try out.
The idea was that the pupils would just work through the sheets, working out the answers.
They had a sheet showing a car park and also cars to cut out.
They had to fit the cars in the car park in such a way that each car could get in and out.
The cars (four of them) were all different dimensions.
Well, we started off as expected but then the pupils started asking:
How did we know it would be those four particular cars?
(I thought I had got out of this by saying it was a firm's car park so it would be the same four drivers.)
Ah yes!
But what if one or more changed their cars?
They thought the entrance to the car park on the sheet was not in the best place, so they changed it.
Some decided they would have an entrance and an exit.
I tried to say perhaps this was not possible as we did not know what was outside the car park, walls, buildings.
etc.
They decided that as there was nothing shown on the sheet, there was nothing there and if there was, it should have been shown.
They were no longer happy to accept worksheets at their face value and we had two whole lessons with them querying and rearranging.
It made me suddenly realise how much they had changed.
I had never known low-ability children to question worksheets.
They had always been fed a diet of worksheets which led them along step by step — now they were thinking and making decisions for themselves.
I have to say that my approach to teaching mathematics has changed beyond all my expectations and I now see my pupils enquiring and searching for answers themselves.
It certainly keeps the teacher on the ball when the pupils are not prepared to accept everything you say or do without questioning.
Teachers have also found their pupils more able and willing to apply ‘routine skills’ to a level exceeding previous expectations.
Children have shown themselves able to take ideas further than ever before.
The pupils' work shown overleaf illustrates this.
Their teacher had played a ‘think of a number’ game with them, using starters like: ‘I think of a number.
I divide it by two.
The answer is five.
What was my number?’
The children responded by making up their own problems for each other.
Their problems were far more complex than any the teacher might have set them.
These changes in teaching approach have developed through teachers coming together to question and challenge their own and each others' assumptions about mathematics learning and teaching.
Through reflecting on and discussing their experiences in the classroom, both successful and unsuccessful, teachers involved in LAMP and RAMP have found themselves better equipped to facilitate the mathematical development of their pupils.
This ongoing professional development is based on the    fundamental premise that solutions and strategies lie in teachers' own expertise and experience.
The process of intensely examining one's own practice is not an easy one.
This teacher wrote of his experiences:
I have been enabled to think seriously and deeply about my approach to the subject.
It has made me question every aspect of my teaching, including things that I  thought I was doing well!
Psychologically this has been quite traumatic; but essential.
Towards the end of this ‘shake down’ period it has enabled me to experiment confidently, often using the experience and success of other teachers as encouragement.
The Project provides a focus and catalyst for a large and continuously growing network of working groups whose emphasis is always on the development of professionalism and improved practice.
A group of teachers involved in one such group attempted to draw up a list describing necessary ingredients for a rich mathematical activity.
WHAT MAKES A RICH MATHEMATICAL ACTIVITY
It must be accessible to everyone at the start.
It needs to allow further challenges and be extendable.
It should invite children to make decisions.
It should involve children in speculating, hypothesis making and testing, proving or explaining, reflecting, interpreting.
It should not restrict pupils from searching in other directions.
It should promote discussion and communication.
It should encourage originality/invention.
It should encourage ‘what if’ and ‘what if not’questions.
It should have an element of surprise.
It should be enjoyable.
They then went on to pool ideas on strategies for generating mathematical enquiry in the classroom.
START WITH EXPLORATORY TYPE QUESTIONS LIKE:
HOW MANY DIFFERENT ways to work out 21 + 13? ways to draw an equilateral triangle?
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN ?
CAN YOU FIND A BETTER WAY ?
IS IT TRUE THAT  14 -13 is the same as 13 -14?
GET PUPILS TO SET THEIR OWN QUESTIONS  pass them around.
ASK THEM TO FIND OUT HOW TO DO SOMETHING  find the area of a triangle.
construct a 30 degree angle.
START WITH A PROBLEM OR DILEMMA  explore.
sort out the contradictions or confusions.
START WITH AN ANSWER  explore.
how did they get it? what was the question/problem? what's gone wrong?
USE AN OUTSIDE STIMULUS  radio/TV/newspaper puzzles.
advertisements.
familiar everyday anomalies.
GET PUPILS TO MAKE OR INVENT SOMETHING  to measure turn.
to measure time.
to carry a certain weight.
USE GAMES  can they make them harder? can they understand each other 's rules?
All these strategies have the potential to involve all pupils in mathematical challenge, enabling them to engage in a broader curriculum.
The following list is taken from Gifted Children and their Education (Hoyle and Wilks, 1977).
It is part of ‘a teacher's checklist’ designed to help identify the gifted child in the classroom.
The gifted child will:
have great intellectual curiosity;
learn easily and readily;
have a wide range of interests;
have a broad attention span that enables them to concentrate on, and persevere in solving problems and pursuing interests;
have ability to do effective work independently;
exhibit keen powers of observation;
show initiative and originality in intellectual work;
show alertness and quick responses to new ideas;
possess unusual imagination.
Teachers involved in LAMP and RAMP have found that their so-called ‘low attaining’ pupils are continually showing themselves to have these learning characteristics and more.
This should make all those involved with mathematics education question what it is that we can do to enhance and develop these talents.
Our pupils' mathematical attainment and experience must not be limited by our restricted expectations.
Hidden Messages
There is an almost unchallenged assumption that mathematics education, for both teacher and taught, occurs in a political vacuum.
This I cannot accept: it seems impossible that such a central part, mathematics, of such a political institution, education, should really be politically neutral.
It is easier to be objective about, and therefore to recognise, the social bias of mathematics questions from abroad.
Chinese examples stress agricultural and military applications; a Cuban textbook asks children to find ‘the average monthly number of violations of Cuban air-space by North American airplanes’; Russian children are asked about collective farms; East German children have a similarity problem about a tower in Berlin and a bigger one in Moscow.
All the following problems contain assumptions, some explicit and some implicit, about the society from which they (or in some cases their enemies) come.
Twenty-three peasants are working in a field.
At midday six guerrilla fighters arrive to help them from a military base near to their village.
How many people are working in the field?
(Mozambique)
Once upon a time a ship was caught in a storm.
In order to save it and its crew the captain decided that half of the passengers would have to be thrown overboard.
There were fifteen Christians and fifteen Turks aboard the ship and the Captain was a Christian.
He announced that he would count the passengers and that every ninth one would be thrown overboard.
How could the passengers be placed in the circle so that all the Turks would be thrown overboard and all the Christians saved?
(USA)
A Freedom Fighter fires a bullet to an enemy group consisting of twelve soldiers and three civilians all equally exposed to the bullet.
Assuming one person is hit by the bullet, find the probability that the person is (a) a soldier, and (b) a civilian.
(Tanzania)
When worker Tung was six years old his family was poverty-stricken and starving.
They were compelled to borrow five dou of maize from a landlord.
The wolfish landlord used this chance to demand the usurious compound interest of 50% for three years.
Please calculate how much grain the landlord demanded from the Tung family at the end of the third year.
(China) These examples coming from foreign cultures strike most of us as blatantly political, a part of the indoctrination of the young into the currently dominant values in these societies.
But I feel that we are less aware of this same process when it occurs in British schools.
To find out more about this I recently made up a small collection of questions on percentages.
They were based on textbook questions, some almost as printed, but slightly altered to make political points.
I then asked some twenty-five teachers (in schools and FE) for their reactions to these questions.
One question concerned Mr Jones who owned a factory employing 100 people.
He drew a salary of £15000 pa, paid each of the 20 supervisory staff £10000 pa and the other 80 employees £6000 pa.
The question asked for the total wage bill and went on:
The company has done well in the last year so Mr Jones decides to give himself a 15% rise, the supervisory staff a 10% rise and the non-supervisory staff a 5% rise.
There were then questions about the new wage bill.
Only ten out of my twenty-five teachers found the social and political assumptions here worth commenting on:
There's a bit to talk about there…we might have a little talk about industrial justice.
This is the shocking one…
I'd have to have a laugh about it…couldn't resist a comment.
It was surprising that there was divided opinion even amongst teachers from the same institution, about whether or not the student would notice the inequalities of this industrial situation.
Another question was ridiculous, about a spider's weight which increased to 500 g.
Sixteen teachers commented on this absurd situation, six more than had mentioned the social context of the previous question.
Was this because the first consolidated their own view of the world?
One question was about a man who won £2000 in a competition and the way in which he shared the prize money, his wife getting nothing and each of his sons more than their (older) sister.
No one mentioned the latter point and only four teachers the former.
Again, did they notice or was it that this is how they know things are?
One teacher made a different point: I don't believe in competition…
I usually say so.
It was alarming that only about half the teachers responded adversely to the use of the word ‘alien’ in this question:
Assuming that the number of aliens in the UK is ⅓%; of the population and that a football crowd is a random sample of the population, how many aliens would you expect to find in a crowd of 60000?
I would avoid [it]…
[It is]likely to cause embarrassment to certain people and give rise to the nastier feelings of one or two members of our society.
Calling people ‘aliens’ smacks of racialism.
We'd be on very dangerous ground…to use words like ‘alien’ or even draw to children's attention that our society is a racial mix.
We've got quite a few pupils in our school who will seize on anything like this as a means of causing friction between the various groups.
But what of the half who did not comment?
They came from a variety of schools and backgrounds and it is difficult to believe that their pupils  are more immune to racial prejudice than those mentioned above, or that such wording does not encourage prejudice, albeit subconsciously.
Indeed on two occasions a teacher accepted the question without comment while another in the same school mentioned the extreme dangers of its use.
(One of the teachers whom I interviewed, and who did not comment on this question, has since told me that she used it with a class.
A Greek boy strongly objected to the use of the word ‘alien’.)
Just under half the teachers I spoke to broadly agreed with the two who said of this collection of questions: ‘very establishment’ and ‘obviously class-biased, sex-biased and race-biased’.
But the rest either did not find them so, or did not consider it relevant to their teaching of mathematics.
It would have been interesting to see the teachers' reactions to questions about profits from burglary or tax evasion rather than investment.
Even more revealing, had I been asking the questions now (the year of the miners' strike), would have been the reaction to this one, suggested by Griffiths and Howson.
A coal-mine employs 1000 men and loses £N per year.
If it were closed down suppose 750 of the men would not expect to find another job and would have to live off social security payments.
What value of N makes it cheaper to the state to keep the mine open?
Is this a good way of thinking about the problem'?
Would you use this question?
Why?
Or why not?
Swetz found a problem in a Tanzanian textbook about canned peaches and ‘is concerned about asking a poor man to struggle through the problems of the rich’.
Likewise British textbooks use questions about mortgages, investment and interest for those whose families, or who themselves, are on social security.
In fact, the time has perhaps already come when some people would find questions about wages offensive.
Few questions ask the rich to struggle through the problems of the poor.
After further discussions with the teachers, covering attitudes, methods and topics (‘If a few more people had understood what inflation meant, they might not have won the election'), about a quarter of the teachers remained clearly of the view that mathematics education is, and should be, politically neutral.
It was interesting to see the pervasive and unanimous attitude of guilt and apology whenever a teacher felt she was questioning the norms of society.
Four teachers expressed fear of being thought ‘leftist’.
Yet none was anxious about upholding the values of the right.
For some, discussions, and particularly the examples, caused a shift of position:
Just looking at these questions…one can…have an influence even through mathematics which I see as being unlike many other subjects…
You've exposed to me that it is quite easy to subconsciously…accidentally, inadvertently…put forward views which…you may not believe in.
But…through a degree of thoughtlessness and ill-considered preparation you may end up putting forward social views that you disagree with.
But no one went as far as the teacher quoted by Len Masterman.
For over twenty years I worked under the delusion that I was teaching maths.
The social pressures I put upon the kids were designed to make my maths teaching more effective.
I now realise that I was really teaching social passivity and conformity, academic snobbery and the naturalness of  good healthy competition, and that I was using maths as an instrument for achieving these things.
For me, the final proof that mathematics education is by no means neutral came in answer to the question ‘Has mathematics a role to play in furthering social causes and political understanding?’
Two teachers, from the same institution, replied: ‘Yes, definitely’ and ‘Oh, I shouldn't think so’.
How can anything which can elicit two such opposing but adamant replies be neutral?
Politics is about conflict and there was conflict here.
Politics of percent
The declared objectives of the curriculum focus on traditional mathematical topics — things like area, ratio, percentage, simple and compound interest rates, algebra, measurement and the manipulation of statistics.
However, the content through which these mathematical skills are taught has a set of messages all of its own and because we live in a capitalist society we can easily be unaware of these messages — about the exploitation of labour, the sexism, the inequalities based on racism and social class — that are all a part of the ideology of capitalism.
The point was well illustrated by Jenny Maxwell in her article ‘Hidden Messages’.
Here I want to focus on some examples from recent textbooks for O level and CSE courses.
I have taken those of Greer as a basis for discussion, not because his books are more sexist or pro-capitalist than other textbooks used in 16+ examination preparation, but because they are typical of such textbooks.
Another reason for selecting Greer's books is that they are used in almost all of the ILEA schools which do not use the Authority's SMILE project and in many secondary schools nationally.
Greer's CSE Mathematics Book 1 was first published in 1978 — it is now into its fifth reprint; Book 2 was first published in 1979 and has been reprinted twice.
Comprehensive Mathematics for O-level was first published in 1983 and it has been reprinted twice to date.
This book is the successor to Greer's previous O level book, which is still, according to the publisher, one of the leading O level texts in this country and abroad.
The books are sold in Africa, Singapore, Hong Kong — almost everywhere that British O levels are taught, except for the Caribbean for which there are special editions.
In both O level and CSE texts, Greer defines simple interest as follows:
Interest is the profit return on investment.
If money is invested, then interest is paid to the investor.
If money is borrowed, then the person who borrows the money will have to pay interest to the lender.
The money which is invested or lent is called the principal.
The percentage return is called the rate per cent.
The example is used, like those in other mathematical textbooks, to present ‘interest’ outside the political and ideological context within which investment takes place.
Interest seems to be a concept which is entirely theoretical and context-free.
It is a phenomenon which occurs in a social and economic vacuum.
It is presented as a neutral and value-free mathematical construct.
The idea of interest seems to have a clean and rational image.
Mathematics textbooks present the notion of profit in a way which can only confuse students in their quest for an understanding of the  term.
To distort the notion of profit in the way that these examples do is likely to blinker perceptions and prevent a critical awareness of contemporary social reality.
Greer writes:
When a dealer buys or sells goods, the cost price is the price at which he buys the goods and the selling price is the price at which he sells the goods.
If the selling price is greater than the cost price, then a profit is made.
The amount of profit is the difference between the selling price and the cost price.
The definition of profit implicit in this description is an entrepreneurial one.
The mathematical exercises which follow are mainly to do with shopkeepers and car dealers making profit or loss.
On the other hand, other exercises on the concept of ratio use the term ‘profit’ in quite a different way.
The entrepreneurial definition is clearly inappropriate here.
What, then, is a useful way of conceptualising profit in relation to such examples?
For Marx, the value of a commodity is determined by the total amount of labour that has been put into it and this labour ‘constitutes exactly the fund out of which surplus value, or profit is formed’.
If a profit is equivalent to surplus labour, then the capitalist, in keeping a larger share of the surplus than is given to the workers, is in effect ‘stealing’ from them, although what amounts to theft is written into an agreement and therefore not recognised as such.
The capitalist becomes rich because the workers become poor.
Thus poverty is related directly to the accumulation of wealth.
This argument oversimplifies the relationships between people today; the idea of ‘the capitalist’ and ‘the worker’is an unreal abstraction in a world where GLC pension funds are invested in Rio Tinto Zinc.
However, in presenting profit as ultimately unpaid labour, Marx suggests that if the total of goods or capital in a social system is unequally divided between people at different levels in the social-industrial hierarchy, exploitation is necessarily taking place.
When removed from the toy-town world of textbooks, information about investment and calculations based on an understanding of interest rates can be illuminating for the young mathematician who may also be studying geography, business studies or economics at school.
It can also be taken seriously as part of an education which is about the real world.
The following ‘sums’(from Greer's CSE Mathematics Book 1) involve working out average wages:
In an office, 5 people earn a wage of £36 each, 3 earn a wage of £40 each and 2 earn a wage of £42 each.
Calculate the average wage.
A business employs 125 people.
The wage bill for a certain week was £3537.50.
What was the average wage?
In three weeks a man earns £60, £50 and £58.
His average weekly earnings for four weeks is £54.
How much did he earn in the fourth week?
Incidentally, these examples illustrate how quickly textbooks date and the above three questions illustrate that mathematics which attempts to be relevant can quickly become ridiculous.
The wages quoted are low by today's standards; the examples can be dismissed as irrelevant in real life, and seen only as the means by which averages are learned — in which case they are what Cockcroft would describe as ‘about nothing at all’.
However, the main point of interest is the unintended learning outcomes of such questions as these.
The first example describes, and because it does  not comment, appears to legitimise the hierarchical organisation of labour in offices, with the majority of workers on lower pay than the minority.
Similarly, the third example can be seen to legitimise systems of employment in which people's weekly income is uncertain and variable — as in fact it is in certain trades and industries, building being a notable example.
The hardships associated with uncertain wage levels include difficulty in obtaining a mortgage, difficulty with HP purchase, or uncertainty about whether the rent — or the food bill — will be paid.
Uncertain and variable wages are a great problem for the people who receive them; it is not necessarily desirable to appear to legitimise such methods of payment.
This unquestioning acceptance of the established conditions of work is a form of indoctrination (even if unintended) of the students, many of whom will end up in jobs where wages are variable and income uncertain.
Here is another exercise:
A man is paid at the rate of £1.50 per hour for normal working.
His overtime rate is double time for Saturday and all weekday time over 8 hours and treble time for Sunday working.
His deductions for a particular week were £5.50 plus 6% of his wage for the pension scheme.
If during that week he works the following number of hours, how much should his take home pay be?
This example is an interesting one.
A man…(most of the examples in mathematics textbooks refer to men: women are invisible — a point not picked up in the Cockcroft Report which devotes a whole chapter to why girls perform less well in mathematics than boys do)…earns £74.50 for a 48 hour week.
Another example of out-of-date statistics, and therefore irrelevant content.
However, the hidden messages in such a question may be of some importance in terms of conditioning the consciousness of the — largely working class — students for whom CSE mathematics courses are intended.
Does the example implicitly condone overtime working as a means by which a living wage is earned?
Does it also present as natural and inevitable the fact that for many working people the concept of a ‘weekend’ is nothing to do with ideas of rest and leisure with family or friends?
Like other textbook writers, Greer seems to have a clear understanding of the ways in which the examination system services a class-ridden society: CSE Mathematics Book 2 has a whole section on overtime and piecework with a briefer section on salaries paid to ‘people like teachers, civil servants, secretaries and company managers’.
The four examples provided list hypothetical annual salaries from which the students are expected to calculate average monthly earnings — the salaries range from £3,144 per year to £10,152 per year.
There are perhaps two main conclusions to be drawn from the above discussion:
examples like these cannot possibly be politically neutral if they are rooted in an economic system and the ideology which supports it;
textbook examples like these, which strive for relevance, need updating at least annually.
The second of these conclusions is important if teachers and syllabuses are to meet the objectives of mathematics education which are outlined by Cockcroft in relation to relevance.
The first, however, is even more important if we are to avoid the kind of education which merely confirms and therefore helps to perpetuate — an unequal status quo.
As teachers, we need to be aware of the extent to which inequalities are enshrined within the status quo and the fact that many of the students with whom we work are the products of an unequal social system.
Perhaps one of our tasks should be to examine the extent to which we are complicit in reproducing structural inequalities through the very nature of the work we do.
A further task which could become the focus of co-operative endeavour in mathematics departments and curriculum development groups is to engage in the preparation of learning materials which do not simply support the status quo, but which enable our students to question and challenge it.
This should certainly include some detailed attention to how mathematics might be used to expose the racist, sexist and class-ridden nature of the society in which we live.
Looking for relevance: can we let them decide?
It is fashionable at present to suggest that the school curriculum should be relevant.
The HMI document The Curriculum from 5 to 16 suggests that ‘all that pupils learn should be practical, and therefore relevant, in ways which enable them to build on it or use it for their own purposes in everyday life’.
Mathematics, more than almost any other subject on the school curriculum, has long been perceived as useful (and relevant?) by pupils themselves, their parents, their teachers, industrialists and Government.
Unfortunately, the ways in which these groups define relevance may vary widely.
Pupils not infrequently ask teachers what is the use (or relevance) of what they are currently struggling to learn.
We believe that pupils ask this question when they are finding the work they are doing boring or difficult.
For pupils, work is relevant if it is enjoyable.
Most teachers, too, want their pupils to enjoy their learning.
More importantly, however, teachers want to enjoy their own teaching.
Because teachers are, on the whole, expected to have quiet, orderly classrooms they will be most likely to regard mathematics as relevant if it leads to good behaviour.
Parents are likely to want children to do well in life.
Some parents, who as children may have been afraid of school or bored by it, may only see education as relevant if their children are finding education unthreatening.
Other parents equate education with the passing of examinations.
To them mathematics will be relevant if it helps their children gain a qualification which, in turn, will enable them to obtain a good job.
The content of the mathematics qualification to them is immaterial.
It is hardly surprising that many children eventually acquire a similar attitude towards the relevance of mathematics.
Politicians are likely to have different goals.
They frequently have to deal with awkward and unpleasant problems which may or may not be of their own making.
Frequently it is useful to have someone else to blame for such problems.
If the problems involve young people it is convenient to blame school teachers.
One way of doing this is to accuse teachers of failing to teach relevant skills and attitudes.
Because mathematical skills are perceived as being easy to define and to recognise, and because such skills are perceived to be relevant, schools may be attacked if it is believed that they are not teaching such skills effectively.
It is against this background that we turn to the mathematics curriculum and ask what mathematics is relevant to real life.
Skills learned as part of the school arithmetic syllabus are perceived by almost everybody to be relevant mathematics.
To what are such mathematical skills relevant?
It is undoubtedly true that without a certain facility with money and with other arithmetical skills, people are handicapped in going about their daily business.
It is also true that many of the comments made about the usefulness of arithmetic do not address this central theme.
A teacher was doing some mental arithmetic, including estimation, with a group of 15 year olds.
One girl objected that practising getting the ‘wrong answer’ to the questions posed was rather silly.
When it was suggested that estimation might be a useful skill when shopping in the supermarket, she replied, ‘Yes, but we are not in the supermarket now’.
She was suggesting that ‘relevant’ skills are best learned in the context in which they are relevant, and that teachers can never be certain that their pupils are acquiring the ability to cope in any particular context unless they see them operating in that context.
Arithmetical skills are often considered to be ‘basic skills’, and the implication is drawn that such skills are relevant to everyday life.
Pupils in most schools spend a considerable amount of time practising the manipulation of fractions, perhaps because of the mistaken belief that such skills are useful.
It seems clear to us, however, that such skills are not useful in adult life.
Indeed it is a very good thing that this is so, because research shows that very few pupils leave school with any competence at these skills.
We consider it strange that adults (teachers, parents, publishers of textbooks and examiners) behave as if they believe both that manipulating fractions is a useful skill and that most children can acquire this skill.
Calculators, on the other hand, are still not entirely approved of by some parents and teachers, even though our experience would suggest that an ability to use a calculator is a far more relevant skill for everyday life than almost any of the pencil-and-paper arithmetic taught in schools.
Geometry is a part of the mathematics syllabus which has been in decline in recent years.
This is partly because teachers have acknowledged that mathematical proof, as it was taught in O level Euclidean geometry, is too difficult for the vast majority of pupils.
The teaching of geometry has also declined because it has become increasingly fashionable to focus on ‘achievable objectives’: children work steadily through textbooks and workcards.
Geometry is not a subject which lends itself to such treatment.
The facts and skills in geometry, such as calculating the third angle of a triangle, are relatively trivial and appear to have little practical relevance.
But geometry is about spatial relationships, and an appreciation of space and form is of considerable practical value.
This cannot be taught by means of a sequence of graded exercises.
It is significant that some parts of the mathematics curriculum (notably arithmetic and algebra) are seen by many people both inside and outside education to be relevant, whereas other parts (topology and, perhaps, geometry) are not.
When there is general agreement that a subject is relevant it appears that no justification is required to maintain its position  in the school curriculum.
Arguments that some of the skills practised by pupils are obsolete fall on deaf ears, or are heeded only very slowly.
There is still widespread popular belief in the efficacy of practising such ‘relevant’ skills, even though research clearly indicates that such practice is largely futile: if pupils are unable to master a skill fairly quickly they do not appear to improve subsequently.
Perhaps some teachers and others believe that, nevertheless, such practice is good for the soul!
During the next few years children are likely to be engaging in more sustained projects as part of their learning of mathematics.
In several primary schools children are working together at ‘turtle geometry’ projects in which they set their own goals and spend several days or weeks achieving them.
GCSE mathematics includes a coursework element which will become compulsory in 1991.
This development has its opponents, but it does provide a way in which mathematics can become more meaningful to some of the children studying it.
It would be sad if teachers and others were seduced into believing that the most useful projects are those which involve ‘real-life’ problems.
One reason why this will not always be the case is that ‘real-life’ problems are frequently adapted to make them more ‘mathematically respectable’when they are studied in schools.
The value of projects lies less in the subject matter than in the fact that topics are chosen and worked on by the pupils themselves.
The ‘relevant’ skills learned concern the ability to plan projects, to apply mathematics as and when appropriate, to sustain work on them until some conclusion is reached and to communicate what has been learned to other people.
The National Criteria for GCSE mathematics make it clear that the curriculum must be differentiated.
In other words, different pupils will follow different curricula so that what they learn is ‘appropriate to their individual levels of ability’.
On the face of it this seems to be a good idea: one frequently voiced criticism of comprehensive education is that all pupils have been forced to follow a grammar-school curriculum.
On the other hand, who is going to decide what is appropriate for a particular pupil?
As we have already indicated, there is lack of agreement about what is relevant or appropriate because different groups of people use different sets of criteria.
It is not easy to achieve the recommendation of the HMI document The Curriculum from 5 to 16, that pupils should be able to use what they learn for their own purposes, because each of us has different purposes in life, and what is relevant to one pupil will not be relevant to another.
The only way to make mathematics relevant to pupils who study it is to involve them in deciding what they want to learn and how they want to learn it.
To accomplish this, children must be treated more like adults.
This may seem a revolutionary step, but it is surely the most significant step we can take to ensure that, in the words of The Curriculum from 5 to 16, education ‘is seen by pupils to meet their present and prospective needs’.
What are we assessing in mathematics and what are we assessing for?
Introduction: some examples of assessment in school mathematics
Example A
Staff in infant school A have listed the concepts that they hope children will learn.
These were chosen by examining the mathematics scheme, deciding what the children were most likely to grasp and determining what is important, in terms of relevance and application to their present world and to their future mathematical learning.
The list of concepts includes:— one to one correspondence and suggests, as ways of assessing this concept:
can set out cups and saucers so that there is one cup for each saucer;
when counting, says one number word for each object counted.
Example B
Junior school B is in an LEA which has developed a primary mathematics record card.
Teachers are asked to complete this for each child to show their attainment.
In discussion, members of staff became aware that they had different interpretations of some objectives, such as:
in a reasoned argument has shown evidence of being able to argue ‘it can't be…because…’
can describe a movement in terms of: left and right,…reference points,…rotations.
As a consequence of their different interpretations, they had different criteria for judging attainment.
They decided to discuss each group of objectives to clarify their meaning and find suitable assessments and organised occasional teaching in pairs to agree criteria.
The school is building up ‘case lore’ for each objective, by keeping a written record of their agreements.
Example C
School C sets NFER Basic Mathematics Tests (NFER, 1969–80)) for every junior school pupil.
Papers are administered and marked by class teachers in March.
Scores (the total of correct answers) are given to the headteacher who makes year-by-year comparisons for classes and individual children.
The majority of teachers also examine the results by looking at:
performances of individuals, to see who did badly and which questions they got wrong;
overall numbers of correct and incorrect responses on each question for each class.
Example D
School D, a secondary mixed comprehensive, uses the Graded Assessment in Mathematics system of assessment (GAIM, 1988).
Some of the regular work, including investigations and problem solving, is examined carefully by teacher and pupil together, in relation to GAIM criteria which describe objectives in learning mathematics.
These are listed by mathematical topic, and grouped together into levels according to their difficulty.
For investigative work, an overall grade which reflects an holistic assessment of the pupil's work is also given by the teacher.
The objectives attained are recorded on pupils' profiles, which are useful for:
planning learning activities;
reporting to parents or informing discussions where there are enquiries or causes for concern;
reporting to future employers, or further or higher education institutions at the end of secondary schooling.
Example E
School E is a secondary (11–18) boys' comprehensive.
New entrants do written tests in mathematics and English in their first week.
Scores are used to allocate pupils to one of eight streamed classes.
Results of end-of-year tests in mathematics, English, science and the first foreign language are used to reallocate some pupils to a new stream at the beginning of the new school year.
Example F
One local education authority, which gives all children a written test in the final year of junior school (10+), offers help from advisory teachers to those schools where many pupils achieve only low scores in the test.
These examples of assessment illustrate a variety of purposes, including:
to inform the teacher's task of selecting appropriate learning experiences;
to inform pupils about their progress;
to report to parents, employers or the next stage of education;
to organise teaching groups;
to assist in the evaluation of a school's overall performance.
There are other purposes, not exemplified here, including:
to motivate pupils and teachers;
to influence or control the curriculum.
Sometimes assessments are carried out simply as a classroom routine.
The term formative assessment refers to assessment which looks forward to pupils' future learning, as opposed to summative assessment which looks back at what pupils have already achieved.
Assessment for selection and evaluation is summative; assessment to inform the teaching is formative.
At a first glance, the information collected for summative assessment for one stage would appear identical to that of formative assessment for the next.
However, summative assessment seeks, for each pupil, to classify mathematical knowledge into what is ‘known’ and what is ‘not known’, whereas good formative assessment attempts to focus on precisely the ‘grey areas in between’that summative assessment sets out to avoid.
Thus, the content of summative assessment is very different from that of formative assessment, and the crude distinctions usually employed in summative assessment are insufficiently precise to be useful in planning activities.
Subsequent sections of this article explore, in turn, assessment for teaching, selection, evaluation and curriculum control.
Assessment for teaching
Assessment for teaching involves collecting information which helps the teacher teach effectively.
It may involve one or more of a range of assessment activities from informal observation to oral, practical, or written procedures.
In some instances, it may be impossible for the teacher to select appropriate learning activities for a particular pupil without collecting more detailed information.
This deliberate gathering of detailed information for teaching is termed diagnostic assessment.
It is a type of formative assessment, insofar as it looks ahead to future learning activities, but differs in that it usually involves the use of more specific procedures or protocols.
There is, however, no clear-cut distinction, rather a continuum exists between the specific procedures and general information gathering.
Towards one end of this lies, for example, brief verbal questioning of the whole class about their ideas in a particular topic; towards the other lie perceptual discrimination tasks designed by psychologists.
Diagnostic assessment will not be necessary for all pupils, at all times, but appropriate techniques should be used when more general formative assessments fail to indicate activities from which the pupil can learn.
At times, diagnostic  assessment is necessary not only for ‘low attainers’, but also for ‘high’ or ‘average’attainers.
Diagnostic assessment
An older term than ‘formative assessment’, diagnostic assessment is a metaphor derived from the medical world.
It originally referred to special treatment for remedial pupils in an analogy with ‘the sick’.
The remedy was more practice in identified areas of weakness.
This now appears inadequate in its view of mathematics and of the learner.
In Example C, information was collected about which questions were answered incorrectly by each child, from items ranging across the whole primary mathematics curriculum.
The teaching which followed aimed to show children through exposition and practice how to answer correctly those types of questions which they got wrong.
This both reflects and promotes a view of mathematics as a collection of arbitrary, fixed procedures in which learning comes through repetition, and teaching is by telling.
This is an inadequate view of mathematics; it is also unhelpful in educating pupils who are required to make decisions and to adapt to change in a complex technological society.
The learner is seen as passive.
This ‘analogy with the sick’ adopted by Rees and Barr (1984) is rightly criticised (Shiu, 1986), because it fails to take into account research results which indicate that pupils are active in their learning and logical in tackling tasks.
Pupils' responses in individual interviews (quoted, for example, in Dickson et al., 1984, pp. 262–3) support this perception of learners actively and logically seeking solutions.
These show how pupils' mathematical thinking may be inferred from what they do and say.
In one large-scale study, the secondary mathematics project ‘CSMS’(Hart, 1981), extensive interviewing was carried out on a range of mathematical topics, and the strategies that pupils used were identified.
In many instances, the same incomplete or inappropriate strategy was frequently used, producing the same incorrect answer.
Often, these strategies were invented by the pupils rather than taught by the teacher.
They are referred to as ‘child methods’ and give correct answers for easy questions, but not for more complex items.
Insight gained in the interviews allowed an informed interpretation of results in the large-scale written assessment.
The ‘Chelsea Diagnostic Mathematics Tests’(Hart et al., 1984), which are based on this research, were designed to measure pupils' levels of understanding and identify particular errors which each of them make.
‘Levels’ are described for each test, and these refer to both the mathematical ideas and the strategies which pupils use.
In a similar way, the study carried out by Christine Shiu (this volume) revealed pupils' mathematical thinking within a topic, which was of considerable value in planning the teaching.
The research projects ‘Strategies and Errors in Secondary Mathematics’(for example Booth, 1984) and ‘Diagnostic Teaching’(Bell et al., 1985) both focus on developing teaching approaches to help pupils develop appropriate strategies and avoid common errors.
Using only a small sample of children, we (Denvir and Brown, 1986) developed an oral and practical diagnostic assessment to assess ‘low  attaining’ 7–9 year olds' understanding of number.
Again, the technique was to attempt to identify children's available strategies.
The assessment was based on a framework which described the orders of acquisition of number concepts.
We identified ‘hierarchical strands’, in which, for the children interviewed, the acquisition of one ability depended on the development of an earlier ability, allowing assessment of each child's understanding of number concepts.
The results indicated that this progressed in several broad stages.
However, results of the teaching studies did not support a step-by-step approach to teaching the ‘next skill’ in the hierarchy, but gave a useful indication of a range of strategies that each child might soon acquire, which was valuable in planning the teaching.
Assessment of pupils' understanding of certain concepts is more validly based on their use of strategies than listing which items in a written test they answer correctly or incorrectly.
However, there are difficulties in using pupils' strategies to measure mathematical attainment.
These relate to context, mode of presentation and response, and pupils' interpretations of the task.
First, the mathematical thinking that is prompted in an individual depends on context as well as underlying mathematical structure.
For example, a highly motivating task, or a familiar and easily recognised context, might prompt a ‘common sense’, pragmatic solution; a mathematical context might stimulate recall of a standard procedure, and a threatening context might be avoided.
Response to any task, then, may not provide a valid description of mathematical knowledge.
Moreover, individuals will be affected in different ways by different contexts.
To minimise this difficulty pupils might be assessed in a range of contexts and the contexts in which pupils are most likely to succeed might be sought.
If one context has been presented as an exemplar, however, evidence for the pupils' grasp of the idea should be sought in a different context.
Secondly, the mode of presentation and response is likely to influence pupils' thinking.
One reason for the widespread use of written tests is the ease of administration and collection of data.
Oral and practical assessments take more time, yet yield richer, but more ambiguous, information.
In order to examine the feasibility of assessing children's understanding of number in a class, rather than an individual setting, we (Denvir and Brown, 1987) carried out a small-scale study with 8–11 year olds.
Individual responses in a class test were compared with responses to the same items presented in an interview: many were found to differ.
For example, in the class test, Neelam responded to the verbally-presented problem ‘52 take away 36’ by writing the standard decomposition algorithm and producing the correct answer.
In the interview she replied:
…eighteen.
B: How did you decide it was eighteen?
Neelam: Well first I thought it was twenty something but then I realised it was six; two take away six can't do that…so…um…it went down to ten.
And there was the six…sixteen.
And then there's the two left over from the fifty-two.
In contrast, Simon wrote ‘52-36=24’, but said:
Sixteen.
I took thirty from fifty, that gives twenty, then took two from the six and took away four from the twenty.
Different modes of presentation and response, then, may provoke different strategies.
In the study, about one-quarter of the children performed markedly less well in the class test than they did in the interview.
The third difficulty is related to both those already outlined.
In order to reflect accurately the pupil's mathematical thinking, it is vital to assess the response in terms of the problem as the pupil perceives it.
There is, in most assessment activities, an assumption that once a question has been stated, then the problem perceived by the teacher becomes the pupil's problem.
In fact, inability to ‘see’ from the teacher's viewpoint may result in an ‘inappropriate’response, which may be regarded as creative or worthless.
The pupil may be labelled genius or idiot, and the mathematical thinking not credited for what is is.
A possible way of minimising this difficulty is outlined in the following section on more general formative assessment.
General formative assessment
Teachers do carry out formative assessment, sometimes deliberately, but often unconsciously selecting activities because they ‘feel right’.
Frequently based on sound experience, these criteria are often implicit or not clearly articulated.
Consequently, these judgements are underrated, labelled ‘subjective’ and accorded less status than the numerically-quantifiable results of standard written tests, although they are capable of reflecting attainment with greater subtlety.
Shiu's assessment (this volume), the ‘Chelsea Diagnostic Mathematics Tests’ and the written test used in the Denvir and Brown study (1987) which were discussed under the heading ‘Diagnostic assessment’are all, when used without individual interviews, examples of formative assessment and carried out before teaching, because they indicate suitable starting points.
The difficulty of interpreting results of written tests, the time-consuming nature of individual interviews, and uncertainty about the task which the pupil is actually attempting to solve, have also been discussed under the heading ‘Diagnostic assessment’.
To avoid these difficulties in making formative assessments, our current curriculum development initiative, ‘Learning Mathematics and Science through Investigative Work’(Murphy and Denvir, in preparation), which focuses on assessment only insofar as it assists the teaching and learning process, aims to establish a rich meaning in the learning activities which are selected.
This is done by embedding activities within a theme in which the pupils have ‘expert’ knowledge and by ‘negotiating the meaning’of the tasks through discussion.
This work aims to help teachers provide challenging tasks, at an appropriate level, which are rich in mathematical and scientific concepts and procedures, will motivate pupils and will thus enhance learning.
In this work, formative assessment is seen to involve collecting a range of different types of information about the children, including an awareness of:
the mathematical and scientific concepts and procedures that they have grasped;
the contexts in which these have been experienced and understood;
the children's interests, knowledge and expertise in their everyday world, as well as in their school work.
For example, in a sequence of activities on the theme ‘Packing’, children spent time discussing occasions when they packed and problems encountered in particular packing activities.
Both discussion and the way that activities were tackled gave some indication of children's understanding of the ideas.
Subsequently, they carried out the investigation ‘Maxbox’, which involved deciding which of the open boxes that can be made from a 12 cm x 12 cm square of paper by cutting squares from the corners and folding into a lidless cuboid ‘held the most’.
Various materials were provided and children's strategies were noted and listed (Denvir, Brown and Eve, 1987).
Like other forms of assessment, this approach has some limitations: a child's strategy may not represent the most sophisticated available.
However, much is revealed about children's thinking in incidents as well as in the general strategies used.
For example:
One child looked in surprise whilst members of her group zeroed the pointer on the balance before weighing the sand filling one of the boxes.
Then she asked ‘Why are we doing this?’, revealing much about her understanding of measurement.
This type of assessment is demanding for teachers, who need to observe pupils' strategies carefully.
However, primary school teachers attending an INSET course were able to determine what strategies were adopted by most of the children in their classes.
Formative assessment seeks to serve pupils' interests by helping teachers teach more effectively.
It seeks to answer three questions.
What do pupils know within this topic?
What are they likely to learn next?
What activities should be provided to foster this learning?
Assessment for selection
Within school, pupils may be selected for a teaching group according to particular aspects of their school performance.
This may be done in a rigid way, as in setting or streaming, where allocation to a different group occurs infrequently, as in Example E. By contrast, there may be flexible groupings for particular activities within the classroom.
Selection also takes place for purposes which go beyond the school.
Some local education authorities assess children at the end of primary school in order to make allocations to secondary schools.
Public examinations, employers', schools' and colleges' own assessments and profiles, such as that described in Example D, are used to decide whether a pupil will or will not be accepted for a job, vocational training or higher education.
What selectors desire is good predictive information.
The question they wish to answer is ‘Which pupils will excel in this area, will  make useful contributions or will benefit most from the opportunities which are in our power to grant?’
They need information about what constitutes and causes success or failure within a particular domain, as well as strategies for detecting this at the time of the selection.
However, there are considerable difficulties associated with assessment for selection.
First, the state of knowledge about what, precisely, we mean by ‘mathematical attainment’, and what particular aspects are needed for certain jobs or courses of study, are unclear.
Secondly, even where there is some clarity about the required attributes, there is difficulty in measuring their attainment.
Thirdly, there are insurmountable difficulties in ensuring equal opportunities for all pupils, regardless of gender, or socio-economic and cultural background, because all assessment tasks are bound within a particular context and culture which will inevitably favour some pupils to the detriment of others.
Finally, pupils who perceive that they are unlikely to be selected for anything which is valued may become disheartened and fail to fulfil their potential.
Assessments for selection primarily serve the interests of the selectors, who, in turn, represent concerns within society such as industrial and economic achievement, or academic excellence.
However, selection for opportunities outside affects what happens at school.
Choices about the mathematics syllabus at secondary level for all pupils may, for example, be dominated by the needs of a small minority who wish to study mathematics at university, and this can result in an inappropriate syllabus for many.
Selection for teaching groups within the school may also affect pupils.
For example, many schools organise pupils into groups according to ‘mathematical ability’.
This may reflect teachers' beliefs that mathematics by its nature is learned most effectively in groups of homogeneous ability.
Alternatively, it may be the strategy with which teachers feel most able to cope with the wide range of pupil attainment.
In either ease.
it encourages the perception of pupils' attainments as being at one of a number of discrete ‘levels’.
There is little evidence for the existence of meaningful ‘levels’, as constants across the whole of the mathematics curriculum.
This oversimplification is likely to lead to inappropriate curricula for many, and also to affect attitudes adversely through the labelling associated with allocation to a particular group, especially to a bottom set or stream.
For any selection procedure, there are three questions to consider.
Is it fair to pupils in allowing equality of opportunity to all who might benefit from what is offered?
Is it effective in selecting employees who can do the job or pupils who can learn from the course?
Does it have a negative and disproportionately large influence on those who are not selected, especially those who do not wish to be considered for selection?
Assessment for evaluation
The purpose of evaluation is to allow pupils, parents and society as a whole to question the educational system.
For evaluation to be carried  out constructively, it is vital that evaluators, teachers and pupils have some shared understanding of what they are trying to achieve.
The intention is to determine whether pupils are being offered appropriate experiences and the school is adequately fulfilling its task.
Results of assessments are sometimes used to evaluate the progress of pupils, classes, schools or local education authorities.
Their use is also envisaged to evaluate a particular teaching approach, or even for the appraisal of individual teachers.
There are a number of caveats which concern the validity of using the results of assessment in this way.
Evaluation such as that carried out in Example F is likely to misrepresent what has been achieved in the teaching unless it takes into account pupils' initial performances and the relative difficulty of what they are learning.
The question which should be addressed in evaluation is whether the progress is satisfactory and, if not, where it falls short and could be improved.
Drawing the distinction between what is satisfactory and what is not raises three substantial educational issues.
First, there is no point in labelling children, progress, teacher or school as ‘unsatisfactory’ unless this goes hand in hand with the means to bring about improvement.
Secondly, the notion of ‘satisfactory’ implies some sort of ‘norm’, but this is difficult to define.
Rates of progress are erratic: the transition from one idea to another may be accomplished by one pupil in a matter of minutes, whilst another will take months apparently covering the same ground.
The question of how, and if, one might define a ‘unit of progress’ would probably be answered best empirically.
Since pupils' performances vary across different mathematical topics, profiling, such as that described in Examples C and D, will provide a fairer description of pupil progress than will a single grade.
It is not clear, however, how profiles might be compared for the purpose of evaluation.
Background variables which affect learning are difficult to quantify, making the idea of a ‘fair’ comparison still more elusive.
Thirdly, while evaluation intends to assess outcomes such as progress or performance, inevitably it is people who are labelled.
This labelling of some learners and teachers as ‘unsatisfactory’ is likely to lead to poor motivation and disengagement from the proper tasks of learning and teaching.
What pupils and parents require is some notion of progress in relation to other people, that is norm-referenced data; in relation to mathematical objectives, that is criterion-referenced data; and in relation to pupils' own earlier performances.
This information can assist individuals in developing an awareness of the areas of strength on which they can build, and areas of relative weakness which need to be developed.
For pupils themselves, good evaluative assessment might aim to provide both summative data, describing what has been achieved, and formative data, suggesting current priorities in learning.
For this to be effective, it is best done together with pupils making their own self-evaluation, so that teacher and pupil may agree what has been achieved.
In mathematics, there is considerable difficulty in clarifying for pupils what it is hoped they will achieve in the future, since mathematics, in the way that it is commonly described in the school syllabus, is very heavily concept-laden and learning is almost synonymous with forming new concepts.
In modern languages, for example, the student can be asked to work towards ordering a meal in a German  restaurant , with the reasonable expectation that what this involves will be meaningful.
However, in mathematics, the pupil who does not have a meaning for vectors, say, will hardly be motivated by knowing that this is the ‘next topic to be learned’.
Assessment for evaluation is justified on the basis that it serves the interests of the consumers of education: pupils, parents and society.
However, since evaluation gives prestige and rewards to those who are judged to be doing well, and condemns those who are not, it is very important that any evaluation should be fair and linked to positive suggestions for improvement.
Two major questions emerge in relation to assessment for evaluation.
Does the assessment and the way that results are reported accurately reflect what progress has been made?
Are there adequate and appropriate resources to remedy any deficiencies which are exposed?
Assessment for curriculum control
Many people and institutions, not just the pupils themselves, are likely to be judged by pupils' performance in assessment tasks.
Consequently, teachers, wishing their pupils, their institutions and themselves to perform well, will prepare carefully for the assessments.
Thus, imposed assessments, either incidentally, when assessments are carried out for selection or evaluation, or deliberately, if they are so designed, can have the effect of controlling the curriculum.
For the majority of the population, ‘mathematics’ is synonymous with what has been selected from the vast field of mathematics for inclusion in the exam syllabus.
For secondary school teachers of mathematics who have been eager to respond to the call for investigative work, the introduction of GCSE coursework assessment may have come as a rational consequence of what they see as timely changes in the curriculum.
But for the majority of teachers, the converse is true and changes in assessment are forcing changes in the curriculum.
In a similar, but more localised manner, some education authorities which carry out ‘blanket’ testing, or testing a sizeable sample of the junior school population, have introduced items which must be carried out using a calculator.
In some cases, this has been done deliberately to encourage use of calculators, and also in order to change the emphasis in the aspects of number which are taught and learned.
The perceived advantages and disadvantages of using assessment to control the curriculum hinge on one main and two linked subsidiary issues.
First:
Who should have control of the curriculum; do those who have control have the education of all pupils as their first priority?
and, secondly:
Is the envisaged change in the curriculum seen as educationally valuable, and are the assessments effective in producing the change?
Summary and discussion
I have addressed two major issues in assessment in mathematics education (what is being assessed? and what is the purpose of the assessment?) in this article.
Different answers to these will suggest different practices.
Failure to address and resolve these issues will lead to conflict.
What is being assessed?
I raised several different ideas of what is being assessed.
The intention may be to assess or evaluate:
pupils' attainment;
pupils' progress;
teachers;
schools;
teaching approaches.
There is a fundamental issue which is concerned with the nature of mathematics and mathematical learning.
The public view of mathematics as a system of fixed rules and absolute truths ignores perceptions of mathematics as a creative human activity for children who are ‘learning’ it, as well as mathematicians who are ‘inventing’it.
It also ignores the reality that school mathematics, both what is studied and the way that it is taught, is selected by groups within society from a vast range of possible topics and approaches.
Before we can agree about how to assess or evaluate mathematical attainment or progress in learning, we must clarify what we mean by ‘doing mathematics’.
Does it, for example, refer to the marks made on paper, or is it the whole of the thinking process involved in solving mathematical problems?
In the current political climate in which the government seeks to establish a national curriculum and associated assessments, many concerns are voiced about assessment in mathematics (for example Schwarzenberger, 1987; Denvir, Brown and Eve, 1987).
These reflect many basic conflicts about the nature of mathematics and its role within education and society (see, for example, Gill, this volume).
What is the purpose of the assessment?
I have underlined four major purposes of assessment.
This categorisation could have been carried out in other ways, and other purposes seen here as secondary could have been given greater prominence.
Nevertheless, whatever the grouping, one major distinction will remain and this will give rise to a fundamental conflict for the teacher.
In response to imposed assessment for selection and evaluation, the teacher will prepare children to perform well.
For many, this preparation consists of rehearsed responses to boost pupils' scores.
It has, then, the deliberate aim of covering up weaknesses and encouraging pupils to adopt behaviour which apes understanding.
In contrast, formative assessment will encourage a very different teaching approach, one in which pupils will be encouraged to find their own solutions instead of having to learn ready-made rules.
Since these two purposes are in fundamental conflict, one will, inevitably, dominate.
It is vitally important, if we are to improve the mathematical attainment of our society, that the educational purposes of formative and diagnostic assessment, which seek to improve the teaching, take precedence over the monitoring and evaluative purposes, which at best merely seek to describe.
School applications of IT
Some people expect that in a few decades' time youngsters will learn from their home tutor computers and rarely, if ever, have contact with a human teacher.
Such views (for example, Stonier and Conlin, 1985) imply that information technology (IT) will lead to the dismantling of schools as learning centres.
In that scenario, children will then go to school only to gain social skills and join in curricular and other group activities.
To most of us, this may be a revolutionary picture.
Yet IT will certainly be able to allow such an approach, should we decide to go that way.
It is, after all, the case that open learning is growing fast in all phases of school and college work as well as for adult study.
Open learning involves an individualised approach to meeting the needs of the learner; he or she need not then be part of a larger formal group treated as one unit.
This important predecessor of computer-based study at home is exemplified by the style of the Open University, though there are many other cases in Britain and elsewhere, for work with adults or with younger learners.
My preferred vision of the future is what I call computer-aided freedom (caf)(Deeson, 1983).
Here semi-formal learning still takes place in semi-formal learning centres, heavily intermediated by each learner's powerful, portable, personal micro, a machine no more costly than a calculator is now.
The ‘freedom’ in the name has all kinds of implications.
The most important, perhaps, is freedom from the restrictive grasp of the ‘all together now’ class teaching system that goes back to Victorian times.
There are also connotations, however, of freedom from fear, freedom from the boredom of having to deal with work for which the learner has no motivation, freedom to move from activity to activity as desired.
Such a system would be able to help learners in almost any context including, of course, the study of mathematics at most levels.
In its way, caf is just as revolutionary a picture as computer-based home learning; the roads to take are very different, though.
Roads have beginnings as well as ends, so where are we now?
Where are we now?
First, perhaps I should explain what I mean by information technology.
Information technology (IT) is the application of modern ideas and techniques in the fields of computing, telecommunications, microelectronics and video to the handling (storage, access, processing, transfer) of information.
As with any technology its prime concern should be the betterment of the lives of the individuals in society.
Megarry (1985) provides a particularly readable introduction.
IT is not just computing, but that is the aspect I spend most time on here.
Mathematics differs from a number of other parts of the formal curriculum in needing an investigatory component for successful delivery.
Useful investigation can take place in an individualised environment (as many Open University students know); however, it is often best to approach it as a co-operative endeavour.
From the definition of IT above, it should be clear that IT ought to be able to offer a lot to mathematics learning in schools and colleges — but how much, in fact, has IT affected it?
The answer is —‘not a lot’.
While there are a few changes in detail, most British school and college mathematics classrooms do not differ much from those of a hundred years ago.
The subject matter taught is much the same; the approaches are much the same; the anticipated outcomes are much the same; and the teachers' and learners' attitudes are much the same.
There is, however, somewhat more investigation now than in the past, and occasionally the teachers may wheel in a micro or a video player to provide a degree of reinforcement of learning in a given field.
Yet even at university, it may well still be a minority of departments that expect all mathematics students to use computers as a matter of course; indeed, some people fear that higher education will be the phase most resistant to new IT, rather than the one that provides a strong lead.
A recent British Government report (DES, 1987) made this clear.
It noted that most headteachers feel that IT has as yet made little impact on formal education.
We should not really expect otherwise.
Most secondary schools have now reached double figures in their stocks of micros — but only a few years ago the authors of a book (Howe and Ross, 1981) could gently suggest that ‘we can readily envisage the time when every educational institution in the country will have access to at least one microcomputer’.
Such a short period is hardly enough to allow the development of mature and coherent styles of usage.
It is only in the last few years, then, that new IT, mainly in the form of the microcomputer, has started to play a part in formal education.
The change will go on.
By the mid-1990s, powerful compact machines will exist at prices that should allow at least a couple in each classroom and workshop plus plenty in staff and student work areas.
By that time, the patterns of usage — still being developed as far as mathematics is concerned — will have become fairly clear.
People have been struggling to explore and clarify those patterns in recent years.
What, then, are they?
Learning mathematics with computers
Most current and currently potential uses of micros for mathematics learning apply to other subject areas too, at least broadly.
The general outcomes of research and development in educational computing apply in this context, therefore.
Here is a list of the current main types of use:
awareness — allowing the learners to gain familiarity with the IT systems
they are likely to meet in the outside world;
computer studies — the computer (and its uses) as a subject of study in its own right, rather than as a tool in other curricular areas;
management and administration — the computer as a tool for background departmental work;
using office software — word processing and so on;
computer-aided learning — where systems add to the other resources learners can call on;
control — using a computer to capture data from its environment and to control other equipment.
When computers first reached secondary schools and colleges, many mathematics specialists, like colleagues in physics, welcomed the new horizon and set up computing/IT departments.
The first two types of educational computing in the list above are at the moment basically the province of such departments — but it is good to know that in many schools and colleges there are strong links with mathematics.
This is despite the fact that the problems of mathematics staffing have increased as a result of the ‘brain drain' to educational IT.
(In primary schools, there has been a similar move, but by no means to the same extent; primary IT has not suffered so much, as a result, from a leaning toward mathematics and science.)
The next two areas in the list of uses-management and administration, and using office programs — come together in that both involve much the same hardware and software.
The difference is that in the former case it is the teachers and support staff who use the systems, while in the latter it is the learners.
Computer-aided learning (cal) is, for me, a portmanteau term for all cases in which computers help along the learning process.
Here we view the micro and its software (including program languages like LOGO) as a learning resource — in the same way as an overhead projector and its associated software, a video player and its pile of cassettes, a library and its contents, are all learning resources.
Defined in this way, most cal programs tend to be very restricted; however, people have long seen in them much potential as resources.
They mainly include what most commonly carry the name of educational software, packages such as:
revision drills and objective test programs — like some of the ideas in 132 Short Programs (Mathematical Association, 19X5);
so-called page-turning — barely interactive — routines that present screen after screen of text, maybe with a few simple diagrams and/or questions;
simple games based, perhaps, on co-ordinates (like Pirates — ITMA, 1972) or building up intersecting sets;
more advanced games, including adventures like L (ATM, 1984);
graphic introductions to certain areas, maybe with animation and maybe with interaction (for example, Graphic Calculus — Tall, 1986);
teaching-machine-style programs with perhaps a certain degree of branching, and leading to interactive video;
simulations of, for instance, loaded structures and situations to analyse;
exploration of specially relevant computer program languages such as LOGO.
The final area in my list of mathematics education IT uses is control, in essence the first step to robotics.
Microprocessor-controlled rows of lamps can help learners with number work (for example, in binary), while using a computer to collect temperature data, for instance , and present it ready for a graph is also of value.
Using LOGO or similar to help a real floor turtle draw a pattern is a well-known use of IT at all levels.
All the same, mathematics learners do not always seem to gain as much from this kind of work as one might expect; maybe present syllabuses provide a barrier?
Down to business
Office (or business) software is now fast coming to be recognised as able to offer as much to education as to training.
In comparison with, say, a suite of games and teaching programs in the field of 2D figure areas (which would cost much the same), a business program has several advantages.
First, it is content-free, so can offer much to other subject teachers.
This has implications for curriculum integration, finance and staff training.
Second, it is office software, so that the college, school, or department office may use it too — with the same implications.
Third, more and more educational establishments are starting business studies (or at least enterprise schemes).
To the same implications we may now add the advantages of having high-level staff expertise to call on.
It is also good for business students to see office software used in very different contexts — the concept of its near infinite flexibility is a crucial one.
In other words, no one working with a computer should be forced into a straightjacket of usage: IT should liberate rather than restrict, and the best applications are those in which the uses are almost boundless.
The potential of office software as a factor in the integration of the curriculum must not be ignored, therefore.
This is because each program in the category is content-free, highly versatile, limited in practice only by the user's imagination.
It is useful to divide office software into two groups — the first division and the rest (Deeson, 1987).
The main types of business program — those in the first division — are word processor, business graphics system, data base management system (data base for short), communications package and spreadsheet.
(There is often a degree of integration between these; this aims for the use of the same key-presses for the same effects and allows the transfer of data between functions.)
There is insufficient space in this article to explore the other types of office software.
They include such things as stock control, critical path analysis, and organiser programs — and may well have a major role to play in mathematics learning in the future.
Indeed, all these are coming to be used as powerful tools for tutors and learners in some schools and colleges already.
There are many possible uses for staff and learners of each of the main types of office software.
After a quick outline of what each type of  program lets you do, I list some uses to whet your appetite.
In each case, I do so for both the tutors and the learners, even though their needs do not really differ so much.
Note that each list gives just a few of the very many uses of the techniques concerned in mathematics learning.
However, I do not provide references: in each case there are many books and articles that report background theory and teachers’ views in practice.
Word processing
A word processor is much better than a typewriter in letting you enter and edit your text more easily; print it out as required with much more flexibility; save it on disc for future work; and transfer it through an IT link (see, for instance, below, under communications) to a colleague elsewhere.
Staff:
handouts
notes
notices
question banks
stock lists
test papers
worksheets
Learners:
essays and other assignments
investigation reports
projects
text for displays
Many tutors now accept word processed output from their learners.
The main barrier seems to he fear of getting non-original work — but we get that anyway.
Word processing can be such a liberation from what most young people would call the drudgery of pen and paper that it is as bad to ban it as to ban calculators.
The word processor is a very powerful tool for the transfer of thought from brain to paper; probably most IT teachers would use it as the first introduction to practical computing, at least with literate students.
A really effective technique for tutors with access to many keyboards is to expect the learners to complete word processed task sheets on screen, and store them on disc for later study, marking and collation.
It may or may not be a disadvantage to use word processors with an in-built calculator feature!
Better is a programmable word processor; though a sadly rare beast, this allows some very exciting interactive work with learners (Deeson and Megarry, 1987).
There are several other newer forms of word processing software that have exciting implications for work with learners.
I deal with two of them — desktop publishing and hypertext — after graphics.
Predictive typing is of particular value with disabled learners; the software guesses the word or phrase you are currently typing, and offers you its guesses to save you key presses.
Graphics
Business graphics programs are picture processors — they can produce a range of histograms, line graphs and pie charts from data sets; they also often offer statistical analysis features.
More specialised graphics software includes computer-aided design (cad) programs; the so-called art software that can give you displays and printouts of diagrams (freehand or line, for example those of structures, flowcharts, geometrical situations); and special programs for work with shapes and patterns.
The last type comes under the cal umbrella, but it should be clear which application in the lists below apply to which of the others.
Staff:
drawing geometric and trigonometric figures
plotting many types of relationship in the contexts of theoretical and practical concepts
producing quality illustrations for overhead projection, for notices or for distribution to others
showing expenditure and assessment breakdowns clearly
Learners:
drawing sets, geometric and trigonometric figures
graph drawing activities of all types in all contexts
plotting investigation results
producing quality illustrations for projects, assignments and reports
It was mentioned above that many people find word processing to be the best way in to practical computing for learners.
For the less literate this is less true, and graphics, especially in mathematics, are an excellent way to start learners getting their hands on the equipment.
However, in practice, processed pictures and processed words mostly support each other; use of desktop publishing (dtp) software can make achieving this support easier than it is otherwise.
With dtp, the user can process pages of material as wholes, as well as the individual text and graphic items that make up the pages.
An advanced form of word processor, a dtp program is perhaps better called page layout software.
Another advanced form of processor is hypertext.
View this as a system for setting up three-dimensional banks of text and graphics, between which the ‘reader’ can jump at will by pressing a special key when a highlight on screen shows there is a link to material on another layer.
Such links within pure text may lead to illustrations, definitions, references or further notes, for instance.
Data base management
Data base management is structured information processing — the software offers the electronic equivalent of card and paper files.
Applications depend greatly on the flexibility of the program used.
Searching and sorting and some further degree of processing are allowed.
Staff:
glossaries
learner records (but do not forget data protection laws)
orders, suppliers, and stock records
practical class registers and profiles
question banks
reference files
Learners:
glossaries
a huge range of information processing needs
reference and revision notes
Communications
Here, under message processing, I exclude local area communications, for example, computers in adjoining teaching areas sharing data and printers, or departmental work stations being part of a network.
Rather, I am thinking of access to public data bases (such as Prestel, the Times Network System, and NERIS, this last being a data base of worksheets and such); here too come electronic mail and other forms of electronic communication, such as computer conferring, between departments in different areas or even different countries.
None of these are as yet much used in mathematics education (except for the dissemination of papers and electronic conferring in higher education).
However, if we are to go much further along the road to open learning mentioned earlier, we need to explore and extend the potential of electronic information transfer.
There are also a few experiments in Earth geometry that gain from the rapid transfer of data between distant schools.
Staff:
consulting with others elsewhere during new course planning, development, and dissemination
more rapid ordering of stock
obtaining up-to-date data to make problems closer to real life
sharing text files and other resources
Learners:
finding out material for projects
getting help and reinforcement, especially in open and distance learning situations
Spreadsheets
A spreadsheet — a table processor — is a 2D (normally) grid of cells; each can hold text, a numeric value, or a formula that relates the values in other cells.
Staff:
analysis of assessments and examination results
budgeting, stock control and accounting
processing and analysis of experimental results
Learners:
linear programming
vast ranges of problem solving
tuck shop accounts and planning
tabulation and analysis of investigations
work with matrices
To close
The educational computing euphoria of the early 1980s has gone for ever.
While we are not far off the figure of a micro to every teaching room, we do not have the masses of high-quality, subject-specific learning software everybody thought there would be.
Indeed, we could not afford it if it were published.
Using business software can make a great deal of difference to learning mathematics, because of its flexible open-ended nature as described above.
Other possible approaches that may come to the rescue include interactive video, expert systems (a form of ‘machine intelligence’), and the use by tutors of authoring systems to produce at speed specific, computer-based ‘lessons’ made up of text, graphics, and self-assessment questions.
However, in practice often the micros are not to be found near the chalkface: rather they tend to live on trolleys and inhabit locked cupboards in primary schools, and cluster in specialist departments at secondary and FE levels.
There are other problems teachers have to face up to in practice; getting to learn how to use the programs and how to fit them into their schemes, for instance: both require much thought and time.
At the start of this account, computer-aided freedom, caf, was proposed as the future way forward many tutors and learners would like to tread.
We have seen that caf can have several roles; to move toward it we must break away from keeping our learners straightjacketed in systems that do not allow them to express their individual needs and ideas.
Office software, interactive video and expert systems offer a great deal more hope in that regard than does ‘traditional’ cal.
The following points seem clear.
IT is of growing importance in all areas of life, including all those which affect our pupils and students now and when they leave us; it would be artificial not to use IT in learning mathematics.
IT offers the tutor more effective methods than before of helping learners explore concepts and carry out investigations, and of organising the department.
IT is no use on its own: the attitudes and energy of tutors and learners are very relevant to making it a valued and effective resource.
However, the most important question that follows the introduction of new technology into mathematics education concerns how much the curriculum should change.
I have implied that the curriculum is Victorian; even if you do not agree with that, ask yourself if the current approach to school/college mathematics is what the citizens of the early twenty-first century need.
Will society want them to be literate and numerate in the senses we now use the words?
We are long overdue for a complete overhaul of the mathematics curriculum at all levels.
And I mean complete.
It is ironic that IT makes fundamental change both essential and possible, but — to repeat — we need the change anyway.
Computer-aided freedom is worth working for!
Opening-up
How often have you read articles about open-ended investigative work in the classroom and thought: ‘This is all very well but I wouldn't have a clue where to start’?
Courses do not always help to get rid of this feeling and can even make it worse.
The tutor extols the virtues of this approach and you, of course, agree.
She sets you some work to do in groups and you enjoy it.
Every other group produces more sophisticated results than yours, your own results seem to vanish in the general feedback, and to cap it all she then shows you work which is more sophisticated than any of yours, probably containing a result which is on the A level further mathematics syllabus, and declares that it is work from mixed-ability 13 year olds!
All your enthusiasm vanishes; not only have you not been able to ‘do’ it, but you are now convinced you are not cut out for mathematics teaching at all and none of your pupils could produce anything like that.
Strangely enough, I think self-doubt is an ideal state of mind in which to start thinking about working investigatively.
The teacher who knows all the answers and expects pupils to produce a fixed sequence of arguments leading to some final conclusion is not the best person to draw creative thought from a class.
The teacher who sometimes admits ignorance, is prepared to accept hunches and half-truths, and generates a feeling of shared problems, is more likely to enjoy and encourage their own thought-processes.
Let us suppose that your department is keen to try investigative work; some have been on courses; there is access to a few ideas from books and journals; and the main concern is how people will cope personally and pedagogically in the classroom.
I offer a few ideas which have worked for me in this situation.
Planning to listen
It helps to listen to what pupils are trying to say in order to see the direction of their thought.
A cunning little exercise to help you test your listening skills is to ask a class to think about a rectangle and then describe it one-by-one.
They think it is a geometry exercise and some of them will produce accurate classical descriptions which you can acknowledge with a nod.
One also gets a selection of more unusual descriptions such as: ‘stretched square’, ‘an endless shape with corners’, ‘it looks like this …’.
So long as these descriptions are more or less correct they should be praised, and everyone's attention drawn to the most unusual ones.
This exercise does several things which will be of use to investigative work later on.
You learn to listen because you know what a rectangle is and you can measure your idea of it against theirs.
You encourage the creative approach and the unusual ideas.
Those who produced classical responses might have been slightly shocked at what you found praiseworthy.
You encourage less-able pupils and publicly acknowledge the value of their contribution.
You enable pupils to verbalise concepts which are apparently easy to understand.
This is good practice for verbalising more difficult ideas later on.
This exercise can be extended to answer questions like: ‘What is a circle?’
‘What is adding?’,
‘What can you use a line for?’ and so on.
Planning for mess
If a long time is spent teaching pupils how to present work and arguments neatly, insisting on underlined headings, dates, and sharp pencils, there are going to be problems convincing them that rough work is valuable and that you are prepared to spend some time looking at it.
Perhaps you have to convince yourself first!
Next time you work something out in rough keep the paper for a week and then look at it again.
Can you follow the train of thought you had then?
Are all the arguments written down?
Probably not, but that does not invalidate the work.
How often do you write up something neatly when you have worked it out in rough?
Probably not very often, or only in special circumstances.
This is not an argument against neat presentation of work, but you may need to prepare pupils to find ways of recording their work at the speed of their thought.
There will be times during a good investigative session when they need to draw several quick diagrams perhaps, or they may suddenly see connections between things which they cannot yet explain but need to indicate immediately.
The use of circling or underlining parts of their work, arrows to show how pieces of work connect, brainstorming, asterisks to show things which may be worth returning to, parts of diagrams abandoned as a result becomes clear, and other messy ways of working may need to be encouraged if people are used to hiding their rough work or throwing it away.
I have shown pupils examples of my rough work and neat finished products.
I often ask to see rough work from other areas of the mathematics curriculum.
I sometimes start an investigation by doing a bit of ‘working-out’ on the board and using intentionally ‘messy’techniques to illustrate how useful they can be, always emphasising that they will, at some stage, have to look back at their work to write it up neatly in some form or other.
If people are working in groups, anyone who spends too long recording or drawing will either be hurried up by the others or excluded from the group's progress.
Planning for sharing
Working in groups can yield a wide range of benefits.
It can help to speed up the work where an investigation involves the results from several different cases.
It can help pupils appreciate each other 's contribution to the work and develop their own.
It can help some to keep track of what is going on if they have others to help them.
On the other hand it can isolate quiet pupils from the action, and very quick pupils can ignore slower ones without intentional cruelty.
Individuals can resent their own ideas being absorbed or submerged by other people's, just as some of us do when we work in a group.
Classes already used to working in groups for mathematics have no problem.
Otherwise perhaps there is some other curriculum area in which groupwork is used and the experience of other teachers can help get things started.
If you have to start from scratch you need to think quite carefully about the ability-grouping and gender-groupings.
This is a big topic which I do not intend to tackle here, but in my experience groups of like ability do not produce the best or most imaginative work.
The more able pupils often produce stereotypical work which may generate the ‘right’ answer but may not stimulate them to ask further questions.
On the other hand, groups of mixed ability may not be able to conclude their work in the form of a generalised theorem or similar conclusion, if there is one to be found.
Having decided on groupings, a straightforward topic might be tried at first; I suggest tangrams, or the building of solid models, as a suitable exercise.
One task while this is going on is to observe how the groups are working, who is too dominant, who is too isolated, and what adjustments to the groups might have to be made.
Planning to get started
It is worth considering how to start the investigation: whether to do a bit yourself first to get them going, or work with the whole class as a large group, or just state the problem and let them do it all.
Sometimes an investigation can grind to a halt after five minutes because there is a flaw in the statement of the problem.
This is not your fault or theirs.
You can congratulate them on getting into the problem so quickly, discuss the flaw, come to a mutual agreement about definitions or regulations, or dictate further instructions as needed.
The types of questions which can arise are varied; for instance, ‘Can we turn the paper over?’,
‘Does line mean straight line?’,
‘What are we supposed to be counting?’,
‘Can we used dotted paper?’ and so on.
The more of these questions you can anticipate the better, but there will always be surprises.
Planning to avoid collapse
Possibly the greatest fear one might have is that, because the lesson is relatively unstructured, it could grind to a halt.
It may seem obvious to try the investigation yourself first, but this can have hidden dangers.
If you discover some wonderful patterns or general algebraic relationships hidden in the structure of the problem it can be very tempting to steer pupils towards them and generate a feeling of disappointment if they do not get there.
It is often better to bite your lip and let pupils charge off in the ‘wrong’ direction, because the more of this kind of work you do the less you will be able to define ‘wrong’.
In the first investigative session I ever ran I expected pupils to produce a quadratic relationship, or at least a verbal description of one, from a problem involving lines and their intersections.
Instead one group produced an entire family of curves ‘stitched’ from straight lines and some rather neat sequences of numbers to describe each one.
So anything is acceptable within reason, but what if instead of‘anything’ you get ‘nothing’?
As in any mathematics teaching, clever use of questions can nudge people along.
Three of the most useful are ‘Can you guess…?’,
‘Why?’ and ‘What if…?’.
‘Can you guess…?’ can be used to help those who are stuck but feel they understand where they are going.
It can also be used when several results have already been found but people are unable to proceed further to a generalisation; for instance, they may have failed to spot a linear relationship or a well-known number-sequence in their results.
After guessing comes testing, followed by more confident predicting and a verbal or symbolic statement of the pattern they have found occurring.
Very many investigations can follow this kind of pattern and you can always encourage pupils to take this approach if they are stuck or you are unable to see where else they might go.
‘Why?’ is a useful question when someone has made an error but you want them to diagnose it.
It is even more useful if people have produced verbal statements without explanation, or have given you a formula but missed the underlying structure.
For instance, in the well-known ‘frogs’ puzzle, it is one step to say the puzzle can be solved in 15 moves, a further step to produce a general formula for different numbers of frogs, but an even greater step to say why the relationship is quadratic in terms of how the frogs move.
Pupils can often fall back on a circular argument such as: Why is the relationship linear?
Because it makes a straight line.
‘What if…?’ is the queen of questions in investigative work.
It is worth having a store of them up your sleeve until confidence has grown to the state where they can be produced off the top of the head.
Here are some examples: What if you…used triangular paper? tried it in three dimensions? plotted a graph? tried a simple case first? shared your results with someone else? tried fractions or decimals or negative numbers?
Planning for next time
I have a notebook near me throughout a session and I jot down any questions I could not answer.
I think them through after the session or consult with colleagues.
I also jot down the questions I did answer and ask myself if my answers were open or closed.
I give myself a pat on the back for every question which I answered in a way which led the pupils deeper into the problem.
I give myself two pats on the back for every answer which  started with ‘I don't know but what if…’ because these answers show that I regard the investigation as a shared experience.
Self-doubt probably still lurks somewhere so I write down very quickly all the things which went wrong and get them out of the way by incorporating my ideas on them into my plans for the next investigative session right away.
I sit back and feel good about the things which went right.
How many pupils obviously enjoyed it?
Did I enjoy it?
How much enthusiasm was there'?
I think of what each group produced, not in terms of how far from a conclusion they were, but in terms of how much they had achieved.
Perhaps I can remember what each individual achieved without looking at any written work.
How many had ideas of their own during the session'?
How can I build on these achievements next time?
Now what would be a suitable investigation to do next?…
Responding to change
The experience of changing one's classroom practice may not be a comfortable one.
It can be fraught with problems which all too often only surface once change is underway.
This article contains three case studies of teachers, all of whom were involved with innovations designed to incorporate mathematical activities of an investigative and practical nature into their classrooms.
The contexts in which they work vary, as do their personal and professional backgrounds.
In each case a number of issues arose, some of which were resolved, as they attempted to modify their classroom practice.
My focus here will be upon those issues which have arisen because of the challenges being made to pre-existing ideas about:
(a)
what constitutes mathematics;
(b)
how children learn;
(c)
who controls access to mathematical knowledge.
Rick has been teaching for twelve years and is Head of Mathematics in a boys' secondary modern school in a small town, with an intake mainly from middle-class homes.
His experience of mathematics teaching in his first post was SMILE in its early days.
He did not enjoy it and this has coloured his attitude to individualised schemes ever since.
When he moved to his present school, he abandoned individualised learning and lessons fell very much into the mode of ‘exposition by the teacher, pupils do the exercise’.
Personal boredom with the formal way in which he was working, coupled with an awareness of the lack of relevance to the pupils of much of the mathematics he was teaching, led Rick to begin making changes to his classroom practice.
Initially, he experimented with his second and third year lower sets, basing his syllabus on the Cockcroft Foundation list (DES, 1982) and using games and other activities to try to make lessons more enjoyable.
However, he kept the ‘traditional’ way of working with exam classes because of external pressures.
I wasn't prepared to totally drop things from the various courses (because they still came up every year) but over the years less and less emphasis was placed on the more mundane work.
Many parents still expected their sons to have a ‘sound’ mathematics education and I'm sure the idea of playing with bits of coloured paper and Sellotape instead of doing ‘proper’maths like they had to, would have horrified some of our parents.
Rick felt that he knew very little about practical mathematics apart from‘making a scale drawing of the minibus and taking kids out to measure the  rugby pitch’ and even less about investigations and problem-solving.
He signed up for a ten-week ‘twilight’ course in order to ‘remedy this deficiency’.
It served a dual purpose; it provided him with lots of material for the classroom and enabled him to discuss his ideas with colleagues from a wide variety of schools.
I personally needed to know that these ideas were not wrong.
I needed reassurance from many colleagues that they too were thinking along the same lines.
The idea of investigations or, more importantly, an investigative approach, had to have the backing of my peers within the profession to give it respectability.
A combination of peer support and the ‘legitimising’ effect of the GCSE upon the new ways of working encouraged Rick to contemplate making radical changes to his mathematics curriculum for the intake year.
The idea of changing from a syllabus-dominated to an activity-based curriculum was not welcomed by the headteacher.
He was concerned that parents would want to see their children doing ‘real’ maths, and advised injecting investigations into the existing syllabus instead.
In the event, an activity-based curriculum went ahead, albeit somewhat clandestinely.
The other teachers in the department were prepared to support Rick in this, partly because of their personal and professional regard for him, but also because they too knew things had to change because of the GCSE.
Rick tried to ensure their involvement by inviting each of them to contribute one unit of activities to the year's scheme of work.
Everyone took up the invitation.
One major issue for Rick was parental concern.
Complaints from parents took some time to appear.
More precisely, one complaint from a parent actually appeared, but this was enough to set alarm bells ringing.
It pointed out that:
Everything seems to be done by trial and error.
When will it be consolidated into proper' mathematical theory'?
and
Pupils are tempted not to do the job properly because they do not see the work as proper' maths.
A concluding remark was that their son was ‘enjoying the work immensely’ but he was not sure that he was doing maths.
Behind what was often voiced as concern for ‘what parents want’ is the fundamental issue of what constitutes mathematics.
Whilst Rick's aim in changing the curriculum was to focus on mathematical thinking, this was at odds not only with many parents' perceptions of mathematics, but also those of one member of his department and the headteacher.
Their ideas were based on what one might describe as ‘school mathematics’— a set of facts and techniques — in which questions have one right answer and prescribed methods of solution.
Hand-in-hand with this notion of what constitutes mathematics goes the perception of how it is to be learned.
Mathematical knowledge is transmitted from teacher to pupil; telling, showing and explaining are the order of the day.
Rick's method of dealing with these conflicting images was to hold an evening parents' workshop in which he outlined the rationale and aims of the new mathematics curriculum for the intake year.
By undertaking  mathematical activities themselves, and through discussion with members of staff, parents began to see that there was an alternative, and viable, view of mathematics.
Additionally, they were given the opportunity to experience other ways of learning mathematics than those which they knew about from their own schooldays.
The evening was a great success, evidenced both by parents' reactions during the course of the evening and by the positive comments made by parents on a questionnaire Rick had devised.
Maths is much more interesting these days.
I now understand what my son has as maths homework.
I now see the light — many thanks.
A helpful workshop to better understand the system being used to teach maths.
From this point onwards the headteacher was completely won over.
The issue of parental concern had been resolved, at least for the time being, and Rick and his department could proceed with their curriculum development without the spectre of parental complaint haunting them.
To the outside observer, there has been considerable change in classroom practice within this maths department.
Children work in groups rather than sitting in rows facing the blackboard.
All the elements of paragraph 243 of the Cockcroft Report are in evidence rather than simply exposition and practice.
Yet with this one major issue resolved, Rick is now questioning whether what goes on in his classroom has really changed so much.
I come in.
I control the class.
However little time I spend at the front they don't come in and get on with something, they come in and wait for me.
Whatever the activity, I still see this as the old style…it's teacher-led from that point of view in that they rely on me to start them off and I mean it's almost as if I stand there with a gun and say ‘Go!’
So I start the lesson, I tick it over half way through and I finish the lesson and my discipline and control is there all the time overriding everything.
A concern with pupil autonomy manifested itself in two ways.
The first, and the easiest for him to deal with, involved classroom organisation.
Instead of retaining exclusive control over classroom resources, Rick showed pupils where equipment, etc. was kept and expected them to help themselves to whatever they needed.
The second, and the one with which he is still struggling, required him to search for a means of making the pupils less dependent on him for their mathematics.
By setting more open-ended tasks he is encouraging pupils to do ‘their maths’, although he is aware that he still controls the selection of these tasks.
Rick is unsure as to what his next move in this direction will be.
Older pupils, who are still being taught in a more ‘traditional’ way, demonstrate a much higher degree of dependency upon Rick in their maths lessons than do younger pupils who are involved in the new curriculum.
The former frequently ask ‘Is this right?’ or ‘What do I do next?’, whilst younger pupils seem to spend more time showing him what they have found out.
Rick hopes this attitude will spread up the school as these pupils grow older.
This aspect of his practice is only just beginning to change, but he intends to persevere with it, spurred on by the personal satisfaction he has derived from ‘seeing them do their maths’.
For Betty, pupil autonomy is also an issue, though not in the same way as it is for Rick.
She teaches in a middle school where she has worked for many years.
The school's mathematics syllabus reflects its more ‘academic’ past, still containing references to logarithms although no one teaches them any more.
In an effort to make the mathematics curriculum more practically-based, the new headteacher introduced a commercial maths scheme which he thought would improve teachers' classroom practice by shifting the emphasis away from whole-class ‘chalk and talk’ lessons and towards more individual and group work.
Betty uses the scheme once a week, although she is unhappy about the fact that she has to spend so much time getting the equipment ready.
Her room is not equipped for easy pupil access to equipment and she has to store apparatus on a trolley elsewhere.
Betty's other criticism of the scheme is that she has been told to use it for individualised learning and she does not believe that the children learn properly this way.
She would prefer to be spending her time on planning for a teacher-led lesson, rather than on organising equipment and administering a scheme:
There's no time to do detailed work any more.
In addition, her long-established methods of classroom organisation are better suited to whole-class teaching.
When she uses the scheme she stays at her desk whilst pupils queue for help, for marking or to find out what they should do next.
Practical tasks do feature in Betty's mathematics lessons outside of the commercial scheme.
Her normal pattern of working with this type of activity is for everyone to undertake the same task.
Betty demonstrates the way they are to tackle the task and the pupils carry it out in unison, at least initially.
A technique she often uses after such an activity is to ask the pupils to write about what they have learned.
A member of the mathematics advisory team was invited by the headteacher to work in the school and while it was not compulsory, it was assumed that every teacher would work with him at some stage.
In the course of this involvement, he undertook a series of once-weekly sessions with Betty and her class.
A variety of practical and investigative activities was tried out, largely with the children working in groups and occasionally with the groups engaged in different tasks.
The latter was reluctantly agreed to by Betty who thought that ‘when one group sees another doing something more exciting they'll be discontented’.
In the event, each group was so involved in its own task that this did not happen.
After some initial scepticism, Betty gave enthusiastic support to the venture.
She was involved in planning the activities with the advisory teacher and took on full responsibility for organising the equipment for each session.
She supplemented the once-weekly group sessions by finishing activities begun in the session with her class and she sometimes initiated a task for the whole class to do to reinforce what had been done with the advisory teacher.
The advisory teacher and Betty disagreed in their views about how a task might be presented.
This difference could be described as a conflict between ‘discovery’ on the one hand and ‘showing’on the other.
Betty acknowledged:
I'm scared to let the children try things out for themselves.
I'm happier showing them everything.
The reason she gave for this was that she felt that experiencing repeated failure was bad for pupils.
She referred to one pupil's piece of writing which described what he thought he had learned in the first session with the advisory teacher:
I lern not much at all.
However, she was prepared to go along with the advisory teacher's point of view in the sessions and reassured herself concerning her own fears by using whole-class lessons to reinforce what she felt pupils should have discovered.
When the series of sessions with the advisory teacher came to an end, Betty said that she thought that the work had gone well and that the children had enjoyed it, although she had noticed that the response of the ‘difficult’ children, whom she also described as ‘poorly motivated’, was much the same as usual.
Her concern now was how she was going to cover the syllabus since she had used up so much time on these practical activities.
One thing the advisory teacher had failed to convey was that the syllabus was being covered via these activities.
Betty's stated guiding principle, that every child should experience success, was not at variance with the philosophy behind the school-imposed innovation with which she had been virtually obliged to become involved.
Where a major difference arose was the means by which this might be ensured.
Betty's technique was to set all her pupils the same task and then to teach them to accomplish it.
One possible reason for the lack of motivation within her class could be attributed to tasks not being sufficiently challenging for some pupils, whilst being beyond the intellectual grasp of others.
She did not accept that within a more open-ended task, all children could experience success by setting themselves goals which they would work towards accomplishing.
These goals, and the methods of achieving them, would not be the same for all pupils, and hence the criteria for judging success would need to cater for this.
Embedded in the teaching method employed by Betty is the transmission model of learning referred to earlier.
She believes that the most efficient way for pupils to learn mathematics is by being told what to do, and preferably by a teacher, rather than a textbook.
This was at odds with the view of mathematics and the theory of learning underpinning the innovation with which she was involved.
In this, the pupil was seen as being very much an active participant in the learning process rather than as a passive recipient of someone else's mathematical knowledge.
Betty's classroom practice changed whilst she worked with the advisory teacher, but the lack of congruence between her beliefs about mathematics and about how children learn and those behind the innovation, made it unlikely that such changes would be sustained once he left.
This was evidenced by the continuation of her long-established teaching methods and forms of classroom organisation between sessions with the advisory teacher.
For Rick, the motivation to change his classroom practice came from within himself, whereas for Betty the pressures were primarily external.
It could be suggested that this is one determining factor in whether teachers  are able to effect and sustain change.
The concluding case study concerns a teacher whose decision to change was strongly influenced by external factors but whose personal enthusiasm and commitment sustained the change in classroom practice.
Joanne works at a grammar school and almost all her teaching experience has been at this school.
She describes herself as an ‘old-fashioned’ teacher in referring to what might be considered rather traditional teaching methods.
These consist largely of exposition and practice with the occasional excursion into recreational mathematics ‘to spice it up a bit’.
Joanne was quite happy with the way she was teaching until the GCSE began to be talked about, particularly in relation to its emphasis on investigative work and school-based assessment.
It was clear that the department would need to move with the times if its pupils were to continue to get good results, and, encouraged by her new Head of Department, Joanne found herself entrusted with the management of a curriculum innovation for the intake year.
She began by rewriting the syllabus to bring it in line with GCSE, which involved some reduction in content.
Then, in conjunction with her Head of Department, she grouped the remaining content into broad areas and added a list of process objectives, for example, ‘to specialise, think systematically, hypothesise, generalise.
etc.’
Other teachers involved in the intake year were invited to take responsibility for preparing materials for some areas of the new curriculum.
These were to incorporate practical and investigative mathematics.
Joanne and the other members of the team of teachers working with the intake year embarked on the new curriculum with a good deal of enthusiasm and more than a little apprehension.
Without exception they had liked the role they played within the classroom and a remark by Joanne sums up how they felt about the more pupil-centred approach:
The idea of kids finding things out for themselves appeals to me, but I enjoy explaining.
In addition, Joanne felt that the new approach exposed her weaknesses as a teacher.
By this she was referring to her perceived poor organisation and her lack of knowledge about other approaches to teaching, learning and assessment.
She felt that
It's lack of confidence in your ability to use a new approach that stops you changing.
You've been doing things the same way for years and you know you can get things across, but…
Once the new curriculum was underway, the predominant concern of the department was the time it was taking to cover the syllabus.
This concern was voiced by Joanne within the first month of the new way of working:
Inside I was screaming, ‘I'm never going to get this done!'
Joanne often felt that she could have taught a topic to the whole class in a fraction of the time it was taking them to find it out for themselves.
The issue of coverage did not dissipate during the year and with the exception of the Head of Maths, everyone was worried that they were not able to complete even this much-reduced syllabus, and that the knock-on effect  could lead to serious repercussions in later years.
When the syllabus was referred to, it was the content objectives to which everyone referred; the process objectives were for the most part ignored.
In the past, Joanne and the other teachers had been able to measure how well they were doing by ‘ticking off’ sections of the syllabus as they completed them.
The end-of-year panic on discovering that other teachers had covered more had led to a general feeling that the quicker topics were completed the better.
There was also the belief that traditional methods ensure that everyone in the class gets the same information and that you therefore know what pupils have learned.
Joanne sensed that this was not quite true as she was aware that there were children within her classes who had not learned what she thought she had taught them.
‘Rounding off’ was a preoccupation of all teachers implementing the new curriculum.
When Joanne worked on more open-ended work, she liked to have a whole class session to ensure that everyone had ‘got the basic idea’.
She described a strategy she had developed to deal with this:
The thing that worked best when we were going through an investigation was to get individual kids to come and explain it…mind you they made such a racket applauding them when they'd finished etc., but I felt they were listening more carefully to them than they were to me!
Joanne began to focus on what she could see as the positive aspects of the new approach, and while she did not specifically identify them as such, they were related to the process objectives within the scheme of work.
An example which was particularly significant for her arose in some work on graphs.
The pupils were asked to plot pairs of points and to try to find a rule for working out the coordinates of the midpoints of the lines joining these pairs of points.
The vast majority of her class was able to state a rule in words and then to generate an algebraic formula.
In the past, her pupils would have been shown the way to work this out, given the formula to memorise, and in many cases they would have forgotten it.
Joanne was impressed with their ability to formulate the rule for themselves and felt that since they understood what they were doing there was a better chance of retention.
On other occasions, teachers commented that tasks without an obvious method of solution which were set to the intake year and also to other years were tackled better by the intake year in spite of the fact that they were younger.
It was felt that they were prepared to ‘have a go’ whereas the others foundered in the absence of a well-defined and pre-specified method.
A feeling began to emerge that the advantages of the new approach might be long- rather than short-term, but the dichotomy between wanting to work in the new way because of its potential advantages and ‘Are we ever going to get the syllabus done?’ continued to be problematic.
It did not, however, stop them continuing with the innovation in the next school year, after making some modifications to the scheme of work.
The major underlying issues for Joanne and for the department in which she works concerned teaching methods and the distinction between content and process in mathematics.
As regards method, most teachers were concerned with ‘getting things across’, the transmission mode of teaching again.
Because they had taught a topic, it followed that the  children had learned it.
When test results did not confirm this, they could still console themselves with the fact that every child had been given the same opportunity to learn.
This method of teaching was effective in that it produced good results in an examination which focused on mathematical content.
The teachers understood that what they were doing would have to change if they were to foster skills of mathematical thinking, but it was still difficult for them to change well-established habits for others of unproven value.
When Joanne had first contemplated changing her classroom practice, the GCSE had been her prime motivation.
She had included process objectives in the syllabus because these featured in GCSE.
She was aware that these could be developed by investigative work, but once she became immersed in the new curriculum, struggling on occasions to keep her head above water, she began to lose sight of these objectives, focusing instead on the more familiar content objectives.
For other members of the department, some of whom were less aware than Joanne of what they were trying to achieve via the new approach, this was even more the case.
As Joanne herself commented:
It's just that you've been doing things the same way for ten plus years and it's second nature.
Change in classroom practice is often talked about as if it were easy to effect and impatience expressed towards teachers who are unable to accomplish it overnight.
As these case studies show, even when the willingness to change is there, whether the initial impetus comes from within or without, actually bringing about change is hard for the individual.
It requires teachers to look critically at their own present practice as well as being able to conceive of alternatives.
This needs time and it needs support and encouragement, from within the school, from other colleagues, and from the Advisory Service.
Tensions
Have you ever had the experience, in the middle of a lesson, of suddenly wishing you were not there?
Like a wave washing over you, you realise that things are not going well.
Perhaps you ‘take control’ and conduct things from the blackboard; perhaps you ‘let them keep working’, waiting for the bell to ring.
The feeling of inadequacy, but of having to cope, is an example of a tension.
Have you ever found yourself talking, telling pupils things, and wished that somehow things were different, that they were doing the work?
Or have you ever got a group of pupils talking, and having heard how inarticulate they are, how little they understand, wished that you had never embarked in this direction?
This is an example of a tension.
Like elastic bands wound up, feelings of inadequacy or guilt, or just knots in the stomach, are indications that you have touched a basic tension.
Another way to detect tensions is to notice ‘if onlys’.
If only pupils wanted to learn…
If only they would pay attention…
If only the class were smaller…
These too are indicators of underlying tensions.
Despite the fact that ‘if only’ implies that things could be different, they do not actually go away when the ideal conditions are achieved, they just surface in a new guise.
Yet each day these tensions are coped with in some fashion by each and every teacher.
Some stance, some action is taken, which often obscures the underlying dilemma.
The resultant of all the many forces on teachers is often, not surprisingly, inaction and numbness.
In this article, I want to acknowledge openly a number of tensions that I experience, and which I suspect others may recognise.
I do this in the belief that by admitting them publicly we will discover that others share them.
The history of education in general, and mathematics education in particular , is riddled with attempts to nullify basic tensions.
Yet I suspect most tensions are endemic and inescapable.
Getting them out into the open means that they can be robbed of their numbing effect, and turned instead into potent sources of energy.
Consider the following quotes from pupils and teachers.
The pupils asked me if this was ‘on the exam’.
I said, ‘Well, no, not exactly…’ and they switched off immediately.
I want to get them enjoying mathematics.
They just want to get through the day.
Don't make me think about it, just tell me how to do it!
I've read the card, Miss, but is it an add or a multiply?
These are the sorts of remarks that are heard quite often, signalling the presence of a basic tension of teaching and learning.
In what follows I have tried to be explicit and specific about experiences which are by their nature woolly and indeterminate, resisting expression.
Looking back over them, I see that in many cases the same underlying tension is addressed in different ways.
Keeping control
I must keep my class under control, both to permit individuals to work, and so as not to disturb other classes.
With a new class I want the pupils to feel that I am in control and that I know what I'm doing.
I tend to keep a tight rein at first, and gradually relax as I get to know them.
The stronger my control, the less opportunity for individuals to explore, to express their own ideas.
Yet inevitably there are one or two pupils who do not seem to respond to my way of working, who are hard to control.
The only question is how to survive to the end of the lesson.
If I turn my back, then some of them immediately start break-dancing round the room!
Do other teachers have similar difficulties?
New teachers on probation may be afraid to admit to difficulties, for fear of being branded inadequate, and even losing their job.
An experienced teacher may be wary of revealing uncertainties for fear of losing status in the eyes of colleagues, or perhaps the chance of promotion.
If I work the way I want to, what will the teacher think who takes them next year?
A head of department may be too concerned with gaining or keeping the respect of colleagues to admit to having problems.
Time
The syllabus is packed, the examination looms, there is too little time to cover all the material.
If I stop and get the pupils discussing, or investigating, I will lose valuable time, and some topic will be missed.
The tension of time is unresolvable, no matter how it is approached, due to the pressures of society to ‘get on’.
If I take the time necessary for pupils to really understand a topic, then I will certainly have trouble exposing them to everything that is expected.
On the other hand, I might be able to demonstrate, even inculcate, ways of thinking that will enable them to take on new topics much more quickly.
Notice how discussion of lack of sufficient time brings up some standard primitives and metaphors:
I was afraid we wouldn't get there/reach the topic.
I felt I had to push a bit harder to get to the answer in the lesson.
The metaphors of ‘knowledge as place’, and of ‘teaching as movement’ are quite common.
Are they appropriate?
A related metaphor is revealed in expressions such as There isn't time to cover the syllabus.
I haven't covered inequalities yet.
Painting seems to be a popular pastime — but is it an appropriate image?
What images might be more accurate or more precise?
Shortage of time is a common complaint in every walk of life, but perhaps it is only a perception.
If I really want to do something, I will find the time.
Put another way, perhaps the things I do with my time are really what I want to do.
Confidence vs challenge
It has been said over and over again that pupils need to gain confidence, and that confidence comes from success.
Unfortunately, success is associated only with jumping hurdles, like tests and examinations, and not also with seeing a generality, or capturing it in words and symbols, or explaining it to someone else.
The result is that we try to ‘give pupils confidence’ by providing simple tasks with little or no challenge.
For example, the current concern about ‘low attainers’ stems directly from the requirement that all pupils study mathematics every year, but indirectly from the age-old observation that ‘standards are falling’.
(Cicero complained bitterly of this, and was by no means the first!)
The confidence challenge tension leads educators to simplify the tasks given to low-attaining pupils, to break things down into tiny, anodyne steps.
Any intellectual challenge is removed on the grounds that they cannot handle it, and so all edge, all interest, is gone.
Product vs process
I want my pupils to participate in mathematical thinking, and to take the initiative.
I know that their actual task is to pass the examinations they meet.
Their attention is on learning what they are told they have to learn, on being able to do the questions.
My wish is to emphasise thinking skills so that they will be able to deal with unexpected questions on an examination, and more importantly, continue thinking and questioning throughout their lives.
As soon as I start ‘teaching’ mathematical processes, there is a real danger that they will simply become products, words to be memorised.
For example, I want my pupils to realise deeply within themselves that it often helps to specialise — to try simple cases, systematically as well as randomly — and then to generalise — to look for a general pattern.
But how long do I let them struggle with a complicated example before intervening?
If I come in too quickly, specialising will become a superficial behaviour, and it will not be available as a potent force when they really need it.
If I give no clues, they may never become aware of the power of specialising.
Pupils will quickly learn to say the ‘right’ words back to you, but do they really appreciate their real meaning?
This dilemma is endemic.
The way we cope depends on many factors, such as whether the particular answer really matters or whether it is being used as a vehicle to introduce, or work on, ‘specialising’.
Frustration is important in mathematics, for you cannot really experience release, that beautiful sense of things falling into place, if you have not previously been confused, feeling that things were out of place.
Analogously, you cannot guide trainee teachers past the fundamental teaching tensions.
They have to experience the dilemmas themselves before they can even ‘hear’ the advice.
It is an old story; but there is no royal road to learning (or teaching).
Autonomy
Pupils need standards against which to measure their own performance.
The more the standards are imposed by the teacher, the more the pupils are ‘working for their teacher’, rather than for themselves.
In primary and early secondary school there may appear to be no harm done, but when pupils get older and  disaffected with school, their teachers become part of ‘the system’.
Pupils may lose their reason for working unless they have learned to work for themselves, to value the pleasure that comes with seeing, and with being able to explain to others.
What then do I do with a capable but unproductive pupil?
Some forceful pushing may help get through a barrier, but it may also produce dependency on me to keep pushing.
If the teacher imposes all the discipline, then will the pupils learn to access their own will, or do they simply bide their time until they leave school?
If a teacher leaves it up to the pupils to work on their own initiative, will they miss out on essential skills while coming to grips with being responsible for their own learning?
When they are stuck, it is so much more attractive to tell them what I think than to encourage and cajole them to tell me what they think.
It also gives me pleasure to rehearse a story clearly that I have thought about.
It reinforces my ‘seeing’.
Unfortunately, it also reduces their opportunity to ‘see’.
For me, Gattegno's memorable expression ‘the subordination of teaching to learning’ sums up this tension.
To teach, to take the initiative, to impose what shall be attended to, puts the student in the position of reacting to external pressure.
Military disciplinarians believe that by imposing very strong discipline you break through barriers and train people to be highly self-disciplined.
Some pupils take to it, others reject it as soon as possible.
At the other extreme, I can elect to work with and respond to those who give evidence of wishing to work mathematically, and simply keep some semblance of order amongst the rest.
Some may ‘take advantage’ of this way of acting, and not discover until too late what they were missing.
There is no answer to this tension, no way to relieve it.
I can decide how I am going to act, stick to my guns, and ignore the consequences.
I  can also keep alive inside me an awareness of the delicate balance, looking out for an opportunity to support independent initiative within whatever restrictions are imposed.
What is important is being alive to the tension, rather than trying to avoid it.
Intervening
The tensions mentioned so far are fairly global.
There are also many more specific ones felt moment to moment in the classroom.
For example, a group of pupils are ‘working’ at a table.
Should I intervene?
How?
Why?
Shall I let them carry on and see for themselves; shall I ‘guide’ or ‘direct’them?
Must I be present for something worthwhile to happen?
Must I check that everything is correct?
What if they go away with a misunderstanding?
(When don't they?!)
In any group there are liable to be passengers.
Does it matter?
What should I do?
How can I tell if someone is working, or just copying?
A standard way to intervene with one or more pupils is to ask them something along the lines of ‘tell me what you're doing’.
Another way to intervene is silently, simply listening to what they are saying, and watching what they are writing.
Some pupils don't like being watched, however.
Sometimes an intervention provides a useful impetus to try to articulate what they are doing, and in the process, see things more clearly for themselves.
Sometimes an intervention blocks progress.
Just when the struggle is most important, my intervention may draw pupils back to earlier parts of their investigation, perhaps even exposing unsuspected or overlooked difficulties, and leave them feeling that they are getting nowhere.
If I am working on pupil autonomy, then I have to find some way to remind pupils that it often helps to talk out loud to someone, and to establish an atmosphere in which they readily approach each other and me for this purpose.
Didactic contract
The didactic contract is between teacher and pupil although it may never be made explicit.
The teacher's task is to foster learning, but it is the pupil who must do the learning.
The pupil's task is to learn, or at least to get through the system.
They wish to be told what they need to know, and often they wish to invest a minimum of energy in order to succeed.
Guy Brousseau, who coined the expression ‘didactic contract’, points out that it contains a paradoxical dilemma.
Acceding to the pupil's perspective reduces the potential for the pupil to learn, yet the teacher's task is to establish conditions to help the pupil learn.
But what does it mean to learn, and how is it best assisted?
The teacher looks for certain tell-tale behaviour, as does the examiner.
The pupil seeks to provide that behaviour.
Soon the focus is on the behaviour, not on the inner state which gives rise to behaviour.
The dilemma is then that everything the teacher does to make the pupil produce the behaviour the teacher expects, tends to  deprive the pupil of the conditions necessary for producing the behaviour as a byproduct of learning; the behaviour sought and the behaviour produced become the focus of attention.
Put another way, the more the teacher is explicit about what behaviour is wanted, the less opportunity the pupils have to come to it for themselves and make the underlying knowledge or understanding their own.
Thus for example, if I want pupils to understand subtraction, the more I rehearse the different details of the algorithm publicly, the less likely the pupil is to do anything other than pick up the outer show.
If I want pupils to become aware of a generality, the more I guide them, the less chance they have of really appreciating it for themselves.
The dilemma is not even as simple as this, because under certain conditions, exactly what I need is to see someone else going through the steps, or to have my behaviour confirmed, or to hear the generality articulated.
Pupils have many different views as to the nature of learning and the role of teachers, and part of the work with a new class is in some cases to get them to modify their perspective.
William Perry (1970) has brilliantly charted the development of different perspectives amongst college students; he has described a number of ‘positions’, which vary from
my teacher knows the truth, and is responsible for telling it to me clearly, to
in some areas there is certainty, and in some, only opinion backed up by reasoning; my job is to learn how to justify my opinions, and to examine critically those of others.
Certainly many of the ‘Perry positions’ are visible in staffrooms as well as playgrounds.
To stay alive as a teacher, it is necessary to be aware of the variety of perspectives and the fact that they are very deep rooted.
In the midst of a lesson we have to cope, so we respond to the pressures of the moment.
But I have also caught myself locking up energy in resentment or guilt or ‘if onlys’.
I experience a struggle between
what I can do, and
what I think I ought to do, what I think others do, what I want to do.
I believe that it is important to be open to these sorts of dilemmas, to take opportunities to talk about them with colleagues, to try to become precise in our articulations, because then it is possible to unlock the blocked energy and exploit it positively.