

ALEXANDRA
CHAPTER ONE
‘Alexandra!
Alexandra!’
At the sound of her mother's voice, faint but even at this distance still accusing, away down there on the snow-covered lawn, Alexandra drew away from the window into the shadows of the room behind.
‘Alexandra!’
She knew why her mother sought her outside.
She had been down to the lochside in the early morning with a basket of crusts and potato peelings for the water birds and had left a row of neat black boot prints in the snow.
She had then come back past the stables to pay a visit to her father's huge slobbering wolf hounds so the tidy boot prints didn't have a returning track beside them.
‘Alexandra!’
The voice was fainter now.
She stepped forward to the window again and looked down from her turret, whence she had the view of a seagull, on to the sweep of snow, blanketing terrace and steps and lawn, rolling on white and smooth to the ruff of black shrubs on the lochside, and then beyond that the grey water, still as glass, gleaming like steel.
On the far side, the hills rose again, white fortress walls of snow, broken here and there by smudges of low trees, and at their foot the jolting road to Inverary, empty now in the grip of January.
Everything was empty, the lawn, the loch, the heavy dove-coloured sky, everything except for the break in the shrubs where the garden gave on to the water and where her mother now stood, leaning on her stick, screaming for her.
Alexandra could imagine her face, white and drawn, her eyes shut against the effort of calling, the effort of standing there with almost all her weight on the one leg that was any use to her.
‘No,’ said Alexandra out loud.
The mice in their home-made cage on the table by the window sprang to life at the sound of her voice and began to scutter desperately around their dwelling.
‘Don't worry,’ Alexandra said, ‘I wasn't talking to you.
She looked down at the table.
On it lay her attempt at drawing the mice.
It wasn't very good, she knew that, she didn't seem able to capture the vulnerable, and at the same time intensely alert, look of their eyes and ears.
It was about her twentieth attempt too.
It hardly seemed fair to keep them in the cage she had made out of an old claret case she had dragged up from the cellar.
She really was more than half-minded to take them downstairs again and post them through the hole in the mahogany skirting board of the dining-room where they could lie in wait for crumbs of bread and cheese and apple peels that she would be careful to drop…
But then, she might somehow get the drawing right, just as she had dreamed of playing the clarinet exquisitely enough for an important conductor, conveniently marooned in a snow drift, brought half-dead to Castle Bewick and hearing those magical notes drifting from her tower, to stagger from his couch and say, ‘Ah what notes of fairyland do I hear?’
What if, say for local example, the principal of the Glasgow School of Art, his leg broken while foolishly roaming the hills in the amateurish manner of town dwellers, and also brought half-dead to Castle Bewick should spy, carelessly hidden beneath a sofa-cushion, a drawing of such rare and touching brilliance that he too, broken leg notwithstanding, should limp forward, eyes blazing, the paper shaking in his hand…
‘You'd be much better off in the dining-room,’ Alexandra said to the mice.
The clarinet lay dusty on a shelf beside a Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare, a sheep's jaw from which she had meant to begin a study of anatomy, and a rough  tangle of embroidery wools with which she had resolved to emulate Penelope, stitching and stitching as if her life and virtue depended upon it.
Below it stood the childhood doll's house she had intended to renovate for posterity and the guitar whose broken strings had halted her on the path to world fame as a singer of gypsy ballads, in a costume of scarlet and yellow sewn with little mirrors.
‘Alexandra!’
Her mother sounded nearer now.
Alexandra shut her eyes.
She would be down there on the terrace, in her black flannel coat and skirt, clutching her plaid shawl round her shoulders, her skirt hem clogged with snow…
‘Alexandra!’
She had won, as usual.
She was right below her window now, gazing up those steep granite walls.
‘I wish I were you,’ Alexandra said, ‘I wish I were a mouse,’and then, drawn inexorably, she leaned forward across the table and looked down through the closed window at her mother's upturned face below.
It was ten minutes before they met.
Alexandra's reluctance to descend from her tower, Iskandara's lameness as she negotiated the stone stairs to her sitting-room, fiercely beating off all help with her stick; both these things delayed them.
Alexandra, dawdling along the gallery that led to the sitting-room, could hear the drag and gasp of her mother's ascent and put her fingers in her ears.
‘Why did you not answer me?’
Iskandara always chose the wing chair that had been her mother's, covered in wine-red leather and studded with brass nails as big as gull's eggs.
She sat in it as if it were a throne, her back bolt upright inches away from its back, her black flannel skirts smoothed to disguise the fact that only one foot could be conventionally booted.
‘I was drawing.’
‘Drawing!’ against her.
It wasn't simply her mother, ramrod straight in the red chair, but her grandparents too, those glorious, improbable beings whose beauty and courage and glamour were so legendary.
They seemed to range themselves behind her mother somehow, their portraits, hung either side of the huge stone fireplace, seemed to glow with energy and disapproval.
‘Drawing!’
Iskandara said again with contempt.
Alexandra stole a look at her grandmother, beautiful celebrated Charlotte Bewick with her wine-red hair full of the diamonds her husband had given her, dressed in a flowing thing of cream silk and wrapped in furs.
‘Even — even the man who — who painted Grandmamma must have had to practise, you don't simply become a genius overnight —’
‘A genius!’
Alexandra could have sworn her grandfather snorted.
She did not look up at him, she didn't dare.
He had been painted in wonderful Afghan clothes, a tunic and turban of deep blue and red embroidered with gold, clothes he had brought back from the exploits during which he had found Charlotte, the fabulous exploits that had been Alexandra's bedtime stories every night, every single night in childhood, haunting her sleep with nightmares of cruelty and savagery in wild, barbaric places.
The Afghans had called him Iskandar.
That was why her mother had this outlandish name of which she was so proud and which Alexandra had tried to keep from her few childhood friends.
Indeed he accounted for Alexandra's own name but not, unfortunately, for her looks.
She knew without looking at him, every line of his looks, his blazing handsomeness, his grey eyes, dark moustache.
But of course, her father had confused those looks for her, given her hazel eyes and hair whose redness owed more to carrots than claret…
‘Listen to me,’ Iskandara said.
‘Oh please —’
‘Listen.’
Alexandra sank on to a stool and bowed her head.
I know what's coming, it's always the same, please God make her stop, help me bear it, let me think of a poem to say as a distraction, make this all go away, Charlotte, Alexander, Mother, everything, only not father, not the farm —;
‘Listen!’
‘I am, Mother.’
‘You go up to that room, deliberately, because you know I cannot follow.
Why your father ever sanctioned making it comfortable for you, I cannot imagine, because all you ever do in it is idle.
Idle and dream.
Do you realize that by your age your grandmother was a national heroine?
Can you imagine yourself in her place, reckless of her own safety, involved in escapades that left the public gasping, braving death to rescue your grandfather yet always solicitous of the meanest person's welfare?
And you…you.
Marooned in that room or dawdling on the shore.
Achieving nothing.
Nothing.
Dreaming, dreaming always, endlessly supposing some Act of God will lift you out, make you remarkable through no effort of your own.
Alexandra, if I had two legs as you have, if I were whole and young and healthy, do you suppose I should be content to moon through the days, dabbling at this and that, as you do?
Do you imagine I could bear to live with these glorious examples before me and not strive to emulate them, not strain every sinew to make Bewick still a name —’
‘My name is Abbott,’ Alexandra said.
Iskandara flung her hands across her face and began to weep.
Alexandra sat and watched her.
The dark hair inherited from her father was streaked with grey now, and when she wept, it would loosen itself from the neat coils in which she pinned it over pads called ‘rats’ every morning, as if in sympathy, and strands would creep down over her hands and cheeks.
She was much older than most mothers.
Even in  Alexandra's sheltered life she knew that.
In three years she would be sixty — and Alexandra would be twenty-four.
The servants believed there was some blight on Iskandara and her mother — they had gossiped across Alexandra in her nursery when she was supposedly too small to understand — some blight so that only daughters were born to these remarkable women who craved sons, and lone daughters at that, born late, at a time when most women were coming to an end of their childbearing.
‘Please don't cry,’ Alexandra said.
Iskandara took her hands away from her face and glared at her daughter with the same light, bright aqua-marine eyes that looked out from her mother's portrait.
‘You make me cry!’
‘No.
No.
I — I don't mean to.
I can't be what you want, you know I can't.
I haven't it in me, I'm not a Bewick by nature, I'm an Abbott.
We've been through all this before, so often.
You can't behave in 1905 as you could in the 1840s, I couldn't rush about India doing good and performing wondrous deeds, it's absurd —’
‘Absurd!’
‘Yes, absurd.’
Slowly and stiffly, Iskandara rose from her chair, found her stick and limped to stand beneath her mother's portrait.
Alexandra stayed on her stool and watched her.
She had never seen her mother's withered leg; indeed, imagining it had fuelled some of the worst nightmares of her childhood, worse even than Afghanistan which was at least safely half a world anyway, not just down a corridor, released from its sheath of leather and metal, grotesque and awful.
‘Look at her,’ Iskandara said.
Alexandra rose obediently but she did not cross the room.
‘What must she feel about you?
How can you stand before her and offer her the nothing, the nothing, that you are?
How do you suppose I feel, crippled, helpless —’
Alexandra took a step back, towards the door.
‘Mother, please.
please don't —’
Iskandara raised a hand and touched the pale painted hand above her.
It was so like an act of worship, so supplicating, that Alexandra could not bear it.
She spun round, almost falling over the voluminous folds of her skirts, and made for the door.
As she pulled it behind her, reckless of whether she slammed it or not, she could hear her mother's voice again.
‘Alexandra!
Alexandra!’
Her father was where he always was in the afternoons of mid-winter.
The home meadows were not so much white with snow as grey with sheep, a bleating, heaving block of woolly bodies, gathered in from the hills in the autumn and brought down to the Castle for feeding and safekeeping in the snows.
There were several shepherds out there carrying loads of hay on pitchforks, but her father was working with them, his wrappings of leather and tweed and sacking indistinguishable from theirs, his voice as thick and soft, his movements every bit as practised.
He paused when he saw her by the iron railings that separated mown lawn from pasture.
She waved and then crossed her arms to lean on the fence and thus indicated to him that there was no hurry, there was nothing urgent.
Her heart was hammering hard but she knew that if she breathed slowly and deeply and looked long and intently at the comforting ritual of man and beast before her, the thudding would subside.
Beyond the few meadows on this apron of land that girdled the house on the lochside, the hills rose again, hills as individual and familiar to her as people, whose slopes and habits she knew intimately, walking them year in, year out with her father, the gun he had taught her to use broken carefully in the crook of her arm.
The snow made her a prisoner, diminished her world, took away the pleasure and the freedom ——
‘Well, my lass?’
James Abbott held the crook he carried every working day, the crook that had been his father's when he was shepherd here, head shepherd to Alexander Bewick.
‘A bad day, father.’
James looked towards the house briefly.
‘You'll get a fork, then.’
‘Yes, father.’
‘You'll see to the small ones at the back here.
They're lucky to get so much as a mouthful.
You'll have to push in, they'll not be looking your way for food.’
He looked at the sky.
‘More snow on the way.
It's a bad winter this one and I've known them all here, man and lad.’
The hay had been brought up on a wain in front of which two of the farm horses stood, blowing plumes of steamy breath.
As a precaution, Alexandra took her fork round to the far side of the wain, in case her mother should be looking from a window, and plunged and twisted it in most expertly in order to bring out a huge wedge of tawny grasses, cut last summer in these very meadows.
Then she followed her father back towards the flock, where the sheep at the rear, desperate at the sight of hay ahead and too stupid to look for it from any source except the one they all sought, were scrambling on to each other 's backs in panic.
When Alexandra was nine she had had her only birthday party.
She knew her father had pleaded for her, had said she was too solitary and that her mother had refused to allow the shepherds' children to come, the children she liked to play with.
The children who did come were not familiar.
They came from the big houses down the loch or over the pass towards Loch Lomond, or the castle at Inverary, from miles and miles, little girls in furred and caped coats and dresses gathered into heavy bows behind the cascades of ringlets.
Alexandra had been very shy, had wanted to run out to the stables and hide, but she had had to stay, unhappy at the head of the table while all the little girls who knew each other from Christmas  parties and dancing classes, from the complicated social traffic among their parents, chattered and giggled among themselves, as if she wasn't there.
Then at last, desperate, Alexandra had leaned towards her nearest neighbour, a pale aristocratic child with thin mouse-coloured hair tied up in blue ribbons and said, meaning only to establish identity, ‘Who is your father?’
The child, staring, had replied coldly, ‘At least he isn't a shepherd.’
There had been no birthday parties after that.
The servants had taken pity on Alexandra, old Elsie especially who had nursed her as a baby and who now kept the linen cupboard, and helped in the kitchen; and she had learned that her mother had married beneath her, far beneath, but that being over thirty and a cripple, she was, in a sense, lucky even to get James Abbott, if a man was what she wanted besides all she had already, castle and land and sheep.
James had been head shepherd and farm manager since her parents' death, he had guided the young Iskandara through the pitfalls of estate management, helping her to hire and fire, to plant with trees the slopes that would not take sheep, to deal with poachers on the river, maintain the roads and fences.
And then, after twelve years she married him.
Once over the first fright of finding out that this was an unconventional arrangement, Alexandra found it less surprising that her mother should have married her father, than vice versa.
He was indifferent to the house, indeed almost disliked the grander parts of it, preferring the fire in the hall where he could drink his dram in company with his dogs as if he were by the croft hearth of his childhood.
He seemed to take no interest in his wife's wealth as such; in fact Alexandra could never remember him buying anything unless it was for the farm or some little thing for her.
It was the farm that was the key.
Alexandra had come to see that, perhaps two years after the disastrous birthday party, finding her father in the midst of the  flock at lambing time, naked to the waist like the other shepherds, his right arm streaked with the birth slime of the lambs whose arrival had been difficult.
He had looked so utterly contented then, surveying his growing flock, his flock, not just the flock he had care of, but his own, Abbott's sheep driven down to market on the Isle of Bute by his men, shepherds in his employ.
If he had married Iskandara for her sheep, he had given good measure in return.
Alexandra sometimes found his patience with her mother hard to bear, but he would brook no criticism even from his beloved daughter.
‘We've no way of knowing what she must bear, we've no burdens like hers.’
He had, of course, known those grandparents whose glamour made Alexandra's existence so difficult, but he saw them in a light so different from his wife's that they seemed hardly the same people.
‘He was no farmer,’ he would say of Alexander.
‘Knew not one end of a sheep from the other.
She could shoot straight, mind, straighter than most men but she could no more keep house than fly to the moon…’
He did not believe in dwelling on things.
When she asked him if they had really been as beautiful as angels, he had told her abruptly to look at the portraits, just as now, sensing that she had been hounded out of the house, he had given her something to do, a task to occupy her hands and head.
A few thin snow flakes began to fall, drifting silently down out the leaden sky.
She put her fork down and looked up, letting the quiet wet snow alight on her face.
‘You'll go in!’ her father shouted.
She hesitated.
She was only wearing a threadbare old cloak she had seized from the hallway as she came out, but she was quite warm after the exercise and she didn't want to go in, alone, back to the remnants of her mother's angry despair.
‘I'm telling you!’ he shouted again, ‘I'll want to find my tea ready!’
He had given her the excuse as usual.
Pulling her cloak around her and laying her fork carefully along the wooden pegs on the side of the wain, Alexandra climbed the iron railings, already cold and slippery with new snow, and went off in the direction of the kitchen.
CHAPTER TWO
Tea was laid twice, as was customary.
Her mother's was on a tray with fine china, nothing to eat, slices of lemon for the pale, scented tea she liked laid out on a glass dish like a shell.
It was often her task to carry it up to the little sitting-room, followed by Mary from the village, who came in as a daily maid, bearing a silver jug of hot water and matches to light all the lamps.
Her father's tea was set at a corner of the kitchen table, a pile of oatcakes, cheese, a cold wing of game.
He never ate between breakfast and sunset, but could not last without tea until the meal he clearly still found extraordinary, eaten by wax candlelight in the dining-room at an hour when all his shepherds were asleep.
‘Will you be taking up your mother's?’
‘Not today,’ Alexandra said.
Elsie, spooning black tea into the fat pot her father preferred, said, ‘She could do with company.
You were up there alone in your tower all morning and you've been away out an hour or more —’
‘The post's come,’ Mary said.
Alexandra looked at it indifferently.
It was always farming circulars for her father, copies of the newspaper to which he occasionally contributed articles on sheep, seldom anything for her mother beyond invitations the senders knew they were safe from her accepting, or appeals for money from charities, the Scottish Women's  Institute, funds to save a painting for the Glasgow Art Gallery.
‘I'm having tea down here today,’ she said.
‘I'm cold.
It's snowing again.’
A bell on the wall, one of a row on curved metal springs above black glass plates announcing, in gold letters, the rooms they belonged to, sprang jangling to life.
Silently Mary put some of the letters on to the edge of the tray, wedged against the silver teapot, and carried it from the room.
As the door swung back behind her, an icy draught whistled into the room from the black corridor beyond.
‘It's not kind-hearted,’ Elsie said reprovingly.
‘I know.’
‘You're a bairn no more.
You must put yourself out.
She's a sick woman.’
‘I — I think I make her worse.’
‘By hiding yourself away you do.
You could be a companion to her.
A young lass like you, full of life, you could amuse her.’
Alexandra sat down at the huge scrubbed table at which she had watched twenty years of bread and pastry being made.
‘Could I have some tea?’
Elsie put a mug before her, not a cup and saucer.
It was a rebuke in itself.
‘It's time you were married, lassie.’
‘Married!’
‘At your age, I'd been married five years.
If you'd a husband and bairns to occupy yourself with, there'd be none of this drawing and tootling on flutes.
You've done nothing in five years, nothing since that Miss Gracie left.’
Miss Gracie had been the last governess, a pale sad woman who had lived for the brief holidays she could get away to spend with a beloved brother and his family in Stirling.
She had taught Alexandra all the history she knew from an intensely Scottish point of view, and French with a cramped and ladylike accent.
She had been no  worse and no better than the three women who had preceded her in Alexandra's life, all driven away in the end by the isolation and the powerful ghosts.
Elsie dumped a pile of peeled carrots on the table and began to chop.
‘Cook's sister's not well, not at all and she's gone into Inverary to look to her family, so I said I'd get dinner.
No word to your mother mind, she's not to be upset by thinking things aren't as they should be.’
Alexandra picked up a disc of carrot and bit into it.
‘Whom do you suggest I marry?’
‘You'll not find him sitting here.’
‘Where then?
Glasgow?’
Elsie stopped chopping.
‘You'll not use that tone with me.
You're to me as my own and I'll not stand cheekiness from either.
It's a pity you've money, you'd be a deal better off if you'd a living to earn, teaching or nursing.’
Alexandra put her carrot down.
‘I know.’
‘Well, then.’
‘Elsie, I don't know how to start.
I don't know how to do anything, not properly.
I can't cook or clean because you all do that, I don't even sew very well because you do it better, I can't play or draw, not really —’
‘You could learn.’
‘Where?’
‘Not here, lassie.
If you'd a mind to be a true child to your mother, you could, but if you haven't, you're best out of it.
And quickly.’
The outside door beyond the kitchen scraped open and was banged shut.
‘Your father,’ Elsie said.
She jerked her head towards the range whose temperaments ruled all their lives.
‘You'll fetch him his tea.’
As she set the pot on the table, her father came into the kitchen, his beard dark with melting snow.
‘You down here, my lass?’
‘I was talking to Elsie.’
Her father and Elsie exchanged smiles.
They had been children together at the village school in the ‘fifties, staying at home whenever their parents needed them, finishing with the whole business of education at twelve when a wage might be earned.
Above their heads, the same bell jangled abruptly again.
‘That'll be your mother,’ James Abbott said.
He took off his jacket and tossed it across a wooden bench by the fire.
‘Tell her I'll be up when I've eaten, he said.
Tell her Jamie found four more sheep in the drifts up above the pass and they're alive.
That'll please her.’
‘Of course,’ Alexandra said in a low voice.
Her father reached for the tea pot.
‘That's my lass,’ he said.
In Iskandara's sitting-room, a lamp had been lit beneath the two portraits, as if they were altars, and the lamplight gave the two faces an eerie look of real life.
Alexandra felt the six accusing, disappointed eyes turned upon her as she came in, three Bewicks who despised her for her inability to be one of them.
‘Mary says you have been helping to feed the sheep.’
‘Yes, Mother.’
‘That is better.
Better than mooning in your room.
But not really suitable, not for you, not for my daughter.’
Iskandara had changed into an afternoon dress of soft black wool with huge puffed upper sleeves and rows of little jet buttons down the bodice.
‘You are still in your coat and skirt, Alexandra.’
‘I'm sorry.
But — but you can't feed sheep in a gown.’
‘I had rather you did not feed sheep.’
‘Father says four more have been dug out of a drift and they are still alive.’
Iskandara smiled faintly.
‘That will please him.’
‘Did you want anything in particular, Mother?’
‘I had hoped you would bring up my tray.’
‘I — I saw the post had come,’ Alexandra said desperately, ‘I wondered if there was anything — interesting, anything at all—’
Iskandara picked up the few envelopes and looked at them disinterestedly.
‘A request to subscribe to a building to re-house some people in the Gorbals, an invitation — which of course I shall refuse — to lunch with Lady Laughlan.
And a letter from your Great Aunt Emily to say she is not well again.
It is extraordinary to imagine that she and my mother could ever have been sisters, they were like beings from different species.
My mother loved her dearly of course, she was so infinitely tender-hearted, but she was a frail-spirited thing by comparison, totally dependent on my mother —’
‘Is she very ill?’
Alexandra said.
Great Aunt Emily was the only person who had remembered her childhood birthdays, sending parcels from Cornwall full of exquisite doll's clothes made with her own hands of which Iskandara had been suitably scornful.
‘She always imagines herself so.
She had to be carried into Afghanistan that fateful summer because she could not face the rigours of the journey and took refuge in illness.
I expect she is simply disliking the winter.’
‘She is quite old,’ Alexandra said, ‘And she lives alone —’
‘Alone?
My dear child, Richard Talbot would never have left his widow alone.
She has more servants than she knows what to do with.
My mother spoiled her, Richard spoiled her, her servants spoil her.
She lives in Cornwall like a queen and complains if she has the smallest twinge.
It is so like her to ask if you may go and nurse her until the spring, like her self-indulgence —’
Alexandra said, ‘She asked if I might go to Cornwall?
She asked for me?’
Iskandara sighed.
‘She did.
She used to ask my mother too, endlessly attempting to work upon her soft-heartedness, whenever  she so much as had a headache.
She never asked me, she knew better.
I have never been to Cornwall.
I would not go.’
Alexandra was holding her hands so tightly, the one gripping the other, that she could feel bone grind on bone.
‘Oh may I go?
Just once, just to see her, just to meet her?
She may not live long and I won't ever have known her.
And she may be really ill and need me —’
‘Need you?
I need you here.
There is no question of your going.’
Before dinner, Alexandra brought the claret box down into the dining-room and released the occupants.
There was no-one in the room at the time for Murray had only newly lit the fire and the table was still unlaid apart from the great branching candelabra like silver trees.
When the mice had scattered across the carpet and melted into the shadows by the wainscoting, Alexandra picked up their home of five days and carried it back to her tower room.
She put it down on the floor beside her guitar.
It was very cold in the room, for Iskandara had given orders that a fire was not to be lit there as a matter of course and Alexandra was shy of asking Mary or little Annie to bring up a bucket of coals for her.
Often she carried one up herself and sometimes her father, without comment, brought one, but tonight there was nothing, not even the glow left from the morning's fire.
She looked round the room, at the haphazard stacks of books, the half-finished drawings, the partly-made toy theatre, boxes of paints, pieces of unfinished embroidery, the dust-covered instruments.
Pictures were pinned on the walls, copies of pictures she admired, notably Millais and Holman Hunt.
She wondered if she really liked them any more, if they still struck her as both noble and imaginative in the highest degree.
She put her hand under John Ruskin standing by a waterfall and tore him off the wall.
‘And you,’ she said to the next one.
‘and you, and you.
All of you.
I'm going to start again, everything, everything new, all different —’
She crammed the stiff, shiny paper into the fireplace.
‘Now,’ she said and stood looking resolutely at the rest of the room, ‘I will finish the theatre.
I will get my guitar mended.
I will do half an hour clarinet practice each day.
I will learn another language, perhaps German.
I will not put up any drawing that is not my own.
I will finish that chair seat.
No — not German, Spanish so that I can learn flamenco songs in Spanish.
I will begin tomorrow —’ and then she crumpled up softly on to the cold floor and began to weep.
She did not weep silently like her mother in a web of hands and hair, but noisily, like a child, with great sobs and huge tears that splashed down on to the brown wool of her skirt to which little bits of hay still clung from the afternoon.
She sat there for a long time rocking backwards and forwards and giving herself up to howling, letting her gasps for breath shake her to pieces and leave her shuddering.
Far away a clock struck seven.
She wondered whether to stay where she was, cold and tear-stained, and let her father find her and pick her up to comfort her as he did when she was small.
But he wouldn't do that now, he hadn't picked her up for twelve years.
She would only bewilder him quite as much as she would distress him.
It was sheer self-indulgence to stay.
So she got up slowly from the floor, the last few sobs still springing unbidden up her throat, and without looking round at the disordered room once more, she picked up her lamp and went down to her bedroom to change.
There was game soup for dinner, and haddock cooked in milk with a bay leaf, and blackcock with carrots and potatoes and a pudding Alexandra detested flavoured with marmalade.
Iskandara had changed into black taffeta and her mother's diamonds and James wore plaid trousers and a velvet jacket and a collar he loathed  almost as much as Alexandra loathed the pudding, a high stiffened wing collar around which Murray had tied a bow tie of black grosgrain.
Alexandra wore green velvet and hoped her eyes were not pink.
‘No, thank you,’ she said to the pudding.
Murray waited beside her, his pale eyes fixed enquiringly on his mistress.
‘A little,’ Iskandara said.
Alexandra made no move to help herself.
Murray cut a small neat slice and put it deftly on her plate.
Alexandra bent her head.
‘You eat that,’ her father said, ‘and you shall have a wee dram with me.’
‘James!’
He smiled at his wife.
‘Malt whisky never did anyone anything but good.’
‘It isn't suitable.
There's no question of it.’
‘I imagine,’ Alexandra said with difficulty, her swimming eyes still fixed on her plate, ‘that in most households, people of twenty-one are not required to eat food they detest as if they were children.’
Her father said softly, ‘That will do, my lass.’
‘James, I am glad about the sheep.’
He smiled at his wife again.
‘I knew it would please you.
When the snow clears a little, I'll drive you up there to see for yourself.
Drifts as high as a house Jamie said.’
‘Eat, Alexandra,’ Iskandara said.
‘If she mayn't have a dram,’ James said, ‘What might I tempt her with?
What would you fancy, my lass?’
Alexandra ate her pudding in two savage mouthfuls and gulped as if she was swallowing medicine.
‘Father, I'd like to go to Cornwall.
Aunt Emily has asked for me.
She's over eighty and ill and she asked Mother for me.
I want to go.’
‘Well?’
James said down the length of the table.
‘Of course she can't go.
Emily is practised at exploitation.
She began with my mother, attempted unsuccessfully  to go on to me and now feels Alexandra is old enough to be the next victim.
She likes to have people at her beck and call —’
‘But she's ill?’
James said.
He ran a finger around his neck and shook himself like a dog settling itself inside its collar.
‘She's always fancying herself ill.’
Alexandra tried not to look imploringly at her father.
She took a mouthful of water to drown the lingering memory of marmalade.
‘Alexandra should go, Iska.’
‘No!’
She almost shouted in her surprise at his opposition.
‘Yes, she should.
It's no life for her here.
It may be no better there, but it'll be different.’
‘No!
No!
I can't spare her, I can't —’
‘You've me.’
She put her hand out to him down the table, imploring him.
‘Please James, don't make me, don't —’
He got up and grasped her hand.
‘I don't make you do much, Iska.
I've no mind to.
But in this I have.
You think I don't notice much out there with the sheep, you think I don't concern myself with what goes on between you and the lass, but I've noticed, I've thought about it.
She's twenty-one now, she's no bairn.
I could wish the first chance that came her way wasn't nursing some poor old woman with a weak chest.
But it's a start.
Your Aunt Emily lives more in society than we do.
Cornwall's another way of life.
She can come home if she wants to, as soon as she wants to, but go she will.’
‘Father —!’
Alexandra said.
‘There'll be no gloating from you, my lass.
I'll drive you to Glasgow the minute the snow lets up but I'll not hear a word about it.’
Iskandara had put her hands to her face again.
‘Come now, Iska.
Here's your stick.
I'm coming to sit  with you tonight I'll take my dram with you and those parents of yours.’
He helped her to feet, and drew her free arm through his.
Since her last cry of ‘Don't!’ she had not uttered a word, and now she went out of the dining room on  James's arm without once looking back at Alexandra.
CHAPTER THREE
‘You look young for your age,’ Aunt Emily said.
She was sitting up in bed in a profusion of little pillows.
The room had a pinkish pearly glow like the inside of a shell, its pale draperies lit by the steady warmth of a coal fire.
Alexandra smiled.
‘So do you,’ she said.
‘I'm eighty-four,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘I was over sixty when you were born.
That's the only time I saw you, at your christening.
I stood godmother to you though I don't think your mother wanted me too much.
It was Charlotte's wish really and when she wished something we all fought to fulfil it for her.
You hated your christening.
You wept and wailed all the way through.
I can see your poor little furious red face now, glaring at me and the tears kept running down your cheeks into your ears and I remember wondering if one's brain could become waterlogged.
Alexandra, we must do something about your hair.
And your corset.’
Alexandra's hands fluttered immediately between her head and her waist.
‘I don't go in enough, I know, and my hair — well, it's not a pretty colour —’
‘Oh, it's pretty enough.
But you pull it back so tightly.
It should be much softer.
You don't really look like a Bewick at all you know.
They are extremely beautiful, Bewicks, but fierce-looking too.
I'll never forget seeing your Grandfather for the first time, I couldn't believe any human being could have a face like that.’
‘And Grandmamma too.’
There was a small charcoal drawing by Aunt Emily's bed, buried in a forest of medicine bottles and flasks of eau de cologne.
Aunt Emily picked it up.
‘And Charlotte too.’
Alexandra leaned back in her chair and looked about her.
She was warm, deliciously warm, all over, for the first time since leaving Scotland, and when she had arrived, but an hour before, she had come straight up to Aunt Emily's room with no injunctions to change her boots or smooth her hair, and been given a tray of tea and toast cut into little fingers and tiny biscuits flavoured with almond.
There had seemed, in the carriage ride from Bodmin, to be no snow in Cornwall, and the air when she stepped out in front of Aunt Emily's door had a faint, sharp tang of salt, a whiff of the sea.
‘Did you think you should find me very ill?’
‘Mother —’ Alexandra began, and stopped.
‘Said I should only be pretending.
I do pretend a little, especially since Richard died.
I suppose it amuses me and I never needed to be amused before, not when he was here to do it.
Now you will amuse me and I shall be well at once.
Staying in bed seems a very sensible occupation for January and February, like a tortoise.
We have such an amiable tortoise here, he spends the summer under the fig tree and the winter in a box in the stable.
I always look forward to his waking up, he looks so antediluvian he makes me feel only a girl again.
My dear, it is a great treat for me to have a girl in the house.
Did the journey alarm you?’
‘Only — only before I did it.
Driving to Glasgow I wondered how easy it was to get lost and end up in Wales or Norfolk or somewhere, but once it began, it was so exciting and I saw one couldn't get lost, not even if one tried.
And — and I liked being alone.’
Aunt Emily eyed her.
‘Some Bewick in you after all, then.’
‘Oh Aunt Emily!
Travelling in a first-class carriage, waited on hand and foot and endlessly interrupted by kind ticket inspectors who wanted to see if one was quite happy!
It's hardly being alone in the Bewick sense!’
‘It's a beginning.’
‘Yes,’ said Alexandra, ‘It's a beginning.’
The door opened.
‘Janet,’ Aunt Emily said without looking round, ‘I suppose you have come to take Miss Alexandra away.’
‘That's right ma'am.’
Alexandra prised herself reluctantly out of the chair and stood looking down at her Great Aunt.
That round, soft face with its clear blue eyes and straight nose, those small, pretty hands, the plump frame swathed in shawls, all that had actually gone to Afghanistan 60 years ago, had taken part in the adventure that had provided the myth and the burden of Alexandra's childhood.
‘I can't quite believe I'm here.’
Her bedroom was as unlike her bedroom at Bewick as it could be.
She was used to draughty spaces, soaring walls, a nightly ritual of wraps and hot bricks in winter.
To open a white painted door, its handle and finger plate of white porcelain rimmed in gold and painted with fat roses, and find herself in a low warm room where every surface was cushioned and padded, designed for comfort, was a revelation indeed.
Her trunk had been placed at the foot of her bed, whose curtains, in harmony with those at the window, were of heavy glazed chintz patterned with flowers.
There was a chaise longue upholstered in velvet, a plump dressing-table stool to match it, a bureau with a padded chair.
Rows of silver and china objects filled the mantlepiece and the top of the dressing-table; there were looking-glasses there and two, framed in mahogany, fixed to the wall, either side of a great gleaming wardrobe so that everything was magnified by reflection, the cushions, the lamps, the fire, the flowered fabrics, the rugs laid on the carpet.
It was wonderfully luxurious — and slightly stifling.
She had only been there a few minutes, revelling in the multiplicity of objects and fabrics, when a little maid crept in and indicated shyly that she would unpack.
Alexandra had packed her own trunk — Iskandara had required it —; and she wondered now if her methods were fit for public scrutiny.
‘I'm to wait on you, Miss.
If that's all right, Miss.
Seeing as you've no maid of your own, Miss.’
She was perhaps fifteen, small and sturdy with a bright complexion and crooked teeth.
‘What is your name?’
‘Lyddy, Miss.’
‘Lyddy.’
‘Yes, Miss.
D'you have your keys, Miss?’
Father had said Cornwall might be different and in little more than an hour, how different it was.
At Bewick she would not have dreamed of sitting by a fire in idleness while her clothes were sorted and shaken and put away in drawers and cupboards, which, when opened, gave out breaths of lavender.
She closed her eyes and tried to picture herself, but three days ago, in her mother's sitting-room, making up the fire, carrying trays, standing apprehensive in the doorway dreading a fresh outburst against her selfishness in going away.
But the image wouldn't come, it was softly blotted out in this warm, rosy room with drawers and cupboards being gently closed upon the last of her possessions and Lyddy asking her which dress she wanted laid out for dinner.
She ate dinner alone before a fire made of driftwood that sent salty blue flames leaping up the chimney.
The windows were barred with white painted shutters covered with curtains of crimson velvet, her feet rested on a Turkey carpet and the walls were as thickly covered  with pictures as if they had been pages in a stamp collection.
Two dogs came in to share her solitude, absurd, dignified little Pekinese who regarded her gravely with their blue-brown eyes like marbles and then lay before the fire and ignored her.
She was waited on by Penman.
Aunt Emily had said he was Janet's husband.
He did not speak much but smiled broadly when she thanked him.
He brought her soup in a paper-thin china cup, a morsel of fish in a flotilla of pink shrimps, chicken creamed in a silver dish, peaches and grapes on a glass plate.
‘I do hope you weren't lonely,’ Aunt Emily said later, ‘I do hope you had enough to eat.’
‘It was wonderful,’ Alexandra said solemnly.
‘Wonderful, and so pretty.
Everything is so pretty.’
She stooped to kiss the soft crumpled cheek.
‘Alexandra, I have something for you.’
Aunt Emily fumbled beneath her pillows and pulled out a small fat volume bound in red morocco.
‘I'm sure you know that all good little girls should keep a diary.
I used to keep one.
Charlotte never bothered.
She would always rather live life than write about it.
But I kept one when we went to India, I kept one about Charlotte.
You should read it.
Not tonight, because travelling always distorts one's feelings for a time, but at your leisure, when you feel settled.
You should know about her, the real her.
Because you are her granddaughter, there is something of her in you.’
‘I don't think so,’ Alexandra said.
‘That is what makes mother so miserable, that I don't resemble her in any way.
‘You wait,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘You wait and see.’
When Lyddy folded back the shutters in the morning, bright cold winter sunlight bounced into the room like an explosion.
‘There's a few snowdrops out, Miss,’ Lyddy said.
‘To welcome you, Miss, to Bishopstow.’
‘Snowdrops?
In January?’
‘Oh yes, Miss.
Always in Cornwall.’
She sat up in bed.
On the chaise longue lay her brown wool skirt, neatly brushed, and beside it her pink striped blouse with a white collar that needed to be fastened on with studs.
Next, in the order in which she would need them, were her flannel petticoats, her cotton bodice and frilled drawers, her black woollen stockings, her long boned stays and the combinations that had so irritated her skin when she was small.
They had been covered with a square of spotted muslin, for decency she supposed.
The muslin square was not her own.
‘I've polished your boots, Miss,’ Lyddy said.
‘I — I usually dress myself.’
‘No, Miss,’ Lyddy said firmly.
It was strange and awkward, being dressed by someone else, seeing Lyddy kneel to put on her stockings, lace up her boots, feeling the steady foreign strokes on her head of a hairbrush wielded by another hand.
‘You've lovely hair, Miss.’
‘No,’ Alexandra said.
‘It's red.’
They surveyed it together in the dressing-table glass, heavy, thick stuff falling to her elbows, the colour of barley sugar.
‘Not my notion of red, Miss,’ Lyddy said.
She buckled a stiff hard belt around Alexandra's waist and stood back to admire the effect.
Alexandra felt smooth and neat and tight and regretful that, with Lyddy to keep a stern eye on standards, she could not secretly leave off her stays when the weather got warmer as she did occasionally at Bewick.
Breakfast and the Pekinese awaited her in the dining-room.
It too was full of sharp yellow sunlight, and the sideboard was laden with food, a ham on a china column, fish and eggs under silver domes, muffins, coffee, sweet pale butter, a honeycomb running syrup on a green plate like a leaf.
Beyond the window the garden sloped in terraces, intricately cultivated, and beyond that green fields rose to a gentle hill, each one outlined with a grey stone wall.
‘The sea?’
Alexandra said to Penman.
‘Is the sea over there?’
‘A mile or so, Miss Alexandra.
You can see it from the fields up there.
It's the mouth of the estuary.’
‘The estuary?’
‘The river Camel, Miss Alexandra.
Down that way.
Running to the sea.’
It suddenly seemed a waste to be sitting over muffins and honey.
‘Can I get to the river?’
Do I go down through the garden?
Is it far?’
Penman refilled her coffee cup.
‘Mrs Talbot asked for you, Miss Alexandra.
You're to go up when you've done breakfast.’
‘Of course,’ Alexander said and cast a regretful glance out of the window.
‘Of course I will.
I intended to anyway.’
Aunt Emily said, ‘And did you sleep well?’
She was wearing a different lace cap, another fine soft shawl.
‘Oh yes,’ Alexandra said, ‘So well.
But I dreamed a good deal.’
‘That's travelling, my dear.
It shakes up one so.
‘Penman said just now that there was a river down there, beyond the garden, and that if one climbed the hill one could see the sea.
Our loch is a sea loch, but that isn't the same as the sea, it's much tamer —’
‘The sea is why you slept so well.’
Alexandra said, ‘I'd love to see it.’
Aunt Emily patted her head.
‘All in good time.
We have so much to do.
You must have a good corset first, it's of the greatest importance.
I shall ask my dressmaker from Bodmin to come out and we will see about some new clothes for you.
Lyddy has done splendidly with your hair.
And then of course there are all the people round who will want to meet you.
I'm  a very poor caller in winter, but you shall do it for me, everyone will be so pleased to see you.’
She paused and then said, ‘Don't pull a face, my dear.’
‘Aunt Emily, it isn't any good.
It would be a waste of time.
I don't know any people, we don't at Bewick, we don't see anyone except the shepherds and Mother's lawyer every so often.
I shouldn't know what to say.’
‘And that is how you will remain, is it?
Unable to speak to people, awkward in company —’
‘Am I awkward?’
‘Yes,’ said Aunt Emily, ‘very.’
Alexandra went over to the long glass on a mahogany frame that stood in the bow window and looked at herself.
‘In what way am I awkward?’
‘You look as if you weren't in proper charge of your arms and legs, as if your clothes were uncomfortable.’
‘They are,’ Alexandra said.
She caught Aunt Emily's reflected eye and laughed.
Aunt Emily said, ‘You are a dear child.
I don't want to make you different, merely easier.’
‘You mustn't feed me so well, then.
It will only make my clothes much worse.’
‘Where do they come from, Alexandra?’
‘My clothes?’
Well, Mother's from Glasgow and then mine are copied from those.
By Mrs McPhee in the village.
Her husband is the carpenter at Berwick.’
Aunt Emily looked intently at Alexandra's skirt.
‘I can understand the connection,’ she said.
‘You shouldn't wear brown, it makes your eyes like boot buttons.
I think you should wear peach and cream and pale green, sage green, and grey perhaps.
Should you like a new dress?’
‘Not particularly,’ Alexandra said with truth.
‘If I have to look at you,’ Aunt Emily said without rancour, ‘I should like to see you in a new dress.
I am used to looking at pretty things, they give me pleasure.’
‘I — I didn't mean to be ungrateful.
Or — or rude.
I just  find it difficult to be interested in clothes or how I look.
I don't like how I look very much.’
‘I do’, Aunt Emily said, ‘What do you like instead?’
‘I should like to go and look at the sea.’
‘Then I will give you two things,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘I will give you new frocks and some company manners, whether you like them or not.
And I will also give you a good deal of freedom to look at the sea.’
CHAPTER FOUR
Imperceptibly almost, Aunt Emily began to get up.
Alexandra would find her by the fire in the drawing-room in the afternoons, the Pekinese guarding her against invisible dangers, then she came down in the mornings and needed letters written, wools held.
The dressmaker called, and the merciless corsetière, and two obsequious men from Bodmin with bolts of wools and flannels and silks which they laid out across the drawing-room sofa for Aunt Emily to see.
She did not consult Alexandra when choosing.
‘This won't give you any pleasure, Alexandra, so I shall give some to myself.’
A grey coat and skirt were made trimmed with darker grey silk braid, and a pearl grey silk blouse with a tall frilled collar.
It was followed by two afternoon dresses with tiny waists and lace inserts and huge pleated upper sleeves like bellows.
‘For calling in the afternoons,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘You will need them.’
Then came a box of hats, huge, wide, heavy affairs swathed in pleated velvet and accompanied by an army of pins to secure them.
And two little silk handbags on gilt chains, and gloves and a box of spare collars with bows and rosettes to fasten them with.
‘Please stop,’ Alexandra said.
‘It's so kind of you.
But it's not what I came for.’
‘It's part of the process,’ Aunt Emily said.
Lyddy insisted on doing her hair over at least twice a day.
She would have liked to do it a further time, after luncheon, but Alexandra was adamant.
‘No, really, no.
It's as smooth as anything.
My head won't bear more brushing.’
Aunt Emily made her practise walking in a hat, sitting down gracefully in her sweeping skirts.
‘You must glide, Alexandra, not march.
Think of moving from the hips.
Imagine yourself infinitely tall.’
And then there was the piano.
Alexandra had confessed about the clarinet and the guitar, at her inability to persevere with either.
‘I will persevere for you,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘We will play what is delightful, Mozart and Chopin.
A little time every day.’
‘Did — did Charlotte, I mean Grandmamma, play?’
‘No,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘She drew a little, but apart from that she didn't like sedentary occupations.
Have you read my journal?’
Alexandra took her hands off the keyboard.
‘No,’ she said.
‘not yet.
I'm waiting for the right moment.’
‘What sort of moment?’
‘When — when I feel — I feel even the smallest bit like her, when I feel in sympathy.’
‘Have you felt any yet?
Any at all?
Does she seem any more real to you here, more real than at Berwick?’
‘I don't know about real,’ Alexandra said, ‘but less frightening certainly.
Less remote.’
She paused and looked down at her lap.
‘I don't think I like sedentary occupations very much either.
Perhaps that is why my perseverance is so poor.’
There was a brief silence, broken only by the tumble of a coal in the fireplace.
‘You may go out,’ Aunt Emily said, ‘When you have earned it.’
After three weeks, the first callers came.
Alexandra, in her new afternoon dress, her hair parted in the middle and drawn up by Lyddy into a series of padded puffs and curves behind, waited in the drawing-room on the edge of the sofa.
A huge fire was burning, and beside it sat Aunt Emily, dressed in heliotrope and a number of shawls.
A bowl of daffodils stood at her elbow, the first bright heralds of spring, and the room smelt of their freshness, along with the beeswax of the furniture polish and the comforting smell of the coals.
Aunt Emily said, There is no need to be so stiff, my dear.’
‘I feel stiff.’
‘Is the dress too tight?’
‘No.
I am.
Inside.’
‘That will pass,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘All the people round here are so charming.
You will forget to be shy.’
When Penman opened the door to the first knock, Aunt Emily said, ‘You will see how easy it is.’
‘Yes,’ Alexandra said, ‘yes, I expect so,’and then the door opened and Aunt Emily looked up and said, ‘Mrs Burrows!
How good you are to come!
My first visitor of the year!’
Alexandra stood up, found she was standing on her own hem, bobbed a little to release herself and confronted a large, commanding woman pulling off brown suede gloves.
‘My niece, my great niece, Alexandra Abbott.’
Alexandra held out her hand.
Mrs Burrows took no notice.
‘Daffodils already my dear!
Of course, I should expect them in this house.
I shouldn't be in the least surprised to see daffodils in September here.
Are you a gardener Miss Abbott?
Your aunt and your late uncle were famous gardeners, the best west of the Tamar.
Do you garden?’
‘No,’ Alexandra said and blushed.
‘I'm afraid not,’ she corrected herself.
To Mrs Burrows, she then became perfectly invisible.
Talk of the Rector and his unruly family, of her wild Harry's doings at Oxford, of the poor hunting season it had been, all flowed between her and Aunt Emily and when she rose to go, and Alexandra held out her hand in farewell, Mrs Burrows stalked past her to the door as if she had no more real existence than an armchair.
‘Very modest,’ Aunt Emily said when she had gone.
‘Very proper.
Not at all a bad beginning.’
The next visitor was made more alarming by bringing with her two daughters, perhaps a little younger than Alexandra, who both seemed to have no trouble at all in managing their skirts and hats and gloves.
‘My daughters, Miss Abbott,’ Mrs Langley said, ‘Rose and Grace.’
Rose said, ‘We go to Scotland every autumn, don't we Grace?
You know, to fish and Papa to shoot.
Don't we Grace?
But what do you do all year, if you live there?
What is there to amuse yourself with?’
‘I shoot too,’ Alexandra said.
Rose and Grace Langley exchanged glances.
‘I mean, I shoot in season.
Of course.
Father taught me.’
‘We like archery,’ Grace said, ‘Rose is rather good.
But guns —’
‘I've never used a bow and arrow —’ Alexandra said.
Rose interrupted, ‘That's what I mean.
Even if you knew how, I don't suppose there is anyone up there most of the year to shoot against.
We saw not a single sign of any fun last year.
Did we, Grace?
No archery, no parties, no hunting, no nothing, just mountains and rivers and rain and those awful midges.
Do you remember the midges, Grace?
When we were on Skye I thought I should have died of the irritation of them.’
‘What do you do in Scotland all year?’
Alexandra spread her hands.
‘I — I don't know really.
The time passes —’
‘Did your gown come from Scotland?’
‘No.
It's a present from Aunt Emily.’
‘We have to wear such awful clothes in Scotland.
Don't we, Grace?
We hate them, all tweeds and so heavy.
We usually go to London in the winter but the house is having alterations done to it so we can't.
Do you hunt?’
‘I — I ride,’ Alexandra said.
‘Don't you hunt?’
‘I haven't ever —’
‘Have you met Harry Burrows?’
‘No, no I haven't met anyone.
I've only been here a little while, looking after Aunt —’
‘Oh, he's the best fun in the world.
We had the most wonderful Christmas party, didn't we Grace?
Harry and our Langley cousins and both the Trethowans and all the houseparties they had staying.
It was glorious.
We even sent an invitation to Michael Swinton as a joke just to see what he'd do, but it was hopelessly disappointing, he simply pretended he hadn't had it —’
‘Have you seen him?’
Grace demanded.
‘Who?’
Alexandra asked, bewildered.
‘Michael Swinton.’
‘No, no I haven't —’
‘Well, of course, you wouldn't have, he's a recluse, a hermit practically, on account of being so peculiar and gloomy.
The villagers won't go near him, except for mad old Meg, but then she's almost a witch herself.
Harry Burrows rode round his house on Midsummer Eve in a white sheet pretending to be a ghost, we nearly died laughing when he told us —’
‘So we won't see you at the meet on Tuesday?’
Rose said.
Alexandra shook her head.
‘Our cousins are coming.
Our Langley cousins.
At least some of them, George I think and perhaps Hers.
Why don't you come?’
Alexandra said almost in a whisper, ‘I haven't ever hunted.
I haven't a horse —’
‘I can't understand it.
That huge estate in Scotland —; I've been listening to Mamma and Mrs Talbot with half an ear, you never know what you might miss — and you don't hunt.’
‘No, I don't.’
‘Who do you live near in Scotland?
The Campbells?
The MacPhersons?
Do you know Reggie MacPherson?
He proposed to Grace last season in London.
We nearly died laughing, didn't we Grace?’
‘No,’ said Alexandra, ‘I don't know him.’
‘Oh,’ said Rose, ‘Don't you?’and then she looked at her sister and they both looked at their laps and a heavy silence fell.
‘Who — who is the man you tease?’
Alexandra said with some desperation.
She felt she was honour bound, as hostess, to keep the conversation going, and the mention of the poor man who had had to endure Harry Burrows moaning in a sheet beneath his windows had been the only topic to cling to her memory.
Grace said, ‘Michael Swinton?
Oh, don't worry about him.
He doesn't count.’
‘Nobody ever asks him to anything, that's why we did, for a joke.
Papa says he's a gentleman but we know he paints, pictures you know, so Mamma says he can't be.’
‘What sort of pictures?’
Alexandra said.
Rose stared at her.
‘Heavens, I don't know.
Does it matter?
He's extremely odd.
I've never seen him but Grace has, haven't you Grace —’
‘About a year ago.
We trespassed on his land.
Hers said it was by mistake but I know it wasn't and he came wandering out of the wood, all black and shaggy like the Beast in the fairy tale in the most peculiar clothes, very ancient, and dreadful wild hair like pictures of the Prophets.’
‘Was he angry?’
Alexandra asked.
‘Did he shout at you because you were on his land?’
‘Shout?’
Grace said and looked in amazement at her sister.
‘At us?
Of course not.
He simply said something about it's being his land and Piers told him we had made a mistake and we all rode off as hard as we could because we were bursting with laughter —’
Alexandra said quietly, ‘Poor man.’
‘Poor?’
They chorused.
‘To be teased.’
Rose giggled.
‘Don't you like fun?’
‘I don't know,’ Alexandra said, ‘I didn't know that's what fun was.’
Mrs Langley called across the room to her daughters.
They rose at once, extremely eagerly, shaking out their skirts and smoothing their waists with graceful gestures.
‘We shall look forward to seeing you soon, Miss Abbott,’ Mrs Langley said.
Alexandra blushed.
‘Thank you,’ she whispered.
‘So fortunate that you are so close in age to Rose and Grace.
The young people in these parts have the best times in the world.
Shall you be hunting on Tuesday?’
‘She doesn't hunt, Mamma,’ Rose said clearly.
‘No,’ Grace added, ‘She hasn't a horse.’
‘May we not lend you a mount, Miss Abbott?’
‘Thank you,’ Alexandra said, crimson with mortification, ‘I do ride, I mean, I can ride, but I haven't ever hunted.
I — I shouldn't know what to do —’
Mrs Langley eyed her in silence for a while.
‘I see,’ she said and then she bowed, very slightly, and Rose and Grace did the same and then all three moved out of the drawing-room, upright and daunting.
Aunt Emily had her eyes shut.
‘I'm tired now, child.
Tell Penman will you, that you will see any further callers.
I'm going to my room.’
‘Not on my own,’ Alexandra said.
‘Not without you!’
Janet had come in and was assisting aunt Emily to her feet.
‘You can manage quite well, quite well.
Come and see me after tea, when I have rested.’
Alexandra did not move from the sofa but sat on it quite rigid, her ears straining for the dreaded sound of wheels on the gravel of the drive.
Her new corset dug savagely into the soft parts at the sides of her waist and seemed to crush her ribcage in an inexorable grip.
She seemed pulled out, elongated by it, so that her shoes, her new bronze slippers with rosettes on the toes that Aunt Emily had said she must keep hidden at all times if possible since legs and feet were highly indecent, seemed far further away than the five and a half feet she knew separated them from the crown of her head.
The door knocker sounded like a knell.
Alexandra heard herself gasp.
Her eyes fixed themselves in terror on the door.
It opened, and Penman said.
‘Mrs Chamberlin, Miss Abbott.’
‘My dear, don't get up.
Please don't.
I'm the Rector's wife, I should have come weeks ago, I knew perfectly well you were here, I know everything in this village.
All the children have had measles, all five, you cannot imagine what hard work it is, day and night and their poor eyes so sore as well as the rash and the fever.
I do hope your aunt isn't ill again, I quite expected to find her up, her card, you know, her card indicated she was ready for callers again.’
Mrs Chamberlin was most consoling in appearance.
She wore an oatmeal flannel coat and skirt which even Alexandra could see was badly cut, and a heavily pleated cream blouse, the collar fastened with a huge hideous brooch made out of a green polished pebble set in silver.
Her hair escaped in wayward fronds from beneath her brown velvet hat, and her eyes, of the same brown, were full of friendliness.
‘She is better, thank you,’ Alexandra said, ‘but tired.
We have had two — no four, callers already —’
‘Who, my dear?
Do tell me who came.
I'm going to sit right on this glorious fire and get warm all through to my bones.
I suppose it would bore you to come and see my poor children, but they do need amusing, they are at that stage of convalescing when nothing is entertaining for very long and Mamma is certainly not entertaining at all, so a pretty thing like you would be a breath of fresh air.
Now, tell me who came.
I've no business to ask, but I do like to know everything that's going on here, and what with the measles, I've been so dreadfully out of touch.’
Alexandra told her and then added with enthusiasm, ‘I should love to come and see your children.
I really should.’
‘The Misses Langley, eh?
And how did you find them, I wonder.
In my view they need good steady husbands as soon as they can be found, and Harry Burrows needs a commission in the army and to be sent somewhere really uncomfortable.
Should you really, my dear?
It would be kinder than you know.
There are so many sick in the village, February is a wicked month, and it seems to take me all my time to get round the cottages and then when I am back, I am extremely tired and I fear I'm not as patient as I should be, poor little creatures and the baby still in his petticoats.
Tomorrow?
Would you come tomorrow?’
Alexandra thought of tomorrow afternoon, presumably in her other new dress, waiting in the drawing-room for the thud of the knocker.
‘Yes,’ she said firmly, ‘I should be happy to.’
‘Shall you mind a walk?
It's not far, under a mile, the grey house beside the churchyard, the one with those disagreeable laurels I long to have cut down but the Rector says no, they give us some privacy and I suppose, as usual, he is right.
I imagine you are used to walking, coming from Scotland.
We went to Edinburgh on our wedding tour and I thought it beautiful but I think that my state of mind at the time was such that I should have thought anywhere beautiful.
Shall I expect you at three?
Don't wear that pretty dress because the children do romp so, it's only affection but it's detrimental to one's clothes all the same.
No don't get up, my dear, I'm thoroughly toasted now, warm as a new loaf —’
‘Thank you for calling,’ Alexandra said, and smiled.
‘I shall look forward to tomorrow,’ Mrs Chamberlin said, ‘I shan't tell the children until luncheon otherwise they will plague the life out of me.
Did I leave my umbrella in the hall?
I expect I did, but I never know, I'm so afraid of losing things that sometimes I take them into the most unsuitable places.
I took a basket of eggs into church last Sunday because I was so afraid I should forget to give them to old Mrs Baldwin on my way home.
You must see my hens, I'm most proud of them, your aunt doesn't keep hens, I can't think why.
It would be so easy to have hens here, and a cow and a goat and even a pig or two.
Give your aunt my love and tell her I shall see her soon, very soon.’
When Mrs Chamberlin had gone, hurrying into the gloomy February afternoon, her oatmeal figure bent resolutely against the wind, Alexandra looked round the drawing-room and saw it had an animated, unsettled look, as if the last caller had stirred everything to action, all the silver photograph frames, the vases and pin-cushions, the rugs and cushions and shaded lamps.
Smiling to herself at the thought, and confident that it was now too late to be interrupted further, Alexandra went upstairs.
‘I don't think you will care for it at the Rectory,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘There are five children and all woefully undisciplined.
They will tear you to pieces.
I wish you wouldn't go, it will quite ruin your new clothes —’
‘I shan't wear them,’ Alexandra said.
‘I shall wear my Mrs McPhee coat and skirt.
That was built to last if anything ever was.
And I shall like the walk — she stopped abruptly.
After all Aunt Emily's generosity, it seemed churlish to point out how stifled she was, cooped  up in the warm, soft, comfortable house, fed like a lapdog and learning to be a lady.
To cover up her ingratitude, she held out her gros point.
‘Aunt Emily, do you think that is better?
Is it more even?’
Aunt Emily leaned sideways from her pillows.
‘Better, but not perfect.
And it has to be perfect before I shall allow you to go on to petit point.’
Alexandra's heart sank.
Petit point was clearly seen as a reward, not a threat.
‘I wish you would not walk, my dear.
Murphy will take you.
The horses have done nothing all winter and it would do them so much good.
I do rather crave a motor car.
Mrs Burrows has one and Mrs Langley says she will give Mr Langley one as a birthday present.
I always did like anything new, as long as it was comfortable.’
‘But I should like to walk.
I should like the exercise.’
‘Exercise!’
Aunt Emily said in horror, and fell back among her pillows.
As she stepped out of the front door, Alexandra felt like a bird finding its cage door opportunely left open.
For almost a month she had remained in the house, eating and sleeping and sitting, submitting to Lyddy's hairbrush, practising her daily ration at the piano, performing her daily ration upon tapestry canvas, running endless little errands for Aunt Emily, trying to make her handwriting more ladylike, her movements more graceful.
The sky above her was weak pale blue, misted with clouds through which a dim sun struggled to shine, but the air was soft and fresh and the damp black earth along the edges of the drive was pierced with the sharp green points of spring bulbs.
The lane from Bishopstow village came right up to the drive gates and ended there between stone gateposts crowned with lichened pineapples.
Alexandra stood between them and looked down the lane, sunk between high fields, and saw the church tower rising among leafless trees and the blue  slate roofs that clustered round it.
It was a pity her way lay away from the sea, not towards it.
She imagined she could hear it at her back, behind the house and the soft green swell of land that shielded it, could hear the breaking thud of the winter waves on the shore she had not yet seen.
By the time she reached the village her face was pink with air and exercise and she felt that her nose was too.
She had walked fast, comfortable in the old corset she had firmly told Lyddy was quite sufficient for visiting the Rectory children, and as she passed the church, the clock struck three sonorously into the still afternoon air.
The village street was empty, the pump deserted, for all the domestic chores were done by midday and the women were indoors now, assembling greens and bacon for tea or hooking rugs out of old rags.
The Rectory drive was dank and dripping between its lugubrious laurels.
The gravel was carpeted in bright green moss and leaves lay sodden and dark under the shrubs.
Alexandra saw a wooden hobby horse abandoned in the gloom, one wheel missing.
She went boldly up to the door and let the huge brass knocker fall with a thud.
There was an immediate squealing from inside, like a horde of piglets seeing a trough of scraps, and the door was pulled open, revealing a little red-nosed maid and a tumble of children.
She was towed in like a liner by tugs, her hands and skirts clutched and pulled.
Mrs Chamberlin fussed round them.
‘Oh, Miss Abbott, how good you are, don't pull so, Robert, how can poor Miss Abbott possibly come as fast as you?
Helen, you mustn't tug her skirt so, you will quite part it from the waistband.
Do mind the baby, children, oh dear, he always wants to join in and he invariably gets trodden underfoot —’
The children pulled her irresistibly into a large square room at the back of the house whose floor was covered  with a threadbare brown carpet.
There was a huge brass fireguard before the fire, hung with innumerable little garments, and a table in the centre draped in a green chenille cloth down to the floor.
The floor itself was littered with wooden bricks and fragments of doll and lead soldiers.
‘Can we play mothers and fathers?’
‘Can we play camping in the Canadian backwoods?’
‘Will you read to us?
Will you, will you, will you —’
‘I want to play lions and tigers, can we play lions and tigers, I want to be a lion, I want to be a lion —’
The baby stumbled on a brick and fell heavily into the folds of the table cloth.
‘Ah, poor Jack!
Poor little Jack!
Did it tumble then, did it hurt its little self?’
The baby struggled purposefully out of its mother's arms and made for Alexandra.
‘You go,’ she said to Mrs Chamberlin, ‘You go and do all the things you have to do.
I'll amuse the children, I shall be perfectly happy.’
‘Shall you, my dear, I'm sure I don't like to leave you all on your own, not at first—’
‘Lions and tigers!
Lions and tigers!
Lions and tigers!’
‘Please go,’ Alexandra said, fielding the lion as he plunged at her, ‘I'll call for help if I need it.
Really I will.’
The door closed behind Mrs Chamberlin and silence fell at once.
‘Now,’ said Alexandra.
They gazed up at her, all five of them, pale with illness still, their confidence vanished with their mother's going.
‘Listen,’ said Alexandra.
They were listening already.
Helen, never taking her eyes off Alexandra, craned sideways so that she could wind a finger round and round in a hole in her black stocking.
‘This table,’ said Alexandra, ‘Is a log cabin.
Those  chairs are a forest where a lion lives.
A terrible lion.
The fireplace is a volcano.
Robert is a trapper and Helen is his wife and they live in the log cabin.
They have a child — yes, Jack, you will be the child, a very brave remarkable child who gets ravished away by the lion.
Richard you are the lion and you, Arthur, you are a Canadian Mounted Policeman and when the lion threatens to throw the baby into the volcano, you will come galloping up on that hobby horse — that one there, the one with bells — and rescue him.’
Arthur took his thumb out of his mouth.
‘What will you be?’
‘Who will be the winner?’
Robert demanded.
‘I want to be the winner?’
‘It is not a winning game,’ Alexandra said.
—‘It is an acting game and I shall invent the story.
Now I want you to find something that will do for guns and fur caps and a saucepan for Emily to cook wolf stew in —;
‘Tiger stew!
Tiger stew!’
‘Very well.
Tiger stew.
Go on.
And then we will draw the curtains and pretend it is arctic night and we will all be the wind and howl and moan.’
Arthur plugged his thumb in again.
He now removed it briefly to say, ‘You are a nice lady,’ and then went off in search of a gun.
More than an hour later, Mrs Chamberlin opened the door to find all her children under the table eating tiger stew out of an old bowler hat doing duty as a cooking pot, save one, who was crouched on top of the table growling ferociously.
Alexandra was standing on a chair and most of her hair had come down on to her shoulders.
‘He's a lion,’ she explained, ‘Richard is a lion.
They don't know he's there because the wind is howling so loudly.
At least it was, but I'm rather out of breath.’
‘You are a miracle, my dear,’ Mrs Chamberlin said.
At the sound of her voice, all the children surged  out from beneath the table and began to jump up and down and scream.
The baby staggered to Alexandra's chair and hung on to her ankle with grim determination.
‘How do I reward you?
Dear Miss Abbott, how do I possibly reward you?’
Alexandra said shyly, ‘I should like to see your hens.’
‘My dear, the very thing!
And just before it's too dark and they have to be shut up.
Don't, Robert, you will quite pull poor mamma over.
Yes, you shall take some eggs back to your aunt, my Rhode Islands lay such beautiful brown speckled ones with yolks like marigolds.
Helen, don't cry my pet, Miss Abbott will come again, I am sure, and Richard, that is enough roaring now, quite enough, you will make your throat quite raw.
Mind the baby, Arthur, how can Miss Abbott get down if you are to stand just there?’
The hens lived in the orchard.
The light was thickening but the twisted silvery grey trunks with their crusted bark showed up clearly against the long grass where some of last autumn's apples still lay, puckered and brown.
The hens moved carefully about, picking their way on their spindly yellow legs, muttering comfortably to each other and darting their heads to the ground every so often in pursuit of something delicious.
They were a beautiful colour, rich, glowing, russety brown and their combs and wattles were pure clear scarlet.
‘Oh!’
Alexandra said in delight.
‘Aren't they splendid!
I'm so glad you appreciate them, so few people do, they leave them to gardeners and such like, it's such a pity, they're so characterful —’
‘How many would one need,’ Alexandra asked, her eyes on the hens, ‘for just a small household, say eight people?
How many hens?’
‘Roughly two hens a person, my dear.
These Rhodes lay like clockwork, though of course they all have a poor  period, a sort of resting period.
I give them a hot mash too, as well as letting them scratch about here, we cook up all the scraps in the kitchen.
Did you not have hens in Scotland?’
‘Yes, we did, but they were part of the farm, the shepherds’ wives looked after them.
I didn't.’
‘They don't need much looking after, that's the joy of them.
I do shut them up at night because of the stoats and the foxes, but they put themselves to bed, I only have to shut the door.
Come out of that tree, Arthur, you make Jack want to follow you.
My dear, I don't in the least want to hurry you but I think you should go.
The days are lengthening a little, but with this gloomy weather you hardly seem to notice it.
I can't thank you enough, really I can't, and I hope you will come whenever you feel like it.’
Alexandra stooped and kissed the children in turn.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I should like to.
I should like to very much.’
That night, sitting by Aunt Emily's bed before going to her room, she said.
‘Would — would you let me keep hens, Aunt Emily?
Just a few, six or so.
They needn't be any bother or trouble and of course I should buy them myself —’
‘Hens, my dear?’
‘Yes.
Yes, I should so much like to.
Mrs Chamberlin has more than a dozen and she gave me such beautiful eggs to bring home.
It would be such a pleasure and I would promise you that they would be no inconvenience to you.
I should keep them out in the orchard.
Oh, please may I?
Please!’
Aunt Emily smiled at her in a puzzled manner and picked up a letter which lay on the quilt.
‘I suppose you may if you want to so much.
We never had hens, the local farm has always been so obliging.
But certainly you may if it means so much.
Now look at this, Alexandra!
Now we are really making progress!
Guess what this is?
It's a letter from Mrs Burrows asking you  to dine next week!
Isn't that a stroke of luck?
Murphy shall take you and you may borrow my pearls.
Dear Alexandra, I think things are just beginning!’
CHAPTER FIVE
Alexandra sat in front of her mirror in her new cream silk gown while Lyddy folded her hair carefully over the pads.
None of her was comfortable.
There was no denying that the new corset had an impressive effect on her waist, but the dress disconcerted her — the first true evening dress she had ever had — because it left her shoulders quite bare as well as a considerable amount of — of, well, upper bosom, and all her arms.
The skirt was lovely, there was no doubt of that, swishing down rustling folds to the deep ruffle at the hem, but she was doubtful about managing the small train, even after an hour of practice in front of Aunt Emily.
She had cream silk stockings and cream satin slippers with waisted heels and bows of stiff cream ribbon on the toes.
Lyddy put the final touches to her hair and slipped two ropes of pearls carefully over the finished edifice.
‘There, Miss,’ she said, her voice rich with satisfaction.
‘My dear child!’
Aunt Emily said from the doorway in much the same tone, ‘My dear Alexandra!
What an utter transformation!
What a triumph.’
‘You have been so kind,’ Alexandra said unsteadily.
‘All these clothes, and shoes and — and lending me your pearls —’
Aunt Emily waved a shawled arm.
‘It is my pleasure, dear child.
Tonight it is absolutely my pleasure.’
Once in the carriage, Alexandra stopped feeling merely  apprehensive and became sick with fright.
She sat with the blood thudding in her ears, just as it used to do when her mother began a tirade, and prayed for the impossible, for the carriage to be overturned, for it to be the wrong night, for her to develop a sudden and dangerous illness.
It seemed only minutes, desperately short minutes at that, before she was riding smoothly up a huge curved drive towards a house whose long windows were ablaze with light.
In front of the shallow steps that led to the door were parked two — no three, motor cars.
Murphy climbed down to open the door for her.
‘You — you will be back at eleven?’
‘Prompt, Miss,’ he said and seemed gone at once, leaving her only halfway up the steps, with the great door still to negotiate, not to mention a butler and a huge hall beyond and all the alarming noise made by people who know each other very well.
‘Ah, Miss Abbott!’
‘Why, it's Miss Abbott.
She doesn't garden you know.
So unlike her aunt.’
Her new velvet cloak was whisked away, and she found herself in a large red room full of lights and people.
‘I say, that's a very jolly dress, you know —’
‘My son, Miss Abbott.
Harry, this is Miss Abbott, Mrs Talbot's great-niece.
She comes from — from Scotland,’ Mrs Burrows said with emphasis.
‘Do you,’ Harry Burrows said, grinning.
He was square and solid with curly brown hair and a neat, thick moustache.
‘What a jolly life you must have.
In Scotland.’
‘No, I don't,’ Alexandra said truthfully.
‘That is why I came here.’
‘Did you, by jove!
I say, do you smoke?’
‘No!’
Alexandra said, shocked.
‘I say, have I shocked you?
Plenty of girls do, you know.
And you look so topping in that dress that I thought you might be a sport.
Mind if I do?’
‘Not at all.’
‘Have you met the Langleys?
Awfully jolly people.
Rose  and Grace ride to hounds like nobody's business and their cousins are simply topping.
Cambridge isn't big enough to hold them.
I'm an Oxford man, myself.
Best fun in the world.
Trinity, of course.’
‘Of course,’ Alexandra said faintly.
‘By jove,’ he said, ‘haven't you met an Oxford man before?’
He took her in to dinner.
Mrs Burrows was careful to indicate what a privilege this was, her only son and she, Alexandra, a nobody and a temporary resident at that.
Behind her in the procession to the dining-room was Grace Langley on the arm of a languid young man with a monocle, several couples of strangers, and then Rose Langley in pink, giggling, and a young man like a ferret.
The table was enormous and gleamed redly in the candlelight.
There were baskets of flowers with long green trails of smilax all down the length of it, and by every place, above the glittering phalanxes of silver and the shining forests of glass, were engraved menu cards, each held in a little silver fist.
Alexandra counted desperately.
Nine courses.
Nine.
Already she felt she couldn't breathe, laced into this frock like a second skin.
After nine courses would she simply explode, like a too-fat sausage —?
‘Piers Langley,’ said the young man with the monocle.
‘And you're Alexandra Abbott and you don't hunt.
I've asked.’
He sighed.
Alexandra said tartly, ‘Then there's nothing more to say, is there?’
He said, ‘I say, I didn't mean to upset you.
I didn't hunt until I was ten.
I was supposed to be delicate.’
‘I'm twice that and still I haven't hunted.
I don't know what you do.’
A plate of greenish soup descended over her left shoulder.
‘Turtle,’ Piers Langley said gloomily.
Alexandra picked up her spoon.
‘I say!’
Piers said in alarm.
She looked at him questioningly.
He cleared his throat.
‘Lady Pemberton hasn't started yet.’
Alexandra looked uncomprehending and moved to put her spoon in her soup.
‘I say, you shouldn't,’ Piers said, ‘not until she does.
She's on Mr Burrows’ right, after all.’
Blushing and slowly understanding, Alexandra laid down her spoon.
‘Now you can,’ Piers said a moment later.
Head bent, Alexandra concentrated miserably on her soup.
When she had finished she said to Piers, to hide her confusion, ‘I — I always think how odd it is that turtle soup doesn't taste of turtle.’
He gazed at her.
‘It isn't turtle.
It's mock turtle.’
Alexandra looked quickly away.
All down the table, white-gloved footmen were removing the soup plates, the men's all empty, the ladies' all — all but her own —; three quarters full still.
She was hot with shame.
Fish came, and game, and beef in pastry and a cheese soufflé.
She dared not eat any of them.
When ice cream was offered her, a marvellous thing like a fairy castle, she was afraid to touch it and shook her head.
‘You should, you know,’ Harry Burrows said.
‘It's pretty good.
Mater's very hot in the fodder department.
Here, I'll give you some.’
He put a huge wedge of gleaming white pudding on her plate.
‘You could come hunting with me,’ he said.
‘I'd look after you, only the easy fences and all that.’
Alexandra picked up a spoon, remembered, shot a mortified glance at Lady Pemberton and blushing, laid it down again.
‘It — it isn't the fences, it's the manners.’
Harry let out a breath.
‘You don't want to give a fig for those.’
‘I don't,’ she said, ‘but other people do.’
‘Then we're two of a kind,’ he said encouragingly.
‘How awfully jolly!’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘how — how jolly,’and then she put her spoon suddenly into her ice cream and the whole glistening thing slid smoothly off her plate on to the shining red table.
‘I say!’
Harry said, ‘what fun!’
But there were tears in Alexandra's eyes and a lot of the older people had stopped talking to watch.
A footman came and did something deft with a spoon and a plate and a linen napkin.
Conversation began again.
‘It helps, you know,’ Piers Langley said slowly, ‘to use a fork.
Spoons are for soup.
Pudding is eaten with a fork.’
‘Yes,’ Alexandra whispered.
A hot tear made a dark spot on the cream silk of her bodice.
‘I say,’ Harry Burrows said, ‘I say, I really will take you hunting you know.
When I say a thing, by jove I go through with it.
And that really is a topping dress —’
Alexandra cried all the way home, quite unrestrainedly.
Her smooth cream front became quite blotched with dampness because she made no effort to check her tears, just let them run down her face and drop wetly on to her bodice.
Her hair came loose at the back where she rolled her head against the cushions and the locks slipped down against her neck and got cried on to as well.
To her relief, Aunt Emily had not waited up.
But Lyddy had.
She was there in Alexandra's room with hot milk flavoured with nutmeg and the fire lit and Alexandra's nightgown spread on a chair before it to warm.
‘Why, Miss, whatever —’
‘No, Lyddy,’ Alexandra said with difficulty, ‘not a word, not a single word.
And especially not to my aunt.’
‘You all right, Miss?’
‘Physically, perfectly.
I just want to go to sleep and forget — forget it.’
Lyddy picked up an envelope on the dressing-table.
‘This came for you, Miss.
Mrs Talbot forgot to give it you.’
She held it out.
It was postmarked Inverary and bore her father's handwriting.
She tore it open in a frenzy; she would go home, at once, tomorrow, at least she was appreciated there, well anyway by her father, at least she didn't make a fool of herself —;
‘Your mother and I are so pleased you are so happy.
A letter from your Aunt Emily told us how much she likes having you and how accomplished you are becoming.
Don't get too fine for us, my lass.
I've not mentioned it to your mother yet, but since the thing is such a success, I think you should stay, through the summer at least.
Your aunt says there is a chance of you hunting, which is grand, and you'll catch the tail of the season.
So don't fret about us here.
We're all well and your mother has been out a good deal.
You stay where you are and enjoy yourself and maybe we'll see you after the summer —’
Lyddy said, ‘No bad news, Miss?’
‘Not very,’ Alexandra said and threw the letter, so cursorily read, on to the fire.
Lyddy gasped.
‘Oh Miss!’
‘It's all right, Lyddy, I didn't want it, I just want to sleep and sleep.’
‘Yes, Miss.’
‘Lyddy.’
‘Yes, Miss.’
‘No word to my aunt, please, nothing at all.’
‘Yes, Miss.’
CHAPTER SIX
Aunt Emily sent for her after breakfast.
She hadn't eaten anything, just pushed a piece of ham around her plate to  placate Penman and crumpled up a muffin.
Looking at herself in the looking-glass on the stairs she saw how small and pink her eyes looked, their lids still puffy and her skin was tired and lifeless.
‘Well?’
Aunt Emily said.
She looked to Alexandra disgustingly spry and healthy, rosy and refreshed after an excellent night and full of happy anticipation at hearing of the dinner party.
She patted the bed.
‘Come and tell me all about it.
My dear, you look tired.
Of course it is always difficult to sleep after great excitement.
Now, who did you sit next to?
What did you eat?
Were there ices?
Mrs Burrows is famous for her ices, she uses cream from her own cows —’
There was nothing for it but to pretend it had all been as Aunt Emily would have wished it to be.
Once embarked upon the fabrication of an imaginary dinner party, Alexandra found it quite easy.
‘— and I was placed between Harry Burrows and Piers Langley and they told me all about hunting round here and really it was so interesting that I hardly noticed what we ate, some sort of fish and pheasant I think and, oh yes, there was an ice but by that stage, you know, I didn't have the smallest corner to put in so much as a mouthful —’
Aunt Emily said with real warmth, ‘I am so glad, my dear.
I know your mother scoffs at social life but I don't think she realizes what pleasure she is missing, how delightful it can be to be among amusing people.’
Alexandra smiled bravely.
A small sharp throbbing was beginning in her temples and her eyes felt sore and gritty.
‘I — I know it's silly Aunt Emily, but I'm — I'm so little used to late nights that I do feel absurdly tired.
I — think if I had some fresh air today I should feel much better, if I went down to the sea, perhaps.’
‘Of course,’ Aunt Emily said comfortably.
‘After luncheon.
When my letters are done and you have told me how your parents are and whether your gown was  admired.
After luncheon.
When I am resting, then you shall go.’
After luncheon she said to Penman, ‘Can I walk anywhere?
Does it matter?’
And Penman, removing her untouched pudding with a troubled air said, ‘If you go straight through the garden and over that rise, Miss Alexandra, the shore all before you belongs to Bishopstow House.
But up to your right, where the estuary flows into the sea, that's Mr Swinton's land and although I know no harm in him myself, they say — they say he doesn't like trespassers, Miss Alexandra.
He's a very solitary gentleman.’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I'll be careful.’
The air outside was marvellous after the close warmth within, sharp and sweet, and the sky a pale, soft grey like plucked feathers.
She went down the garden with a buoyant step between the neatly trimmed shrubs her uncle had so lovingly planted, past the magnolia, black and wet and knobbly, and through the rose garden the Talbots had laid out together in the manner of an Elizabethan one, formally-shaped beds edged with fat hedges of box.
A solitary yellow leaf hung here and there, still in the windless air.
At the end of the rose garden an iron gate between grey stone pillars gave on to the fields beyond.
Drops of water hung on it and the latch was stiff with lack of use.
There were no cows in the fields that sloped up gently before her, no sheep, nothing except empty tidy green grass and neat grey walls.
‘What a waste,’ Alexandra said aloud.
‘All these home fields and nothing in them.
What a waste.’
She set off across the rough turf towards the low hill brow ahead.
The first wall had a stile in it of stone slabs set like a crude staircase at intervals into the sides, rough with golden lichen.
Alexandra climbed carefully up the first side and then leaped from the top on to the grass below.
She looked back briefly at the house behind her, low and grey with its long eighteenth-century windows and its sheltering clumps of trees, then she picked up her skirts and began to run up the slope towards the sea.
She heard it before she saw it, murmuring louder and louder with the squeals of gulls cutting shrilly across the regular soft booming of the waves.
Alexandra came stumbling, panting, over the crest of the hill and then the ground ran sheer downhill before her, covered in tawny winter grasses, down to the bleached pale strip of sand and the heaving, shifting steely mass of the sea.
Ahead of her, straight ahead, she could make out the grey hills on the far side of the estuary and to her right where the land first widened out and then melted away altogether, the sea flowed to the ocean, limitless, miles of moving, salty water.
A little round hill, a sort of headland, thrust itself out into the estuary slightly to her right, and beyond it, she thought she saw a great bay, a giant bite out of the smooth slope of grassy shore.
She began to run again, down towards it, jumping from tussock to tussock, and then her hat came loose and she snatched it off, scattering pins as she did so, and ran on, holding it in her hand and every so often bowling it ahead of her like a hoop.
It was indeed a bay, a vast expanse of ribbed brown sand over which the water was just beginning to creep, a gleaming line on the outer edge.
She set out across it, wishing she had a dog with her and admiring, over her shoulder, the neat prints of boot sole and heel that she left behind her as she walked.
Every so often there was a little crab corpse or a twist of sand thrown up by a sandworm or a streak of brilliant green weed like the hair of a water nymph and sometimes a smooth small rock and beside it a still, clear, tiny pool with mussels, blue black and pearly.
Alexandra began to sing.
At the far side of the beach the rocks began, some humped with brown weed, some slatey and treacherous, breaking away in thick flakes.
She looked hastily up at the rising land behind her, saw nobody, and hitched  her skirts up to tuck them into her waistband.
It was absorbing work, scrambling over the rocks, especially hampered by a hat in one hand, so after a while she left the hat on a dry plateau beside a pool and pursued her way unencumbered.
She went steadily on, from foothold to foothold, only stopping to peel off her glove now and then and push a finger into the wet fringed mouth of a  sea-anemone , but mostly she concentrated on the next step, the next handhold, with the sea on one side of her, the swell of grassy land the other.
She was so absorbed that it was not for some time that she realized that the sea on her left was no longer the water of the estuary but had become the ocean.
She stopped for a moment, and gazed at it with pleasure, and saw how huge it was, surging against the rocks with far more power and energy than it had in the shelter of the estuary, flinging plumes of spray about in a reckless manner and dragging back to gather itself for the next rush forward.
She came to a little patch of sand, the bottom of a miniature canyon, and on the far side of it there was a smooth grey rock, sliced neatly off at the top to make a platform.
Alexandra dug her toes into fissures in the canyon wall and pulled herself on to the platform which was dry and flat and sloped slightly towards the sea.
It was the perfect look-out.
Glowing now after her exercise, she sat down on the rock and pulled her skirts over her knees, hugging them to her so that her chin could rest there while she gazed.
It was perhaps the most luxurious moment she had ever known.
Vibrant with exercise, alone, firmly pushing aside all thought that oppressed her, she sat and watched the sea, while the salty air buffeted softly against her cheeks and the gulls wheeled overhead, slightly paler than the pale sky.
She could hardly see where sea and sky met far away in the soft grey mistiness, but she let her mind wander out there and find ships and whales and foreign shores.
‘On a monument, I see,’ a voice said below her, ‘but not, I hope, smiling at grief.’
She felt as if she had been woken from a deep sleep and was conscious of pulling her mind back, painfully, as if it had been a kite out there, held to her by only a string.
There was a man on the sand below her platform, a black-haired stocky man with a beard, dressed in an old cloak and hatless, who was gazing up at her with powerfully blue eyes, astonishing in his dark face.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
He had a deep resonant voice and she caught a glimpse of white teeth in the dark forest of his beard.
‘I see you weren't grieving, only musing.
I shouldn't have disturbed you.’
‘I wasn't — thinking at all—’
‘No,’ he said, ‘I see that.
I regret interrupting you.
It was just such a surprise to see you here.
There is never anyone here, the shore is always quite empty.
I'm afraid curiosity got the better of me and now I have broken your mood.
Please forgive me.’
Guilt and apprehension rushed over Alexandra's face.
She attempted to get up, was foiled by her skirts and clumsiness, and ended up on her hands and knees looking down from her platform directly into his face.
‘I — I didn't mean to trespass, I didn't think, I'm so sorry, I just went scrambling on, not thinking, I do apologize Mr — Mr —’
‘Swinton,’ he said, ‘Michael Swinton.’
‘Yes.’
‘You know?’
‘I — I've heard —’
He grunted.
Then he moved a little up the canyon to where the jutting rocks made a rough natural staircase and held out his hand.
‘May I help you down, Miss —?’
Alexandra got to her feet with difficulty.
‘Alexandra Abbott.
I'm so very sorry —’
‘There is nothing to be sorry for.
Not on your part.
It is I who am so sorry for disturbing you.
Come, take my hand.’
She hesitated, putting her hands to her bare head, murmuring ‘My hat —’
‘I'm thankful you have lost it.
Come now, whatever you may have heard of me, this is a perfectly ordinary hand, not a centaur's hoof or a goblin's claw.’
She blushed.
She stepped carefully from her platform to the first foothold and put her hand in his.
Even through her glove, she could feel his warmth and he guided her down a step or two and then, at the last moment, let her go in order to put both hands at her waist and swing her down.
‘There,’ he said, ‘most elegantly done.
And you are smaller than you looked up there.’
She nearly said, ‘And you are larger,’ but didn't, only looked up into his face and saw that he was not a young man, perhaps even as much as forty.
He had thick brows and a nose which was so curved it was almost hooked, and she felt apprehension rise in her like sickness.
She said, ‘I must — I must go back.
Thank you for your kindness.
I won't — I won't disturb you again —’
‘I should like you to disturb me a little longer.’
‘Oh no!’ she said in fright, ‘no — I mean, I mustn't think of it, I should go back, I was very wrong to walk on your land —’
‘I am asking you to walk on it further.
Come,’ he said and held out that strong, flexible hand again, ‘come and see my house.
Come and see the sorcerer's kitchen where I brew up the grotesque potions that make me a legend here.’
Instinctively she looked up at the sky.
He said, ‘I'll see you safely home before dark.
Don't worry.
Where is home?’
She said almost in a whisper, ‘Bishopstow House.’
‘Ah, the charming Mrs Talbot.
I hardly ever see her now because she doesn't go out and neither do I. But I used to see her when her husband was alive, indeed they  were almost the only people I ever saw.
For choice, that is.
She is your —?’
‘Aunt,’ Alexandra said faintly.
His blue eyes were full of mockery.
‘Come and see the wizard's lair, Miss Alexandra Abbott.
I have a man, quite as terrifying as myself, and I will send him to tell your aunt that you are quite safe and that I will restore you to her by nightfall.’
He held his hand out and this time he did not wait for her to respond, but grasped her hand firmly and began to lead her, with great skill and speed, over the rocks towards the cliff.
At the top of the cliff, Alexandra said breathlessly, ‘I didn't mean to be impolite.
I didn't mean that I don't want to see your house.
Of course I don't believe the silly stories —’
‘You don't?’ he said sceptically.
He was not in the least short of breath.
‘You don't?
What stories?’
‘Oh!’ she said, ‘you aren't fair!
You know what I mean, you have made fun of them yourself already —’
He was laughing.
He said, ‘There are some stories which say that I am not quite right in the head and some that I am full of evil powers.
Those stories circulate in the village.
And there are other stories, and these of course are much worse, and they have currency in the houses of the local gentry, and they say,’— he lowered his voice and spoke in a shocked whisper —‘that I cannot be a gentleman because I am — a painter.’
Alexandra coloured.
‘I know,’ she said, ‘I have heard them.’
‘And you will chance your luck?’
She smiled for the first time at him.
‘Yes,’ she said.
His house was a grim, grey dwelling, appropriately masked in creeper.
A broad terrace ran round it with tufts of herbs growing on it and broken steps leading down on to the ruins of a lawn.
From one of the chimneys  only rose a thin, faint streak of smoke, but although it was a sunless day and darkening already, the black windows sent out no gleam of lamp or fire.
‘Do you think it suitable for me?’ he asked.
‘Properly abandoned and forbidding?’
She hesitated.
‘I see you do.
I am just as neglected as my house.
I have my man and a bent old crone from the village who drinks my whisky which she thinks I don't notice.
We live in the kitchen together and I live in my studio alone.
There, there are my studio windows.’
Facing out towards the sea and the cold north light were the largest windows Alexandra had ever seen, huge soaring panes of glass reaching from the terrace to the guttering below the slates.
‘The view and the north light, that's why I bought the house.
Come in.
Come in and see.’
The kitchen reminded her strongly of Bewick, lofty and castle-like, except that the order which prevailed at Bewick had no chance here.
The table was strewn with books and papers and candle-ends jammed into empty bottles, and the floor was similarly littered, but with boots and boxes.
The dresser was crammed with a thousand things beside plates, old envelopes and letters, mousetraps, rags, pipes and screws of black tobacco in papers, and every chair was heaped with clothing, shirts and coats and cloaks.
There was a huge range on which a vast kettle simmered like a cauldron and beside it a gun rack where four guns rested, gleaming with care and beautiful.
He shouted, ‘Punch!’
A man came out of the pantry beyond, a small man with a sharp clever face, in an apron and gaiters.
‘Miss Abbott, this is Punch.
I picked him off Newbury racecourse after he had broken most of his ribs under the flying hooves of his competitors.
Punch, I want a chair cleared for Miss Abbott, and tea.
While you do it, I shall show her the studio.’
If Punch was astonished, he gave no sign.
He made a sort of ducking movement to acknowledge his orders and tipped up the nearest chair so that its burden of garments slithered to the flagstones.
Men minutes, Punch,’ Michael Swinton said.
He guided Alexandra out of the kitchen and along a passage so dark that if it had not been for his hand on her elbow, she would not have known where she was going.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘the heart of the matter.’
He flung open a pair of doors she had not even noticed in the gloom and revealed the largest room she had ever seen, endlessly high, and filled with the grey light of the sea.
It was curiously ordered after the kitchen, with canvasses in neat stacks along the walls, and in the centre a table, clearly from its size once a billiard table, covered in piles of drawings, pots of brushes, bottles and jars and a huge battered shallow leather case, full of tubes of paint like silver fish.
Everything had been arranged with strict symmetry except for the giant easel standing on a square of Turkey carpet by the window, and everything, canvasses, table, marble busts, was covered with dust.
He didn't say anything.
He simply stood aside and let her enter.
She walked all down the room on the bare boards, looking at the paintings on the walls, breathing the smell of paint and turpentine laced with the richness of linseed oil.
She walked up and down for some time, looking and sniffing, but not touching, and he waited by the door in the shadows and watched her.
And then she said, in a simple, firm tone, with no gush to it, ‘It's wonderful.’
He let out a long breath.
‘How very satisfactory you are, Miss Abbott.’
She said, ‘May — may I see what is on the easel?’
‘No,’ he said.
She recoiled a little at the sharpness of his tone.
‘You wouldn't understand it.
It's one of the things I  try to do for selfish pleasure, glorious, indulgent, selfish pleasure, rather than for money.’
‘Money!’ she said and her tone was shocked.
He laughed again and she could see his teeth gleam whitely across the room.
‘Ah, Miss Abbott.
Money.
That stops me being a real artist in your eyes, doesn't it.
Money.
Dear, dear.
Miss Abbott, I must peel the scales from your eyes entirely.
I must tell you that once, fifteen years ago or so, I made a lot of money.
A lot.
I painted the young Lloyd George, I painted most of the Cabinet, I even painted two of the royal grandchildren.
Now I don't paint so fashionably, but I still sell.
I have an exhibition in London each spring and Punch makes wooden crates to pack my canvasses in and we put them tenderly on to the train in Bodmin.
I don't go with them.’
‘Never?’
‘Never.’
‘Wouldn't you like to hear the praise?
Wouldn't you like to see the admiration on people's faces?’
‘I have seen and heard it.
I don't want it any more.’
She said in a rush, ‘I — I used to dream about being famous, I used to imagine how wonderful it would be, to feel that you mattered, that people knew who you were, that you were somebody.’
She remembered the sketches of mice and the dusty clarinet and blushed at the recollection.
He came forward into the room to stand close to her and bent to look into her face.
‘Ah, my dear,’ he said with great gentleness.
Alexandra took a step back, a lurch of fear jumping up her throat again.
Michael Swinton straightened up and ran a hand over his rough black head.
‘I'm afraid fame is not like that,’ he said.
‘At least, it was not like that for me.
The more celebrated I became the worse I painted and the more false I felt.
It was a very simple process and very powerful.’
‘So — so you came here?’
‘Yes.
Just like that.
I came here.’
He smiled again.
‘I can't appal you with gothic stories of ill-treated wives and neglected children.
Never had either.
At least— at least — I don't know what it is about you, Miss Abbott, but you make me want to bare my soul to you — I did have a wife once, years ago, when I was very young, but she left me, not I her, to live with someone else.
She died soon after, coughing her lungs out.’
‘How dreadful!’
‘Yes.
Yes, I suppose it was.
It's twenty years ago, long before I came here.
And the mention of twenty years reminds me that that must be the number of summers you own to, Miss Abbott and that being young and having spent the afternoon in the sea air, you must be hungry.’
The litter on the kitchen table had been pushed back to leave a clear corner on which a cloth, clean but creased, had been laid, and on it were two unmatching plates and two cups which bore no relation in design or size, to their saucers.
There was a white milk jug, a rough block of butter, a loaf on a wooden board and a fat teapot, just like the one her father used every day —;
‘Miss Abbott, what is it?
Your eyes are full of tears.
Is it the crudeness of everything here?
Does it distress you?’
She said hurriedly, ‘Oh no, not at all, it's just that the teapot — the teapot gave me a pang of homesickness, just a pang.
My father uses one just like it.
That's all.’
He took her hand in his warm clasp for a moment and then he said, ‘You must pour from it at once and lay the ghost.
Pour for both of us.
Punch, will you ride to Bishopstow House forthwith and leave a message to the effect that Miss Abbott is here with me and that I will return her within the hour.’
Punch said nothing but slid at once from the room.
Michael Swinton cut bread, thick satisfying slices and speared one of them on to Alexandra's plate.
‘He will be there in minutes.
He always rides as if he were winning the St Leger.
I suppose it is a habit.’
Remembering the turtle soup, Alexandra said in confusion, ‘I'm — so sorry but — but I really am dreadfully hungry.’
He looked at her in surprise.
‘Of course you are.
I knew you were.
I expect you to be.’
She ate gratefully and ravenously.
‘When did you last eat, Miss Abbott?’
‘L — last night.’
‘And why no breakfast and no luncheon?
Food at Bishopstow House was always excellent.
I remember it with great nostalgia.’
Looking at her plate she said, ‘It was at a dinner party.
At — at the Burrows’ house.’
She paused and then because he said nothing, but only kept a silence full of sympathy and put more bread on her plate, she burst out, ‘I did everything wrong that I could.
I drank all my soup, I didn't hunt, I don't know about fashionable Scotland, I dropped ice cream on the table, I didn't know when to begin to eat.
But you see at home, it's so isolated we never see anyone, I never learned how to behave properly.
I mean, I'm sure my mother does but I never believed her, I was always afraid of being like her and I'm such a disappointment to her, so hopeless and not beautiful, not like my grandmother.
And my father was her shepherd so nobody asks us to their houses, so I never met people like this before and Aunt Emily is trying to bring me out and she's so sweet, so generous.
She keeps giving me clothes —; not this dear old awful thing, Mrs McPhee at home made this — and making me practise manners and the piano and I couldn't tell her about last night, I couldn't, I can't disappoint another person, not after my mother —’ and Alexandra put her head down on to the slice of bread on her plate and burst into tears.
He didn't speak or try to touch her.
He sat quite silently until she had cried enough, and then he waited until she had pulled herself upright again when he handed her his handkerchief, cleanish but crumpled like the tablecloth.
‘I shall give you more bread,’ he said.
‘You can't eat damp bread.
It is probably indigestible.’
He cut another slice and then he leaned across and buttered it for her, as if she had been a child.
‘Eat that, my dear.’
She did as she was told, sobbing every now and then, rubbing the handkerchief across her eyes.
When she had finished the entire slice, and he had refilled her cup, he said, ‘There is a way out of this, you know.
It doesn't have to be fame.
That is probably the worst solution.’
‘I couldn't think of any other.’
‘I know.
It is most understandable.
But I think a more modest aim would make you just as happy, just as satisfied.
What is it that you really like to do?’
She thought for a long time, not looking at him, but at the glowing red centre of the range.
She thought of all the things she didn't like to do, the sewing and painting and practising, and then she tried to think of the days at home she had enjoyed most and unbidden, pictures came to her mind of the farm and the sheep and the days on the hill with her father.
She said slowly, ‘I like doing things.
I liked helping my father with the sheep.
I liked shooting with him.
I like his wolfhounds but my mother wouldn't let me feed them.’
She took her reddened eyes from the fire and looked at her host.
‘A week ago I played with the Rectory children.
I liked that.
And I saw Mrs Chamberlin's hens and they were splendid and Aunt Emily says we may keep some and I shall make sure it is me who looks after them, not Murphy.’
He smiled at her.
‘You see, my dear, you don't really need advice at all.
You are beginning to work out your own salvation.
For yourself.’
‘Am I?’ she said.
She sounded genuinely surprised.
‘Follow the hens with a goat, or perhaps a cow and a pig or two —’
‘All those lovely empty fields!’
‘Precisely,’ he said.
He stood up.
‘I must take you home, Miss Abbott.’
She said, ‘I — I am sorry about the handkerchief.
I will get it washed and return it to you.’
He looked at her very intently for a moment.
He said, ‘Perhaps I have a salvation too,’ and his voice was so low and his look so piercing that she felt a sudden clutch of fear, just as she had in the studio.
Perhaps he saw it, for his face relaxed at once and he held out an arm to her.
‘Pray take my arm m'lady and I shall convey thee hence in the twinkling of an eye.’
She smiled and put her hand in his arm.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘And thank you for tea.’
‘Do not thank me,’ he said.
‘Do not ever thank me.
It is I who thank you.’
CHAPTER SEVEN
‘You must have been a success,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘I knew you would be.
Mrs Burrows called this afternoon while you were on the shore and said that Harry was most anxious you should take part in some theatricals the young people want to perform at Easter.
She said he would have come himself but he had to go Oxford of course.
He was only home for the weekend.
He won't be down again until next month.’
Alexandra wondered if Mrs Burrows had said anything else, but she gazed at the tapestry on her lap and said only, ‘She — she is most kind.
But I don't think I will.
I've never acted and I'm sure I should be extremely awkward.
Worse than usual.’
Aunt Emily said firmly, ‘You have plenty of time to change your mind.’
Then she added, ‘You must call on the Langley girls tomorrow.
It's only proper.’
‘Oh, please!’
‘There is no question.
And you are immeasurably more poised than you were.
You won't find it in the least difficult.’
Alexandra stitched in silence.
After a while, Aunt Emily said
‘And what did you make of Mr Swinton?’
Alexandra said, ‘He was very kind to me.
I trespassed quite by mistake and he was most generous about it.’
‘He is generous,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘Your uncle admired him very much.
We used to see something of him, but of course, he never mixed, he is too odd, too difficult.
He used to come and dine here sometimes, just on his own, and he and your uncle would talk and talk.
He came here as quite a young man, perhaps twelve, fourteen years ago, but we never knew anything about him, where he came from, who is parents were.
Of course we knew he was a celebrated painter, everyone did, and I think the neighbourhood felt quite disappointed when by moving down here he became less celebrated.
He almost refuses to work which seems so oddly deliberate in view of his talent.’
‘There was a painting on his easel, but he wouldn't let me see it.
He said I shouldn't understand.’
Aunt Emily looked away from her into the fire.
‘He was undoubtedly right.
Your uncle maintained that he was a man of immense depth, a very philosophical creature in the classic sense.
He once did something quite extraordinary for me.
I told him about Charlotte and he said would I describe her, in the smallest detail that I could.
I was of course, delighted, and as I could recall her face more clearly than anyone else's, except perhaps Richard's, I was able to comply.
Two days later, he brought me a charcoal drawing of her, very lightly done, a sort of dream-like impression and it was so like her, it captured the essence of her so minutely, that I could not believe he had never seen her, only listened to me.’
‘The drawing by your bed,’ Alexandra said suddenly.
‘The very one.
She is more vivid in that, more vital, than in any of the countless, expensive portraits Alexander had done of her.
That is why I keep it by me.
Which reminds me, have you read my journal yet —’
‘No’, Alexandra said hurriedly.
‘I nearly could today, very nearly.
But there will be a better moment.
You mustn't feel that I don't want to read it, but I am a little frightened of reading it after, well, after mother and her feelings for — for her mother and for me.’
Aunt Emily said, ‘If you read it, dear child, it will take away your fear,’ and Alexandra, stubbornly remembering Michael Swinton's saying that she seemed to be working out her own salvation and feeling that the decision to read the journal must be part of that working out, shook her head and sent her needle stabbing in and out of the canvas.
After a while, after a silence broken only by the whispering of the fire, she raised her head and said, ‘May I really have some hens soon?
If I were to get half a dozen hens and half a dozen pullets, because I think you would like their little tiny eggs, would that suit you?’
Aunt Emily shook her head in puzzlement, but she smiled.
‘Yes, yes.
Of course.
Such an extraordinary desire, but of course you may.
What harm could there be?’
At two thirty precisely the following afternoon, Murphy and the carriage and the stout, gleaming pair of bays were ready before the front door.
At two thirty-five, the front door was opened by Penman, and Alexandra, in a green wool crèpe dress with a lace jabot and a good deal of complicated silk braid around the hem, under a coat of similar fabric, slit to the waist at the back and sides to allow for the movement of her skirts, and a hat swathed in green gauze and decorated on the left hand side with brown velvet pansies, came down the steps and climbed in.
Penman said, ‘Langley Dene’, to Murphy who indicated with a faint grimace that he knew his destination perfectly well already, and closed the door of the carriage firmly upon Alexandra.
She sat very upright and looked down at her green lap and the bronze toes of her boots, and the brown silk handbag on a gilt chain which contained a handkerchief, a phial of sal volatile and some of Aunt Emily's calling cards in a mother of pearl case, since she had none of her own.
She thought, ‘I shall count, very steadily, all the way there and then I shan't have a chance to be afraid,’ and then the carriage turned right out of the driveway and went past the orchard wall and with a leap of pleasure, she thought, ‘In two days the hens will be there!
My hens!
My own hens!
Under the apple trees!’ and when she thought again about her fright, it had quite vanished.
They were going inland, behind the little fishing village of Rock, towards Wadebridge, past little green cushions of fields and hedges of tamarisk and white cottages with blue slate roofs and windows made tiny against the weather.
She sat and watched it all slip past, and thought how she must persuade Murphy to let her cook up the hens’ mash on the saddle-room boiler, for Dora would hate her to do it in the kitchen, and how she would need a galvanized bucket and an old ladle and a door on the old donkey shed in the orchard to keep out the foxes.
In the fields to her left, a man was riding, or perhaps it was a boy, for the figure was very small.
She craned forward to look more clearly and saw it was Michael Swinton's man, Punch, and that he was putting his horse, a great mangy thing, at the walls of the fields and leaping them and going on to the next as if he were steeplechasing.
It was lovely to watch, the effortless, rhythmic flowing of the horse's limbs and then Punch turned his mount and came thudding towards the road.
Alexandra thought they couldn't stop, not possibly, but they did and she saw  Punch's face, two yards away, look towards her, blank with unrecognition until she smiled and waved her hand and then he too grinned, and ducked his head at her and swung his horse away from the wall again.
‘Of course he wouldn't know me,’ she thought.
‘How could he?
I must look a different being to yesterday.
I wish it was yesterday, I wish I was just climbing over the rocks in dear comfortable Mrs McPhee who doesn't mind getting wet and lets me breathe —’
Murphy had swung in between two newish and very neat grey gateposts.
The gravel under their wheels was new too and very yellow and smoothly raked.
Little young shrubs lined the drive growing in finely sifted black earth behind a neat strip of cropped grass.
And then the drive curved and the house came into view, a huge solid new house, built of the same neat grey blocks as the gatepost, with enormous sash windows staring blankly out and a shallow slate roof with heavily moulded eaves.
Murphy climbed down and opened the door for her.
Mindful of the stable-room boiler and the bucket, she gave him a brilliant smile as she stepped down and then she said, ‘Twenty minutes, Murphy,’ and he grimaced faintly again, as if to say he knew perfectly well she would be twenty minutes, ladies calling always were.
A stout butler led Alexandra across a hall floored in gleaming yellow wood and lined with large dark paintings, and announced her at the drawing-room door.
Mrs Langley rose from a chair by the fire and Alexandra was aware of her daughters and someone else on a sofa in the great square bay window; and even as Mrs Langley was greeting her she could hear Rose say clearly, ‘Well, whatever else she hasn't got, she certainly has elegant clothes,’ and Alexandra, stung out of all terror quite suddenly, said crisply, ‘I will tell my aunt how much you admire her taste.
She has chosen all of them for me.’
Rose gave a tiny stifled scream and the third person  in the bay window proved itself to be a young man by throwing back his head and shouting with laughter.
Even Mrs Langley looked a little confused.
She said hastily, ‘Miss Abbott, may I present my nephew George Langley.
You will forgive him using but he had a bad fall yesterday and has damaged his ankle.
The doctor has forbidden him to put any weight on it.’
Alexandra said, emboldened by her success, ‘Then perhaps it is as well that I don't hunt.’
George Langley held out his hand.
‘I'm awfully sorry not to get up.
I failed to get myself introduced the other night.
It was the jolliest dress you had, in that I will agree with my cousin, though I don't in much.
Do I, Rose?’
Rose said, almost accusingly, ‘You missed a really splendid day.
We found in the first covert and then twice more, I can't remember so many good runs in a day before, not all at once.’
Alexandra was not sure if she should sit down before she was invited to, but by now she hardly cared.
She seated herself in the bay window and said to George, ‘Are you not supposed to be at Cambridge?
I thought it was still the term time.’
He pulled a face of mock terror at his aunt.
‘It is.
I should be.
But Aunt May won't let me go because of this confounded ankle.
I daren't disobey her, Miss Abbott — dare I, Aunt?— because you see, my brother and I have been in her care since we were boys and stand in the greatest awe of her imaginable.’
Mrs Langley said fondly, ‘George.
What nonsense.’
Grace spoke for the first time.
She said almost tentatively, ‘You sat next to George's brother, to Hers, at —; at the Burrows.’
‘Yes,’ Alexandra said, ‘I remember.
He too, plagued me about hunting.’
This spirited behaviour seemed to be quite easy, now she had embarked upon it.
She said, ‘I like to ride for my own pleasure, but I'm not at all sure I want to hunt.
I'm going to keep hens.’
For the second time George Langley burst out laughing.
‘Oh, but I can imagine you, Miss Abbott!
In a charming little bonnet and a print pinafore standing in your model farmyard and calling your devoted flock by name —’
‘I am perfectly serious,’ Alexandra said.
‘So am I,’ George Langley declared.
‘I think it is a delightful amusement.
I shall borrow the carriage — may I, Aunt May?— and come and witness this pastoral idyll before you get tired of it.’
Alexandra said calmly, ‘I shan't get tired of it.
It isn't a game, I am going to learn about hens and I shall look after them entirely myself.’
Mrs Langley said faintly, ‘Hens —’ and Rose, startled out of the remnants of her confusion said, ‘Why can't —; can't the gardener do that?’
Alexandra looked at her.
‘I should like to do it myself.
And then I should like to buy a cow perhaps and maybe a pig.’
‘Oh, my hat!’ said George Langley in delight.
Alexandra turned to Grace.
‘I saw Mr Swinton yesterday.
I met him quite by chance when I was rambling on the shore.
And I didn't think him in the least like the Beast in the fairy tale although his hair and beard need a little trimming perhaps.
He was very courteous and very kind.
I went to his house and saw his studio and we had tea in his kitchen.
He is a very famous painter, you know.’
She looked at Mrs Langley.
‘He painted two of Queen Victoria's grandchildren when he was younger.’
Mrs Langley seemed to grope for words.
‘Yes —’ she said at last, scarcely audible.
Grace and Rose said in chorus, ‘You saw Mr Swinton?’ and their voices were shrill with incredulity.
‘Yes,’ Alexandra said, ‘I told you.
We talked together for about two hours.
And I can assure you,’ she said with emphasis, ‘that he is a gentleman.’
George Langley said in a fervent tone, ‘You were  wasted on my brother the other night, Miss Abbott.
Quite wasted.’
She turned to look at him.
He was of the same cut as Piers, tall and dark, but his face was more animated, his eyes not so heavy-lidded and languorous.
She said, ‘I think you would probably have scolded me just as hard, Mr Langley,’ and then she gathered up her handbag and rose to her feet.
‘Don't go!’
George Langley begged.
‘Please don't go!
Aunt May, be as firm with Miss Abbott as you are with me.
Make her stay!’
Mrs Langley seemed flustered.
She said, ‘Why George, my dear, I think — I am sure Miss Abbott — but of course only too delighted —’
‘I must go,’ Alexandra said, ‘I have a very busy afternoon ahead.’
‘But you will come again?
Soon?
I don't know how long I shall be laid up with this wretched ankle.
Please say you will come!’
‘Yes,’ Alexandra said, and smiled at him.
‘Of course I will,’ and she smiled at Mrs Langley and held out her hand and smiled at Rose and Grace, and then she went swiftly from the room and across the hall and down the steps to collapse shaking into the carriage.
‘The Manor House, Miss Alexandra?’
Murphy inquired through the open door, ‘Mrs Burrows?
Or Pemberton Park?’
‘Neither, Murphy’, she said, ‘The Rectory.
Take me to the Rectory.’
Murphy said doubtfully, ‘Very good, Miss Alexandra,’ and closed the door upon her.
The carriage had hardly halted in the Rectory drive before the door was torn open and the children came tumbling out with Mrs Chamberlin behind them vainly trying to exert some sort of control.
Murphy forgot to a stately and was off the box as nimbly as a boy in order to prevent his precious carriage being invaded by this horde  in battered boots and smudged pinafores.
They danced up and down on the gravel and shouted and sang out Alexandra's name.
‘My dear!’
Mrs Chamberlin said as Alexandra stepped down, ‘You look quite ravishing!
A living fashion plate!
Children, children!
You are entirely forbidden to touch Miss Abbott when she is dressed like this, entirely forbidden.
Robert!
Did you hear me?
Arthur!
Arthur!
There will be no jam on your bread today if you so much as lay a finger —’
‘I don't mind,’ Alexandra said, ‘really I don't.
They are only clothes, after all.’
She was towed into the house as before and taken straight to the nursery despite Mrs Chamberlin's protests that dressed like this they should take Miss Abbott to the drawing-room, the parlour at least, she insisted —;
‘I am quite comfortable here,’ Alexandra said.
‘Please don't trouble yourself.
I came to recover from calling at Langley Dene.
I think I behaved extremely badly.
I seemed possessed of some extraordinary mad courage.
I think — I think I said some shocking things.’
The children began to clamber on to her, calling for games, demanding she be a lion too this time, begging that they could all be mounted police, even the baby.
‘No,’ Alexandra said firmly, ‘not now.
I shall talk to your mother first.
Then I will play.
If you interrupt, I shan't play at all.’
They subsided at her feet.
Their mother said, ‘I don't know how you do it.
I can't, to be sure.
They have talked of nothing but Miss Abbott since you came last, nothing at all.
Now, my dear, I don't know about saying shocking things — and I must confess, although the Rector would be horrified to hear me say it, that I should be very tempted to say shocking things at Langley Dene, such very new money my dear, everything so dreadfully bright and shiny — as I was saying, I don't know about saying shocking things, but you are certainly doing them.
The village is buzzing — Arthur you must never, never put  objects up your nose, it is quite dreadfully dangerous — as I was saying, that gossip is loud today about you.
In fact, I can't remember when it was last so vociferous.
Rumour says, my dear, that you actually took tea with Mr Swinton!’
‘Yes,’ Alexandra said, ‘I did.’
Mrs Chamberlin spread her hands.
There now!
And I have spent all morning saying it cannot possibly be true, that you devote all your time to your aunt, that you have scarcely left the house in over a month and all the time you were doing just what you were rumoured to be doing!
Of course, old Meg is not to be relied upon at all , owing to her unfortunate fondness for the bottle, and when I heard that she was the source of the story I said that it couldn't possibly be the case, that she didn't know what she had seen, as usual —’
‘Old Meg?’
Alexandra said, puzzled.
The baby had been endeavouring with grim determination to haul himself from the floor on to Alexandra's knee, gripping handfuls of her skirts to assist himself and heaving with astonishing strength.
Alexandra now lifted him on to her lap, where he immediately settled, plugged his thumb into his mouth and gazed pityingly down at his brothers and sister.
‘My dear, do put him down.
You mustn't let yourself be exploited though he is a dear, aren't you, Jack?
Mother's own one.
My dear, Meg works as a cleaning woman for Mr Swinton.
I think he allows her considerable freedom over her — her weakness, you know, and so she is quite content to work for him whatever the village may say of him, and they do, to be sure, say some very foolish things.
At least, I am sure they are foolish.
It seems that Meg was washing up in the pantry yesterday when Mr Swinton came in from the shore as is his custom in the afternoons, and you were with him!
And then he gave orders to Punch for tea to be prepared and they had a terrible time finding any china that wasn't cracked or broken and then she went on working in the pantry as quiet as  a mouse and she could hear you both talking as clear as clear.
And then of course, when she came into the village to buy the few things they need — it is astonishing how modest Mr Swinton's needs seem to be, she hardly buys any comforts at all but I gather his man is an excellent gardener and they keep a pig for bacon —’
Alexandra said a little sharply, ‘And I suppose she also told you everything we talked about?’
Mrs Chamberlin coloured.
‘My dear, I never meant to offend you.
It's simply my tongue.
Of course, she didn't.
She said — she said she did not understand a word you said, either of you.’
Alexandra said, ‘He is the most interesting person I ever met in my life.’
A voice from the doorway, a tired, kind voice, said, ‘I am so glad to hear it.
It is what I have always felt.’
‘My dear!’
Mrs Chamberlin said.
She sprang up and all the children rushed towards their father save the baby, who was not, even for that prize, going to chance losing his throne.
‘Miss Abbott,’ the Rector said, advancing into the room, his legs severely hampered by the clinging children, ‘you will think me abominably lax not to have called upon you since your arrival.
I feel most conscious of the lack myself.
But the truth is, we have all been unwell, I'm sure my wife will have told you, and there is so much sickness in the village —’
He looked so tired, his thin face drawn below tufts of reddish hair, that Alexandra smiled at him warmly.
‘Please don't think of it, Mr Chamberlin.
I feel just as guilty because I have been here five Sundays and not come to church on any of them.
Aunt Emily likes me to read morning prayers to her, but I should have come all the same.’
He seated himself beside her, seemingly unaware that a rag doll and two lead soldiers had occupied the chair before he reached it.
Helen let out a wail and plunged for her doll.
Apart from a look of mild surprise, the Rector  seemed unaware of the toy being pulled roughly from under him.
‘I am so glad, so very glad, that you have spoken to Mr Swinton.
I feel him to be a lost soul, a good one, an excellent one, but a lost and unhappy one.
Of course, so few are aware of his background and he being, shall we say, a little unorthodox in his dealings with people, never seems to think of it or to realize that in some circles it might be of — of help to him.
His father, Miss Abbott, was a Sir Thomas Swinton, of an exceedingly ancient family who have lived at Swinton — the Somerset Swinton, you know, spelled as Swynetoun in the Domesday Book where the manor is described in detail — since before the Conquest.
Mr Swinton is Sir Thomas’ third son and he was unable to persuade his father that art in any way constituted a life's work.
Sir Thomas, you see, was so very much a local philanthropist, a local administrator, indeed he was Lord Lieutenant I believe, some time in the ‘seventies.
I understand there was some kind of rift and Mr Swinton is not recognized by his brothers, the eldest of whom has now assumed the baronetcy.
So you see, Miss Abbott, though he might never, on account of his birth, want for money, he lacks sadly the human love that lucre can in no way replace.
It is really wonderful to think that someone, a young person like yourself —’
‘Forgive me,’ Alexandra said, feeling a recurring surge of the courage that had invaded her at Langley Dene, ‘but I think — with respect, I think that everyone is making too much of my meeting Mr Swinton.
I trespassed on his land and he was most kind about it and, as I said to Mrs Chamberlin, he is extremely interesting to talk to.
That is all.’
The Rector blinked at her.
She wondered if she had gone too far, so she turned to Mrs Chamberlin and said with real enthusiasm, ‘Imagine!
Aunt Emily has no objection at all to a few hens!
Isn't she good?
They are to come from Grove Farm, just as you recommended, 12 Rhode Islands and 6 pullets.
They are to be delivered on Friday.’
Mrs Chamberlin smiled with real warmth.
‘My dear!
I am delighted.
They will give you such pleasure and satisfaction.
I cannot think why Mrs Talbot never chose to have any herself, there is really something special about a poultry yard.’
Alexandra disengaged Jack with difficulty and rose to her feet.
‘Play!
Play!’ the children clamoured.
She looked down at them.
‘I did say I'd play.
I know I did, but I think not today, not dressed like this.
I'll come tomorrow and we will play at Indian princes and elephants —’
‘And lions and tigers!
And mounted police!’
‘All of them,’ she promised, ‘Every one.’
Outside on the drive Murphy was waiting, the carriage door open.
‘Pemberton Park, Miss Alexandra?’ he said doggedly.
‘The Manor House?’
‘No, thank you,’ she said.
‘Neither of them.
Just home.’
Once the carriage was in motion, she closed her eyes, tired now and a little dispirited.
How odd people were, how unpredictable and curious, how difficult it was to know how to behave so that one pleased oneself and society as well.
It had been a confusing afternoon as well as a satisfying one, but one thing was clear, quite clear.
She could not, evidently, repeat her chance and happy encounter with Michael Swinton.
CHAPTER EIGHT
The day the hens came, squawking faintly in a crate from Grove Farm, Aunt Emily received a note from Mrs Langley.
‘Listen, my dear,’ she said to Alexandra, summoned  flushed and impatient from the orchard where she had been settling her new charges in and attempting, as tactfully as possible, to exclude Murphy from the process, ‘Mrs Langley says George is heartened beyond anything by your visit.
He was so depressed, poor boy, at falling in the first place — all Langleys ride as if they were born to it — and then at not being able to return to Cambridge for the last few weeks of term, and his aunt was quite at her wit's end to know what to do with him.
And then you called and he enjoyed your visit vastly and Mrs Langley says that while he is laid up, with the girls hunting two days a week, would you be sure to go and see him —’
‘Please, aunt —’ Alexandra said desperately, twisting her hands together.
If she stayed indoors much longer, Murphy would have taken over her tasks and have filled the old beer crates they were to use as laying boxes with straw, and be collecting the scraps from the kitchen, that Dora had reluctantly promised to keep for her.
She knew he would.
He was stiff with disapproval at the notion of her carrying buckets of steaming hen mash about the place like any farmer's daughter in the first place and any chance to cram her back into what he considered her proper place as a lady, he would take.
‘Dear Aunt Emily, please may I go?
Of course I'll call to see George Langley, anything, only please —’
‘I am delighted for you, Alexandra.
It is all turning out just as it should.
The Langley girls hunt on Tuesdays and Thursdays and Mrs Langley will expect you then, and to stay a little longer than usual.
Perhaps George will teach you chess.
You ought to play chess —’
The faint but unmistakable sound of an outraged hen came through the closed drawing-room windows.
‘Anything, aunt!’
Alexandra gasped.
‘Of course, Tuesdays, Thursdays, anything, I promise, of course —’ and fled.
In the orchard, Murphy was standing beside the trough Alexandra had appropriated for the hens' use.
In his hand was a bucket, the very bucket she had chosen in which  to cook up scraps.
Around his feet the red-brown hens surged in anticipatory ecstasy while the smaller, paler pullets scrambled frantically round the edges of the group, certain they would be the losers.
‘Murphy!’
Alexandra said sternly from the gate.
He started guiltily.
‘I told you, Murphy, that although I am immensely grateful to you for helping me to repair the shed to make a hen house and for finding me the things I need, these are my hens and I shall look after them.
You are not to concern yourself with them at all.’
She marched forward and took the bucket from him.
‘Tisn't proper, Miss Alexandra.
Hens is dirty things, that bucket's 'eavy.
Tisn't right you should touch them things.’
Alexandra put her free hand under the end of the bucket and tipped the contents into the trough.
The hens clambered in, cackling with delight and greed.
She looked at them for a moment with pleasure and then set the bucket down and turned to Murphy.
‘Listen to me, Murphy.
I know what's bothering you.
You don't want me in the harness room, do you.
You don't want anyone prying into your private domain and observing quite why there were so many conveniently empty beer crates for us to use.
Well, I will tell you now, Murphy, that as long as you continue to do properly the job for which you are paid I don't care how much you drink nor shall I tell anyone about it, not anyone.
I shan't inspect the harness, I shan't poke around the stables.
All I will do is to come in after breakfast every day and put my bucket on the harness room boiler to cook up, and an hour later I will take it away.
I will do it even when it snows and when it rains.
I won't interfere with you and you, Murphy, won't interfere with me.
Is that clear?’
Murphy, whose face had gone through a perfect pantomime of reactions during her speech, now nodded silently, his complexion purple.
‘Then you may go.’
He made a move to pick up the bucket but saw Alexandra's glance in time and withdrew his hand unhappily.
He went out of the orchard most uneasily, turning every so often to look at her as she contemplated her hens.
Then he shut the gate and ambled off to the house, shaking his head in perplexity, to complain to a sympathetic Dora in the kitchen.
‘Now,’ Alexandra said to the hens when he had gone, ‘come with me and I will show you where you will sleep.’
The following Tuesday, Murphy brought the carriage to the door with his usual punctuality.
Alexandra came down the steps in her new green clothes, under which she had managed to put her old comfortable corset when Lyddy had left the room to polish her boots, wearing a smile that was partly triumph at her illicit comfort and partly the satisfaction of having taken five hens' and four pullets' eggs to Dora in a little rush basket that very morning.
Dora, kind-hearted even if disapproving, had promised to make a soufflé for dinner, which Alexandra had assured Aunt Emily would be superior to any she had ever tasted before.
When the carriage stopped at Langley Dene, the butler seemed more deferential as he opened the door and Mrs Langley, instead of merely rising from her chair, came half way across the drawing-room to welcome Alexandra.
George was on his sofa in the window as before, and beside him was a table littered with books and cards and fruit and bottles.
He said, ‘It's seemed like a year, waiting for you to come again.
I made Aunt Emily write the moment you had gone.
I was wondering how on earth I should endure these hunting days, especially when they all came back and crowed over me about the jolly time they'd had, and then I thought, by jove, there's Alexandra Abbott and she doesn't hunt and she made me laugh more than anyone has for years.
So I exercised an invalid's moral pressure, you see, and here you are!’
Mrs Langley, who had stood over them while he spoke, forbidding in burgundy taffeta and garnets, said she was sure they could amuse each other very well without her.
‘I shall be at my desk, George,’ she said levelly to her nephew, ‘so I shall not be far away.’
When she had rustled off, Alexandra said with genuine simplicity, ‘Why does it matter where she is?
What might you do?’
George's colour rose hotly.
‘I say, Miss Abbott, you certainly go to the heart of things —’
‘Won t you call me Alexandra?’
‘I should like to above anything.
What a sport you are.
It's an awfully jolly name, you know.
I suppose you were named for the Queen.’
‘No,’ she said flatly, ‘after my grandfather.
He was wonderfully handsome, incredibly dashing, astoundingly brave and entirely fascinating.’
George Langley said, ‘Why do you say it like that?
In that — that dead sort of voice?
My grandfather —’ he glanced at the impressive dark red back at the far end of the drawing-room and lowered his voice, ‘My grandfather was a fat, red manufacturer of mill machinery with a strong Lancashire accent.
It must be splendid to have a grandfather like yours.’
‘It isn't,’ Alexandra said.
He leaned forward.
‘Why?’
She shrugged.
‘It doesn't matter.
Aunt Emily said you should teach me to play chess.’
I say, I'd love to.
Then I might have a chance of winning, at least for a week or two.
Don't frown, Alexandra, it makes me think you didn't want to come.’
She smiled at once.
‘Oh, I did!
I wasn't — I wasn't at all sure your aunt would want me here again, but of course I wanted to come.
It must be so frustrating to be laid up like that.’
George leaned forward again so that his bright, good-looking face was only inches from hers.
‘Between you and me, Alexandra, Aunt was much impressed by your performance last time.
She made a lot of conventional noises, of course; she had to because you can't have Rose and Grace getting any sillier than they are already and they might have taken it into their heads to copy you, but I could see she thought you had real spirit.
You do, too.
How are the hens?’
‘Nine eggs today,’ Alexandra said proudly.
‘Farmer Dawes said it might take them a few days to settle down but they were laying on the second day.’
He laughed.
‘Splendid!
And who won, the servants or yourself?’
‘I did.’
‘I thought you would.
You are just about a match for anyone, aren't you?’
‘I shan't be at chess.’
‘I'm relying on that.
You have to let invalids win, you know, otherwise they have relapses.’
She found the chess-board under a pile of books and manoeuvred it out.
‘You aren't a real invalid.’
‘I'm going to be from now on,’ he said, ‘now that I've made you come.
If you keep coming, I shall be an invalid for weeks and weeks.
We can have an infinite chess game which will go on for months.
Chess is like that.’
She looked about her.
‘Where are the men?’
‘Under there.’
There was a wooden box under his table.
She picked it up and set it on her knee, then began taking out the yellow and black wooden pieces and setting them on the board.
George watched her in silence for a while and then he said in a low voice, ‘I say did I offend you just now?
I'd do anything rather than offend you, you know.
It was when — when we were talking of grandfathers.
Did I put my foot in it?
I'd hate to do  that, so tell me where I blundered and I'll know not to do it again.’
Alexandra put down a black and a yellow bishop side by side on matching squares.
‘It wasn't anything you said, I promise you.
I can't tell you why I spoke like that, I — I don't find it easy to talk about I'm afraid.
But it was nothing to do with you and you mustn't reproach yourself.
Now then, how do I set up the board?
The pawns all go in front of the others, don't they, in a line?’
‘Yes,’ he said.
He looked at her keenly.
‘You will come on Thursday, won't you?’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘of course I will,’and smiled at him.
She went straight home from Langley Dene although her aunt had instructed her to call on Mrs Burrows.
She said, ‘Home directly please,’ to Murphy and this time he did not sigh or look pained at all, but simply said, ‘Very good, Miss Alexandra,’and obeyed.
The house was very quiet when she reached it.
Janet, tiptoeing out into the hall when Penman had opened the door, said that Aunt Emily was resting and would come down at tea-time.
Alexandra nodded and went quietly up the stairs and down the landing, past the bowls of pot-pourri and prints of wild flowers framed in black and gold, to her own room.
Lyddy was there at once.
Alexandra took the long pins out of her hat and laid them in the red glass tray on her dressing-table.
‘I shall get into something comfortable,’ she said, ‘and then I shan't want anything for the whole afternoon.’
‘I'll make up the fire, Miss, and bring up some more coals —’
‘No thank you, Lyddy.
The room is like an oven already.
I don't want a single thing but solitude.’
When Lyddy had gone, Alexandra went to one of her huge wardrobes and from beneath a pile of linen drew out the little morocco volume Aunt Emily had  given her the evening of her arrival.
The covers were very worn, as if it had been travelled about a good deal, and on the fly leaf was written ‘Journal 1841’ and then, in a different coloured ink, ‘And 1842’and then, below that, carefully, ‘Emily Brent’.
Charlotte had been Charlotte Brent, Alexandra's mother had Brent somewhere in her name, even she, Alexandra was a little bit Brent, somewhere, some part of her.
Taking the book to the chair by the fire, Alexandra sat down with it in her hand.
Then she eased off her shoes, put her stockinged feet on the fender and began to read.
She supposed she must have risen at some point to light a candle on the mantlepiece.
She couldn't recall stirring but when she came to the end of the journal and looked up, bemused and far away, not recognizing her surroundings for a while, the room was faintly glowing with fire and candlelight and the sky beyond the windows was inky blue.
She sat quite still, the little book in her lap and gazed up at the pale candle flame, hardly seeing it, so busy was her inward eye upon the scenes that had held her in thrall for two hours or more.
as if sensing she had finished, Lyddy came softly in and began to light lamps and draw the curtains, gently pulling Alexandra back to reality.
‘Mrs Talbot wants you downstairs, Miss.
She's ordered tea late for you.
There's a gentleman come.
You're to go down as soon as you can, Miss.’
Alexandra nodded, still silent.
Lyddy knelt and put on the shoes she had kicked aside and then brought a hairbrush.
Alexandra moved her head away.
‘No — no, don't Lyddy.
I am perfectly tidy —’
‘There's a gentleman come, Miss.’
‘I am tidy enough for him, too.’
Alexandra said, and drifted from the room, the journal still in her hand.
She went along the landing and down the staircase, still in a waking dream, crossing the hall and seeing Penman there, waiting to open the drawing-room door for her, as if it was someone she was watching perform, not herself but another being altogether.
The drawing-room seemed very hot and bright.
She dimly saw Aunt Emily by the fire and the silver tea service winked on a table beside her, and there, in front of the fire, standing there as comfortably as if it were his own fire, she saw with no surprise at all, that it was Michael Swinton.
Aunt Emily and Michael Swinton spoke to her together and then laughed and she saw that he looked quite different, much younger, that his hair and beard had been trimmed, that his expression was full of vitality.
He said, What have you been doing all this time?
Silently she held out the journal.
‘I thought as much,’ Aunt Emily said.
‘I knew you would read it sooner or later.
Show Mr Swinton.’
Obediently she put it into his outstretched hand.
He was smiling and his eyes were very blue.
‘Well, my dear?’
Aunt Emily said, ‘What did you think?’
Alexandra sat down.
‘Just as you thought I should.
That she was really fascinating, really, truly fascinating — and lovable as well.
I couldn't see how she could be lovable.
But now I do.’
Michael Swinton said, the book open in his hands, ‘And did the journal end there?
Christmas in Bombay in 1842?’
‘Yes.
I never wrote another word.
There was Richard, you see.’
He put the journal on Alexandra's lap and went to sit down in the chair beside hers.
‘Well, Miss Abbott, is it all a great relief to you?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
Aunt Emily said, ‘She is quite like my sister, you know, Mr Swinton.
She wouldn't hear of it to begin with, but I see more evidence of it every day.
Come and pour out for us, my dear.
Is it not rather a triumph actually to  have Mr Swinton here?’
I thought you had given up drawing-rooms entirely.’
‘I have,’ he said.
He took up his cup from Alexandra and smiled at her again.
‘Miss Abbott will tell you that I don't even possess one of my own to entertain her in.’
‘I don't mind,’ Alexandra said, ‘I like kitchens.
I would spend more time in Aunt Emily's except that Dora doesn't like it.
But I have made her promise to teach me to cook a little even though at first she said she wouldn't think of it.’
Aunt Emily said, looking into the fire, ‘You see, Mr Swinton?
My sister never gave twopence for convention either.’
‘Why have you come?’
Alexandra said suddenly, standing before him with a plate of wafer thin bread and butter that he had already refused.
‘How sensible you are, Miss Abbott.
When you want to know the answer to something, you ask outright.
I have come to thank you.
Nothing more, nor less.’
She sat down, balancing the plate of bread and butter on her knee.
‘Why?’
‘Alexandra, really,’ Aunt Emily remonstrated.
‘My dear, please —’
‘I enjoy it, Mrs Talbot.
She is the least self-conscious creature I have ever met.
Miss Abbott, when you came to my house the other day and wandered round my studio and let me see something of your thoughts, it was as if a gale had blown through all the dust and cobwebs, all the mouldering old habits that were growing up round me like ivy, and when you had gone, I tore that canvas off the easel and smashed it —’
‘Oh!’
Alexandra exclaimed, shocked.
‘Wickedly wasteful, I know, but I smashed it, and set up a new one and I have painted upon that new one the first thing that has given me real pleasure for years, oh, years and years.
It is magnificent for me to feel that way again.
So I have come to thank you.’
‘You certainly look quite different,’ Alexandra said, catching his mood and smiling.
‘I've had a haircut,’ he said, teasing her.
‘At least, Punch did to me what he does to the horses in the spring.
I'm no judge of whether it suits either of us.’
Alexandra looked at him.
‘It does,’ she said decidedly.
He returned her look with a glance so suddenly intent that she felt a flash of absurd panic, and rose hurriedly to busy herself with the teapot.
Behind her back he said, ‘Punch saw you the other day, going out in a carriage.
He was exercising a horse.
I let him keep young ones for sentimental reasons since I don't need them for practical purposes.
He said you looked like royalty.’
Alexandra's face was fiery.
Aunt Emily said, ‘She is making a very satisfactory silk purse, Mr Swinton,’ and they both laughed.
‘And the farming plans?’
Michael Swinton asked, forcing Alexandra to turn back to him.
‘A dozen hens,’ she said and her voice was full of pleasure, ‘and six pullets.’
‘Excellent!’ he said.
‘Mrs Talbot, when will you allow her to keep a cow?’
‘A cow!’
‘Yes!’
Alexandra said.
‘Oh yes!
A cow —’
Aunt Emily closed her eyes.
‘It is hardly fair to me to encourage her, Mr Swinton.
She insists on looking after the hens herself.
Imagine, with a cow —’
‘A rustic bonnet, perhaps,’ he suggested, ‘and a yoke with two pails.
And a little three-legged milking stool.’
Alexandra ignored the teasing.
‘I should like that.’
‘So should I. I will come and paint you while you do it.
It will be a rural idyll.
The Academy will love it.’
He put his cup down and rose to his feet.
‘Mrs Talbot, that was the most delightful hour.’
‘You will come again, Mr Swinton?’
He hesitated for only a moment, then glanced briefly at Alexandra and said, ‘I should be happy to.’
‘My husband would have been so pleased.
He would have liked to know that you still came to see me.
Wednesdays, you know, Wednesdays are my afternoons.’
He bent and kissed Aunt Emily's hand.
Then he turned and said simply to Alexandra, ‘My dear, thank you,’ and was gone.
CHAPTER NINE
Until mid-March Alexandra faithfully visited George Langley on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Even when his ankle was much improved, the fracture knitting itself together most satisfactorily, she still went and would find him hobbling around the conservatory which was raw and bright, being still too new for the vines and jasmines to have masked its bare white ribs.
They played chess and bezique and silly paper games, Alexandra attempted sketches of him which convulsed him with laughter and read comic poems to him.
She tried reading him Wordsworth and Tennyson and Browning but he would sigh and interrupt her when she did, so she went back to the lighter Kipling poems and he would lie and grin happily to himself and make her read his favourite passages over and over again.
Twice a week, with equal fidelity, she went to the Rectory, partly for poultry conversations with Mrs Chamberlin, and partly to play Mowgli with the children whom she had introduced to the Jungle Books with wild success.
When she arrived they would clamber in a body on top of the nursery table and standing there, hands on hearts, would chant to her —;
‘For the strength of the Pack is the Wolf, and the strength of the Wolf is the Pack.
When thy whiskers are grown,
Remember the Wolf is a hunter — go forth,
And get food of thy own!’
And then they would spring down with a howl and rush to embrace her.
On Wednesdays, to please Aunt Emily, she stayed at home to receive callers.
It was tedious, but no longer alarming, and as she contrived most mornings to slip down to the shore for gulps of sea air, though she was careful now never to go beyond the rocks around the headland, she did not chafe at the confinement as once she had.
Mornings had indeed developed into quite a happy routine of little errands and duties for Aunt Emily, the hens and the sea; and if she felt now, as quite often she did, an incomprehensible longing for something wilder and freer and more satisfying than this domestic round, she put it down to needing to be in the open air more and gave herself, next morning, a longer spell on the smooth buff sands of the bay.
When she wrote home, as she now did regularly, she wrote believing herself to be very contented.
The week before Easter, a week in which the air suddenly lost its sharpness and became soft and spring-like, Harry Burrows and Piers Langley arrived home from university.
Langley Dene erupted into chatter and activity and the Manor House, around which Mr and Mrs Burrows had moved in stately solitude all term, echoed with shouts and thundering feet.
Harry brought friends with him, the family carriage was despatched to Truro to meet a London train bringing Mrs Burrows' oldest friend, a widow with a daughter who was reputed to be an awfully jolly girl, and a motor car rolled up to Langley Dene with more cousins, swathed in veils and goggles and long motoring coats, come to celebrate Easter.
Alexandra stopped visiting George.
‘But why, my dear?
Mrs Langley says she wishes you would go.
You have been so good to George and you deserve a little reward now that all the young people have come.
She came yesterday afternoon, even though she knew it wasn't my afternoon, hoping to find you, but of course you had gone to the Rectory, and begged me to persuade you to go to Langley Dene on Saturday.
They have immense plans for you all, and then you shall dine there.
You may have the carriage all day and take Lyddy with you so that there will be no difficulty about dressing —’
Alexandra, sorting tapestry wools, looked up from the muddled skein in her hand.
‘Dear Aunt Emily.
I really don't want to go.
Really.
I have nothing in common with those people, I should be bored and cross.’
‘But it would be so much better for you.
I don't like to think of you spending so many afternoons playing panthers and bears with those Chamberlin children.
It's very kind of you but — but so odd.
I had so hoped, when you started to visit George Langley —’
‘I know exactly what you hoped,’ Alexandra said, ‘and I like him on his own.
I expect I should like all of them on their own.
But not together.’
Aunt Emily sighed but said no more.
The following day, two unexpected allies of Aunt Emily came in the shape of Harry Burrows and George Langley.
Harry had driven his friend over and was in boisterous good spirits at having been the first person to be allowed to take George away from the house.
‘By jove, Miss Abbott, it's simply topping to see you!
You look awfully — awfully — doesn't she, George?
I say, George, you're a lucky dog to have — to have —.
D'you know what we've come for, Miss Abbott?
Sh, George, don't spill the beans.
Quite the wounded hero, isn't he, Miss Abbott?
I say, what a jolly house this is.
Do you know, I've never been inside before, simply splendid to be near the sea —’
‘Why don't you come near me now?’
George demanded, lowering himself carefully into a chair by Alexandra.
She said frankly, ‘I don't care for crowds.’
‘Pooh, nonsense, Miss Abbott,’ Harry Burrows exclaimed, striding about the drawing-room and picking up Aunt Emily's treasured objects.
‘Crowds are the jolliest thing, you know.
You'll find that out, won't she, George?
Come on, George, you tell her why we have come.’
George said, ‘We are going to put on a play, Alexandra.
There's the perfect place at the Manor House where the front and back drawing-rooms meet with curtains.
We're going to do Maria and Murder in the Red Barn.
It's the funniest thing you ever heard of.
I've put in to be a corpse already and then I can laugh my head off on the floor all the way through —’
‘We want you to take part, Miss Abbott.
I say, may I call you Alexandra too?
How jolly sporting of you.
We're all agreed, Rose and Grace say they think you'll be simply topping and I've some awfully jolly people staying who are just waiting for me to bring you back with us so that we can decide on the cast and get started.
By Jove, it's going to be the best fun in the world!
Get your hat, Miss — Alexandra, and let's be going!’
Alexandra said, ‘You will both think me the poorest — sport, but I'm going to refuse.’
‘No!’ they shouted.
‘You can't,’ George said earnestly.
‘You must come.
We need you.
I — it won't be half the fun without you.’
Harry Burrows looked thoroughly bewildered.
He made an effort to understand her, wrinkling his honest brow.
‘Is — is it because you think you should stay with your aunt?
Mother says you are simply splendid —’
‘No,’ Alexandra said.
‘It isn't that.
Aunt Emily would love me to go.
I just can't —’
The door opened and Penman said in a voice that was not entirely neutral, ‘Mr Swinton, Miss Alexandra.’
Both young men froze.
In the moment before she rose to greet Michael Swinton Alexandra noticed their fascinated  and apprehensive expressions with amusement, and saw Harry dart one swift glance at his friend.
Michael Swinton looked easily at both of them and said to Alexandra, ‘My dear, you really are holding court.’
She introduced them all.
Harry and George bowed silently, their gazes fixed at some point rigidly below Michael Swinton's chin.
‘You have come in the nick of time,’ Alexandra told him.
‘I was being persuaded to act in some amateur theatricals.’
‘Against your will?’
‘Was she?’ he said to Harry Burrows.
Harry licked his lips.
‘Sir.
We — we asked her, sir, because we thought it would be — be awfully jolly, sir, to have her with us.’
‘Just a bit of fun, you see,’ George said, his drawl emphasized by unease.
‘Perhaps you would help to persuade her for us.’
Michael Swinton looked at Alexandra, then chose a chair and settled himself comfortably in it.
He was wearing top boots and had evidently ridden over, because they were splashed with mud.
‘I can't do that, I'm afraid.’
‘Why not?’
Michael avoided the questioning look in Alexandra's eyes and turned to answer Harry.
‘Because, Mr Burrows, she is promised to me.
Miss Abbott is sitting for me, for a portrait.
It has to be finished this month in order to be considered for the Academy's Summer Exhibition.
As it is, it is late and the Hanging Committee have very kindly allowed me a few weeks’ grace.
So you see, Miss Abbott has no time.
I have commandeered it all.’
George Langley said in a low voice to Alexandra, ‘You said nothing of this.’
She said to her lap, ‘I — I had not quite got round to it —’
George struggled to his feet.
‘But you'll come and see us every so often, all the same, won't you.
You can't stop, just because I'm up and about now.
I'm not allowed to ride yet, you know, I'm still pretty tied to the house.’
‘Of course I will come,’ she said warmly.
He smiled at her in undisguised relief.
‘Aunt says she hopes you will dine with us soon.’
Harry Burrows shot an aggressive look at Michael Swinton.
‘So does Mother.
She sent an especial message to you.
When they had gone, Michael Swinton let a small silence fall and then he said, ‘We had better make the lie a truth, I think.’
‘Why — why did you do it?’
‘You needed to be rescued, didn't you?
And I want to paint you.
It seemed obvious.’
She smiled at him.
The strange, wild feeling that usually drove her down to the sea was beginning to thump in her bosom.
‘I certainly didn't want to take part in the play and I am not at all at ease with those — those people.
But — to be painted!
Oh!’ she said in despair, ‘I'm blushing, I can feel it.
I suppose it's the thought of being painted, of you wanting to, of you looking at me —’
‘I shall,’ he said.
‘Very intently.
Beginning tomorrow.’
‘Tomorrow!’
‘In the morning.
The light is best then.
Don't look so horrified.
Bring a maid if you want a chaperone.’
‘Yes — no — I — the village, you see, the village —’
‘Will talk.
Of course it will.
Do you really mind?’
She thought a moment.
‘No,’ she admitted and then added shyly, ‘I — I should like to be painted.’
He looked at her keenly and then stood up.
‘Good.
I must go now.
Aren't you going to ask me what you should wear?’
He smiled.
‘Most women do.
In fact, I think all the women I ever painted did.
It was the first question usually.’
She stood up too.
‘Well, then?’
‘Wear Mrs McPhee,’ he said, ‘and something cream under it, nothing formal.
Don't do your hair too elaborately.
If you do, I shall simply stand you out in the wind for a while.’
He moved towards the door and put his hand on the handle.
‘Give my regards to your aunt.
Tell her I was sorry not to see her.
And I will see you tomorrow.’
When he had gone, she stood for a long time in front of the looking-glass that hung over the fire, her hands pressed to her cheeks, her face quite alive with excitement.
The excitement seemed to spread all down her, in fiery threads, right down to her fingers and toes.
Only later, much later, when Penman knocked and asked if she would like tea, did it strike her that she had no idea why Michael Swinton had really called.
It did not occur to her, going upstairs in happy anticipation, that Aunt Emily would do anything other than smile upon the plan.
It seemed, after all, a perfectly proper arrangement and one that was, in a way, almost professional.
But Aunt Emily was shocked.
‘My dear child, there is no question of it.
You cannot possibly go.
He may be — indeed is, as I am sure you have gathered — a gentleman, but his being a painter makes him a little— unconventional, shall we say, and it would be entirely improper for you to go to Trelorne alone —’
‘But I shan't!
I shall have Lyddy!
And I have had tea there and no harm came to me!’
‘That was an accident,’ Aunt Emily said firmly, ‘after you had put yourself considerably in the wrong by trespassing.’
Alexandra fell on her knees by the bed.
‘Aunt Emily, please, oh please!
I am simply going to sit in his studio for perhaps three hours for the mornings of the next few weeks and Murphy shall take me and bring me back and Lyddy shall sit close by me and I will take Janet too if you would allow me —’
Aunt Emily said suddenly, ‘How — how did he say he wished to paint you?’
‘Oh, so comfortably Aunt Emily!
You can have no objection to that.
He wants me to look very ordinary, very much as I did the day I trespassed.
I am to go in that old brown coat and skirt I brought from Bewick —’
If Aunt Emily had looked shocked before her eyes now dilated in horror.
‘You cannot be serious!
That dreadful, badly cut shabby old coat and skirt!
I am dumbfounded you should even think of such a thing with that lovely new cream gown hanging in your wardrobe and I should have been so happy to lend you my pearls.
Have you listened to nothing I have said all these weeks?
Have you profited by no example?’
Alexandra cried, ‘Oh Aunt Emily —’ but her great aunt lay back on her pillows with finality, holding up a hand and closing her eyes.
‘Go away, Alexandra.
At once.
The whole affair is out of the question.
You have exhausted me.
Go away and send Janet to me at once.’
Alone in her room, banging the knob of the blind cord against the glass in the window in frustration, Alexandra glared out into the darkening world and raged.
She did not rage so much against Aunt Emily but more at herself for being so naive as to agree to and promote a plan that any less raw and unworldly creature than herself would have seen was hardly possible.
She had a violent impulse to summon Murphy and go at once to Trelorne and find Michael Swinton, and so strong was this inclination and the need to explain to him that she was personally so very  Lyddy before she realized that such an action was only a perfect sequel in childish impetuosity to her former one of agreeing to be painted in the first place.
‘I — I want — paper and a pen, Lyddy.’
‘But they'm here, Miss Alexandra.
Right in your bureau, where they always are.’
There seemed no point in justifying her mistake still further, so she merely sat down in silence and allowed Lyddy to place paper and ink and a pen before her, just as if she had summoned her all the way upstairs for that very purpose.
She meant, after ten minutes' solemn consideration, to write that she was extremely sorry, and entirely responsible for the change of plan, but she could not now sit for him.
She intended to plead her own nervousness and her desire not to be destined for public exhibition and planned to finish by thanking him for the compliment of his request and wishing him well in finding a more practised model.
‘Dear Mr Swinton,’ she wrote
‘I am bitterly disappointed, for Aunt Emily says that it would not be at all proper for me to come to Trelorne and that I was very wrong to let you think that I might.
She also feels it would be highly unsuitable not to be painted in full evening dress.
I can think of no way round this dilemma except that you come in person and explain to her that it is an entirely business-like arrangement.
Yours Sincerely,
Alexandra Abbott’
When she had finished, she did not even read it through, but thrust it into an envelope, rang furiously for Lyddy and demanded that the letter be taken at once to Trelorne.
Then she sat at her bureau and put her  hands to her flaming cheeks and tried to think about the hens, the sea, the possibility of buying a pig, something, anything, rather than the likelihood of not being painted by Michael Swinton.
In the morning, Punch brought a letter from Trelorne, whose contents Aunt Emily did not reveal, but Alexandra found her in the drawing-room after luncheon.
‘But Aunt Emily! it is Thursday, not Wednesday!
There is no need to leave your room —’
‘I am expecting a visitor, Alexandra.
I think I should like you to call on Mrs Chamberlin for me.
This is usually the time of year she asks for my subscription to the Church of England Orphans and I wonder if she has forgotten me.
She must be at least a week late.’
Dawdling down to the village on this spurious errand, Alexandra was consumed with impatient curiosity.
When she arrived at the Rectory she found that Mrs Chamberlin was out, the Rectory children had been taken for a walk by the nursemaid, the Rector had asked not to be disturbed for he had both a parish letter and acute indigestion to tackle that afternoon.
Alexandra wrote her message on one of her aunt's cards and retreated to the lane.
She walked slowly back to Bishopstow House, her eyes on the verge, her thoughts entirely preoccupied, so that when she found Michael Swinton on horseback in the gateway, motionless and watching her, she gave a genuine start of surprise.
‘Oh Mr Swinton!
I am so glad to see you!
I thought —; I mean, I supposed it was you Aunt Emily was waiting for, but she sent me out, she thinks I have been very silly over the whole affair —’
‘You have,’ he said smiling, ‘but impulsiveness has great charm and often great effect.’
She put her hand on his horse's neck.
‘Oh, did she, I mean, now you have spoken to her, will she let me come?’
He leaned down so that she saw his whole face was alight with a slightly satirical amusement.
‘Of course you will come.
I explained to her all about the Academy and my standing as a painter and the patience of the Hanging Committee and the uniqueness of you as a model.
She agreed at once.’
He straightened up.
‘I shall expect you in the morning.’
‘Mr Swinton, oh, I am so pleased, I mean to say, I —’
He touched his whip to his hat brim.
‘I expect you at ten.
Don't be late, Miss Abbott.’
The following morning, accompanied at Aunt Emily's command by a trembling Lyddy who was sure she was going to the very mouth of Hades, Alexandra was driven out to Trelorne, dressed very much as she had been when she trespassed along the shore.
The house looked grim and dreary in the faint damp rain and Lyddy shivered beside her.
Punch was waiting, small and silent, in his leather apron.
He took them through the cavernous littered kitchen, where an old woman in a grey shawl was mixing something in a basin on the table, and down the dark passage to the studio.
He paused there, waited a moment, his ear pressed to the panels, and then knocked.
‘Come!’
Punch opened the door and stood aside to let them pass, Lyddy pressing as close to Alexandra as she dared.
At the far end of the studio, near the easel, on a sort of crude platform, an arrangement had been made of what appeared to be boxes under grey blankets.
Michael Swinton jerked his head towards them.
‘Rocks,’ he said briefly.
He was wearing riding boots again and breeches, and over whatever jacket he had he wore a full calico garment like a surplice, liberally smeared with paint.
‘Right,’ he said.
‘Jacket off, hat off, boots and stockings off —’
Alexandra and Lyddy gasped in unison.
‘Oh — but Mr Swinton, I can't — I — really I cannot —’
He did not look at her but said calmly, ‘Why not?
It seems to me a perfectly simple procedure.
And I see you even have a minion who will help you with the difficult task of unlacing your boots.’
Alexandra's cheeks were scarlet.
‘But — but I cannot have — have — bare feet in front of— of you.
I can't do it.
I mustn't.’
He looked up briefly from his palette, but he did not smile.
‘Don't be miss-ish, Miss Abbott.
If you were a professional model I should probably require you to take every stitch of clothing off, let alone your shoes and stockings, and, if you will remember, it is on the grounds of the business-like aspect of this arrangement that I have your aunt's sanction to paint you.
If you wish to be regarded as a proper model, you must behave like one.
Take off your boots this moment, before I lose my temper, and sit down over there.
Those are rocks and you are sitting on them gazing out to sea.
You are very fortunate that I don't make you actually sit in the real sea.
Come on, hurry up.’
In silence, Alexandra and Lyddy turned away and fumbled together in a dark corner.
After a while Alexandra turned round and walked with bare feet, her chin high, across the studio and mounted the dais.
‘How shall I sit?’
He smiled at last.
‘That's more like it.
What pretty feet you have.
I should expect you to, of course.
Now sit, quite naturally, just as you would, alone on a beach in order to dream and gaze at the sea.’
He paused and then said quietly, ‘Just as you were when I first saw you.’
She chose a rock facing the window, a low rock, and sat down on it, circling her bent knees with her arms and resting her chin on her knees.
She heard his step on the  floor, and then his hands warm on her own, moving them just a little, and then on her feet, pulling them further from under the brown wool folds of her skirt.
Then he stepped back and said, ‘Perfect.’
After a long while in which she heard nothing but the rasp of charcoal on canvas and the faint distant booming of the sea, he said, ‘Talk if you want to.
I may not answer and if I am doing your mouth I shall tell you so.’
‘I don't want to talk,’ she replied.
‘Oh Alexandra!’ he said, and his voice was full of laughter.
A little later, he said, ‘You really have lovely hands and feet.
The same fine boniness that your cheeks have.’
She wanted him to go on, but he didn't, so she simply sat and dreamed and let her mind go floating out into the grey April morning towards the gulls and the sky and the sea.
When he said, ‘Get up and stretch,’ she was quite startled, and when she struggled to her feet, surprised to find herself so stiff.
‘One more hour,’ he said.
‘That's enough for you.
And for me.
Are you cold?’
‘No,’ she said.
‘May I look?’
‘No.’
‘Not ever?’
‘When it's finished.
Even if it's a betrayal.’
‘A betrayal?’
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘a betrayal.
Now sit down again.’
She sat, simply and naturally as she had done before.
‘Good,’ he said.
‘Excellent.
I'm doing your clothes now, your sleeves and skirts.
Tell me about the hens.’
‘No,’ she said, ‘I don't want to talk.
I'm thinking.
At least,’ she added truthfully, ‘I almost am.’
He muttered something under his breath and she wanted to ask him to repeat it, but couldn't somehow, so silence fell again and lapped peacefully round them so that time seemed quite to vanish.
When at last he laid down his brush and palette and came across to help her up, she found that she resented his breaking the mood.
‘Tomorrow?’ she asked.
‘Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow.
It's the way I work best, never stopping.
It's the way I get the best results.’
She looked at the back of the easel.
‘Will — will it be good?’
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘It will.’
CHAPTER TEN
In the first week of May, a golden week full of sunshine and birdsong and bright new leaves, the painting was finished.
A fortnight later, when it was dry and varnished, Alexandra was allowed to see it.
She was so overcome by what she saw that she burst into tears.
Michael Swinton watched her in silence as he had watched her before, only proffering as he had done once before a handkerchief which he had plainly also used as a paint rag.
She saw it was herself, there on the canvas; in fact it was so much herself that she could not believe that she could be both people, one here on the studio floor and one sitting there clasping her knees, her eyes lost in faraway visions, her white feet on wet black rocks against which little waves were breaking in plumes of spray.
Her skin looked luminous, her hair was the colour of the pale amber beads Aunt Emily always wore because she said they helped her rheumatism.
‘I said it once before,’ Michael Swinton said, watching her, ‘and I will continue to say it.
Miss Abbott, how very satisfactory you are.’
She said sniffing, inhaling the oily smell of the paint from his handkerchief, ‘Do I look like that?
I mean, i know I do but really — really like that?’
‘I only painted what I saw,’ he answered and she had again that sudden, stupid stab of fear and pushed  his handkerchief at him saying that she must go, she was late.
He said only, ‘Punch and I will take it to Bodmin on Friday.
I don't have much doubt that they will hang it.
Do you like the notion of being in the Royal Academy?’
‘Is — is that where I will be?’
‘Yes.
Will you come up to London with me and see yourself?’
No — no,’ she replied hurriedly.
That is — I should love to, but Aunt Emily, I can't leave her.
And she has agreed to a cow at last, next week, I must —’
He cut in.
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘but I shall go all the same .
I shall escort the painting.
I've not been to London in twelve years.’
On the way home, she found that she wanted to cry again and could not think of a possible reason why she should.
There was a letter from George Langley, from Cambridge, waiting for her at Bishopstow but somehow it did not interest her, she could hardly be bothered to open it.
The next few months saw subtle but definite changes at Bishopstow.
Aunt Emily was not exactly ill, at least she had no definable complaint, but she rested a good deal, more and more, and every day seemed happier to let Alexandra take over the household decisions.
At first, it was simply the menus, then her sphere of influence extended to household ordering, the overseeing of repairs, the servants, the account books.
The cow came, a soft-eyed Jersey cow the colour of her own rich cream, and a pig, and outhouses were scrubbed out and whitewashed ready for use as a dairy and cheese-room.
The old cheese presses which had lain dusty in the stable loft were brought down with difficulty on account of their immense weight and set up on the flagged floor.
Alexandra bought a book on cheese-making and ignored Dora's protests that she had helped make  cheese at her mother's knee and knew all there was to know about the matter already.
She took a great interest in the kitchen garden too, and calculated with pleasure how many greengages and damsons they would have, how many cherries and pears and strawberries.
She spent a good deal of time in the kitchen and bullied Dora into showing her how to make bread and pastry; she would take cookery books up to her room and study the methods of jam making and preserving fruit and vegetables.
The little laundry maid who came in daily from the village was dismayed to find Miss Alexandra in the laundry room asking what clear starch was and demanding to be shown how to use a goffering iron.
The days were full now, very full.
She rose early and spent the morning with Aunt Emily or visiting the kitchen and garden and orchard and doing the household accounts and the correspondence she had taken over from her aunt.
In the afternoons she paid the calls she could not escape from, visited the Rectory regularly, or sat at home on Wednesdays devising domestic plans for the future in between visitors.
She sat with Aunt Emily again in the early evenings and read to her, staying with her most nights until she had slipped into sleep when she would tiptoe back to her own room and write home to Bewick or to George Langley in Cambridge.
It was only sometimes, in the warm dusks, that she felt this life was not perfect, not as full to her as it seemed.
She would stand at her window in the summer twilights and feel the tug inside her as if something were straining to get out, urging her on with the kind of excitement she longed for and shrank from all at once.
But that only happened sometimes and when it did she would take out her account book and force herself to concentrate on its columns till the dangerous exhilaration had gone.
Aunt Emily said, ‘Look, my dear.’
She was reading The Times with the aid of a magnifying  glass.
She hardly ever read it herself now, preferring Alexandra to read it to her, but some mornings, when she felt stronger, she would be propped up on extra pillows and given the paper and her glass.
Alexandra, sorting through the enormous bundle of charitable appeals that Aunt Emily kept bound up with blue tape, asked absently, ‘What is it?
Something interesting?’
‘Yes, my dear.
Very interesting.
Read it to me, do.’
Alexandra put the bundle of papers on the floor.
‘Where, Aunt Emily?
Which bit?’
There was no need to ask.
The centre headline said ‘The Royal Academy's Summer Exhibition,’ and below that, the smaller title, ‘A Triumphant Re-entry into the World of Art.’
Alexandra sat down abruptly in her chair.
‘There was a time,’ she read, ‘when the acclaim of both the public and his fellow artists was a common thing for Mr Michael Swinton.
For the last decade, such accolades have been heard more rarely since Mr Swinton chose a hermit's life in the West Country and no paintings of his have come before the Selection Committee at the Royal Academy since he left London.
This year, the phoenix has risen from its ashes, a phoenix in brighter plumage than he has ever worn before.
However much we may lament Mr Swinton's recent seclusion, we are forced to conclude that it has done him nothing but good.
‘A. in Reverie is by far the best painting to come from Mr Swinton's brush.
Who ‘A’ is, remains a mystery, but she is a creature of clearly inspirational beauty who has been captured with a fluidity of drawing and subtlety of palette that would be envied by the greatest masters of the French Impressionist School.
‘Mr Swinton is reticent about everything to do with the painting except to express his relief and delight at the perfect union of conception and execution.
He will find it difficult to escape once more to the fastnesses of Cornwall without a horde of people eager to commission  him clinging to his coat tails.
Were he to refuse them, as he has done for so long, he would do himself, as well as the public, a grave disservice.’
‘There, my dear,’ Aunt Emily said and glanced at the little drawing by her bed.
‘I knew it.’
Alexandra sat and stared at the paper in silence.
‘Are you not delighted, my dear?
Is that not immensely exciting?
What a triumph!’
Alexandra replied slowly, ‘I — I should like Mr Swinton to be admired once more, admired as he deserves.
That is, if he would like it too.’
‘Perhaps he won't come back to Trelorne,’ Aunt Emily said, ‘if he gets back his taste for painting duchesses and celebrated actresses.
They will be clamouring for him now, my dear, simply clamouring.’
Alexandra felt a sharp cold stone at the pit of her stomach.
She said in a small voice, ‘Perhaps they will.’
The next day brought her two letters, one from Cambridge, one from London.
George had seen the notice in The Times, and he was telling everyone he knew who ‘A’ was, he wrote, because he didn't see why she shouldn't have some of the credit and also because he was awfully proud to know her.
He would be back in the first week of July and at home all month until they went to Scotland for the opening of the grouse shooting season on the twelfth.
He hoped she would spare some time for him and he promised he would not ask her to act in anything.
Piers sent his love and was all for going up to London that minute to see the painting.
They would go in a day or two, he thought, and then he could collect his new guns from Holland and Holland on the same trip.
The second letter was from Michael Swinton.
It bore no address at the top and simply said.
‘My dear Alexandra’
You see, I told you it was good, but you knew it too, I think.
You look very lost, hung up there among Royalty and aldermen, and it makes me homesick to  look at you, so I don't, to often.
I am besieged with commissions, literally besieged.
I might even accept some of them.
My regards to your aunt.
Punch tells me Bishopstow House is become quite a smallholding.
Yours ever
M.S.’
For some reason, this letter so unnerved her that she thought she must rush down to the sea at once, and run the thudding in her head quite out of it.
But no, she told herself, there is no reason for that, and you have not seen Aunt Emily yet this morning.
Her room is where you should be, not rampaging on the sands like a hoyden.
So she put the letters in her desk with resolution and went up the stairs to see her aunt.
Towards the end of June, when sitting by Aunt Emily's bed and explaining to her that they grew far too many potatoes for their needs and it would be sensible to grow turnips and swedes instead which would serve as winter food for the animals, Aunt Emily suddenly put out a hand and said.
Don't my dear.
Don't bother.
I don't mind what you do.
You have taken so many burdens from me, you are so level-headed and sensible.
Don't feel you have to tell me.’
Alexandra took the small soft hand in hers and thought that it seemed smaller than ever, frailer, more insubstantial.
‘I didn't mean to trouble you, dear Aunt Emily.
Truly I didn't.
I thought you liked to know.’
‘I did, my dear, I did.
But I don't seem to now.
I seem very tired, all the time.
Peacefully tired, you know, as if I were floating.
So don't trouble to tell me.
Just do as you wish, do everything just as you wish —’
The house grew very quiet after that.
Anxious that nothing should disturb her aunt, Alexandra had the hens  moved to a small paddock the far side of the stables so that their greedy shouting for breakfast could not be heard in the house.
On a visit to Mrs Chamberlin she explained that she did not like to leave her aunt and would from then on come only once a week, and she put it about that for the moment, neither she nor her aunt would be at home on Wednesday afternoons.
Eventually, to the amazement of Murphy and the stable lad, she informed them that the livestock were all in their care until further notice and that the carriage horses could be put out to grass.
If she needed to go anywhere she would walk.
The days revolved around Aunt Emily, days of gentle routine in her room where the white blinds were lowered most of the day against the late June sunlight.
Such meals as she ate were brought to her on trays by Janet, meals that Alexandra and Dora would plan with minutest care in the kitchen.
Alexandra talked to her when she wanted it, read to her when she wished, and while she slept in the daytime, sat and did the household correspondence, knowing Aunt Emily liked her to be there when she woke.
‘I am just a little ship,’ Aunt Emily said, ‘drifting farther and farther out to sea.’
She turned her head to smile at Alexandra.
‘Richard is there, you know, just beyond the horizon.
And Charlotte, of course, and Alexander.
They are all waiting for me.
Charlotte and Alexander have been waiting for years.
So has Mamma —’
Alexandra, Lyddy and Janet took it in turns to sit up at night with her.
She grew a little confused as to which was day and which was night, and increasingly wanted Alexandra there, calling for her in her faint cracked voice, if she woke and found her customary chair empty.
She never noticed if Alexandra was fully dressed or had stumbled straight from sleep in her night clothes but would welcome her always with the sweetest of smiles and a gentle reproof for leaving her alone.
The rhythm of her life grew slower and slower, fewer  meals, longer sleeps, the periods of wakefulness hazy and dream-like.
She called Alexandra ‘Charlotte’ and spoke of far off things, but of Richard even more often, usually as if he were in the room with her.
The doctor, on his now daily visit, said simply to Alexandra, ‘A matter of time, my dear, a matter of time.’
On the first day of July, just before dawn, Alexandra was woken by a weeping Janet, a Janet whose normal self-control and impassiveness had broken down utterly.
Alexandra was out of bed and along the landing, hair flying, in seconds.
Even those seconds took too long.
As she sank by the bed, pressing her ear to Aunt Emily's heart beneath its layers of lace, Aunt Emily's little boat had already slipped quietly over the horizon.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
‘And so Miss Abbot,’ Mr Renfrew said, taking off his spectacles and folding them neatly, ‘that is the sum of things.’
Alexandra sat and gazed at him.
She had never met him before although, as he was her aunt's lawyer, she had written several letters to him in his offices in Bodmin.
After Aunt Emily's death, he had informed her that he wished to speak to her and had proposed that he journey to Bishopstow for the purpose.
He had come before luncheon, eaten everything put before him with great dedication, looked about him hopefully for the cigar the household did not possess, and then explained abruptly without any preliminaries to Alexandra that she was her aunt's sole heir.
‘House, outbuildings, 50 acres and £30,000.’
He had quite stunned Alexandra.
She could say nothing.
‘It was always left to you, you know.
Colonel and  Mrs Talbot drew up their wills after you were born.
I remember them going to your christening, up in the north somewhere —’
‘Scotland,’ Alexandra said faintly.
‘Ah.
That's it.
Scotland.
They went up to Scotland for your christening, 'eighty-three, it must have been no 'eighty-four, and when they came down south again, they came to my office and the wills were drawn up.’
He looked round the drawing-room, at the pictures and looking-glasses and ornaments shrouded in black, at Alexandra herself in the first mourning dress she had ever had.
‘Stay here, will you, Miss Abbott?
Comfortable house.’
‘I — I hardly know —’
‘£30,000 will bring in a very tidy income, you know.
Your aunt never wanted for anything.’
‘I wish I'd come years ago!’
Alexandra said passionately.
‘Why didn't she send for me years ago?
I could have looked after her and been with her so much longer then, not just a few months, not just at the end!’
‘I imagine,’ Mr Renfrew said unexpectedly, ‘that it was only at the end she felt the need.’
He got up from his chair and put his spectacles into a red leather case which he then returned to his pocket.
‘Well, Miss Abbott, you know where I am if you need me.
If you decide to sell up, you know, or want to know where the money's been put.
Don't hesitate.
That's what I'm there for.
I'll wish you good day now.’
When she heard the front door shut behind him and Penman's footsteps retreating, she rose from her chair and began to walk slowly about the room, touching the sofas and lamps and tables.
Mine, she thought in wonder, all mine.
And there, out of the window, all the way to the sea, all mine, the garden, the fields, the trees.
And the dining-room and the bedrooms and the kitchens and all the pantries and the pictures and silver and glass and carpets.
All mine.
And the drive and the carriage and all  the animal and the fruit and the gardens and every brick in every wall and every slate on every roof, all mine, every single tiny plant in my land, mine, mine.
She sat down in a chair by a table and as she had done once in Michael Swinton's kitchen, put her head down on her folded arms and burst into tears of passionate gratitude.
Callers, suitably and sombrely attired, came thick and fast.
The Rector and Mrs Chamberlin, Lady Pemberley, Mrs Burrows and Harry, a tribe of Langleys, George Langley on his own several times, and a host of others Alexandra had never seen, but to whom Aunt Emily had been a fixture for more than 50 years.
They stayed only minutes, most of them, pressing her hand and uttering the easy ritual phrases of sympathy and then departing, leaving their cards in the hall until the salver seemed endlessly overflowing.
‘I must have my own,’ Alexandra said to Penman, gazing absently at the silver tray he brought her, ‘mustn't I?
I must have my own cards.’
She sat in the drawing-room and received all the callers, genuinely grateful for any tribute to Aunt Emily although there seemed to be, among all the people who came so punctiliously, hardly anyone who had known her really well.
Mrs Langley came twice, George more often than that.
Even if he had not known Aunt Emily himself at all well, he seemed to have an inkling of Alexandra's feelings and he was, among all those condoling faces, the only one she felt comfortable with.
‘This is only the beginning, you know,’ he said one day as she walked with him round the garden.
‘They'll beat a path to your door now.
Aunt May is only the front runner.
But then, she usually is.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Alexandra, you are a woman of property now.
You have become someone of consequence.
They'll court you now.’
‘They didn't before.’
‘No,’ he said.
She snorted.
‘Then they won't make much headway now.’
He grinned at her, then swished at a shrub with his cane and asked, with studied casualness, ‘And will you stay here at Bishopstow?
Or will you sell up?’
She said decidedly, ‘I shall stay.
My parents are coming to visit me —’
‘Your parents!
I — I somehow thought you hadn't any, like me, you know.’
Alexandra smiled.
‘Oh yes,’ she said, ‘I have parents.’
She had intended, and was obviously successful, that George Langley should think she had asked her parents to come.
She had not.
They had insisted.
She had written to them at once after Mr Renfrew's visit, encompassing them in the great outpouring of gratitude that had flooded her, and received from her father in reply a letter that had shocked her and alarmed her.
‘Of course we rejoice with you, we rejoice with you to the full.
But I am sure your own good sense will tell you that it is hardly practical nor proper for a girl as young as you still are to run a house alone without a companion of any sort.
We shall come south as soon as possible and review the situation and you must prepare your mind for returning with us until some suitable person can be found to share Bishopstow with you.’
Alexandra had gone for a long walk before replying to this letter.
Indeed, she walked so far and so long that she was too tired to write anything at all upon her return and did not in fact send a reply until the following day.
She wrote to her father alone.
Nothing, she said, would induce her to leave Bishopstow, she loved it with her whole heart, it had become her home.
She was sure the neighbourhood would initially be outraged at her living alone, despite the presence of more servants than she knew what to do with, but she was proof against their opinion and she would only be a nine days' wonder in any case.
He and her mother were more than welcome, she would delight in the chance to show them the treasure that was hers, but leave it she would not.
Not even for a few weeks.
They might come and see how competent she was to run it if they chose, but short of abducting her, they could do no more than advise.
Silence had fallen for almost three weeks and then her father had written again, with the utmost brevity, to say he would review the situation when he saw it and that they could get away after the harvest.
‘They will come in September,’ Alexandra said now to George.
‘My first September at Bishopstow.’
‘It's a long time away,’ he said doubtfully.
‘Won't you be bored, all that time?
Just here, I mean.
I would put off going to Scotland —’
She said, ‘I wouldn't hear of it.
Bored?
I couldn't be bored here if I tried.’
She paused and looked up at the small gentle fields for the placid yellow outline of the Jersey cow.
‘I shall get more cows, I think.
And when my father is here, he can advise me about sheep.
Look at all that wasted space.’
‘What about a horse?’
George said.
‘A nice little mare for your own use.
I could help you there.’
‘I want to learn to drive, really,’ Alexandra said.
‘I don't much care for Aunt Emily's stately old carriage.
I'd like a trap or a gig, something light I could drive myself.
I don't know why I never drove at home.
My father taught me to shoot, I can't imagine why he didn't teach me to drive.’
She clutched George's arm in sudden excitement.
‘Do you realize, I can buy myself a gun now, and keep rabbits out of my own lettuces?’
George said eagerly, ‘I'll find you a nice little gig.
I know just the fellow.
And something brisk to take you bowling about the place.
Sure you don't want a motor car?’
She stopped and looked at him delightedly.
It was like a lovely game.
‘Perhaps I do!’ she said.
Indoors, the afternoon post was waiting for her.
So far, she had answered everything scrupulously as it came, but the volume threatened to defeat her.
She riffled quickly through the pile and saw nothing of interest but an envelope addressed to her in a bold black hand that looked dimly familiar.
She tore open the envelope, ignoring the paper knife Penman laid ready for her each day.
Inside was a single sheet of paper, thick white drawing-paper with roughly-cut edges.
It was undated and had no address.
‘My dear Alexandra —;
I meant to write at once.
You have been much in my thoughts.
And still are.
She was a true friend to lose.
Ever’
M.S.’
Alexandra plunged into the wastepaper basket to retrieve the torn envelope.
It was postmarked Nottingham.
What was he doing in Nottingham?
Why didn't he write more, why didn't he say where he was?
Didn't he realize how much she wanted to tell him about Aunt Emily's magical generosity and her own longing to have done more for her while she lived —?
She stopped herself resolutely.
He was a famous painter once more now, not simply a local eccentric to encounter on the beach.
She held the letter over the basket, ready to consign it to being thrown away, and then at the last minute snatched it back and put in in her desk.
as if in answer to her thoughts, The Times helped her next morning.
Mr Michael Swinton, it said, had accepted a commission in Nottinghamshire and would be at B — Castle some weeks.
A. in Reverie was undoubtedly the painting of the season, and the portrait he had recently finished of Mrs C —, the celebrated actress, was acclaimed — and not only by the sitter — as the best likeness of her striking looks ever achieved.
Needless to say, Mr Swinton was much in demand.
It was thought  he would take a studio for the London season.
It was rumoured that he had even been asked to Sandringham with his sketchbook, some time this coming autumn.
Alexandra read the paragraphs through carefully several times, then cut them out and laid them in her desk with his two letters.
Then she went out into the garden to walk around for a while and before she was aware of her own movements, found herself moving briskly, almost running, up the green slope to the sea.
She insisted on driving with Murphy to Bodmin to meet her parents.
Murphy wanted her to stay by the first fire of the autumn and be waiting there with the tea table, as Aunt Emily had always done; but he knew, after just over two months of Alexandra's rule, that it was pointless even to look his disapproval.
She would not mind it, nor would she take any heed of it.
Dora had told him that Miss Alexandra was but a month short of her twenty-second birthday and he had gone out of the kitchen, scratching his head in disbelief.
She seemed so authoritative already, so decided, a world away from the desperately anxious girl he had taken to pay her first calls that chill afternoon of February.
Alexandra was extremely excited, over-excited in Janet's opinion.
She had spent the previous day helping Janet to prepare Aunt Emily's room for her mother.
Janet had at first demurred at the room ever being used again, let alone so soon after Aunt Emily's death.
‘Do you really think,’ Alexandra had said earnestly, a pile of linen sheets in her arms, ‘do you truthfully think for one moment that Aunt Emily would wish this room to be kept like — like a museum?
I wouldn't put just anybody in it, but my mother, Aunt Emily's niece, her only surviving direct relation except for me —’
Janet had given way.
The medicine bottles were cleared away, the windows flung open, the multitude of little cushions and shawls packed carefully into an old ball dress trunk with a high-domed lid and E. B. painted on  it, in white.
And now, aired and emptied of its clutter, with fresh sheets on the bed and a bowl of roses on the table by the window, the room awaited Iskandara.
Beyond it, the small, bare, white-washed room that Emily's Richard, whom Alexandra had never known but whose benevolence still lay about Bishopstow like an embrace, had used as a dressing-room, had been made ready for her father.
James would like it there, he would feel comfortable in its masculine simplicity.
Alexandra had gone from one room to the other that morning smoothing pillows and straightening covers and, as a last gesture, putting Aunt Emily's little morocco bound journal beside her mother's bed.
As the train drew into Bodmin, Alexandra found herself clasping her own hands so tightly she could feel the seams of her gloves grinding into her flesh and wished, passionately for the visit to be a success, for them to like her house, approve of what she had done — and above all, to leave her alone to do it.
The train slid by, crammed with strange faces.
They have missed it, they aren't on it, they decided not to come —’ At the far end of the train a door swung open and a man climbed down and shouted for a porter.
‘Father!’
Alexandra screamed, one hand on her hat and one at her skirts as she began to run along the platform.
‘Father!
Father!’
He had turned back to help someone else out of the train, but at the sound of her calling, he swung round and stood waiting, his arms outstretched and his face, above that dear and familiar gingery beard, creased with the broadest smile.
‘Father!’ she said, and fell into his arms.
‘It's grand to see you, my lass, grand.
And looking quite the —’
‘Alexandra!’
Alexandra lifted her face from her father's shoulder.
Iskandara was in the doorway of the train, her stick  in her hand and her plaid shawl over a dark, braided travelling dress.
‘Come here,’ she said.
Her voice was queer and hoarse.
Alexandra went obediently to stand and look up at her.
‘Child, you are so utterly, completely changed.
I can hardly believe you —’ she broke off and looked at James.
‘Do we not have a lovely daughter?’
They stayed a fortnight.
The house and garden bloomed in early autumn sunshine, soft golden days full of butterflies on the michaelmas daisy clumps, days with misty mornings and deep blue dusks.
Alexandra took her father over every inch of her domain and he nodded at her enthusiasm, but if he was at all impressed by what she did, what she planned, he gave no sign.
She told him she wanted to buy more cows.
He leant on the wall and surveyed the little Jersey chewing thoughtfully in her field.
‘You get her to calf,’ he said.
‘If you want to learn all about it, you must breed your own.
There's no other way.’
‘I had rather do that,’ she said.
‘I simply did not think of it.’
‘You'll be needing another hand,’ he said, ‘if you're to have more stock.’
‘Yes,’ she said, listening hard.
‘Don't overgraze these acres.
You've not the space we have at Bewick.
Don't walk before you can run.’
‘No,’ she said, ‘I won't.’
He took his pipe out and lit it slowly, squinting at her through the puffs of blue smoke.
‘Abbotts make good farmers,’ he said.
‘We're not afraid of work.
And some Abbotts, my lass, get strokes of good fortune.
I'm one.
You're another.
We'll not forget to be thankful.’
She said, ‘Oh Father, if only you knew how thankful I am.
And most of all, that you'll let me stay.
I know you  will, because you never would talk about the future like this otherwise, you wouldn't tell me what I need.
And you have never mentioned going back to Bewick —’
‘I'm still of the opinion you should have a companion.
It's not right for you to be here alone.’
‘I'll find someone,’ she promised, ‘really I will.
Give me a little time.
I'll ask people round here, someone will have an idea, Mrs Chamberlin perhaps.
I will find someone, truly I —’ She stopped and then said diffidently, ‘And —; and mother?’
‘I'll speak to her.
We have talked it over, you know.
I think she'll abide by what I tell her.’
He put out a hand with uncharacteristic demonstrativeness and touched her cheek.
‘You just had to find the right path, didn't you, my lass.
And once that was done, you've stepped out bravely.
Never be afraid to step out, if it harms no other and gets you your heart's desire.
Now then,’ he swung round and contemplated the pig styes behind them.
‘You'll be needing more space in there when she has her litter, or she'll lie on them and crush the lot.’
Between Iskandara and Alexandra that fortnight, there reigned an uneasy truce.
It could not be said that a peace had been finally made because old habits in Alexandra would not die a final death and made her still reserved, a little wary.
But on the first morning of the second week Iskandara came into the drawing-room, where Alexandra chose to write her letters instead of using the boudoir upstairs as Janet wished her to do, and silently put Aunt Emily's journal down in front of her daughter.
Alexandra, her eyes on the stock prices of the farming page in the local paper said, ‘I suppose you have read it?’
‘Of course.’
She could feel her mother's presence behind her but she refused to turn round or even to raise her head.
‘So you see,’ she said, ‘that you misled me.
All the time  I was a child.
She wasn't so remote, so awe-inspiring.
In a way, she was greater than you let me know because she was approachable too.’
A small silence fell.
‘No,’ Iskandara said after it, and her voice had all the suppressed emotion in it that Alexandra had dreaded all her life.
‘No.
You are no nearer her.
That — that trivial account, those little domestic doings, they simply demean her, belittle her.
Your aunt had not the soul to discern the matchless spirit that was my mother's.’
Alexandra sprang up.
‘Keep her to yourself, then!
Or rather, keep the image you have!
Aunt Emily may have been spoiled but she was irresistibly spoilable because she was so generous, so imaginative, she did not try to destroy people's pictures of themselves as you do, but helped them to build them up!
I thought when I first came here that I hated what she was trying to do to me and then I came to see that the clothes, the manners, the society, all those things were part of a process, a process to give me enough confidence to do what I liked, not to live in eternal dread of insignificance and error.
I am quite sure she was as sensitively generous to her sister as she was to me.
I expect Charlotte owed her quite as much as I do and loved her for her undemanding support and affection as I did.
You won't, in my house, say one word against Aunt Emily, nor will we ever mention your mother again since she and my grandmother are now, I see, quite different people, torn apart by your distorted view.’
She stopped for a breath and took a step nearer her mother.
‘You don't see what is, you only see what you want to see.
I now begin to see what I am, not clearly yet, but more clearly each day.
If I were still at Bewick, I should still have my vision of myself quite obliterated by your violent view of how I should be, but I am free now and you cannot put the chains back on, it is too late, I am growing up.’
Iskandara had felt behind her for a chair back and now stood gripping it, her free hand clenched about the head  of her stick.
She was chalk white, as she always was at emotional moments, but her eyes were blazing.
Alexandra wondered dispassionately if she would weep, and decided that if she did, she, Alexandra, would leave her to do it.
But she did not weep, only said in a low, harsh voice, ‘Then you won't come back?
You won't come back to Bewick?’
‘No,’ Alexandra said.
‘I won't.’
Iskandara's head went up.
‘Then you too are becoming spoiled, I see.
This house, your money, the glamour of being the subject of the Academy's most popular portrait —’
Alexandra said fiercely, How do you know that?’
‘Of course I know.
I imagine everyone who reads a newspaper knows.
Michael Swinton is not, of course, one of our most distinguished painters, his style is too obvious, too photographic but I imagine that to you it seemed a wonderful distinction.’
Alexandra took a long, slow breath.
‘It was a wonderful distinction.
You have, of course, not seen the actual painting —’
‘We saw it in London,’ Iskandara said.
‘I thought it artificial and mannered.’
With an enormous effort Alexandra said, with a small smile, ‘It was better to be artificial than actually to sit in the sea in March.
It has done great good to his career.
So many people admire his work that he can be quite careless of the few who don't.
Mother, I do have work to do.
There are several decisions about livestock I want to take while Father is here to advise me, and I must persuade him to come with me to Bodmin market on Thursday.
Will you be comfortable here until luncheon if I go in search of him?
I will send Janet to you in case there is anything you want.’
Iskandara said nothing, nor did she move from where she stood.
Alexandra walked over to the door and when her hand was upon the handle, turned and said, ‘I am  going to obliterate this conversation in my memory of your visit.
I shall only think of my pleasure in having Father and — and you here, and showing you my house.
Of course, you must do as you please.’
Then she opened the door and passed out into the hall, closing it behind her with a quiet but determined movement, leaving Iskandara staring after her in silence.
If Iskandara said anything of the matter to James, he let it go no further.
He accompanied Alexandra into Bodmin Market on the following Thursday and all the way spoke only of practical matters.
‘Of course I'd like to see you with a few sheep, my lass, sheep being so close to my heart.
But it's cattle you should think of in this country, perfect dairy pasture, rich it is.
You could stand a spoon in the cream here, it's so thick.
You must concentrate on a dairy and maybe a few tender crops we could never grow up north.
Under glass maybe.
Give it a thought.’
When they reached Bodmin, he was silent.
He followed her swift figure among the pens and observed the number of farmers who nodded to her.
‘I haven't bought here yet,’ she said.
‘No more than the cow and the pig.
But I come whenever I can, just to watch and listen.
That is why they know me.’
Only when they were returning home in the dusk did James say, ‘You'll be right not to come back to Bewick.
It's right you should stay here.
You'll be making your way, on your own and it's better like that.’
Alexandra said hesitantly, ‘You — and Mother —?’
‘You know us,’ he said comfortably, ‘we have worked out our ways too.
Your mother takes more interest in the farm now you've gone, she's out and about a good deal more.
Come and see us now and then, but don't have us on your mind.
Abbotts are best kings of their own castles.’
In the dim light, Alexandra stretched out her hand and felt for her father's.
She said fervently, ‘Thank you.’
He said nothing, only grunted, and when he spoke again, it was on the subject of pigs.
CHAPTER TWELVE
The winter began closing in on Bishopstow almost before Alexandra realized it, so swiftly and busily did her days pass.
Her parents travelled home in the first week of October leaving her with fields enriched by the presence of a few dozen sheep and enough advice to see her through the cow's first calving and the sow's first litter.
Mrs Chamberlin had sent up Jem Watkins from the village, the younger brother of two hands at Grove Farm, and Alexandra resolved that he and she should learn together.
He was given a room in Murphy's lodge at the gates and was the only member of Alexandra's household who did not find her independence disconcerting.
This was because, Murphy told him, he had never known a proper lady in the first place.
There had been a little unrest among the servants, particularly in the kitchen and pantries where Dora was resentful of finding Alexandra counting bottles of damsons and crocks of lard, and thrown totally into disarray by Alexandra's demanding to be allowed to stir the jam or weigh out ingredients for chutney made from the vast harvest of plums.
There had been a tense week, in which Alexandra came to hear that Dora had wanted the position of head cook at Langley Dene, but she said nothing to Dora, and continued to interest herself in the kitchen just as before, and the matter went away quietly of its own accord.
October and November passed in wild untidy days and wet nights which left the windows plastered with yellow leaves.
Alexandra bought herself stout countrywomen's  boots in Bodmin and found a dressmaker who would copy Mrs McPhee in thick, practical tweed for her forays around her yard and fields.
The cheese presses went into use for the first time in twenty years, Jem attended Bodmin market with butter and lard and eggs to sell once a fortnight, and, with George Langley's help, a little light trap came, of varnished wood, which Murphy, now beaten out of surprise and disapproval, taught Alexandra to drive with a helpful bay mare between the shafts.
On Wednesdays, as a tribute to Aunt Emily, she was at home to callers, and faithfully, once a week, she went to the Rectory and was a tiger for an hour in the jungle under the nursery table.
As the nights grew darker and colder, dinner parties grew scarcer and most nights Alexandra spent by her own fire, doing her meticulous accounts, writing faithfully to her father or answering George Langley's breezy and frequent letters from Cambridge, Rose and Grace Langley were in London until Christmas, their hunters idle in the stable and Alexandra's life was both peaceful and satisfying in their absence.
Crossing the kitchen two days before Christmas on her way out to the dairy, Dora said, ‘He's back at Trelorne, Miss Alexandra.’
Alexandra stopped, a copper cream pan in either hand.
‘Who, Dora?’
‘Mr Swinton, Miss Alexandra.
I sent Peggy down to the village for yeast and old Meg was at the baker's, first time in months, and she says her master's back.’
Alexandra grasped her cream pans more firmly.
‘Indeed,’ she said, and went on out to the dairy.
The Christmas preparations seemed endless and unnecessary to her.
She had offered Dora and Lyddy a holiday, a chance to go back to their families on their inland farms, but they had refused with dignity.
She might not know what was proper for a lady at Christmas time, but at least they did.
There was nothing that they were going  to forget.
The kitchen was scented with the rich enticing smell of spices and dried fruits, and Alexandra met Lyddy on the stairs carrying down the cream silk evening gown to be pressed.
‘I shan't wear that dining at the Rectory!’
Alexandra said.
Lyddy regarded her levelly.
‘It's Christmas, Miss Alexandra,’ she said firmly and went on her way.
Alexandra thought of calling her back, explaining that Mrs Chamberlin might regret her kind invitation to dine with them on Christmas Day if Alexandra were to upstage the Rectory family in such a way, but then she reflected on the goodness of Mrs Chamberlin's heart and the necessity of living up to at least some of Lyddy's expectations of her.
On Christmas morning, Murphy brought the carriage round to the front door long before Alexandra could send him a message to say she would drive herself to church.
Lyddy had laid out the pearl grey coat and skirt that had been a present from Aunt Emily and a fur coat Alexandra had never seen before, heavy and glossy.
‘She would wish you to wear it,’ Lyddy said, with determination.
‘How else are you to appear in church?’
So, befurred and kid-gloved, her hair put up elaborately around her pale grey hat, she went into the Talbot pew in Bishopstow church, her own pew now, and put Aunt Emily's prayer book on the ledge before her, and knelt to say a prayer of profound thankfulness.
Behind her was the bulk of Mrs Burrows, also thickly padded with fur, flanked by the stalwart figure of Harry and the morose and drooping one of his father.
Across the aisle Lady Pemberley sat alone and behind her two grandchildren wriggled in charge of a governess whose long bony face and ill-fitting clothes reminded Alexandra powerfully of Miss Gracie.
The Rectory children were being confined with difficulty in the pew beneath a brass plate Alexandra could  not read without a pang, commemorating a young man who had died in the Charge of the Light Brigade, nearly sixty years ago, when he was only 22, her own age.
At a respectful distance behind the Chamberlins on the one side and the Burrows on the other, the village people packed the pews, shiny with scrubbing and breathless with the tightness of best clothes.
The pulpit had been wreathed in holly, ivy had been twined up the lectern, garlands of leaves and berries hung from the gallery where 18th-century fiddlers had played before the organ came.
There were candles on the altar, on the pulpit, on the deep stone ledges of the windows, and the glossy leaves gave back the candle flames' reflections.
Alexandra gazed about her with delight, folding the Burrows, the Pemberleys, the Chamberlins, the village, everyone, into the warm embrace of her grateful glance, and sang and sang.
The luncheon table was laid as it had been for 50  Christmases , with a pyramid of polished John Standish apples from Somerset in the middle, flanked by Christmas roses and trails of ivy.
Dishes like silver fig leaves held nuts and dates and raisins.
Penman had even filled a port decanter, Alexandra noticed, deducing quite rightly, that as she would hardly drink any, Christmas munificence would prompt her to tell him to help himself.
She ate quickly, partly because she was so used to eating alone now that it seemed more a practicality than a pleasure, and partly so that the servants might have their own dinner at leisure in the kitchen.
She went upstairs to change after luncheon and then took herself to the chair by her bedroom hearth, and said she should want nothing further, all afternoon.
Lyddy seemed anxious.
‘Nothing at all, Miss Alexandra?’
‘Nothing.
Nothing whatever.
Except to know by your absence that you are enjoying yourself as you should be.’
She must have slept, almost instantly, lulled by her own  contentment and comfort.
She woke to find the room dim with approaching dusk, and without lights except for the glow of the fire.
She rose and went to the window, still in the half-real state induced by daytime sleeping, and looked out at the darkening world where the yellow glow of a lamp in the yard showed Jem was milking.
A week only, and there would be a calf —;
Lyddy interrupted her reverie with the cream silk dress laid across her arms like an offering.
Having accepted that she must wear it, Alexandra then set herself to dress for the pleasure of the Rectory children, throwing good taste to the winds and insisting upon hanging herself with all that glittered from the jewel box Aunt Emily had left her, its rose suede depths heaped with treasures from Richard Talbot.
Alexandra's efforts were not in vain.
When her cloak was removed in the Rectory hall and she went into the drawing-room which had been lavishly and clumsily decorated by the children on precisely the principle Alexandra had used in dressing, they crowded round her with gasps of delight and wonder.
‘Are you a princess?’
Helen whispered, running her fingers reverently over the brilliants in Alexandra's bracelet.
‘You are a beautiful lady,’ Arthur announced, removing his thumb for the purpose, and added as an afterthought, ‘not today a lion lady.’
The baby clawed to be free of his mother and pressed to the brooches that studded Alexandra's bosom and Robert, commonly bright-eyed with aggression, stood scarlet and speechless in a stupor of admiration and wonder.
Mrs Chamberlin was entranced.
‘My dear, you have the best heart!
What a pleasure for them!
There, my darlings, is not Miss Abbott a finer sight by far than that tawdry tinsel fairy you wanted for our tree?
You see, my dear, we had a little difficulty over which should adorn the top of the tree, the star of  Bethlehem which is of course the only proper thing as well as being the only thing countenanced by the Rector, or an immensely glittering and unsuitable fairy doll someone was so ill-judged as to give to Helen.
So you see, my dear, you are a pleasure in more ways than you know!’
When the Rector gravely offered Alexandra his arm to take her in to dinner, Robert's face fell so utterly that she took his arm as well, and moved lopsidedly from the room between her ill-assorted escorts to the unspeakable anguish of the baby.
Her place had been set with a wreath of holly, adorned with a place card on which Richard had laboriously written ‘Miss Abbitt’ in scarlet ink with a liberal spattering of blots.
The table was covered in red ribbon streamers and chains of coloured paper and each candlestick bore a large bow of ribbon and a rosette of gold and silver paper.
The whole room, scented with the Christmas goose, seemed to glimmer with warmth and merriment and if it had not been for fear of distressing the children, Alexandra would have been happy to burst into tears.
After dinner in the drawing-room the children, fierce now with the determination to stay awake on such an evening — for even though dinner had been very early to accommodate them, they had all been awake since dawn — clamoured for games.
‘Miss Abbott's dress!’ their mother cried.
‘My dears, we cannot ask her, we simply cannot, such finery —’
‘Bother the finery,’ Alexandra said.
The children cheered and the Rector even forgot the after effects of goose and pudding on his digestion to smile gravely and agreed to join in.
They played turn the trencher and Blind Man's Buff and forfeits, during the course of which Robert was required to kiss Alexandra and became entirely incoherent with rapture.
She was reluctant to go.
The happy muddle of the Rectory drawing-room, the flushed children, the feeling of belonging, of being part of a group of humans who all wanted her, among whom she could be entirely  herself, all seduced her stay.
But the nodding baby, the beginnings of whimpers from Helen who had decided that she minded bitterly that her fairy doll had spent Christmas in a cardboard box, Mrs Chamberlin's gallant attempts to fight her own fatigue, told her she must go home.
Murphy was summoned, the Rector put her cloak over the cream dress and the avalanche of jewels and she was driven home alone in the quiet dark night.
In her bedroom she was assailed by restlessness.
It was not late, nothing like time for bed, she felt so full of energy, of goodwill, of the need to take some action.
She flung aside her heavy bedroom curtains and pressed her face to the cold glass but there was nothing there, just the quiet, empty blackness which enveloped the families all over Cornwall who were turning the trencher in a thousand drawing-rooms.
Alexandra pushed up the window and the cold rushed in and the sharp salt smell of the sea.
She had meant to walk down to the sea today to greet it on her first Christmas here, her own sea, her own stretch of wild grey winter water.
She thought of the beach and how lovely it was in winter, so clean and cold, and then she thought of the rocks and their pools, icy now in December and how, if the snow fell here, the flakes would melt into the water, the sea would always win.
She shut the window and stood for a moment, her hands still on the bottom bar of the sash, arrested by a sudden thought.
Here she was, possessed of more than she had ever dreamed of, this house, its comforts and warmth, those servants whose lives were spent in caring for hers, friends such as the Chamberlins who had taken her to their hearts, this first, unforgettable Christmas with all its bounty and then — Michael Swinton, in that bleak and dreary place, with only drunken old Meg and silent Punch, his loneliness accentuated by the life he had known these last few months in London and in the great houses he had stayed in.
No traditions and Christmas  games for him, no decorated tables, no candles and dishes of fruits and nuts, only that vast gloomy kitchen and the clutter of bachelor living.
Alexandra looked at her clock.
It was barely ten.
Alexandra rang the bell vigorously.
Lyddy exclaimed in horror, ‘But Miss Alexandra, you can't go like that!’
Alexandra surveyed herself in the long glass on the wall.
‘Why not?’ she said.
‘Of course I can.
You insisted I must wear this to dine, and I am certainly not going to change again now.
I shall go to Trelorne like this, Lyddy.
My fur coat — Aunt Emily's fur coat — is wonderfully’ warm.’
Lyddy said in despair, ‘Mrs Talbot'd never have liked it.
Poor lady, she'll be turning in her grave to think of you going out on your own like this —’
‘I am not going on my own.
Murphy will take me.
I should like to go on my own but I do see that the gig would be a little draughty at night in evening dress.
Now, has Dora everything ready?’
Lyddy thought of the basket that had been ordered filled with mince pies and a cold chicken, and chestnuts and oranges and the decanter of port, to Penman's misery, carefully wrapped in napkins.
‘I'm sure he'll have been provided for,’ Dora had said in disapproval.
‘I'm sure Mr Swinton won't be starving.’
‘It's no use,’ Lyddy said.
‘She's bent on going.
Nothing'll stop her.’
Now she said to Alexandra, ‘Yes, Miss Alexandra, it's all ready.
The carriage is ordered.’
‘Then I shall go,’ she said.
She was filled with happiness, driving to Trelorne.
She held the basket on her knee and revelled in its contents, the treats she had ordered and checked meticulously, even down to a handful of sugar plums in their nests of perforated gold paper.
She wanted to laugh aloud at the  prospect of the delight she would give.
She could visualize them, all three of them, silent around that vast table in the kitchen, as if they were engaged upon the business of any day, any ordinary day, not Christmas.
She pictured them all staring up as she came in and Michael Swinton giving rapid orders to Punch as he had done before, and saw herself putting her basket on the table and showing him what she had brought, the taste and spirit of Christmas from Bishopstow, from her house, her own establishment.
And best of all the pictures that flew through her mind so happily as she jolted onwards was Michael Swinton's gratitude and delight, how touched he would be that she had thought of him, how she would seem to him like some sort of Christmas spirit, glittering in a thousand jewels, her arms laden with bounty…
Trelorne was quite dark as they approached.
It was only the light from their own carriage lamps falling on the neglected driveway that told her they were approaching the house, and the salt smell that got stronger and stronger and seeped through the closed windows of the carriage.
When they stopped, in blackness and silence, before the steps that led up to the kitchen door, the only door anyone ever used at Trelorne, Murphy wanted to accompany her inside.
‘No, thank you,’ Alexandra said.
‘Give me a lamp in this hand and the basket in the other and I shall manage perfectly well.’
At the top of the steps, she stopped, and put down the basket so that she could knock.
There was no answer.
Murphy, at the foot of the steps, waited for her to return to the carriage.
Instead, she turned the handle of the door, picked up her basket, stepped inside and closed the door firmly behind her.
Through the panes of dirty glass at its top, Murphy could see the wavering light from her lantern as she vanished into the interior of the dark house.
She went steadily through the scullery where only a tap dripped in the quiet, and then stood outside the closed kitchen door, and called.
A thin line of light around the  edge indicated that at least the range was alight, even if nobody was sitting by it.
‘Mr Swinton!
Mr Swinton!’
There was no reply.
For the second time, Alexandra set down her basket and put her hand on the door handle.
It turned easily and she pushed the door open, stepping at the same moment into the kitchen and the rosy glow of firelight and the small flame of a single candle.
The room was empty.
She stood there for a moment in confusion, the lantern in her hand shedding a golden light on the creamy folds of her dress where the dark fur had fallen open over it, her hand to her eyes, shading them against the lantern light, her brow creased with puzzlement.
She said uncertainly, ‘Mr Swinton?’
From the shadows he said, ‘Ah, you are a vision, but a flesh and blood one.
I could not be sure.’
He came forward into the firelight then and she saw he had been sitting beside the range, in an old rocking chair which he had left tilting back and forth, to take the lantern from her, grasping her free hand in his.
‘I can hardly believe it.
I thought you were a hallucination you know, a fantasy, standing there all cream and amber in your fur wrappings.
Miss Abbott, in the name of all that is improbable and wonderful, what are you doing here?’
She broke from him and picked up her basket.
‘I kept thinking today how lucky I was, you see, how blessedly fortunate, with all I have, all that is so comfortable, all that makes me so — so much happier than I was, and then this evening I went to the Rectory and when I returned I was in my room and I looked out at the darkness and I thought of you and how lonely you must be after all the company and society you have known just recently and I thought — I thought —’
His blue gaze went from her face to the basket with its bundles and the white swaddled decanter, and back to her face again.
She waited confidently for his smile, his look of wondering gratitude, his stumbling words of thanks, her eyes fixed upon him in happy expectation.
He said furiously, ‘How dare you!’
She did not understand him.
She said, ‘I brought you some port, Mr Swinton, and — and some mince pies, Dora's mince pies are so very excellent —’
His fist crashed on to the table.
‘God, how can you?
Breaking in here covered with jewels like a Jezebel, babbling about pies and port, coming alone to see me — have you no delicacy?
Have you no discretion at all?
No tact?
How dare you patronize me, how dare you flaunt yourself at me when you know —’ he stopped for a moment and shook his head.
‘It is horrible,’ he said vehemently, ‘Horrible.
Horrible that you should tempt me so heartlessly and — and pity me,’ he spat at her.
‘Giving me the crumbs from your great table, taunting me with your presence.
You should not be here, Miss Abbott!’ he shouted.
‘In every way it is wrong for you to be here!’
Dismay poured through her like a flood.
He was terrifying, towering over her seeming twice the size in his fury, but she would not run.
She swallowed several times and tried to speak, but bitter shame held her tongue.
‘Get out,’ he said.
Her eyes strayed involuntarily to the claret bottle on the table.
He said angrily, ‘I am not drunk, Miss Abbott.
I have never been clearer in my wits.
Nor have I ever been more sorely tried.
Get out before — I —’
‘I made a mistake,’ she said.
He let out a long, gasping sigh.
‘I — I am so sorry.
I am sorrier than you will ever understand, Mr Swinton, much, much sorrier.
I never thought I should be — be improper to come, that you should think me patronizing.’
Her voice was shaking badly so she stopped and swallowed once more and bravely went on, ‘I have behaved like a child, a stupid, ignorant child, but I never intended it.
I just wanted you  to have some of what I had had today, some of the joy and warmth, I wanted to give you something —’
‘Stop it,’ he said.
He had turned away from her a little and she could not see his face.
She waited, forcing back tears she thought might irritate him further, watching his implacable shoulders.
At last he said, ‘We have got ourselves thoroughly at cross purposes have we not?’
‘I hope not — any more,’ she said in a low voice.
‘But — but I should go now.
I have behaved so badly, I can't bear to think I have angered you —’
He swung round.
‘You haven't.
Or rather you did violently, but I judged you too hastily and I am not angry now.
I am extremely —; oh, a host of things, but not angry any more.
Will you not stay a little while, Miss Abbott?
Since your reputation is now ruined by your own hand?’
She smiled wanly at him.
‘Only in Murphy's eyes.’
He laughed then, his easy familiar laugh and gestured to the fire.
‘Come and sit down.
Perhaps you wonder why I am all alone.
Christmas is Punch's one luxury, Miss Abbott.
He will be insensible with drink until the New Year.
He began last night and he knows I do not want to see him again until he is sober.
And I packed that old witch off to the village.
She reminds me more of All Souls’ Eve than Christmas.
I dined off bread and cheese and this excellent claret.
I don't suppose you know much about claret but this Chateau Margaux 1875 is nectar.
I am even going to give you some, which I should not do for someone who knows nothing about wine.’
When he had seated her in his rocking chair and put a glass of dark liquid in her hand, he moved her lamp and his single candle so that her face was illumined.
‘Don't,’ she said.
‘I — I feel like an altar.’
‘Very appropriate,’ he said.
‘Don't touch them.’
He pulled a wooden chair away from the table and brought it so that he could sit opposite to her.
He was  dressed with his usual carelessness, in boots and dark breeches and jacket and a shirt whose collar he had pulled open for comfort.
His hair was still quite closely cropped, and his beard now followed the lines of his jaw and allowed her to see the hard fierce lines of his face.
‘Beauty and the Beast, are you thinking, Miss Abbott?’
She blushed hotly.
‘I shouldn't blame you.
You have had enough praise heaped on you this year to last most women a lifetime.’
She said shyly, ‘Did the painting really help you?’
He took a swallow from his glass.
‘In one way, which is obvious, immeasurably.
In another way, which I might tell you of shortly, it has made me damnably unhappy.
What is in the glass will not bite you.
Put your nose in and take a deep, magnificent breath of it.
Then take a mouthful, and hold it there in your mouth for a moment, then swallow it, very slowly, noticing the taste of it all the way.’
He watched her.
‘Very neatly done.
What did you think?’
‘I — never drank anything like it before.’
‘Of course you haven't.
It would be a criminal waste to give it to most women.’
‘It was — was a very big taste, somehow, a great deal of it —’
‘Ah!’ he said with satisfaction.
‘I may even give you some more.’
She asked without looking at him, ‘Were you unhappy’ to be back with fashionable people?
Was it like before, when you were famous and — and couldn't paint?’
‘No,’ he replied, ‘it wasn't like that at all.
I can paint anything I want to at the moment, anything, everything.
I have never had mastery like this before.’
He stood up and picked up the candle and went wandering off into the shadows with it.
From across the kitchen he said, ‘I don't think anything I have painted this autumn is quite as good as this, but then, I would not expect it to be.
Not all my sitters are Miss Abbott.’
Alexandra swung upright in the rocking chair.
Across  the room, the single candle flickered in his hand and illuminated her own bare feet on a black rock, her own hands clasped round her bent knees and the brown familiar folds of Mrs McPhee.
She stood up.
‘But — but that is my portrait!’
‘Of course,’ he said calmly and came back across the room.
‘What did you think would happen to it?
Did you suppose I should sell it?’
‘I — I didn't think what would happen to it.
I didn't think much about it.’
He put the candle down on the table and came to stand close to her.
‘Of course you didn't.
You never do think much about yourself.
Or of yourself.
That is one of your most powerful attractions, your unselfconsciousness.
The others of course, are legion, your loveliness, your adorable practicality, your kindness, your loving-heartedness, your naturalness.
You are why I came back, Miss Abbott.
I could have stayed in London of course, eating my heart out for you as I have done ever since you put your head down on to your bread and butter here in this room and burst into tears; but the combination of Christmas, and not having seen you in months drove me to a railway station and this morgue of a house.
I packed you up in your painted form as I have done for every move I have made since the Summer Exhibition, and we travelled down to Bodmin together, you and I —’
He stopped.
She said nothing, but gazed at him with wide, terrified eyes, then almost involuntarily she made a small gesture with her hands to ward him off and he, taking it as a token of reciprocal feeling, stepped forward and took her in his arms.
She felt them go round her, strong and decided against her dress, beneath her coat, and then he put his mouth on hers and began to kiss her, and for a moment she felt that she was flying, and the next minute she was clawing herself free with the superhuman strength of panic and stumbling for the door.
He was there before her.
Even as her hand fumbled  to open it, he thrust himself between her and the door, barring her way.
She screamed, ‘No!
No!
Let me go!’ and flung her hands out and he caught them and held them firmly.
She twisted herself sideways in frenzy, screaming still and trying to wrench her wrists free and then he moved both her hands to one of his and gave her a light stinging slap across her cheek.
She gasped.
He said, ‘Calm down.
I did not mean to frighten you, either by kissing you or hitting you.
Come and sit down.’
‘No!’ she said.
‘No!
No —’
‘Do as you are told.
Don't be melodramatic.
If we part like this, we shall create the most monumental awkwardness for each other and ourselves.
Sit down.’
She obeyed him, sinking on to the wooden chair he had pulled up for himself.
He handed her her glass of claret.
‘Drink this.’
She gulped and almost choked.
‘If you drink my Margaux like that, I shall give you another slap.
Alexandra, listen to me.
Look up.
I wish to speak to your face.’
She raised her head slowly and looked apprehensively at him.
He was sitting on the edge of the table and was regarding her with his steady blue gaze.
‘Cross purposes, my dear!
How right I was.
And more crossed even than I knew.
You cannot conceive of the feelings that consumed me when I understood — or rather when I thought I understood — why you had come tonight, when you said you wanted to share your happiness with me, wanted to give me something.
I misinterpreted you, my dear.
I forgot how young you are, how inexperienced, in what a simple spirit you saw your generosity.
I supposed, during those brief, heady moments after your heartbreaking apology that you had wanted to come to me tonight as much as I wanted you to come.
That is why I kissed you.
I imagined — wrongly  — that you wanted me too.
Now you have shown me that I was wrong, that I was mistaken.
That is so, is it not?
I was mistaken to think you loved me?’
Slowly, hardly knowing what she did, Alexandra nodded.
His mouth twitched a little.
He said, ‘I never meant to frighten you and I am sorry that I did, truly sorry.
Here,’ he held out his hand to her with a little smile, ‘take my hand to show you forgive me for alarming you.’
Her own was shaking, she could not seem to stop it.
His clasp was as warm and steady as ever.
‘If I had been sensible, Alexandra, I should have known I had no chance.
How old are you?’
‘Twenty-two,’ she whispered.
‘Just.’
‘Then very recently I was twice your age.
Now I am rather less.
Small consolation, that is.’
He stood up.
‘Miss Abbott, you must go home.
We shall meet in the course of things, I think, and we will do so on just the footing we have always known.
Before tonight, that is.’
She rose and stood before him.
‘Yes,’ she said.
He picked up her basket.
‘I shall carry this out for you.
I am sure you will understand that the contents would choke me.
Take my arm.
The house is as dark as Hades.’
At the foot of the steps, Murphy waited, bundled up in an old sheepskin.
He looked at the basket in surprise.
‘Mr Swinton has so much already,’ Alexandra said, her voice almost steady, ‘that he asked if you might have the basket for bringing me out here on Christmas night.’
She felt her arm squeezed slightly.
He said, ‘My sentiments exactly, Miss Abbott.
Now in you get.
This is no night for hanging about in the air.’
The door was closed firmly upon her.
She let the window down.
‘Shall — shall you be going back to London?’
‘Yes,’ he replied.
‘That is exactly what I shall do.’
She said in a small voice, ‘Of — of course.’
‘Perhaps I may come down again in the spring.
Then you can show me your lambs, your first lambs.’
He pulled the window up quickly and it was too dark for her to see him step back towards the house.
Murphy swung the horses round and headed them towards Bishopstow, and in the carriage, in her crumpled finery, Alexandra sat and pushed her fists against her mouth to stop herself from crying.