

SUBJECTS
The subject approach: introduction, processes, tools and simple evaluation
1.2.1 Subjects
Users often approach information sources not with names (as have been considered in Part II), but with a question that requires an answer or a topic for study.
Users seek documents or information concerned with a particular subject.
In order to make some provision for this common approach to information sources, it is necessary to arrange documents- and document surrogates in catalogues, indexes bibliographies, computer databases and so on— in such a way that items on specific subjects can be retrieved.
Thus, the subject approach is extremely important in the access to and the exploitation of information, documents and data.
Before we discuss the provision that libraries and information workers make for the subject approach, it may be useful to consider the preliminary question: What is a subject?
In talking about a subject we generally refer to a given area of knowledge or to the contents of an information source of a given scope.
A subject might be considered to be defined by:
an area of interest,
an area in which an individual researcher or professional works,
an area in which an individual writes or an area of knowledge which is studied.
Consider a well-known subject area such as geography.
Ask your friends what they think geography is.
Study the definitions of geography in a number of dictionaries and encyclopaedias.
Examine a few syllabuses for basic courses in geography.
Note the different definitions and the different boundaries for this one subject area.
It is easy to see that users and separate pieces of literature may hold different perspectives on one subject.
The points of divergence in perspective can broadly be summarized by the facts that:
different labels are used, and
different concepts of scope and associations with other subjects are evident.
These factors help to explain the basic problems in identifying a satisfactory subject approach as well as the vast array of different tools required in the subject approach to knowledge.
It is possible and convenient to select a perspective on the scope, associations and labels for subjects which coincides with the way in which those subjects are handled in the literature.
In libraries, most devices for the organization of knowledge concern themselves primarily with organizing literature.
This policy of reflecting the subject labels and relationships present in the literature of a subject is known as being consistent with literary warrant.
On the basis of literary warrant, any classification scheme or indexing language will reflect the subjects (and the relationships between subjects) present in the literature that the scheme or language has been designed to organize.
This could be regarded as a pragmatic approach to the design of devices for the organization of knowledge by subject.
The main limitation of this pragmatic approach lies in the time and collection dependency of the resulting tool.
All collections alter over time; in order to remain effective, the classification device must evolve in keeping with the development of the collection.
There is an alternative method for the design of subject retrieval devices, and that is to build languages or schemes which depend upon some theoretical views about the nature and structure of knowledge.
As will become apparent later, this theoretical approach is also important in determining the nature of subject devices for the organization of knowledge.
12.2 Indexing languages
The term indexing language can seem rather daunting and has certainly had different meanings in its different incarnations.
Here an indexing language is simply defined as:
a list of terms or notations that might be used as access points in an index.
This definition does not exclude the names of persons, bodies, chemicals, trade names and so on, but since we are concerned primarily with the subject approach, this list as discussed in the next few sections will concentrate on terms which describe subjects.
An alternative definition of an indexing language is:
the set of terms (the vocabulary) and the devices for handling the relationship between them in a system for providing index descriptions.
An indexing language may also be referred to as a retrieval language.
Indexing languages may be of three distinct types:
1.
Controlled indexing languages or assigned-term systems are indexing languages  in which a person both controls the terms that are used to represent subjects and executes the process whereby terms are assigned to a particular document.
Normally an authority list identifies the terms that may be assigned.
Indexing involves a person assigning terms from this list to specific documents on the basis of subjective interpretations of the concepts implied; in so doing, the indexer exercises some intellectual discrimination.
There are two types of controlled indexing languages: alphabetical indexing languages and classification schemes.
In alphabetical indexing languages, such as are embodied in thesauri and subject headings lists, subject terms are the alphabetical names of the subjects.
Control is exercised over which terms are used, but otherwise the terms are ordinary words.
In classification schemes each subject is assigned a piece of notation, the usual objective being to place a subject within a context with respect to other subjects.
Both classification schemes and alphabetical indexing languages are used in a variety of contexts, and most of the remainder of Part II will concentrate on controlled language indexing.
Both types of devices are commonly applied in catalogues, indexes to books and periodicals, bibliographies, current awareness bulletins, selective dissemination of information, computerized databases and data banks, abstracting and indexing services, encyclopaedias, dictionaries and directories.
Classification is also prominent in the physical arrangement of documents.
2.
Natural indexing languages or derived-term systems are not really a separate language at all, but the ‘natural’ or ordinary language of the document being indexed.
Any terms that appear in the document are candidates for index terms.
In practice, natural language indexing tends to rely upon the terms present in an abstract or the title of a document, although sometimes the full text of a document is used.
Depending on how it is achieved, natural language indexing based upon the full text of a document may be very detailed; alternatively, it may establish some mechanism for deciding which terms are the most important in relation to a particular document.
In computer indexing, this will involve statistical analysis of the relative frequency of occurrence of terms.
In human indexing, some judgement would be required in selecting terms.
Many of these problems can be minimized by restricting indexing to titles and abstracts.
Either a computer or a person can execute natural language indexing.
The computer may well use a list of terms deemed to be useful in indexing (that is, a type of thesaurus) to identify appropriate terms.
Strictly natural language systems are only one type of derived-term system.
A derived-term system is one where all descriptors are taken from the item itself.
Thus author indexes, title indexes and citation indexes, as well as natural language subject indexes, are derived-term systems.
3.
Free indexing languages do not consist of a list of terms distinct from those used to describe concepts in a subject area.
Indexing is ‘free’ in the sense that there are no constraints on the terms that can be used in the indexing process.
Free language indexing is distinct from natural language indexing in that the  latter is constrained by the language of the document being indexed; the former is not.
Free language indexing may be conducted by humans or computer.
When executed by humans with a sound knowledge of a subject and its terminology, free language indexing can result in an index which is both consistent in the assignment of index terms and which matches the perspective of index users.
However successful, human free language indexing is very dependent upon the skills of the individual indexer.
Computerized free language indexing is, for all practical purposes, the same as natural language indexing.
The computer must have some basis for assigning indexing terms; if a pre-assigned list of terms is not supplied, the computer itself must assign terms on the basis of those present in the document being indexed.
Both natural language indexing, and, to a lesser extent, free language indexing are used extensively in producing both printed indexes and in gaining access to computerized databases and data banks.
Some applications of natural language indexing based upon titles of documents have already been considered in Chapter 11.
Natural language indexing will be used throughout Part III for purposes of comparison with controlled language indexing.
It will also be considered in some detail in parts of succeeding chapters on alphabetical indexing languages and alphabetical indexing systems.
Controlled term indexing languages are claimed to be more consistent and therefore more efficient, but the many tests on indexing languages have failed to prove this convincingly.
Many databases include terms from controlled indexing languages and also support searching on the text of the record, thus offering what might be regarded as the best of both worlds.
12.3 Functions of subject access
Subject access normally seeks to fulfil both of the following functions:
to show what a library, information source or database includes on a particular subject, and
to show what a library, information source or database includes on related subjects.
Different approaches to the organization of knowledge may emphasize the relative importance of either the first or second objective, but it is difficult to neglect one without impairing the effectiveness of the other.
That the two objectives are interdependent can be demonstrated by examining the first objective.
Specific subject
A book on vegetable gardening may contain equally valuable information on growing tomatoes as a book devoted entirely to growing tomatoes.
Thus a book on a related subject can, to varying extents, substitute for a book on the specific subject being sought.
Even a user who starts a search with a specific subject in mind may find that it does not quite match his requirements after all.
A user might start by looking for a map of London, when he really wants a map of Camden; he might believe that the more specific subject (Camden) will not be covered independently.
Later, after examining maps of the area, he may discover that what he is really interested in is Parliament Hill.
The inclusion of related subjects can thus often help the user with a specific search, particularly where he is not adequately familiar with the subject being sought or the way in which the subject is likely to be handled or packaged in the literature.
Relationships
Figure 12.1 shows a small hierarchy or group of ranked subjects which makes some statement concerning the relationships between those subjects.
This hierarchy shows the general subject area of building and its subordinate subject areas: building materials, auxiliary construction practices, construction in specific materials, wood construction, roofing and so on.
Subordinate to each of these subject areas are other topics.
For example, plumbing and pipe fitting are subordinate to utilities.
The converse of a subordinate subject is a superordinate subject.
Again, then, building is superordinate to building materials, auxiliary construction practices and so on.
Two subjects at the same level in the hierarchy (for example, both subdivisions of the same parent or superordinate subject) are said to be coordinate.
Thus, utilities and heating are coordinate to one another, as also are wood and slate.
Relationships such as those shown in the hierarchy in Figure 12.1 are known as semantic relationships, representing connections between associated subjects.
Although we may disagree about detail, semantic relationships between subjects are reasonably stable and reflect the consensus of opinion concerning their connections.
Thus, we all agree that one component of a building is a roof (and not vice versa!), that chemistry is a branch of science, or that an Alsatian is a dog.
There is some agreement as to the permanence of these relationships; they can be expected to alter only as knowledge advances.
There are other relationships between subjects known as syntactic relationships which arise from the context of subjects in specific documents — from the syntax.
Thus a document such as A farm spelling pictures teaching jigsaw
brings the concepts farming and spelling into a related context.
Plainly, there is not    always a connection between farming and spelling; indeed, many other documents can be identified where these subjects are not connected.
Syntactic relationships thus occur in documents, but are less permanent than semantic relationships.
In any subject device, it is necessary to distinguish between syntactic and semantic relationships and to make a different kind of provision for each.
Both classification schemes and alphabetical indexing languages fulfil both of the basic objectives of a subject device.
The distinction arises from different emphases.
Classification schemes specialize in showing networks of subjects and displaying the relationships between subjects, and thus are particularly suited to achieving the second objective.
Alphabetical indexing languages specialize in establishing specific labels for subjects and providing direct access to individual subjects.
Nevertheless, as will be amply demonstrated throughout the remaining chapters in Part 11, all subject devices must attempt to fulfil both objectives.
12.4 The subject indexing process
Indexing is the process whereby indexes and associated tools for the organization of knowledge are created.
Indexing may be conducted manually or may rely to varying extents upon the facilities for the manipulation and ordering of data offered by the computer.
If the resulting index is to be effective and efficient, the assignment of notation from a classification scheme or the application of subject headings from a recognized list involves skill and judgement.
Clearly, the only totally adequate indication of the content of a document is the text of the document in its entirety.
Any other indication of document content, such as classification notation or alphabetical subject headings, are partial representations of content.
Three stages are necessary in assigning terms from indexing languages when intellectual indexing is performed: Familiarization Analysis Translation
The objective in executing these three stages is to construct a document profile which reflects its subject.
Most documents have many characteristics that might be identified by a searcher as the criterion by which the document would be selected as relevant.
Any set of search keys for a document can be described as a document profile.
Different types of indexes and different user groups may require different sets of search keys (or different document profiles) to be developed in respect of one document.
Some of the available search keys have already been considered in Part 11; that is, personal and corporate names.
The other important class of search keys are the subject labels which will be discussed below.
Let us now consider the various stages in framing a document profile.
Step 1.
Familiarization This first step involves the indexer becoming conversant  with the subject content of the document to be indexed.
Documents are comprised of words, and searchers and indexers use words to represent or convey concepts; at this stage however, it is important for the indexer to attempt to identify the concepts that are represented by the words.
In order to achieve good consistent indexing, the indexer must have a thorough appreciation of the structure of the subject and the nature of the contribution that the document is making to the advancement of knowledge.
From time to time the indexer may need to consult external reference sources in order to achieve a sufficient understanding of the document content for effective indexing.
Certainly it will always be necessary to examine the document content, concentrating particularly on the clues offered by the title, the contents page, chapter headings and any abstracts, introduction, prefaces or other preliminary matter.
Step 2
Analysis The second step towards constructing an index involves the identification of the concepts within a document which are worthy of indexing.
Any one document covers a number of different topics.
Take, for example, a book entitled Wills and Probate.
This book contains sections on making a will, executors, administration of an estate, pensions, tax, house ownership, grants and intestacy, to name but a few.
Usually it is possible to identify a central theme in a document and to produce a summary of document content based upon this central theme.
Frequently, but not always, this same process will have been attempted by the author when inventing the title, which explains why the title is often a useful aid to indexing.
Clearly an index must permit access to a document by its central theme, but to what extent should access be provided to secondary or subsidiary topics considered within a document?
This question can only be answered with reference to specific indexing environments.
In catalogues, for instance, it is common to index no more than three separate subjects for any one document.
Indexers for Chemical Abstracts are instructed as follows:
index every measurement, observation, method, apparatus, suggestion and theory that is presented as new and of value in itself;[also]all new chemical compounds and all elements, compounds and other substances for which new data are given (American Chemical Society, Chemical Abstracts Service Directions for Abstractors; Columbus.
Ohio: ACS. 1971).
It is helpful to have such guidelines concerning the types, range and number of concepts to be indexed in any indexing situation, although precise guidelines are not always drafted and the choice of concepts to include may be left to the discretion of the indexer.
More consideration will be given to this topic in section 12.5.
Many traditional indexing approaches have sought to find a label or indexing term which is co-extensive with the content of the document being indexed; that is, the scope of the indexing term and the document are similar.
For example, for the book on Wills and Probate it would not be sufficient to index this book  under the term ‘Wills’ alone, since this heading would not reveal the section of the book on ‘Probate’.
(Note: The term ‘analysis’ has been used here in its restrictive meaning.
Some authors use ‘analysis’ to apply to all processes associated with the construction of a document profile of any kind.
In this definition ‘analysis’ subsumes cataloguing, indexing, classification and abstracting.)
Step 3:
Translation Having identified the central theme of a document, this theme must be described in terms which are present in the indexing language.
In controlled language indexing, this will involve describing the concepts in terms of the classification scheme, thesaurus or list of subject headings which is being used.
For example, a free interpretation of the subject of a document might be:
Social conflict and educational change in England and France between 1789 and 1848.
The concepts represented in this summary might be translated into an alphabetical description of the form: Education — History — England — Social Conflict — France or into a classification notation such as 942.073.
To take another example: Radioactivity in the surface and coastal waters of the British Isles, 1977 might be converted to an alphabetical description such as: Water pollutants Radioactive materials — Great Britain or into a classification notation such as 628.16850941.
This translation will involve not only labelling the subject, but possibly also indicating related subjects, as has been discussed earlier.
The guiding principle in translating concepts into the indexing language of any given system must be that the terms selected and the relationships indicated are consistent with the ‘normal’ user's perspective on the subject.
This coincidence between indexing and user approach is known as user warrant.
In other words the indexing system must be tailored to the needs of the users of the index.
Given that different users may have different perspectives on the same subject, it is clear that different indexing languages and systems may be appropriate for different subjects and environments, and even for the same subject in a different environment.
Consider, for example, medicine.
The approach suitable in specialized indexing tools for medical research will need to be very specific in order to differentiate between closely related subjects.
A collection of general medical books in a public library may deal with the same range of topics, but the indexing can be broader than in a specialist context, and the terms used for the same thing may  be different.
What a doctor might refer to as ‘rubella’ will probably be called ‘German measles’by the mother of the child with the complaint.
Apart from differing needs of users, indexing approaches may differ on policy grounds.
Some types of indexing are appropriate where it is desired to concentrate on generating excellent indexes.
Others are less concerned with perfect indexing, but rather demand that the searcher exercise his skills thoroughly, offering him the appropriate facilities to do so.
It is important to recognize, then, that a variety of different indexing approaches are inevitable, not only for reasons of history and indexer preference, but because different situations demand different approaches.
12.5 The searching process
Information retrieval follows from the generation of an index.
Although this work concerns itself primarily with the organization of knowledge and the production of indexes, catalogues and databases, it is imperative that the indexer should have an appreciation of how the index is to be used.
Indeed, the selection of an indexing approach is crucially dependent upon user requirements.
Equally, it is important that a searcher should have a clear understanding of indexing methods.
Indexing and searching, then, are integral one to another, making a few comments on searching in order here.
These are also intended to demonstrate the similarity between indexing and searching, and to show how indexing tools feature in the searching process.
These comments are as true for author searching (Part 11) as subject searching, and they are introduced here only for convenience.
Searching an index.
a catalogue or a database can be viewed as involving the same three stages as indexing:
Step 1
Familiarization A searcher must be adequately familiar with what he wishes to retrieve.
Although this may seem an obvious statement, there are many instances when the searcher is not fully aware of what can or might be retrieved.
Two common circumstances may arise:
(a)
the searcher is an information worker trying to extract documents or information on behalf of someone else.
Here familiarization can be partially achieved by conducting a reference interview with the end user.
The reference interview should ascertain both a clear subject profile and also other characteristics of the required documents or information, such as any constraints on date, language, source or level.
The intermediary (information worker) also needs to be conversant with the sources to be searched.
(b)
the searcher may be the end user, possibly approaching the search in some ignorance of his real requirements or of the literature that might be  available to meet those requirements.
Some degree of ignorance of this kind is not unusual since the usual objective in consulting an information source is to become better informed.
If the search is to be successful, the user will learn about the subject and its literature during the searching process.
(Of course, an even more unfortunate situation would be where the end user, poorly informed about the information or documents required, charges the information worker to conduct a search on the basis of incomplete or inaccurate information.)
Step 2:
Analysis When the objective is clear, the next step is to analyse the concepts present in a search.
Sometimes, particularly for a straightforward search in a printed index, it will be sufficient to establish these concepts in the searcher's mind.
On other occasions, where the search must be specified with a number of interacting concepts and other parameters, it will be necessary to write the concepts down.
For example, if information is required on ‘primary education’ and this is a heading in the appropriate printed index, then the search profile merely involves the term ‘primary education’.
If, however, the searcher seeks information on ‘Recovering hydrogen from coal tar in a continuous electrofluid reactor’ and is interested only in reports, books or periodical articles which review the subject after 1980, then there is clearly scope for a more complex search profile.
Aspects of this will be considered in Chapter 17.
Building a search profile has much in common with building a document profile during indexing.
The search profile will comprise a series of search keys representing subjects and other characteristics of the search requirements which together indicate the scope and nature of the search.
Step 3:
Translation of the concepts in a search profile will involve consultation of the thesaurus, classification scheme (or its index) or list of subject headings that has been used in constructing the index to be searched.
Often the quality of the translation may be tested by examining the items indexed under a number of possible terms that might have been used to describe a subject in an index.
Thus a searcher might consider perusing entries under sweets, chocolates and confectionery.
Once a satisfactory entry point has been identified in an index, the instructions or guidelines in the index may help the searcher in improving retrieval.
Such experimental retrieval may be more necessary for searches using the natural language of the document.
Here consultation of an inverted file which has been constructed in the indexing of the text may aid in identifying word forms and search terms.
An online thesaurus is useful if available.
If not, other sources of subject terminology, such as thesauri and dictionaries, may be consulted.
Although there are parallels between searching and indexing, it is important to remember that successful information retrieval does not depend only upon effective exploitation of indexing.
It is no good searching an information source  (printed or computer-held) efficiently and with a sound understanding of its construction if that source does not provide access to the information or documents that are being sought.
Many searches involve the use of more than one source, and all searches require that the most appropriate source be chosen.
There is more to effective information retrieval than indexing, though this is certainly an essential component of the process.
12.6 Measures of index effectiveness
Some simple measures of index effectiveness are introduced at this point in order to approach different indexing methods critically.
Extensive theory exists on the evaluation of indexes and indexing, but regrettably there is not space to treat this topic at any length here.
Some authoritative texts on the subject are listed at the end of this chapter.
For any user approaching an index or a computerized information retrieval system, there will be a number of records in the system relevant to the topic of his search, while the remainder will be of no interest on that occasion.
Even for those items that are designated relevant, some may be judged to be highly relevant, whilst others may be regarded as partially or only marginally relevant.
Various scales of relevance ratings may be established.
For example, if a user desires information on asbestos roofing, there may be records for documents in the index that deal specifically with this topic which would be selected as highly relevant.
However, although subject may be the primary consideration in the assessment of relevance, it is not the only factor that determines whether a user wishes to be alerted to the existence of a document.
A user may reject a document because it is in a language that he cannot read or because it is dated.
Relevance is a subjective measure.
Documents rarely exactly match a user's requirements because information can be packaged in almost as many different ways as there are participants in a subject area.
Inevitably an author writes from his understanding and perspective; a user probably has a different background, level of understanding and experience of the same subject.
Consider again those documents indexed by the system that may be partially relevant to a given user's search.
Suppose that, although our reader is primarily interested in asbestos roofing, only a limited quantity of material directly concerned with this topic is represented in a collection.
It is, however, possible to broaden the search and find additional information on asbestos roofing by retrieving general documents on roofing and extracting pertinent sections.
The end result will be more information on asbestos roofing traced, but only by considering all of the documents listed under the much broader category of roofing.
Thus many non-relevant documents will have been retrieved and examined in the process of sifting relevant from non-relevant.
These non-relevant documents are frequently referred to as noise Notice that it would be possible to improve recall until every relevant  document is retrieved by scanning the entire document collection, but such perfect recall (that is, retrieving every relevant document) would be accompanied by a drop in the proportion of relevant documents found.
We have begun to identify, then, two conflicting objectives which are present in any search.
Ideally we would like both to maximize recall the number of relevant documents retrieved — at the same time as ensuring that all the documents retrieved were relevant.
In practice, it is not possible to achieve these twin objectives simultaneously.
The concepts introduced above have been more precisely defined, leading to a consensus regarding their meaning and to experimental measurements.
The following definitions are important in the evaluation of indexes: One easy observation from these definitions is that indexes are measured in terms of their effectiveness in retrieval.
This serves to support some of the statements made in Section 12.5 and again emphasizes that a good index is one which permits effective retrieval.
As discussed above, precision (or the proportion of relevant documents retrieved) is related to recall (the extent of retrieval of relevant documents).
More specifically, recall is inversely proportional to precision, and vice versa; in other words, as one increases, the other must decrease.
In practice the application of recall and precision in the evaluation of indexes is hindered by the difficulty of evaluating some of the components in the definition.
For example, without scanning the entire index, it is impossible to estimate the total number of relevant documents in the system, a figure that is required in the calculation of recall.
Clearly it is easier to measure precision than recall.
A useful application of recall in practice is not to seek a measure of absolute recall (as defined above), but rather to use recall to compare two different indexing systems, by defining what is known as relative recall .
Clearly this definition can be generalized in order to compare a number of different systems and thus provide a useful comparative measure.
Since recall goes up as precision goes down, it is clearly not possible to achieve a system which gives full recall at the same time as full precision.
Thus in index, catalogue or database design, the indexer must choose an appropriate blend of recall and precision for each individual application.
Quite frequently a user will be  satisfied with a few items on a topic as long as they are relevant and meet other criteria such as language, date and level.
Here, high precision but low recall is satisfactory.
On other occasions a user may want every document or piece of information on a topic traced, and then high recall must be sought to the detriment of precision.
Recall and precision are measures of index effectiveness, indicating the extent to which relevant documents are retrieved.
But a good information retrieval system must also be efficient and cost-effective.
Other measures used to evaluate the efficiency of the system might include the following:
The time that it takes to perform a search.
This is an important parameter for the individual user, but unfortunately general measures are likely to prove elusive.
The time that it takes to perform a search in a system is a function of a number of factors, including the user's previous experience with the system, aspects of system design and the nature of the search.
In an experimental situation some of these variables could be controlled, and average search times could be computed for different systems.
The time taken to perform a search is not only influenced by the indexing language and system, however, but also by system response times, search strategies that are available and the style of the dialogue in a computer-based system.
Cost is a further measure of system effectiveness.
Clearly, it is desirable to minimize search costs which include any expense associated with the acquisition of the source or access to it, as well as the searcher's time.
Information retrieval systems embrace online access to external databases, searching of OPACs and CD-ROM, but the economics of making use of these different media varies dramatically.
External database costs are cumulated on a pay-as-you-go basis; CD-ROM are acquired on subscription, so the more searches performed, the lower the per search cost.
With an in-house database, the cost to the organization can be assessed as capital and ongoing, a major component being that of creating and maintaining the database.
Intellectual indexing using a controlled language may incur a significant initial expense, but may assist users with quick and effective retrieval and thus reduce the amount of user education and other support facilities.
Natural language indexing tends to shift the intellectual effort necessary for effective retrieval to the end-user.
Again, it is difficult to calculate the cost of a search, but the searcher will always consider this factor and seek a cost effective means of information retrieval.
User-friendliness is another criterion that might be used to evaluate a system since it will affect the cost of searching and the speed with which retrieval can be achieved.
It will also have some impact on training commitments required of users, and whether end-users can be expected to use the system independently or whether they will need the assistance of an intermediary.
Interface design and the nature of the indexing language are two of the factors that will  influence the user-friendliness of a system.
These are discussed further in subsequent chapters in this section.
12.7 Other features of indexes
Recall and precision interact with other characteristics of indexes.
Some of these are briefly introduced here.
Specificity or the degree of specificity of indexing, must be established during planning for the index and reviewed from time to time thereafter.
Specificity of a system is the extent to which it permits the indexer to be precise about the subject of a document.
A completely specific statement of document content would have to be the text of the document itself.
Obviously a more formal and more summarized profile is required in most indexing systems.
In any index the level of specificity is normally determined by the extent and type of subjects listed in the system.
For instance, it is desirable that a scannable number of documents be listed under each heading in a catalogue.
With a given size of collection, say 20,000 documents, the appropriate number of headings can be identified on the basis of seeking to create scannable categories.
A set number of categories will largely determine the specificity of the headings to be included in the index.
A fundamental theoretical rule of subject indexing is that each heading should be co-extensive with the subject of the document; that is, the label and the information or documents found under that label should match.
In practice this can only be achieved within the constraints of any given indexing language and system.
The relationship between precision and recall and specificity is interesting.
The higher the specificity of indexing, the more likely that search outputs will show high precision.
Lower specificity will be associated with lower precision but high recall.
Continuing our previous search, if the term ‘asbestos roofing’ does not exist in the system, then we must search under the broad term ‘roofing’.
Documents can only be identified as relevant by scanning the rather larger numbers of documents listed under the broader heading.
Exhaustivity of indexing has some impact on recall and precision.
As has already been discussed, most documents have more than one theme.
The indexer is required to consider which topics within a document to represent in an index.
In many traditional catalogues, access will only be provided to two or three main themes.
A more specialized collection may be indexed in greater depth or with greater exhaustivity; up to 20 or 30 separate themes may be identified and indexed in one document.
The indexer can either be constrained as to the number of themes to index per document, or be given the option of indexing as many themes as possible.
Exhaustivity is represented  by the number of themes that are indexed in a document.
This is approximately measured by the number of index terms assigned to a document (although it is possible that more than one index term may be necessary to represent some themes).
High exhaustivity tends to be a feature of databases indexed automatically on the basis of the text of the document.
In contrast to higher specificity, higher exhaustivity increases recall at the cost of impaired precision.
The more secondary themes that are indexed in a document, the more documents that will be retrieved, but in many instances these will treat the topic being sought only as a  subsidiary subject and so be judged as only marginally relevant.
A high exhaustivity of indexing, then, is beneficial where a thorough search is required, but may be a handicap when only a few highly relevant documents are sought.
Error will be present in any system which involves human intervention.
Computers are reliable and less prone to error provided they are instructed or programmed appropriately and correctly.
Errors, such as indexers assigning unsuitable terms to concepts or omitting relationships, will affect precision by producing unsuitable documents in response to a search; on the other hand, the same documents will fail to be identified when a search is conducted under the terms which should have been assigned to the document, thus reducing recall.
Documents and information can be lost forever by faults in inputting.
Thus care in indexing is essential and systems should be designed in such a way as to minimize the possibility of error.
Clear instructions are essential in indexing tools such as thesauri, subject headings lists and classification schemes.
The theory of bibliographic classification
13.1 Why theory?
A study of bibliographic classification could concentrate solely upon the major and some of the more minor bibliographic classification schemes used today.
However, although such a study might permit some comparison of different schemes, this pragmatic approach would not provide the parameters for comparison; nor, indeed, would it identify any criteria that classification schemes should meet.
A study of the underlying features of the classification process and the components of a classification scheme is thus a preparation for the more critical and informed application of classification schemes.
Further, classification and the network of relationships between subjects can be a fascinating study in itself, even devoid of application.
This chapter is relatively succinct and goes little further than identifying the major ideas concerning classification theory that have emerged during the twentieth century and before, and indicating their applications.
There are, in summary, two important applications for classification theory:
1.
New theories can be applied in the development and revision of existing schemes.
These are often large general schemes.
2.
New theories can be used as the basis for new schemes.
Most such new schemes will not be general, but rather special classification schemes designed for a particular application or subject.
Before proceeding it may be wise to offer some definitions.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary defines a class as
a number of individuals (persons or things) possessing a common attribute and grouped together under a general or class' name; a kind.
sort, division.
To continue, a classification scheme is defined as ‘an orderly arrangement of terms or classes’.
The application of such a scheme to a set of documents should result in the ordering or arranging of that set of documents into groups or classes according to their subject content.
In so doing the classifier should group documents  on the same subject together into one class, and arrange classes of documents in a useful order with respect to one another.
Classification, then, is the grouping of like objects.
It is not self-evident.
If a small child is asked to group a set of objects he may gather together items according to their colour (for example, all brown objects) or according to their normal use (for example , all cutlery).
Similarly with classification, the grouping is not self-evident.
The classification scheme is intended to act as an authority in selecting the relationships to be shown.
A classification scheme comprises three components:
the schedules, in which subjects are listed systematically showing their relationships;
the notation which is the code for use in the index or catalogue and has a self evident order which helps in signalling the arrangement; and
the alphabetical index which provides an entry vocabulary or a list of terms for first consultation, as well as identification of the place of a subject within the scheme.
In order to support these three elements and to ensure that schemes are updated, it is important to have some organization which takes responsibility for revision and publication.
This chapter considers each of these components of a classification scheme in turn.
The ideas introduced in this chapter form the basis for the comparison and evaluation of some of the major schemes in Chapter 14.
13.2 Schedules
The schedules the list of subjects — are the heart of the classification scheme.
The schedules determine which subjects can be effectively represented by the scheme, and which relationships are most effectively reflected by it.
What must be recognized is that in approaching different collections, different users at different periods in time will place varying requirements on a scheme, both in terms of the subjects that should be included and also in terms of the relationships that need to be shown.
Any scheme which attempts to remain stable over an extended time period will in some sense be a compromise.
13.2.1 The requirements of an effective schedule
Before examining the two main means of constructing classification schedules, it is as well to consider what the objectives of the designer of a classification scheme should be.
Although some of the criteria listed below may appear obvious, it is necessary to state them because, sadly, some of the major schemes do not meet  these standards.
It is easiest to discuss the criteria for effective schedules on two levels: first, in terms of the main classes or groups in the scheme, and second, in relation to the treatment of specific subjects.
In a general classification scheme, a main class is one of the broad classes into which knowledge is divided before further analysis begins and for which there is no broader containing class.
In respect of the main classes, the following requirements can be specified:
1.
All major disciplines should be represented.
Any major omission will lead to a group of documents which cannot be classified under the scheme.
In a general scheme, all disciplines in human knowledge must obviously be represented.
In a special scheme it is sufficient to identify the main subjects of the application to be covered.
2.
The space in the scheme for a discipline should be approximately proportional to the size of the literature of that discipline.
If not, subjects with limited literature may be subdivided too extensively, producing unused or little used subdivisions, whereas ‘large’ subjects, if allocated only the same number of subdivisions, will have some trying to accommodate unmanageable quantities of literature.
If main classes are unbalanced in size and more subdivisions are made in some classes than others (to cater for the extensive literature of a larger subject), then long notations may result in the ‘larger’ areas.
Measuring the size of the literature of a discipline may present problems, however.
3.
The order of classes should bring related subjects into proximity.
The object of classification is to group related subjects and, at the same time, to separate them from other subjects in other groups.
With a large stock the order of main classes may not be particularly important, although most users would appreciate disciplines placed adjacent to related disciplines.
Thus, language and literature, medicine and physiology, and botany and agriculture could conveniently be placed close to each other.
Although recognizing some such affinities between subjects, it is more difficult to find an overall order of main classes which suits everybody.
4.
1, 2 and 3 have assumed a stable body of knowledge.
This is not the case, so the fourth criterion must require that there be provision for major change in the main classes in order to reflect:
(a)
the extension of developing disciplines, as measured by the relative size of the literature, and as has been evident recently in various areas of the social sciences and in computer science;
(b)
the reduction of contracting disciplines, as measured by the relative size of the literature, and as has been evident for some time in religion and philosophy; and
(c)
the changing relationships between disciplines and the growth of interdisciplinary topics, such as energy and industrial safety.
Within main classes, the schedules must meet requirements in respect of their ability to cover all subjects and all the relationships that might be encountered in the literature to which the scheme will be applied.
It is important that:
1.
There be a clear place for each simple subject, which is regarded as falling within one of the major disciplines in the scheme.
Thus there must be a clear place for poetry, probably in the discipline of literature, and a clear place for lasers, probably in the discipline of physics.
2.
There must be a clear place for every complex subject likely to be encountered in the literature.
Thus, within the discipline of literature, there must be a place not only for poetry, but also for nineteenth-century German poetry, and a place somewhere for the use of fibre optics in cable television.
3.
The order of subjects must be systematic and generally acceptable to the anticipated users of index or collection; it should also facilitate effective browsing between related subjects.
Thus, for example, various books on growing different flowers (such as roses, chrysanthemums, dahlias and sweet peas) should be close to one another when arranged on shelves in accordance with the classification scheme.
4.
There must be provision for changes necessary to keep the coverage of subjects adequate for new literature.
In other words, there must be scope for:
(a)
new simple and complex subjects.
Although provision must be made for new simple subjects, new complex subjects are much more likely to occur.
Knowledge generally evolves from an identifiable base, and often new subjects arise from the coming together of two previously separate subjects.
(b)
topics which have ceased to be the subject of new literature to be deleted from the scheme at an appropriate moment.
(c)
a recognition of changes in the relationships between subjects.
5.
Schedules must be published (either internally or externally), so that the scheme can be applied by those who might find it useful.
In the attempt to match the above criteria, there are two fundamentally distinct avenues leading to the construction of the schedules of a classification scheme.
These two methods, faceted classification and enumerative classification, are introduced in the next two sections.
Faceted classification is now accepted as the more systematic way of constructing a classification scheme in today's environment of rapid development of knowledge and of the literature in which that knowledge is recorded.
However, many of the major bibliographic classification schemes in use in libraries today were constructed according to the principles of numerative classification.
Thus an appreciation of both methods is necessary to an understanding of classification schemes.
3.2.2 Enumerative classification
Enumerative classification schemes aim to enumerate or list all subjects present in the literature which the scheme is intended to classify.
Thus all simple and all compound or complex subjects are listed.
Since to present all subjects in the literature would generate very lengthy schedules, the listing of subjects must be selective.
The enumeration is normally achieved, first, by identifying the main disciplines to be covered by the scheme, either on a philosophical or pragmatic basis, and allocating each a main class status.
Second, each discipline is divided into subclasses.
This process of subdivision is continued until an appropriate level of specificity has been achieved, and all subjects that are required to be represented have been listed in their appropriate places.
The object is to provide one place, and one place only, for each subject.
Figure 13.1 shows how this process can be executed.
The Library of Congress Classification Scheme is very evidently enumerative, but then all the major classification schemes are.
The enumeration in such schemes reflects an analytical approach to knowledge, with subjects subdivided into their component subfields.
The subdivision of a subject defines the categories in that area of the scheme.
Such schemes are essentially analytical in nature, but do not permit any synthesis or joining together of concepts that have been divided from one another.
Enumerative classification can be reasonably effective if subjects are divided by applying a consistent ‘characteristic of subdivision’.
In other words, it is important that all subclasses of a more general class are types of the same thing.
One major criticism of many of the major schemes is that they do not subdivide subjects according to consistent characteristics.
For instance, a quick examination of the subclasses of the architecture schedules in Dewey shows that the subdivisions are not all of the same type.
Instead, they include classes covering architectural periods (for example, Ancient Architecture from the earliest times to ca. 300, and Architecture from 300 1399), the purpose of buildings (e.g. public structure, buildings for religious purposes) and method (architectural structure)(see Figure 13.1).
To consider effective division by a ‘principle’ or ‘characteristic’, consider the garments in a clothes shop.
They can first be divided by the principle or characteristic of function (into, for example, overcoats, underwear, dresses) and then further subdivided within these functional groups by other principles or characteristics such as size, price range, material or colour.
It is important to recognize that division must be by one principle at a time.
In other words, all the classes for functions of clothes must be first enumerated before we proceed to consider subdivision by other principles, such as price.
This consistency in subdivision is important in improving the predictability of the classification and minimizing the opportunities for cross-classification (see below).
For example, if we seek a document on the economic history of Germany and we know that works on history are    arranged first by country, then by social process and then by period, it will be easier for us to find this document than if the subdivision was less systematic.
Although the enumerative approach to the design of a classification scheme can be traced to the Greeks, long experience has shown that enumerative classification schemes are relatively inflexible and, whilst providing a working subject order, do not always adequately allow for all subjects.
The problems that are encountered with enumerative classification schemes can be identified as follows:
1.
If all subjects, simple or compound, are listed in schedules, then the list becomes very long.
The alternative — faceted classification -requires only the listing of simple one-concept subjects (from which notation for compound subjects can be constructed as necessary) and permits much more succinct schedules.
Excessive schedule length has been one reason for the use of the faceted approach in updating major schemes.
For instance, in a fully enumerative scheme it would be necessary to list a category for ‘flavourings used in the cooking of foods in hotels’ if this degree of specificity were required.
2.
Since the enumeration of all subjects generates excessively long schedules, in practice the listing of subjects must be selective (even if relatively long schedules are acceptable).
Any complex subjects which are not present in the scheme must be placed in a more general category where they cannot be distinguished from other subjects.
The selection of certain subjects to be specified and the omission of other subjects is rather dependent upon the collection to be classified; thus, especially with regard to the selection process, it is difficult to design a scheme which is suitable for a number of different libraries.
3.
Cross-classification, or the availability of more than one place for a subject, is quite common in a discipline-oriented scheme that is, a scheme which starts by choosing main classes to coincide with major disciplines.
Pottery, for example, may be treated as art, science or technology, and within a discipline oriented scheme the opportunity will probably exist to classify pottery in at least any one of these three disciplines.
In general, schemes with disciplines as main classes present problems in classifying ‘concretes’.
In such schemes it is often difficult to identify all literature on a given concrete at one location.
For example, railways, children, substances (such as gold), ethnic groups, computers or rabbits may all have more than one place in an enumerative discipline-based classification scheme.
4.
Enumerative schemes can be difficult to revise to take account of new developments.
Every new subject which emerges in the literature and has a reasonable number of documents associated with it must be added to the list in the enumerative scheme.
Further, because it is difficult to overhaul the basic structure of an enumerative scheme without complete revision of certain sections, it is necessary to add new subjects into the existing framework of relationships.
Especially if the new subject is one which upsets the previous  structure of relationships, it will be difficult to fit into the existing order.
Even when drastic revision is seen to be necessary and accepted, the point in time at which to conduct this extensive review can be difficult to select.
The emergence of new complex subjects presents no cause for revision in a faceted scheme, provided that the simple subjects from which the complex subject can be constructed are already present.
Of course, in both enumerative and faceted schemes, it is necessary to take cognizance of new simple subjects.
This list of problems with enumerative schemes is not intended to demonstrate that enumerative schemes are not effective in the organization of knowledge.
Most major libraries use them in order to organize the stock on their shelves, and many use these schemes in the catalogues that provide access to that stock.
However, it is necessary to recognize these limitations of enumeration so that they can be overcome in practice.
Further, these less than satisfactory aspects of enumerative classification help to explain the rationale for the search for more effective methods of designing classification schemes.
13.2.3 Faceted classification
Faceted classification is accepted as providing a sound theoretical basis for the construction of classification schemes.
In various guises, the basic concepts have found application in the design of a number of special classification schemes and have influenced the revision of major bibliographic schemes.
Although some years ago it seemed that a new general classification scheme based upon the theory of faceted classification might emerge and be widely adopted, organizational factors have militated against this.
Faceted classification rests upon the definition of the concept of a facet.
First, however, some preliminary ideas.
Faceted classification arises particularly from the need for classification schemes to accommodate complex or multi-concept subjects.
Any area of knowledge embraces a number of complex subjects and some single-concept subjects.
For systematic treatment, the former must be divided into their component, single-concept subjects.
Thus, the list in Figure 13.2 (below) shows some title-like statements of complex subjects within which more than one simple concept can in general be identified.
These single-concept subjects are referred to as isolates.
Faceted classification starts by examining the literature of an area of knowledge and identifying its isolates.
In taking isolates from the literature, faceted classification rests firmly on literary warrant.
A facet, then, is the sum total of isolates formed by the division of a subject by one characteristic of division.
In other words, in the literature of a given subject area, it is normally possible to identify a number of facets and, by applying several characteristics of subdivision, to divide isolates into facets.
A characteristic of subdivision is an attribute or property which all concepts in a given facet have in common and by which isolates  can be grouped.
Some examples of facets for the subject of office management would be kinds of office, services and procedures, accommodation, equipment and supplies, personnel, organization, and control and finance.
In music literature the main facets are composer, executant (for example, instrument or voice), form of composition, elements of music, character of composition, technique, common subdivisions (for example , periodicals, encyclopaedias).
This process of analysis into facets is called facet analysis, and the resultant classification is termed a faceted classification.
Using this type of analysis as a basis, it is possible to produce a schedule of standard terms to be used in the subject classification of documents.
It should be plain that the making of a classification scheme by this process involves analysis, as single concepts must be identified and distinguished one from another.
Once constructed, the application of the classification schemes involves synthesis or the drawing together of the single concepts which are listed in the scheme from their different facets in order to specify compound subjects.
Thus, these schemes are sometimes known as analytico-synthetic.
Making a faceted classification scheme
In order to demonstrate further how a faceted classification scheme is constructed, it is necessary to identify the various stages in building such a scheme and then to illustrate these points by application to a specific subject area.
This we shall now proceed to do.
The making of a faceted classification scheme is a six-stage process:
1.
Identify facets and group isolates into them.
It is important that the characteristics of division used in this process should be mutually exclusive in order to avoid cross-classification (documents on one and the same subject being classified at different places in the scheme).
The enumeration of isolates should be exhaustive or complete for the subject area.
This can only be achieved by examining the literature of the subject area thoroughly for any isolates that might possibly have been overlooked.
Once organized into facets, the single concepts that have previously been referred to as isolates become known as ‘foci’(singular focus).
Ranganathan proposed five basic types of facets which may occur in many subject fields; these form a useful checklist in many subjects and include:
Personality, for example, types of libraries, crops, languages
Matter — constituent materials, for example, metals, plastics, components.
Energy — problem, method, process, operation, technique
Space — place, location
Time — period
Vickery has postulated that the following series of facets (or a subset of them) may be expected: Thing — part, constituent — property measure patient — process/action operation — agent —(space time).
2.
Order foci within facets.
A helpful order of foci within facets must be sought.
Standard reference works and experts may be consulted, but their appropriate order will depend upon the nature of the subject and the perspectives of its users.
First, a facet may be divided into subfacets or subclasses by the application of an additional single characteristic of subdivision.
For example a health and safety engineering facet would have subfacets such as fire protection, explosive prevention, radiation and electrical protection and others.
The process of identification of subfacets within facets will depend very much upon the nature of the latter.
One facet within a subject area may have several subfacets, whilst others may have none.
Once subclasses or subfacets have been identified and the foci grouped into these, then foci can be arranged or ordered within the facet or subfacets, as appropriate.
There are many potential ways of ordering or arranging foci, but some common ones are:
simple to complex (that is, simplest aspects of a subject first, followed by more complex aspects, methods or equipment);
spatial or geographical or geometric (for example, the arrangement of geographical areas according to their spatial location);
chronological, historical or evolutionary;
canonical, according to the established order, or
alphabetical (a useful choice when there is a list of similar types of properties or objects and no other obvious order is preferred).
3.
Decide combination order of facets.
The combination order of facets (or their citation order when the scheme is used to classify documents) has to be settled next.
The scheme lists simple or single concepts which have to be combined in order to accommodate complex subjects as they are encountered in documents.
This citation order must be selected in accordance with the user's requirements and perspective; it may follow the educational and scientific consensus of opinion as to which are the more important groupings.
It is vital to recognize that citation order determines the main categories for shelf arrangement and thus the nature of collocation.
Classification scatters as it collocates, since it groups primarily by the features listed in only one of the facets applied in classifying a document.
For example, a document on mathematics in primary schools could be classified first either by the grade facet or by the subject facet.
Although the classification notation will subsequently incorporate the notation of the second facet, the document will be placed physically according to the first facet; that is, this document will either be placed with other documents on mathematics or with other documents on primary schools.
It is necessary to decide upon a citation order so that such documents are classified in a consistent manner.
Various standard citation orders have been proposed.
Ranganathan's  fundamental facets have been important in this area.
The five facets identified above have been used as the basis for a standard citation order, that is PMEST.
A number of variations on this basic order was also proposed by Ranganathan.
4.
Decide schedule order of facets Before the schedules can be finalized, the order of the facets in the schedules must be determined.
In the interests of ease of application, the schedule order of facets is usually the combination order of the facets defined in stage 3 above, or in some cases the reverse of the combination order.
Deviations from this basic order may be useful, particularly with regard to what are known as differential facets and common facets.
Differential facets are subfacets which are placed adjacent to specific facets to which they apply; they are not generally used with all of the facets in the scheme.
Common facets may occur anywhere in the schedule order; although listed only once, they can be applied anywhere in the citation order as required to qualify appropriate concepts.
5.
Append notation Naturally a classification scheme is not complete until the notation has been added.
However, notation is never added to the schedules until the basic order of subjects has been determined.
Notation for classification schemes will be considered at greater length in section 13.3.
6.
Compile and index The compiler of the classification scheme will no doubt be all too familiar with the order of subjects within the scheme, but in the interests of other users, an index will be a necessary guide to the concepts used and their location within the scheme.
Indexes are considered further in section 13.4.
The scheme may well now be complete, but revision is recommended from time to time and thought must be given as to how this might be achieved.
Revision is considered in section 13.5.
An example of a simple faceted classification for literature
This section examines the application of the principles of facet analysis to the design of a simple classification scheme for documents on literature.
This scheme can also be used to classify the literature to which these labels apply; if so, this ceases to be a strict subject classification and becomes to some extent a classification by the form in which the literature is written; for example, its language and literary form.
We follow through the six steps enumerated above.
1.
The titles shown in Figure 13.2 can be used as a basis for the types of subjects available in the literature to be classified.
From these subject statements, it is possible to gather isolates.
Note that isolates can be divided into the following facets:
period; for example, medieval period, twentieth century
form; for example, essays, poetry
theme; for example, about cricket, about politics
language; for example, English, Italian.
Obviously once these facets have been identified, it is a relatively simple matter to group the isolates into the appropriate facet.
2.
Once foci have been grouped into facets, they must be ordered.
For this scheme it would seem sensible to order the foci within each facet differently according to the nature of the facet.
Thus we might propose the following broad arrangements within facets:
period facet; ordered chronologically
form facet; related forms grouped together
theme facet; related themes grouped together
Language facet; precedence given to major languages and their literatures.
At this stage it becomes possible to start to draft the types of lists that are shown in Figure 13.3.
This is not an exhaustive listing of all foci, but merely identifies and organizes those that can be derived from Figure 13.2 and its subject statements.
3.
Next the combination order of facets must be settled.
We could accept language, form, period, theme.
Since materials are classified and grouped first by language, all literary forms such as poetry are scattered according to language.
4.
The schedule order of facets must next be decided.
Here we have adopted a schedule order which follows the citation order.
5.
Once all other preliminary decisions have been made, notations can be assigned to the scheme.
Figure 13.3 shows a simple but effective notation.
For example, ‘A collection of nineteenth century French literature’ would be A7E7; ‘English medieval fiction’would attract the notation A2C4E2.
6.
No index is shown here, but this would be the last stage in the compilation of the scheme; besides attempting to classify some items by the scheme, the index serves to check the scheme's likely effectiveness.
13.2.4 Developments in classification theory and the Classification Research Group
The concepts associated with the application of facets in the theory of library classification and associated citation orders were first tested extensively by Ranganathan in the Colon Classification (see 14.5).
Other ideas on the theory of classification were enumerated by Bliss and embodied in the Bliss Bibliographic Classification Scheme, First Edition.
Work on the theory of classification has extended far beyond that which is evident from a study of existing classification schemes and the practice of library classification.
The Classification Research Group (CRG) has been a major force in the  development of classification theory, contributing significantly towards work on a new general bibliographic classification scheme.
The CRG was formed in 1948 after a Royal Society Scientific Information Conference.
Early work led to the production of over 20 special schemes in various areas of knowledge.
The experience thus gained provided a grounding for work on the development of a new general scheme, the first step in this regard being to identify main classes.
It was felt to be important that these main classes should be selected on the basis of a theory or set of principles.
This theory would ensure that the need for new main classes was minimized and that the basic framework of the scheme would appropriately admit every subject.
The search for main classes was first concentrated upon ‘entities’ or things.
The theory of integrative levels emerged, the essence being that the world of entities evolves from the simple towards the complex by an accumulation of properties or influences from the environment.
Thus an early draft of some of the major integrative levels was of the following form:
The CRG set about trying to define a series of integrative levels upon which it would be possible to base the main classes and their order for a new general classification scheme.
Work was centred upon the tabulation of entities.
Simultaneously with the work on integrative levels was consideration of citation order.
Five fundamental relationships were noted between concepts, and these relationships were expressed in terms of a series of relational operators.
Eventually this work on citation orders came to fruition in the rather unlikely context of a new indexing system, PRECIS.
Although the work of the CRG makes fascinating reading and has contributed magnificently in clarifying the principles of classification, much work remains to be done.
The original impetus of the CRG has been diverted into specific applications.
These include the development of the PRECIS indexing system (see 17.4), and the preparation of the second edition of the Bliss Bibliographic Classification Scheme (see 14.5).
In parallel with the work of the classification theorists, general systems theory has evolved to consider similar problems.
General systems theory is the product of various philosophers of science, such as Bertalanffy and Laszlo, and is an important area of study for the intending classification theorist.
Other work relating to the development of classification has been conducted under the auspices of UNISIST.
In 1971 plans were established to provide an international switching language which could indicate the subject fields of all publications.
Although the original intention was that this would be an intermediate language between two established languages (for example, German natural language — switching language -French natural language), the product of the work has been a new general classification scheme known as the Standard Reference Code or the Broad System of Ordering (BSO).
The final draft of the BSO was published in 1978.
More details are given in section 14.6.
Work on automatic classification should not be overlooked, although a brief mention only is permitted.
Various studies have been conducted in order to assess the extent to which computer analysis of text can contribute to the generation of a practical classification scheme.
This is a fresh avenue of approach and shows some promise.
13.3 Notation or codes
Notation or codes are appended to a sequence of topics in order to arrange them in some clearly defined order.
Thus notation or code may be used in organizing books on shelves or files in a filing cabinet.
Notation has an important impact on the effectiveness of a classification scheme.
Poor notation can impair the ability of a scheme to accommodate new subjects and can hinder effective retrieval.
Nevertheless, it is worth reiterating that notation is added to the list of subjects that comprise the schedules of a classification scheme after the subjects to be included and their order have been settled.
A unique notational symbol should be provided for each individual subject, whether it be simple or complex.
The purpose of notation is to impose a self-evident ordering on the subjects listed in the scheme.
As we have  already seen, whilst the systematic ordering of subjects might adhere to some consensus, it will not be obvious to all users of a scheme; it is the purpose of notation to permit ease of filing or ordering.
13.3.1 Types of notation
If notation is to offer a self-evident ordering, then it is important that the symbols used for the notation have a self-evident order in themselves.
There are only two sets of symbols whose orders are reasonably universally recognized: the letters of the Roman alphabet (either small or capitals) and Arabic numerals.
Other symbols are encountered in the notation of classification schemes, and although on  occasions it may be an advantage to include symbols whose filing position is not predefined, these symbols always detract from automatic ordering.
Any symbols other than letters and numbers need to have their filing value defined.
Consider, does a ‘:’ file before or after a ‘?’?
Some schemes use  punctuation marks in their notation; others use letters from the Greek alphabet.
Apart from the different character sets that can be used for notation, there are two different types of notation — pure and mixed.
Pure notation uses only one kind of symbol; for example, letters or numbers.
The Dewey Decimal Classification Scheme is one such pure notation, using numbers only in most instances; for example 714.67, 456.7.
A mixed notation uses more than one kind of symbol such as a mixture of letters and numbers or a mixture of lower case and upper case letters in specifying subjects.
Mixed notations are relatively common; the Library of Congress Classification Scheme uses a mixture of letters (upper case) and numbers; for example, DA783.
Notation is used in two contexts: in catalogues and indexes, and in arrangement of documents.
Not only is notation important in providing an ordering in both of these contexts, but it also frequently acts as the vital link between any of the following: the schedules in a classification scheme, the printed and published index to the schedules of the classification scheme, the classified sequence in a catalogue or index, and the classified order adopted for document arrangement.
Since notation has this function of linking various sequences, an acceptable notational system must fulfil certain basic requirements.
It is easiest to discuss these in terms of the human requirements upon notation; indeed, even with computer-based catalogues and indexes, people will be required to use and write or remember notation (at least until the day when document arrangement is no longer relevant, or when machines are widely available to re-file information, regardless of size or form).
Obviously, computers and the use of notation in computerized systems may place additional constraints upon the nature of notation or, conversely, may eliminate the need to consider some of the characteristics listed below.
For instance, whilst a person may be concerned about the length of notation, this is not usually important to a computer; moreover, a computer has little use for mnemonics (it does not forget!).
Expressiveness, on the other hand, can be extremely useful in building search strategies in computer-based systems.
13.3.2 Ease of use
The notation or code must be easy for users to remember, write, type and match.
Factors which influence the use of notation include the following:
1
Simplicity, or the ease with which notation can be remembered.
It is, for example, generally easier to remember 681.945.6 than 6819456, and easier still to remember a mixed notation such as 532CRM721.
2
Brevity can make an obvious contribution to ease of use.
The shorter the  notation, the easier it is to remember.
A number of factors determine the length of the notation in a classification scheme.
These include:
(a)
The base of the notation, or the number of characters in the character set.
Obviously, using A to Z as the basic character set, 26 subjects can be represented by single character notation.
Using 1 to 9 as the base, to cover 26 subjects some would have to be allocated a two-character notation.
(b)
The allocation of the notation will also affect its length.
Uneven allocation of notation to subjects with the same size of literature,(or the same number of subdivisions being allocated different notational space) will cause notation for some subjects to be exceptionally long.
For example, suppose French literature is denoted by 56 and Bulgarian literature by 768, then the notation of all subdivisions of Bulgarian literature will be one character longer than their equivalents in French literature.
Uneven allocation will thus lead to some subjects having relatively short notation at the expense of others with relatively long notation.
In practice, uneven allocation often arises with the development of subjects; the original allocation of the scheme becomes less balanced with time and the emergence of new subdivisions.
Provision for synthesis often leads to long notation, for two reasons.
First, synthetic schemes tend to facilitate detailed specification, and thus inclusion of a larger number of subjects.
In order to distinguish between all these subjects, it is inevitable that longer notations are used.
In addition, synthesis often requires the use of a facet indicator, to mark the beginning of a new facet; for example , ‘,’, ‘:’.
(c)
Expressiveness can be another feature which contributes to a lengthier notation.
Each step of subdivision involves an extra character (see below).
3.
Deliberate mnemonics are devices which help the user to remember and recall the notation for given subjects.
In addition to ease of use and brevity, either systematic and/or lateral mnemonics may be exploited.
Systematic mnemonics is the use of the same notation for a given topic wherever that topic occurs.
Synthetic devices often lead to this type of mnemonics.
For example, in the tables in the Dewey Decimal Classification Scheme, 42 is always used for England and Wales, and 03 for Dictionaries and Encyclopaedias.
Further, 9 is used to represent history and geography in a number of different contexts.
Literal mnemonics are abbreviations or letters which are easily associated with the name of a subject.
Thus we might use ‘C’ for Chemistry or ‘M’for Music.
Unfortunately, literal mnemonics can only be applied to a very limited number of subjects in a scheme or the order of subjects will be distorted.
Thus ‘M’ for Music will mean that an adjacent class, such as Fine Arts, must be denoted ‘N’.
13.3.3 Hospitality
It is necessary that any notation be hospitable to the insertion of new subjects.
It is fruitless trying to revise subjects already represented in a scheme unless a notation can be appended to accommodate any new or modified subjects.
Generally, updating calls for the insertion of new topics within existing classes, but it should also be possible to insert a new main class if the need arises.
There are two means whereby notation can accommodate, or be hospitable to, new subjects:
1.
Unassigned notation within the sequence or gaps into which subjects can be inserted.
For example, examine Figure 13.4.
Plainly, any new subjects can be offered notations which have not previously been used.
This approach is not always satisfactory because gaps may not be left in the notation at the appropriate place where a new subject belongs.
Further, it is necessary to predict in advance the areas in which new subjects are likely to arise and to leave gaps accordingly; this forecasting is obviously difficult.
2.
Decimal notation can be used.
A new subject can be inserted almost anywhere in a sequence by the use of decimal subdivision.
Thus, if 51, 52 and 53 are all allocated, and a new subject needs to be inserted between the subject at 51 and that at 52, its notation can be provided by decimal subdivision.
This will be given the notation 515 (or any notation from 511 to 519).
Note that decimal notation is also possible with letters.
Thus, ABN can be inserted between AB and AC.
13.3.4 Expressiveness
An expressive notation expresses or displays the relationship structure of subjects within the scheme.
Tn this it helps the user to recognize the structure of the scheme and to identify general subjects and their associated subdivisions.
Expressiveness often relies upon decimal subdivision which may become less systematic with the addition of new subjects.
Thus.
in the Dewey Decimal Classification we find:
620 Applied Physics
621 Mechanical Engineering
621.3 Electrical Engineering
621.48 Nuclear Engineering
624 Civil Engineering.
The need to insert Electrical Engineering and Nuclear Engineering subsequent to the drafting of the scheme has detracted from the expressiveness of the original version.
A truly expressive notation would show all the different branches of Engineering as equivalent.
For instance:
620 Applied Physics
621 Mechanical Engineering
623 Electrical Engineering
625 Nuclear Engineering
627 Civil Engineering.
In order to achieve the above expressiveness, major reallocation of notation would have been required; this is not deemed desirable.
Some schemes deliberately opt for a non-expressive notation.
A good example is the British Catalogue of Music Classification which abandons expressiveness in favour of allocating brief notation to the most common concepts.
Figure 13.5 shows a small extract.
The third column, which gives a hypothetical expressive notation, demonstrates that it is longer in most instances than the actual notation allocated in column one.
A compromise between expressive and non-expressive notation is to be found in the Second Edition of the Bliss Bibliographic Classification Scheme.
13.3.5 Synthesis
There must be the possibility of achieving synthesis within the notation if any synthetic elements are present in the scheme.
In major enumerative schemes, synthesis is often controlled by careful instructions regarding citation order and the way in which the notation for complex subjects is to be built up from its components.
In faceted schemes, synthesis is often achieved with the intercession of a facet indicator which makes it possible to identify which parts of the notation have been drawn from any distinct facet.
Capital letters and various punctuation symbols such as:,, ',may be enlisted as facet indicators.
Thus in the notation FcdEdm, it is possible to observe that the notation Fcd comes from one facet and Edm from a second.
Without the use of the capital and small letters in combination, it would not have been possible to identify how this piece of notation had been synthesized.
Some schemes use retroactive notation in order to signal new facets.
Retroactive notation makes it possible to indicate distinct facets without recourse to mixed notation.
Thus, the self-evident order of a single character set is maintained.
Retroactive notation is achieved by subdividing a letter by letters which follow it in the alphabet (since retroactive notation based upon numbers would be rather restrictive in the number of classes or facets that could be indicated, letters are normally used).
Take, for example, BMNFRSMXZWY as a synthesized piece of notation.
In the synthesized notation, an earlier letter than the letters prior to it in the notation signals a new facet; for example, B, F, M and W in the above signal new facets.
13.3.6 Flexibility
Some users and classifiers find it beneficial to have a notation which is sufficiently flexible to permit a variety of citation orders to be adopted as appropriate to the document and the user's perspective.
Thus, for instance, the Universal Decimal Classification would permit notation to be combined in different orders.
766 for commercial graphic art and 659.3 for mass communication may be combined as 766:659.3 or 659.3:766.
13.3.7 Shelf notation
Notation which is to be inscribed on the spine of books may need to be shorter than that used in catalogues, indexes, databases and bibliographies.
It is helpful if an abbreviated notation (which merely shows the broad subject category to which the document belongs) can be readily derived from the full notation.
Expressive notation is generally easier to truncate — by deleting final characters to create the notation for a more general subject.
For example, in Figure 14.3, the notation  641.493 could be assigned for the Preservation of Poultry and used in the catalogue, but the truncated notation 641.4 could be used for shelf arrangement.
13.4 Index
The index to the classification scheme, which is published as part of the scheme, serves two purposes:
1.
to locate topics within the systematically arranged classification, and
2.
to display related aspects of a subject which have been scattered by the order of subjects chosen in the main classified order.
The index should complement the classification scheme, and the relationships shown in the index should supplement those in the main classified sequence.
There are two types of indexes to be found in classification schemes: a relative index and a specific index.
The relative index is the more common.
A relative index as originally proposed by Melville Dewey, contains at least one entry for each subject in the scheme.
By use of the alphabetical sequence, it gathers together all aspects of a concrete subject which are likely to have been scattered by a discipline-orientated approach in the basic order of the scheme.
Figure 14.4 shows a number of entries concerned with ‘land’ and its variants and located at a variety of places in the main sequence.
A specific index can be devised if the classification scheme is such that there is only one location for each subject.
Thus one specific entry can be made for each subject in the index.
This will be appropriate for simple subjects in a faceted classification scheme.
Many of the points which are made concerning alphabetical indexes in Chapters 15, 16 and 17 may also be applied to the construction of indexes to classification schemes.
13.5 Organization and revision
For a scheme to be successful in the long term it is vital that there should be an organizational structure to support it.
Initially, it is necessary that the scheme be published and available for purchase, and that its use be generally promoted.
But the most important function of the organization is to provide a mechanism for the revision of the scheme.
The use of a scheme in centrally or cooperatively produced catalogue records can also be important in establishing its future.
Revision is necessary to make provision for emerging subjects.
In order that the scheme remains popular, it is vital that revision is conducted with regard to users' needs.
To this end some consultative procedure is to be recommended.
However, lengthy and complex consultative committees can hinder revision and make for a slowly changing scheme.
A number of publication strategies are possible for announcing the modifications to classification schemes:
1.
publish a new edition at appropriate intervals, for example every few years.
2.
publish new editions of parts of the schedules at intervals, for example, new editions of specific subject areas.
3.
publish changes as they are accepted in a periodical publication, cumulating these in a new edition of all or parts of the schedules, as suitable.
These new schedules will reflect the following means of revision of the new subject structure and listing:
expansion, to permit the addition of new subjects or more specific subdivision of existing subjects;
reduction, to take out subjects and their subdivisions which are no longer used;
relocation, in order to rectify an inappropriate placement, to eliminate dual provision (more than one place for one subject) and to make room for new subjects;
changes in terminology, to allow for new subject descriptions to be incorporated into the scheme as subjects change their names.
Although revision is necessary so that the schedules remain suitable for classifying new literature, it must be remembered that there is a gulf between publishing the schedules in an updated form and applying them.
When new schedules are made available to an organization using a classification scheme, it has three options:
1.
ignore the new schedules;
2.
use the new schedules to classify new stock, but leave the old stock classified according to earlier editions of the schedules; or
3.
use the new schedules to classify new stock, and also reclassify the old stock, which has usually been classified according to an earlier edition of the scheme.
Option 3 clearly requires the most work, but equally clearly is the most satisfactory.
However, as Figure 13.6 demonstrates, reclassification can be a major exercise involving much relocation of stock, and this is clearly a serious disincentive.
Particularly in a large organization, reclassification can be a major exercise, although it can be facilitated by the support given by computer-based catalogue records.
Thus Dewey's policy of integrity of numbers has found great favour: an undertaking has been made that a piece of notation will not be revised and given another meaning.
This limits the need for libraries to reclassify, but also restricts the revision process of the Dewey Decimal Classification Scheme.
Bibliographic classification schemes
14.1 Introduction
There are a number of important general classification schemes.
Each of these is sufficiently significant to repay study in its own right, and some are an essential preliminary to understanding catalogues, indexes and shelf arrangement of stock in libraries.
In addition, an appreciation of the distinction between such general schemes and special classification schemes is a component of the complete appreciation of classification practice.
A study of the major general schemes reveals a wide gulf between theory (as outlined in the previous chapter) and practice (as reflected in the major schemes).
The existing major general classification schemes observe few of the theoretical bases for sound classification.
In particular, most were constructed before the ideas of facet analysis were developed.
Thus these major schemes are essentially enumerative and suffer from the limitations of enumerative classification outlined in the last chapter.
Clearly, the originators of the major schemes cannot be criticized for being ignorant of principles which were not recognized when their schemes were initiated.
Indeed, knowledge was more limited and collections generally smaller when the schemes were devised, and so an analytic approach to classification would have been less appropriate than it is today.
Nevertheless, whatever the basis for the major enumerative schemes, they must be judged for their suitability for application in current libraries and information centres.
It is therefore reasonable to apply the principles of facet analysis in order to evaluate the schemes and to identify any limitations.
Also, within the constraints imposed by the basically enumerative framework, the revisers of the major schemes do attempt to take account of a more systematic approach to classification in any proposed revisions of these schemes.
The three major schemes — the Library of Congress Classification Scheme, the Universal Decimal Classification Scheme and the Dewey Decimal Classification Scheme — are treated in most detail, since they account for a good proportion of classification practice.
Other general schemes that demonstrate specific features of classification theory or practice are mentioned briefly, and the rationale for special schemes is explored.
14.2 The Dewey Decimal Classification (DC)
The Dewey Decimal Classification (abbreviated to either DC or DDC) is arguably the most important bibliographic classification scheme.
It boasts a strong organizational basis, being published and revised regularly by the Forest Press and edited by part of the Processing Department of the Library of Congress on the advice of the Decimal Classification Editorial Policy Committee.
It features elements of many of the trends in classification theory and practice over the past 100 years.
Perhaps most important of all, it is used in libraries of all types throughout the English-speaking world and has been translated into many languages.
It has found particular favour in public libraries in the UK and the US and is also used extensively in school and college libraries.
It is difficult to ascribe the popularity of the DC to any particular feature, and its continuing use is probably related to the combination of desirable or acceptable features.
DC has also been used in the British National Bibliography (BNB) and is used in both BNB MARC and LC MARC records.
Despite its pre-eminence, or possibly because of it, DC has its critics.
DC is certainly not regarded as the perfect classification scheme even in sectors where there is no serious alternative.
It is considered rather as a pragmatic solution to the classification of library and information materials; however its contribution in this context should not be underrated.
The scheme has passed through 20 editions.
The twentieth edition is published in four volumes: volume 1, introduction and tables; volume 2: schedules, 000 599; volume 3: schedules 600 99; volume 4: index, manual.
The scheme has been praised for its clear and well-presented schedules, and this is definitely one of its strengths even if the schedules may seem a little daunting on first acquaintance.
14.2.1 Main classes
The scheme is divided into ten main discipline-oriented classes as shown in Figure 14.1.
The scheme is basically enumerative with simple and composite or compound subjects listed within each class.
Each main class can be subdivided into ten major subclasses, and then each of these subclasses into ten more specific classes and so on.
until all subjects that need to be specified have been enumerated.
There are exactly ten subclasses available at each step of division, a restriction which has sometimes hindered any systematic development (where, for instance, a subject needs to be subdivided into 12 main subclasses or branches).
Obviously sometimes not all ten of the possible subclasses are necessary, so that subdivision of a subject may be into less than ten subclasses.
This limit of ten has been a particular handicap in respect of the main classes.
The limited notational base provided by numbers (instead of, say, letters) has required that all subjects be fitted into ten main classes.
This has led to some unlikely liaisons.
For instance, Music and Sports both find themselves in the Arts.
Agriculture and Medicine are both treated in the Applied Sciences, and the Social Sciences class, 300, subsumes Economics, Politics, Law and Education.
Some would argue that many of these areas are disciplines in their own right and merit their own main class.
Other critics have turned their attention to the order of the main classes in DC.
This order is consistent with the established relationships between subjects at the time that the scheme was first published (1876), but produces some strange collocations for today's literature.
In particular:
Language 400 is divided from Literature 800
Technologies are separated from their underlying class; for example, Chemistry 540 but Chemical technology 660.
Buildings at 690 is separated from Architecture at 720.
Also within main classes there are occasional unlikely collocations.
One of the most obvious of these is Psychology at 150, within the Philosophy class, 100.
Another problem with the main classes is that they are unbalanced.
Today, the quantity of literature in the class 100 Philosophy is small compared with that in, say, the 500 Science, or 600 Technology classes.
The apportionment of subjects to main classes reflects the state of knowledge when the scheme was designed.
14.2.2 Synthesis
Elementary synthesis was introduced to the scheme as early as the second edition.
By the twentieth edition synthesis had become a well-established mechanism for allowing detailed specification without resorting to exceedingly lengthy schedules.
Synthesis operates in two ways: through the tables and through the ‘add to’ instructions.
The twentieth edition has seven tables, as listed in Figure 14.2.
These tables may be applied, in carefully selected subject areas and under the guidance of explicit instructions, in order to subdivide a subject found in the main schedules.
Thus   whilst the main schedules may give a number for ‘Cats’, by the application of Table 1 it is possible to distinguish between a document which is an encyclopaedia concerned with cats, and a document on societies concerned with cats.
The Tables remove the need to list ‘common subdivisions’ in each of the many places where they might be applied; indeed, one list suffices for applications with respect to many different subjects.
The content of the Tables is reminiscent of the Tables in the Universal Decimal Classification, and, indeed, they were to some extent inspired by the latter.
However, the use of the Tables in DC is much more closely monitored than it is in UDC.
Table 1 may be used anywhere in the schedules, entirely at the discretion of the classifier.
Tables 2, 5, 6 and 7, however, may only be applied by the classifier where instructed.
Sometimes such instructions are in the main schedules, but on other occasions they may be found in one of the other Tables, for example Table 1 or Table 4.
Table 3 is intended solely for use in the 800 literature main class, and Table 4 for use in the 400 language main class.
Generally, notation from the Tables is added to notation in the schedules to make a more specific number.
A few examples are useful.
In the first example below, 743 for Drawing is taken from the main schedules, and 03 for Dictionaries is added from Table 1 to make the notation 743.03 for a dictionary of drawing.
Instructions for the use of Tables is always given either in the Tables or in the main schedules where the Tables are to be applied.
These instructions determine the citation order of the various concepts represented by the Schedules and the Tables and remove the need for facet indicators such as would be required were more flexibility of citation order permitted.
The other synthetic device in DC is the ‘add to’ instructions.
This permits subdivisions which are enumerated under one subject in the schedules to be used in other specified parts of the schedules, as instructed.
For example, the extract in Figure 14.3 instructs the user to apply various preservation techniques (in 641.41641.47) to various meats and allied foods (in 641.49).
Thus ‘freezing poultry’ is 641.49353, taking'53' from 641.453.
Like tables the ‘add to’ instructions remove the need to repeat subdivisions under several different subjects.
14.2.3 Notation
The notation used in DC is pure and consists solely of numbers.
The numbers are used decimally.
The simplicity and flexibility of the notation of DC are recognized to be two of its strengths.
A particularly attractive feature of the notation is its expressiveness.
Although expressiveness is maintained as far as possible, it has to be sacrificed on occasions in order to insert new subjects.
So, for example, we find:
551.577 Precipitation
551.578 Specific forms of precipitation
551.579 Snow surveys
where the latter two numbers are, strictly, subdivisions of the first.
Generally, the notation is hospitable to new subjects, since they can be inserted by decimal subdivision.
For example 611.5 can be used to represent a new subject which has links with the subjects at both 611 and 612; however, unless the new subject is a subdivision of 611, to place it at 611.5 will impair the expressiveness of the notation.
The notation is reasonably simple.
It is made easier to remember by inserting a decimal point after the first three numbers, and by grouping subsequent digits into threes, for example 641.738 423.
The notation from the Tables provides systematic  mnemonics to a limited extent, since the same notation is used for a concept whichever main class number it qualifies.
Thus 03 (from Table 1) becomes identified with a dictionary or encyclopaedia and recurs in the notation for the Generalia class 030 for general dictionaries and encyclopaedias.
Similarly 09 from Table 1   represents geographical and historical treatment while 900 is the main class for Geography and History.
The concept of a three-figure minimum for all notation was introduced in the second edition.
Thus main classes are denoted by 300, 600, 800 and so on, and not just 3 or 6.
The expressive notation facilitates abridgement in order to specify broader categories.
Thus long notation with exact specification may be used in catalogues or national bibliographies; the class number appropriate to shelf arrangement for a small collection may be derived from the full notation merely by deleting final digit(s).
14.2.4 Index
An important feature of the scheme in its creator's eyes was the relative index.
The rather more detailed enumeration (1000 classes listed) than in previous schemes necessitated an alphabetical index to the classes.
Note how related subjects are drawn together in the extract from the index in Figure 14.4.
The relative index has been influential in indexing practice, and many of its principles are incorporated into indexing methods, such as chain indexing.
14.2.5 History and organization
In 1876, Melville Dewey published A Classification and subject index for cataloguing and arranging the books and pamphlets of a library.
This first edition consisted of 12 pages of introduction, 12 pages of tables and 18 pages of index.
It had three novel features:
1.
relative location, instead of the more usual fixed location.
In fixed location, notation was physically attached to certain places on the shelves and books were always filed in the same place.
Fixed location is difficult to maintain with a fast-growing collection;
2.
relatively detailed specification, which was made possible because of the change from fixed to relative location, and
3.
the relative index, which became necessary once a reasonable number of subjects had been enumerated.
With the second edition a further important principle was established.
This was the concept of ‘integrity of numbers’.
Dewey recognized that extensive reclassification was unpopular and that a classification scheme needed to remain relatively stable from one edition to the next.
In the second edition Dewey announced that henceforth the structure of the scheme would not be fundamentally changed.
Up to and including the fourteenth edition, progress seemed synonymous with ever-increasing detail.
However, much of the detail in the fourteenth edition was a product of haphazard revision.
For example, medicine ran to 80 pages, whereas the schedule for chemical technology had hardly been modified since the second edition.
The fifteenth edition, published in 1951, represented a determined effort to update and unify the schedules.
More balanced schedules were achieved by pruning the 31 000 subjects enumerated in the fourteenth edition to 4700.
Also, many subjects were relocated and the index was drastically pruned.
Although the fifteenth edition met with some success, it was not generally popular.
A period of seven years was set as the publication cycle for new editions; the sixteenth edition thus appeared on time in 1958.
In respect of the extent of enumeration and location of some topics, the sixteenth edition reverted to the fourteenth.
A detailed index was published in a separate volume.
The sixteenth   edition contained the first of the  Phoenix schedules.
Thus completely new — or  Phoenix — schedules were included for Inorganic and Organic Chemistry.
The sixteenth edition was probably the first of the more recent editions to be widely accepted.
The seventeenth edition met with mixed reactions.
It introduced greater facilities  for synthesis, and the Areas Table appeared for the first time.
A more careful distinction was made between common and subject subdivisions.
 Phoenix schedules for General and Special Psychology were included, and examples of Western bias were less evident.
For example, non-Christian religions were developed in more detail, and in many places a user was able to treat his own country or religion as the preferred category.
The eighteenth edition, published in 1971, is significant in having been adopted by the Library of Congress and BNB for their MARC records.
This move has probably affirmed the future of DC.
The eighteenth edition continued changes made in the sixteenth and seventeenth editions.
In the interests of clarity, the ‘divide like’ instructions of earlier editions were modified to ‘add to’instructions.
The last five tables listed in Figure 14.2 were first introduced in the eighteenth edition.
 Phoenix schedules for Law and Mathematics were included.
The nineteenth edition, published in 1979, included  Phoenix schedules which merged 329 and 324 to give a new schedule for the Political Process, and provided a completely new schedule for Sociology.
The schedule for energy and energy resources was one of a range of expansions.
Transfer of Civilization from 910 919 to 930 990 and new area divisions for 41 42 were also incorporated.
In 1983, Forest Press decided to opt for the concept of continuous revision which means that  Phoenixes and major revisions will be released as separates between editions.
The changes will be included on MARC copy as soon as they are published.
This method should make it easier for libraries to absorb the changes.
The ramifications of this policy are:
1.
New editions will essentially be cumulations and therefore a longer gap will exist between editions.
A gap of 10 to 12 years is to be expected.
2.
More than the normal two  Phoenixes will be published between editions.
This policy has allowed the preparation of the  Phoenix on data processing and computer science, for instance, which was published without waiting for the twentieth edition.
The twentieth edition was published in 1989 in four volumes.
The most striking change was the presence of a manual which describes policies and practices of the Decimal Classification Division of the Library of Congress, offers advice on classing difficult areas and explains how to choose between related numbers.
The general format has also been improved, with an increase in the number of notes in the schedules and tables.
The ‘see also’ note which informs the user about related subjects is new.
The only completely revised schedule is 780 Music, although there are a number of other revisions and expansions.
Amongst these are revisions of the numbers, of sanitary and environmental engineering, and of pottery and porcelain.
Various sections of the Tables have also been revised.
The Relative Index has been pruned to eliminate many unlikely entries.
Although libraries may classify new stock by the latest edition of DC, earlier  editions remain important because many libraries are reluctant to reclassify, and thus leave stock classified according to earlier editions long after they have been superseded.
The main method of revision has been by the publication of new editions.
However, ‘DC&: Decimal classification: additions, notes and decisions’ is a useful means by which modifications can be announced in advance of a new edition so that reactions can be assessed before a revision is finally settled.
As mentioned above, Forest Press decided on a policy of continuous revision in 1983.
Abridged editions of DC, giving less detail than the full edition, have been available since 1894.
The latest abridged edition, the twelfth, was published in 1989, shortly after DC20 on which it is based.
The abridged edition is widely used in smaller general libraries, specifically school libraries and small public libraries.
There is also an Introduction to Dewey Decimal Classification for British schools, third edition, compiled by B A J Winslade and published in 1977.
This is a further abridged version.
Dewey established the Lake Placid Club Education Foundation which has provided funds for the continuation of the scheme.
In 1923 the Editorial Office was moved to the Library of Congress.
Thus the scheme has a sound organizational backing.
Consultation with users is achieved via the Decimal Classification Editorial Policy Committee, the British Liaison Committee and the Australian Liaison Committee.
Forest Press, publisher of the scheme, has been acquired by OCLC.
The use of DC in BNB has also been important in establishing DC in British libraries.
When BNB began publication in 1950 it relied upon the fourteenth edition of DC.
This edition was found to be inadequate in several respects, and the same could be said of all editions until the eighteenth.
By 1971, BNB was using a mixture of DC 15, 16 and 17 grafted on to a DC 14 base and modified according to BNB's own scheme.
The emergence of the MARC Project led BNB to opt for standard DC18 and confirmed the inclusion of DC numbers in both LC and BNB MARC records.
14.2.6 The future
The future of DC is assured.
The scheme is extensively used in many libraries and in national bibliographies such as the British National Bibliography.
Cooperation between the British Library Bibliographic Services Division, publishers of BNB, and the Decimal Classification Division has become more fruitful in recent years, and this is likely to further confirm the future of DC.
Many changes in cataloguing and classification can be expected in the next ten years and these must impinge upon DC, influencing its future function and the way in which the scheme will evolve.
But with the continuing need for shelf arrangement, DC will remain necessary.
Regular updating and revision must continue in order to provide for better  balance of detail throughout the scheme, for new topics and complex subjects, and to make the scheme more attractive to users outside the English-speaking world.
Appropriate revision should ensure that the scheme keeps up to date, but large scale reclassifying remains unpopular and an uneasy balance between updating and stability must be maintained; this balance is becoming increasingly difficult to sustain as knowledge changes rapidly.
14.3 Library of Congress Classification Scheme
The detailed classification scheme of the Library of Congress was evolved between 1899 and 1920, and was largely the responsibility of Herbert Putnam, Librarian of Congress, 1899- 1939.
The scheme consists of 21 classes set out in 47 separately published schedules.
Some schedules for some subject areas have now gone through several editions.
Science, for instance, is in its seventh edition.
Other schedules, notably those for Law, have yet to be published in a complete form.
(Law of Europe is now completed, but African, Asian and Soviet Law are still in progress.)
The scheme was designed for the Library of Congress and many of its features derive from this fact.
Nevertheless, other libraries do use the scheme.
In particular LCC has been regarded as suitable for the classification of large general libraries, specifically those that have been established for research purposes.
Included amongst these are university and large research libraries in the US and the UK.
Although LCC is used by other libraries, in order to understand the format of the scheme it is necessary to recognize that it was intended to fit the LC collections and services as closely as possible, without reference to outside needs and influences.
In this sense, although general in scope, in its purpose it is a special scheme.
14.3.1 Principles
The following five principles underlie the construction of LCC and are important in determining its character:
1.
LC is based on literary warrant, as is evident in the collections of the Library of Congress.
In other words, it is based on library collection, not theory.
2.
The emphasis in the scheme is to some extent on the social sciences, as this reflects the interest of the Congress.
Political science and Education are well represented.
3.
The minutely detailed classification is of the type appropriate to an extensive collection.
4.
The scheme is intended to provide a systematic approach to the arrangement of books on shelves.
5.
The scheme covers all knowledge, despite being special in purpose.
14.3.2 Main classes
The basic outline of main classes is based upon Charles Ammi Cutter's Expansive Classification which is essentially by discipline.
The alphabetical notation used to designate main classes permits many of these to be included, as shown in Figure 14.5.
Main classes are divided into subclasses which are further subdivided into form, place, time and subject aspects.
The scheme is largely enumerative.
Like all enumerative schedules, those of LC are bulky, extending to some 10 000 pages.
The scheme is essentially intended for one library — the home of the scheme's compiler and classifier.
This is given as one reason why the need for synthesis is limited.
Individual classes were originally developed by different specialists and are now kept up to date by individual cataloguers as new topics are added to the collections.
There is not necessarily any overall plan for the development and maintenance of the schedules.
Parts of the schedules differ in various respects from other parts.
It thus becomes difficult to talk in general terms about the scheme, although there are a number of features which appear reasonably consistently between different parts of the schedules.
14.3.3 Synthesis
The scheme boasts very little synthesis.
Nevertheless, some classes contain tables which may be used to extend the classes shown in the main schedules.
Types of tables can be divided into three groups:
1.
Form divisions exist in some classes, sometimes listed as a separate table.
For instance the History schedules show period divisions as part of the schedules.
2.
Subject subdivisions are gathered together into tables in some schedules, such as Language and Literature.
See Figure 14.6(a).
3.
Geographical divisions are sometimes given in full in the main schedule, and sometimes elsewhere as tables in classes.
The notation for any given geographical division varies between classes and between different parts of the same class.
See Figure 14.6(b).
14.3.4 Notation
The notation of LCC is mixed, including both letters and numbers.
Main classes are denoted by a capital letter, and in most classes a second capital letter is used to signal major sections or subclasses.
For example, Q stands for Science and QA for Mathematics, a subclass of Science.
Arabic numerals are used to denote further divisions, in an integral manner, running from 1 to 9999, as necessary.
Gaps are      left in the apportionment of notation in order to permit new subjects to be inserted.
Alternatively this can be done by decimal subdivision.
Figure 14.6(b) shows extracts from the tables where decimal subdivision has been necessary.
Cutter numbers are used to further subdivide subjects.
These consist of a capital letter followed by numbers.
For example at HD 8039 for Labour,.
B3 may be added (that is, HD8039.B3) to represent bakers, or.
E5 (ie HD8039.E5) to represent Engineers.
There is little mnemonic value to the notation, but some literal mnemonics have been attempted, for example, G for Geography, T for Technology.
14.3.5 Index
Each class has its own index.
There is no official index to the whole scheme, although an index has been published.
In the absence of a full index, users must be sure of selecting the appropriate main class before consulting the index of a specific class.
The Library of Congress Subject Headings can be exploited as a general index, since it shows LCC numbers for many of the headings listed.
This is published annually.
Approximately 36 40 per cent of headings show LC class numbers.
14.3.6 Organization and revision
Each main class is revised individually without reference to any other class.
Occasionally cross-references are included between classes.
Revision, which is done by subject cataloguers at the LC, is continuous.
As new books are received, new places are found to accommodate them.
New editions of schedules are published as staff and time permit.
All changes are published as soon as they occur in LC Classification -Additions and Changes, a quarterly publication which, unfortunately, is not cumulative.
Periodically, however, Gale Research Company publishes Library of Congress Classification Schedules — A Cumulation of Additions and Changes.
Both LC and BNB MARC records contain LCC class numbers.
These reflect revisions in practices concerning the application of LCC class numbers as they occur.
Equally the class numbers used on LC cards perform the same function.
14.3.7 The future
It is difficult to predict what the future holds for LCC.
The scheme is primarily used by LC itself and by other extensive research collections such as large academic libraries.
In such contexts, computerization of cataloguing and diversification of media will undoubtedly affect the application of LCC, but changes are likely to be slow because of the size of the libraries involved and because computerization of large numbers of cataloguing records is a huge task.
The size of the collections which currently use LCC is likely to be a significant factor in its perpetuation.
The improvement and refinement of classification at the Library of Congress are undertaken with the recognition that any change will affect the location of previously classified books.
14.4 The Universal Decimal Classification Scheme (UDC)
The Universal Decimal Classification Scheme (UDC) emerged from an attempt by two Belgians, Paul Otlet and Henri LaFontaine, to commence the compilation of the ‘universal index to recorded knowledge’ in 1894.
Contributors to the scheme would be drawn from all over the world, and the index would be international in scope.
Had this venture succeeded, the face of bibliographical control today would have been completely different.
However, the most valuable long-term effect of the plans for this index was the classification scheme which was devised in order to arrange it.
A classified rather than an alphabetical approach was necessary in the index because an internationally acceptable notation was important.
DC was already in existence, and since its notation comprised numbers only was reasonably universal.
With Dewey's permission, UDC was developed from the fifth edition of DC.
A conference in 1895 established the Institute International de la Bibliographie (IIB) to be responsible for the index.
The first edition of UDC was published in 1905.
We return to the history of the scheme later.
As its origins suggest, UDC was designed for detailed indexing of documents and not for shelf arrangement.
Thus, over the years it has been used to index reports, trade literature, periodical articles and other similar documents.
The features which contribute to UDC's suitability for detailed indexing are particularly valued in special libraries.
Thus, UDC has been extensively employed in special libraries and information centres in locations all over the world since the early 1900s.
It is also the most widely used general classification scheme on the Continent of Europe, and this in an environment where libraries have not generally seen the virtue of published classification schemes, preferring to use their own private schemes.
Since there is a preponderance of special libraries and information units in the science and technology subject areas and, in the light of UDC's consultative revision policies, UDC has been developed most fully in the areas of science and technology.
Prior to the 1970s UDC was frequently to be found in large card indexes in special libraries and sometimes in abstracting and indexing tools.
Since the introduction of computer-based indexing systems, alphabetical indexing languages have become more prevalent and UDC has suffered a reduction in use.
Ironically, this has left shelf arrangement of stock in special libraries as one of the main domains of application of UDC.
The features which characterize UDC and which make it appropriate for the applications discussed above are:
its extensive synthetic devices,
its cooperative revision procedures and
its detailed specification.
14.4.1 Main classes
The overall outline of the schedules follows DC, but there are some differences in notation, and the two schemes have diverged at various points since the original adoption of the structure of DC5 for UDC.
The main classes are listed in Figure 14.7.
This outline shows class 4 to be vacant, linguistics having been moved from 4 to 8 in 1963 to make room for future developments.
Otherwise the general structure is readily seen to be reminiscent of DC.
With this structure, UDC inherited various of the weaknesses of DC.
Both are essentially enumerative (although extensive provision for synthesis is made).
In both, the main class order can be criticized on the grounds of the separation of Sciences from their respective Technologies.
Some of the problems in main class order and allocation are alleviated by careful definition of any overlapping classes in order to clarify where any given document should be classified.
14.4.2 Synthesis and auxiliaries
The auxiliaries, a central feature of UDC, permit much more scope for flexible synthesis than can be achieved with DC or LCC.
The auxiliaries may be divided into two groups according to whether they can be used anywhere in the scheme (common auxiliaries) or are only appropriate to specific parts of it (special auxiliaries).
The auxiliaries offer a series of facets and facet indicators which permit flexible synthesis.
These auxiliaries may be used when required at the discretion of the individual cataloguer (unlike DC where specific instructions are given for most applications of the Tables or the ‘add to’ device).
Also, any number of auxiliaries may be included in one class number provided they are all required in order to label the document adequately.
The auxiliaries can be divided into signs and subdivisions and are listed in Figure 14.8.
The first auxiliaries are essentially signs which permit the combination of two or more numbers from the main schedules.
These are the plus, the stroke, the colon, the square brackets and the double colon.
The first three of these can be illustrated further:
+ is used to join the notation of two subjects which are commonly associated with one another, but which are separated by the normal sequence in UDC.
For example, 539.1+621.039 Nuclear science and technology.
In essence the ‘+’ defines a new broader discipline by creating a piece of notation which represents the merging of two separate subjects.
/is used to indicate a broader heading in the same way as +, the only   difference being that the component subjects are normally found adjacent to one another in the basic sequence.
For example, 23/28 Christianity.
Thus 23/ 28 represents the amalgamation of all of the subjects with notations between 23 and 28 into a new broader subject.
Thus 23/28 is equivalent to 23 + 24 + 25 + 26 + 27 + 28, provided that all of these notations have been assigned to subjects.
Both + and /are extending devices, and compounds formed with them file before the simple number.
: is used to combine two or more numbers from the main schedules in order to represent the separate concepts present in a multi-concept subject.
For example, 331.2:687.9 Wages in the brush industry.
The relation sign,:, is the most commonly used of these three devices and is characteristic of UDC numbers.
It should be noted that the relation sign does not indicate anything about the nature of the relationship between two subjects, but merely states that two or more concepts are treated in relation to one another in a document.
Some theorists feel that the: is too imprecise and there is a need to state the nature of a    relationship, not just to signal its existence.
Others would argue that flexibility is useful.
It is evident that when two or more pieces of notation are combined with, for instance, the colon, the order in which they are combined -their citation order needs to be considered.
For example, should the final class number be 331.2:687.9 or 687.9:331.2?
Criteria must be established for the preferred citation order in any given library.
Further comments on citation order are included later.
In addition, a mechanism for generating added entries under second and subsequent numbers in a combined number must be invented and adopted.
A process known as ‘cycling’— where each number is in turn brought into the first position in the combined number can be employed in order to generate headings for added entries.
Plainly if only two numbers have been put together for the main number, added entry headings can be generated merely by reversing the component number (e.g. main entry under 331.2:687.9 and added entry under 687.9:331.2).
The alternative to extensive added entries in a classified sequence, which can lead to extremely complex sequences, is to rely upon thorough subject indexing.
The other common auxiliaries have more in common with the Tables in DC:
Language (…=) symbolizes the language in which a document is written.
For example, 657 = 20 a work on accountancy written in English.
Form of presentation (0…) lists bibliographical forms.
For example, 623.821 (042) lectures on battleships.
Place (1/9) lists places both in the usual specific geographical divisions and also other aspects of place.
For example, 656.1 (85) transport in Peru.
Race and nationality (…=) are based on the common auxiliaries of language and may be developed from the main linguistics schedule.
For example, 394.25 (= 951) Chinese carnivals.
Time ‘…’ permits date to be specified in detail or other features of time to be reflected.
For example, 551.509 ‘405’ long-term weather forecasting.
Alphabetical and non-decimal numerical division are merely indications of how to list individuals or items which can be symbolized by a number or alphabetical abbreviation.
For example, 929 Schil Biography of Schiller 820 Shak The Works of Shakespeare
Point of view (00…) may either be added to the main number or used in conjunction with the colon to given an extended facet indicator.
In either application, the device is intended to provide a means of systematically ordering the subdivisions of a given number.
Other auxiliary devices are indicated in Figure 14.8.
Special auxiliaries are signalled by -0/-9, 0, or'.
These are listed in the area of the schedule to which they may be applied.
An auxiliary listed under a given number may be applied to  any subdivision of that number.
For example in 534–6, the -6 may be applied to all subdivisions of 534, such as 534.63.
Thus, 534–6 (Subsonic vibrations) provides -6 which can be applied with 534.63 (Measurement of frequency) to give 534.63–6 (Measurement of the frequency of subsonic vibrations).
Given this array of auxiliaries and the possibility of applying any number of them simultaneously, it is plain that a citation order for the inclusion of auxiliaries in a number must be settled.
The recommended citation order is the reverse of the filing order.
Not only is a citation order necessary for individual numbers, but a filing order for arranging numbers for different subjects with respect to one another must be determined.
None of the notational devices used in synthesis has any inherent filing order with respect to any other, so any proposed order will be artificial and must be learnt by classifiers and users.
The recommended order is shown in Figure 14.8, except that the simple number is inserted after ‘+’ and ‘/’, and direct divisions added after special auxiliaries.
Libraries may settle their own filing and citation orders.
The extent of application of the synthetic devices will vary from one library to another.
There are no particular benefits to be gained from identical application of UDC in different libraries, even though standard schedules from which local variations may depart have some value.
14.4.3 Notation
The notation is similar to that of DC.
The three figure minimum is not required for main classes and their subclasses.
Consequently notations such as the following are to be found:
6 Technology.
Applied Sciences.
63 Agriculture.
Forestry.
Stock breeding.
Animal produce.
Hunting.
Fisheries.
633 Field crops.
Industrial crops
Note also the notation for each of the main classes, as shown in Figure 14.7.
The decimal point is introduced after every three digits; for example, 631.589.2 Hydroponics.
Each of the auxiliaries has a unique piece of notation, as shown in the previous section.
The main criticism of the notation is that for more specific subjects it can be extremely long.
14.4.4 Index
The UDC has no overall index.
Only certain editions have an index, their nature being determined by the editing organization for that language.
14.4.5 History and organization
After the publication of the first edition of UDC in 1905, the 191–1918 War and the unfavourable climate after that war led to the demise of the index, but UDC continued.
The second edition of UDC was published between 1927 and 1933, while the third edition spanned the years 1934 52.
The first and second full editions were in French and the third in German.
The IIB became the Federation International de Documentation (FID) in 1937 and continued to support UDC.
Eventually the British Standards Institution became the official English editorial body; the publication of the full English edition, which was long overdue, began with the fourth edition in 1943.
This full English edition is still incomplete.
Work has now commenced on the second and third full English editions.
The full edition is published in a number of separate volumes, each pertaining to a specific subject area.
There is no general distinction between successive full English editions.
In addition to the full edition, there exist abridged and medium editions of the scheme.
The first British abridged edition was published in 1948, the second in 1957, and the third, and last to date, in 1961.
The medium edition, which is available in various languages, contains about 30 per cent of the total tables.
In actual application special libraries will often use the abridged edition as a general scheme to cover all subjects in their collection, together with the full edition for their particular subject speciality.
Alternatively, they may opt to use just the medium edition.
14.4.5 Revision
UDC's revision structure has always been essentially consultative.
One of the problems with consultation over several different language versions and many subject areas is that revision becomes slow and difficult to coordinate.
In 1984, the FID Council established a limited life UDC Management Group to implement change.
A new management structure, which came into effect at the end of 1986, has a UDC Management Board, supported by a small number of specialist committees and a two-tier revision structure.
Revision is the responsibility of five Coordinating Revision Committees (CRCs), each covering a broad subject area.
CRCs will identify priorities and seek out people to help in the revision of those priority areas.
FID continues to rely on its national members and UDC bodies for support.
14.5 Other general classification schemes
There have been a number of other general classification schemes devised over the past 100 years.
As indicated above, DC, LC and UDC are the classification  schemes most widely used in libraries today, though special schemes may be important in other contexts.
Two general schemes that have represented important milestones in the evolution of classification are briefly mentioned here: Ranganathan's Colon Classification and Bliss' Bibliographic Classification.
The Colon Classification, devised by S R Ranganathan and first published in 1933, is chiefly of interest for its development of facet analysis.
Each edition since the fifth in 1957 has, theoretically, been published in two stages: Stage I, the basic classification which gives sufficient detail for most books; and Stage 2, ‘microthought’ to cover periodical articles, patents and related materials.
The first edition comprised basic classes analysed into facets, using the colon as the notational device for synthesis; the colon was therefore an integral feature of the scheme to which it gave its name.
The Colon Classification is widely used in the Indian subcontinent, but the style of enumeration of subjects is not regarded as appropriate for Western libraries.
The overall pattern of the main classes is Science and Technology, then Humanities, and lastly the Social Sciences.
Because all classes comprise simple isolates, grouped as foci within facets and subfacets, the schedules themselves are relatively succinct.
Specialized subjects are catered for by the combination of foci.
Initially, Ranganathan used an ad hoc approach to analysis and citation order, but by the fourth edition he had started to establish the different kinds of facets to be found in each class.
Facets, he observed, could be accommodated in five groups identified by Personality, Matter, Energy, Space and Time (as introduced above in 13.2.3).
The citation order PMEST and various other facet formulae can be ascribed to Ranganathan.
The Bibliographic Classification was the work of Henry Evelyn Bliss.
In addition to BC, he also published two other major works on classification: The organisation of knowledge and the system of the sciences (in 1929) and The organisation of knowledge in libraries and the subject approach to books (first edition 1933, second edition 1939).
These works, together with BC, represent a significant contribution to classification theory.
However, despite some very sound features, the scheme foundered due to lack of organizational backing for its revision.
The full schedules of the first edition appeared between 1940 and 1953, and the second edition started to emerge in 1976.
These two editions of the scheme are quite distinct.
Bliss believed that the most important aspect of a classification scheme was the order of its main classes.
In BC all of the main classes can be grouped into four main areas: Philosophy, Science, History and Technologies and Arts.
Within main classes facets are carefully identified and many foci are listed.
However, Bliss was hostile to complete analysis, preferring to opt for a more detailed enumeration of subjects.
Specification of compound subjects is largely achieved through the use of the Systematic Schedules; these schedules are extensions of the common subdivisions of other schemes.
BC had a long gestation period, with the first outline being published in 1910, and the full schedules in three volumes between 1940 and 1953.
The first edition was essentially the work of one man and was published by the H W Wilson Company.
In 1967, the British Bliss Classification Association (BCA) was formed to take over responsibility for BC; work began on its revision in 1969 under the editorial direction of Jack Mills.
In 1975, the BCA decided to publish the second edition of the scheme in parts, commencing in 1977 with the Introductory volume and Classes J (Education), P (Religion) and Q (Social Welfare).
Classes H (Anthropology, Human Biology, Health Sciences), K (Society), T (Economics, Management of Economic Enterprises) and J (Education) have also been published, while classes A/AL (Philosophy and Logic), AM/AW (Mathematics, Probability and Statistics) and R (Politics and Public Administration) are expected soon.
The overall order of main classes in the second edition remains essentially the same as in the first edition.
The details in each class are developed with strict application of analytico-synthetic principles.
Volume 1, the Introductory volume, contains the common facets as well as a lengthy introduction which represents a very authoritative account of various aspects of classification theory.
14.6 The Broad System of Ordering
The Broad System of Ordering (BSO) is a general classification scheme which was designed primarily for information exchange and switching.
Together with BC2 it represents one of the major new general classification schemes of recent years.
BSO was prepared by the International Federation for Documentation with the support of Unesco, and was published in 1978–79.
The scheme was initiated under the auspices of UNISIST with the intention of providing a switching language.
A true switching language would permit the translation of natural language concepts expressed in, say, German, into a classification notation; from that notation it would provide a natural language expression of those same concepts in, say, French.
One essential feature of a switching language is that it be at least as specific as the languages to and from which it supports switching.
The BSO is not likely to support this function very successfully because it is a relatively broad and unspecific classification scheme, with only sufficient specification for the classification of organizations concerned with the control of information (for example, libraries, clearing houses, abstracting and indexing agencies) and not to support the indexing of, say, individual periodical articles.
The scheme was essentially devised by a team of three: Coates, Lloyd and Simandl, and has a number of interesting features.
The system has fairly low specificity; topics are not included on the usual basis of literary warrant, but rather on the basis of organizational warrant.
In other words, a topic is included if there is an information centre, source or service covering it.
Not surprisingly this can lead to gaps and uneven coverage of subjects.
The BSO includes 3500 concepts.
Within each class the concepts are analysed, using gradation by speciality and facet  techniques.
Facet analysis underlies the structure, but is not emphasized by facet indicators as in a more conventional faceted classification scheme.
Extensive provision for synthesis is made including auxiliary schedules, ‘expand like’ instructions and synthetic features in the notation.
However, the rules for synthesis are fairly complex and may be difficult to operate.
The basic order of main classes resembles fairly closely that of BC, identifying the following main areas (into which main classes can be categorized);
Knowledge generally
Science and technology
Education
Human needs
Humanities, cultural and social sciences
Technology
Language, linguistics and literature
Arts
Religion and atheism
There is an index to the schedules, but this has been criticized in connection with the inadequate size of its entry vocabulary, the number of entries in the index only exceeding those subjects listed in the schedules by about 25 per cent.
Further work on the index would make the scheme more effective.
The notation is basically numerical and non-expressive, the latter aspect being felt to limit the scheme's usefulness in computerized databases.
Probably the major factor which must be addressed before the scheme can be moved out of the realm of an interesting example of developments of classification theory into a practical classification scheme is its organizational backing.
As already noted, development and revision of classification schemes are essential to their continued usefulness.
Being designed by a small three-man team, financial and organizational support needs to be forthcoming if BSO is to have an assured future.
Plans are underway for a revised edition, which should be published in the near future as a self-financing project.
The FID relinquished responsibility for the scheme in 1990, and copyright is in the hands of the BSO Panel.
14.7 Special classification schemes
The classification schemes that have been considered so far are general bibliographic classification schemes in that they attempt to encompass all of knowledge.
Special classification schemes exist with more limited aims of covering just one main subject area, or are compiled in accordance with the interests of one user group.
Apart from the separately published special classification schemes, there are also many local variations of general classification schemes in use for special applications.
In some senses these could also be regarded as special classification schemes.
Special classification schemes are generally devised for a particular purpose and are to be found in the following environments:
1.
Indexing and abstracting services and their databases; for example, Library and Information Science Abstracts, the British Catalogue of Music, INSPEC database.
2.
Catalogues and shelf arrangements of special collections, especially industrial and research establishment libraries; for example, London School of Business Classification.
3.
Catalogues and shelf arrangements of special collections, especially those of public libraries; such as children's collections, local studies collections and map collections.
4.
Records management systems where files are stored in a topic-related order.
14.7.1 Different types of special classification schemes
A list of the different types of special classification schemes may help to indicate how these schemes may be designed for a variety of different purposes:
1.
schemes restricted to a conventional subject area or discipline; for example, music, insurance, chemistry.
2.
schemes restricted to an association of topics such as might be encountered in local collections in an industrial library or an archive.
3.
schemes restricted to a certain type of reader; for example, children; university students, general browsers.
4.
schemes restricted to a certain physical form; for example, pictures, records.
5.
schemes restricted to a certain form of publication; for example, patents, trade catalogues, unpublished archives.
6.
schemes restricted to bibliographies, indexing and abstracting services, and associated databases.
7.
schemes restricted to a certain form of presentation of ideas; for example, fiction, plays.
14.7.2 Rationale for special classification schemes
Special classification schemes are generally devised for an application for which no major general scheme is suitable.
Typical problems which arise with major schemes are that:
1.
they often do not give sufficient detail for accurate specification of highly complex subjects;
2.
they do not cater for the specialist viewpoints of any given application, since alternative approaches are not normally provided;
3.
they do not provide for flexible combination as is demanded by highly specific subjects;
4.
any flexibility or detailed specification which is possible is too often achieved by unnecessarily lengthy notation, and
5.
the filing order is not always helpful.
Most current special classification schemes have been devised with the aid of facet analysis and are thus faceted classification schemes.
Whilst it may seem attractive to design a classification scheme for each different set of circumstances, it is important to remember the drawbacks of special classification schemes and to assess thoroughly whether a published general scheme will not, after all, be acceptable.
Amongst the disincentives to compiling and maintaining a special classification scheme can be numbered the following:
1.
the work involved in compiling the scheme;
2.
the work involved in revision, especially if it seems advisable to publish the scheme, or if the scheme needs drastic revision to adapt to the changing remit of a special library or information service;
3.
limited opportunity is usually available for cooperation in application of classification or in its compilation and revision; and
4.
users need to learn a scheme which may be unusual or unique and which they might find difficult.
Despite the problems of special classification schemes, they do represent an opportunity to match users' perspectives and the organization of literature to an extent not often possible in a general classification scheme; as a result, such schemes will always have a place in the organization of knowledge.
Perhaps the major problem in devising a special classification scheme is the definition of the subject area to be covered.
First, it is necessary to define ‘core’ topics which form a homogeneous subject field, and then to assess whether users' needs can be matched by one field or whether two are necessary.
Having identified core topics, marginal or fringe topics must be listed, and the type of treatment that they are to receive settled.
It is important to realize that the scope of a scheme which apparently focuses on a relatively narrow area may be quite wide by the time all fringe topics (which are relevant to or have some impact upon the core area) have been noted.
14.7.3 Some examples of special classification schemes
The easiest means of illustrating some of the foregoing points is to introduce in outline some special classification schemes.
1.
Cheltenham Classification.
The Cheltenham Classification is a scheme for a  specific user group.
Although it covers all knowledge, it has been designed to apply specifically to collections in school libraries.
It aims for a more helpful order than the major schemes by following the groupings of subjects as they are taught in schools.
For example, each language is followed by its literature, and material on jobs and careers is given a significant place.
2.
Bogg's and Lewis Map Classification.
This is an example of a classification which is restricted to a specific physical form maps and atlases.
Main classes are based upon a division of localities into continents.
One particular strength is that it is possible to specify both the area and the subject of the map.
Detailed specification is achieved with a relatively limited length of notation.
3.
Fiction Classifications.
Fiction classifications are used extensively in public libraries.
Categorizing fiction according to a subject classification is widely recognized as difficult and unhelpful.
Many public libraries follow a scheme similar to Corbett.
In 1978, McClellan proposed a scheme based on main categories where subdivision is by readability ratings.
Thus, the symbol for easy-reading historical and period novels would be F8a.
4.
The London Classification of Business Studies.
The London Classification of Business Studies is a classification and a thesaurus for business libraries, the second edition having been published in 1979.
The first edition had met a growing need for a special classification scheme in this area, since it was published in 1970 during a period of rapid growth for business schools and business libraries.
By the publication of the second edition the scheme had been adopted by 75 libraries, many outside the UK.
The schedules are divided into three main areas.
The notation is primarily letters, but it also uses numbers to denote concepts in the auxiliary schedules.
Thus, China's industrial revolution.
politics, planning and management, 1949 to the present is classified at JKD 552/61T while Interview skills training: role play exercises is classified at FBGD/N FJ.
5.
Classification of Library and Information Science.
This scheme was developed by the Classification Research Group.
The final version was published in 1975, but possibly the earlier version which is used in Library and Information Science Abstracts is better known.
The citation order was at first unsatisfactory and modifications were made in order to better reflect the needs of users.
The citation order now gives precedence to processes, such as circulation control and cataloguing, rather than to types of libraries.
6.
British Catalogue of Music Classification.
The British Catalogue of Music Classification was developed by Coates for the British Catalogue of Music in 1960.
It is also used in various music libraries and has influenced the development of music schedules in BC2 and DC.
The schedules are divided into two parts, one covering music scores and parts, and the other concerned with music literature.
The facets for music scores and parts are: Executant (for example, trumpet), Form of Composition (for example , march) and Character of Composition (for example , military).
The facets for music literature need to    be more numerous and include Composer, Executant, Form, Elements of music, Character, Technique and Common subdivision.
For instrumental music, for example, subjects in the Executant facet would include type of executant, size or complexity of executant body, accompanying executant and original executant (for arrangements).
The notation is also interesting, being entirely comprised of letters.
More details of this notation were given above in 13.3.4.
14.8 Classification in online searching
Classification can be used in all types of online retrieval systems as an aid in subject searching.
There are three main ways in which classification can be used in online searching:
1.
Direct classification search, where the user enters a classification code and the system responds with records of items classified at or near the entered code.
Most online catalogues and some online hosts provide this facility.
The most usual approach is to lead users to a display of brief bibliographic records in class number order, so that they can browse further.
2.
Classification as a linking device or pivot.
Many UK libraries provide a subject index linking alphabetically arranged descriptive headings to classification codes.
A similar arrangement in an OPAC may allow the user to enter the system with alphabetical search terms and translate them into classification codes, and then identify the records associated with those codes.
There is no reason why the intermediate stage should not be eliminated or why a search that starts with alphabetical index terms cannot be directly translated into records at appropriate class numbers.
Such a linking system may be particularly useful in multilingual databases, with subject access through UDC.
One development of the link is the pivot.
This is based on the very obvious observation that, if a record has been identified as being relevant, other records at adjacent class numbers may also be of interest; thus the search can be developed by looking at the records associated with nearby class numbers.
BLCMP is one of the few OPACs to offer a classmark pivot.
A classmark pivot feature, using DC, was also incorporated in OKAPI.
OKAPI experience with pivots suggests some guidelines for the design of pivot-based systems:
where there is a screenful of records at a specific classification code, there should be a means of skipping to the next or previous codes;
where adjacent codes are likely to denote related subjects, some account should be taken of the nearness of adjacent codes;
the system should not encourage users to look at books classified nearby unless they are closely related;
with an enumerative classification such as LC, it may be impossible to generalize about when it is worth offering adjacent codes, and
even if the possibility exists that other books with the same class number are relevant, the system should not offer these without establishing that this is so.
3.
Direct or indirect searching of classification schedules.
The indexer has access to schedules that the searcher in general does not have available online or even in printed form; thus there is likely to be a mismatch between the indexers' and searchers' perspectives.
One way to enhance the searchers' understanding of the indexing is to make the schedules available online.
The schedules of DC, at least, are available in machine-readable form.
The Dewey Decimal Classification Online Project is the most substantial piece of research available on the use of classification in online catalogues.
The project was carried out in 1984 85, with the following objectives:
determining strategies for searching and displaying DC in an online catalogue,
demonstrating DC as a searchers' tool for subject access, browsing and display, and
testing DC's effectiveness as a searchers' tool.
The team designed two experimental catalogues known as DOC (Dewey Online Catalogue) and SOC (Subject Online Catalogue).
SOC and DOC were similar except that the latter's records were enhanced with text from Dewey schedule captions, notes and relative index.
DOC allowed hierarchical browsing of the schedule captions, as well as direct subject searching.
In DOC the words of Dewey captions, notes and relative index entries were used to index class numbers and their captions.
Thus when the user input a search term, a class number would be retrieved.
Nevertheless, various problems were identified including the terminology of some of the captions and the fact that class numbers tended to be too general and have too many postings.
Above all, searchers wanted to go straight to records and were irritated by having to pass through the display of the classification schedules.
Although it is sometimes useful to engage in hierarchical browsing, this is essentially subsidiary to the direct keyword approach.
On the other hand, the use of keywords from Dewey as a means of generating additional keywords for records was extremely fruitful and allowed better retrieval even if, on occasions, there was some loss of precision due to the granularity of the classification.
There has also been some significant research into the use of UDC in online  searching systems.
Buxton reports a project that examined the potential for the use of UDC in a number of online catalogues, databases and information retrieval packages in terms of their ability to allow searching on UDC numbers.
He concludes that these systems show a number of deficiencies in dealing with UDC numbers unless written with UDC in mind.
A first problem is the punctuation.
It is suggested that spaces be used to split up UDC numbers so that the various parts of the numbers can be used as separate search terms; also that punctuation marks be replaced with letters.
An alternative might be to use separate subfields for different parts of the number.
Clearly, then, some problems with UDC may need to be investigated, including the following:
1.
the fact that the notation is not always expressive of the hierarchy;
2.
the use of ranges — each level in the hierarchy needs its own number;
3.
the precoordination of main numbers;
4.
the existence of various notational inconsistencies, especially in the use of notation for auxiliaries, and
5.
the fact that areas of knowledge, rather than concepts, are classified.
There are a number of projects to put UDC schedules into machine-readable form.
The prospect for holding UDC schedules as a thesaurus is promising, but the schedules will need some adjustment before they can be adopted in an operational system.
The alphabetical subject approach
15.1 Introduction
Although there are a number of different means of facilitating the alphabetical subject approach to documents and information, all these different approaches share common problems.
Some aspects of the creation of a good alphabetical subject index, whether it be printed or computer-based, recur in any subject approach to information.
The underlying problems of the subject approach, the components of the indexing process and some concepts which facilitate its discussion have already been introduced in Chapter 12.
It is important that Chapter 12 should be familiar to the reader before any attempt is made to consider the alphabetical subject approach further.
This brief chapter merely serves to draw together some common problems in alphabetical indexing (which feature in a different way in classification schemes).
Perhaps predictably, many of these problems are concerned with the label that is given to a subject in an alphabetical index.
15.2 Naming a subject.
On first inspection it might appear that the words used in indexes to represent concepts could be determined by reference to normal usage, but to be effective, even in an alphabetical index, such labels need more careful consideration.
Many different words may be used to represent the same concept.
In order to achieve some helpful grouping of, and clear labels for, those concepts, it is necessary to recognize closely related variants.
Natural language indexing has its own solutions, but even in this context, the same problems are encountered; this aspect is discussed further in Chapter 16.
It is simpler to think about the problems outlined below in the context of controlled language indexing.
Labelling of subjects presents problems mainly because, in order to achieve a user-orientated system, the various potential approaches of different users must be catered for.
If a subject has more than one name, a library catalogue or index must bring all material on that subject together (within the limitations of the scope of the  collection or index) under one of those names, and also cater for users who use different names.
Specific problems include the following:
1.
Synonyms, or terms with the same or similar meanings, are present in every subject area.
Near synonyms are most common, with true synonyms (which mean exactly the same thing and which are used in precisely the same context) being more unusual.
However, even near synonyms may be regarded as equivalent for some purposes, but not others.
For example, in a general index it might be adequate to regard Prisons and Dungeons as one and the same, but in a specialist index devoted to Criminology, this would probably not be acceptable.
Some common situations in which synonyms arise are listed below:
(a)
Some subjects have one stem, for example, sterilizer, sterilizing, sterilized; or computing, computers, microcomputers, computed, computation.
Sometimes it is acceptable to treat such words or concepts as equivalent to one another, but on other occasions it is important to differentiate between them.
(b)
Some subjects have both common and technical names; these different names must be recognized and reflected in the index in accordance with the audience for whom the index is intended.
Examples of such terms are salt and sodium chloride, radish and raphanus sativus.
(c)
Changes in usage of terms over time can also present problems.
The Library of Congress, for instance, started with the term ‘Electronic calculating machines’ but had to modify this, in keeping with later normal usage, to ‘Computers’.
(d)
Some concepts are described differently in different versions of one language.
American and English English are two good examples of differences in usage.
For example, the following terms may all be used for the same object: Eyeglasses, Spectacles, Glasses.
The merging of synonyms carries implications for the effectiveness of the index in terms of precision and recall.
If two terms are merged, precision is impaired but recall may be improved.
All unused terms must be included in the entry vocabulary of an index; that is, they must be present as access points in some form if it is considered at all likely that a user might seek information under the unused term.
These unused terms will normally be present in an index only in order to direct the user to the used or preferred terms.
2.
Homographs, or words which have the same spelling but very diverse meanings, must be identified.
In normal usage (as opposed to index usage) the meaning of a homograph is established by its context.
If one word is used out of context as an index heading, plainly it will be difficult to establish the interpretation to be placed on the homograph.
Examples of homographs are: Duty (obligation), Duty (taxation); Ring (to ring, as in telephone, or to draw a  circle around), or Ring (as in a mathematical concept, a finger ring, a ring of toadstools).
In a special index the meaning of a homograph may be obvious by its location within a given subject.
Thus the term Ring in an index to mathematics is well defined.
In a general index it may only be possible to distinguish between different meanings of the one homograph by using scope notes or qualifying terms wherever the term arises, and thus in some way replace the context that is normally absent in respect of index terms.
3.
Plurals and singulars All nouns have a plural and a singular form.
It may seem petty to distinguish between the plural and singular form, and therefore unnecessary to include both in the index.
If both are nouns is there any difference between Farms and Farm?
Generally the plural and singular of the same noun are regarded as equivalent, but there are a number of instances when it is necessary to treat the plural and the singular forms as distinct.
Consider the different meanings, for example, of Exercise and Exercises, Church and Churches.
If one form only is permitted, it is common practice to adopt the plural.
4.
Multi-word concepts Some subjects cannot be described satisfactorily with one word, but require two or more words for their specification.
Examples might be: Origin of Species, Information retrieval, Country walks or Extraterrestrial beings.
Whichever word in the term is used as the main entry point in an index, the user might first seek the subject under the other word in the term.
Once an entry has been identified, the user will expect to find the complete term in order to distinguish it from others containing the same words.
Access must be provided via all significant words in the multi-word term.
Thus if Exceptional children is the preferred term, when the user looks under Children he must also be able to trace a route to the document.
Usually references can serve to direct users from words not used as the primary entry word to the word that does have this status.
Sometimes terms are presented in direct order, for example, Military Hospitals, but on other occasions the terms may be inverted, for example , Hospitals, Military.
Inversion may offer the advantage of grouping like subjects.
For example, inversion to Hospitals, Military will cause this heading to file alongside other headings commencing with the word Hospitals.
The disadvantage of inversion is a reduction in predictability.
How is a user to know which multi-word terms in a system have been inverted and which have not; or, with three-word terms or more, which option for rearrangement of the words has been chosen?
5
Complex subjects, like multi-word terms, may require labels which contain many words.
The distinction between complex subjects and multi-word terms is that the former contain more than one unit concept.
However, each of these concepts may be potential search keys and as such may be described by terms which exhibit any one of the problems listed in I to 4 above.
With complex subjects, citation order becomes even more vital.
For example, it is evident that ‘a bibliography of history’ is not the same thing as ‘a history of bibliography’.
The same two terms, ‘bibliography’ and ‘history’serve to describe both subjects, and it is only the order in which they are cited and, in natural language, the connecting words that distinguish the statements of the two subjects.
The presence of a variety of concepts in the statement of one subject area has been referred to in Chapter 12 as a means of defining syntactic relationships.
It is these syntactic relationships and the ways in which they can be handled which are primarily responsible for the distinction between pre-coordinate and post coordinate indexing systems — approaches which will be considered in Chapter 17.
15.3 Indicating relationships
Although the predominant problem of the alphabetical subject approach concerns the naming of subjects, as has already been demonstrated in Chapter 12, any tool for the organization of knowledge must also take into account the relationships between subjects.
To reiterate, there are two main categories of relationship: the syntactic relationships mentioned above are, for example, evident in a topic such as Sugar and health where the concepts ‘Sugar’ and ‘Health’are drawn together in this particular context.
Obviously either of these concepts may also be present in other circumstances, where the existence of the relationship defined in this document is largely irrelevant.
Semantic relationships show aspects of the genus-species relationships and are expected to reflect assumed and widely accepted subject relationships.
For example, ‘Terrier’ will always be a type of ‘Dog’.
Provision must be made for linking related subjects.
This is normally effected by references and other devices indicating relationships in thesauri and subject heading lists, as well as alternative entries.
This then is a brief résuméof the problems which must be recognized by any indexer and for which the index must allow.
15.4 Why Controlled Vocabularies?
A natural language system takes index terms directly from titles, abstracts, citations or full text.
There is no scope for distortion from indexer interpretation; indexing error is minimized and new terms can be added directly to the vocabulary as needed.
Nevertheless, the preceding sections have identified the problems, mostly associated with language, that need to be tackled in order to overcome the imperfections of natural language as a basis for search keys in an information retrieval system.
In an ideal system the user would be able to pose a question in natural language, and the computer would search the texts and provide a sufficient group of relevant documents.
Research and some operational systems, such as LIBERTAS and STATUS IQ, are moving in this direction, but most systems still offer the following two options:
.
using natural language indexing and allowing the user to deal with the vagaries of that language, or
using a controlled language and asking the user to adhere to an artificially imposed vocabulary.
Controlled indexing languages are widely used in many systems because of their versatility in:
1.
indicating the general concept and its structure in the subject area;
2.
establishing a language that mirrors as closely as possible the language found in the literature and the language used by potential users;
3.
employing pre-coordinated phrases as appropriate to reduce false drops to a minimum;
4.
supplying a standard vocabulary by controlling synonyms and ensuring that only one term of a potential list of similar terms will be used in indexing a given concept;
5.
defining ambiguous terms and distinguishing homographs, and
6.
showing semantic relationships amongst terms.
Recommended reading
General works on this subject are listed at the end of Chapter 12, whilst more specific readings can be found at the end of Chapters 16, 17 and 18.
Alphabetical indexing languages
16.1 Introduction
Control is exercised in respect of the terms used in an index because of the variety of natural language.
Such control may involve the barring of certain terms from use as index headings or access points.
The terms which are to be used are likely to be specified, and synonyms recognized and probably eliminated (for example, Packaging may be indicated as preferable to Wrapping).
Preferred word forms will also be noted; for instance, Heat may be preferred to Hot.
The easiest way to exercise this type of control over index terms is to list or store the acceptable terms in a vocabulary.
Such lists will embody both specific decisions concerning preferred words and also, by example, decisions relating to the form of words to be used (for example, singular or plural, nouns or adjectives).
There are two types of controlled indexing language thesauri and subject headings lists.
These two tools have the same two basic functions:
to control terminology used in indexes, and
to control the display of relationships between concepts in indexes.
On the other hand, they differ in their area of application and to some extent in the way in which they seek to fulfil these two basic functions.
16.2 Subject headings lists
Subject headings lists are lists of index terms, normally arranged in alphabetical order, which have been given authority for use in an index, catalogue or database for describing subjects.
Such a list seeks to negotiate the problems of the alphabetical subject approach as outlined in the previous chapter.
Section 16.6 (below) makes a more direct comparison between subject headings lists and thesauri, while Section 16.7 considers the compilation of such lists.
The basic functions of a subject headings list (as identified in section 16.1 above) may be focused more precisely in the following terms:
1.
the list records terms which shall be used in a catalogue.
index or database and  indicates the form in which they shall be shown; it thus acts as an authority list for index terms and their form;
2.
the list makes recommendations about the use of references for the display of relationships in a catalogue, index or database in order to guide users between connected or associated terms.
Thus a subject headings list is primarily a guide to the indexer or cataloguer in the creation of index records.
Most information about terms and their relationships that could be of assistance to the user of the index will be transferred from the list to the index or catalogue itself.
Subject headings lists are normally generated for a particular purpose.
As in any alphabetical indexing language, it is important that the language reflects the current requirements of the user and the literature; thus it is fairly common to have to modify a standard list or compile a fresh list when a new application is envisaged.
It is therefore more important to understand the principles on which such lists are based than to be able to negotiate all the niceties of any particular list.
There are some published lists of subject headings which are plainly intended for a special purpose.
Amongst these might be numbered the School Library Association's List of Subject Headings Medical Subject Headings (or MeSH) from the National Library of Medicine (US), and Subject Headings for Engineering (or SHE) used in the Engineering Index.
The most effective means of reviewing the structure of such specialized lists is to consider two of the traditional subject headings lists which cover all subjects: Sears List of Subject Headings and the Library of Congress List of Subject Headings.
These two lists have formed the basis of indexing practice, theory and discussion in respect of alphabetical subject catalogues for some years.
16.3 Sears' List of Subject Headings
Now in its twelfth edition (1982), Sears List of Subject Headings was first written by Minnie Sears and published in 1923.
It was designed as a list of subject headings for use in the dictionary catalogues of medium-sized libraries and is still widely used by school and small public libraries, particularly in the United States.
Its overall structure and principles are similar to those of the Library of Congress List of Subject Headings though differences arise from Sears' being designed for smaller libraries.
The headings, for instance, are less complex (Sears would include city planning, rather than LC's Cities and towns planning); less numerous (e.g. Sears' includes only Art, French instead of LC's Art-France and Art, French), and less specific.
Apart from its undoubted value in its own right, Sears' provides a valuable model or point of departure for others wishing to devise alphabetical subject headings lists for applications in which Sears' itself would not be appropriate.
Both functions of subject headings lists are fulfilled by Sears'.
Terminology is controlled by establishing the terms that are to be used in an index or catalogue.
These are indicated in bold type.
Other terms which are useful access points but which will not be used as index terms are listed in light type.
The form or style is also controlled by indicating, for each term, the extent of abbreviation or the order of the words.
In general, the following word forms are included; where it is possible to describe a subject with a single noun, this is preferred.
1.
single nouns; for example, Diseases.
2.
compound headings; for example, Disinfection and disinfectants.
3.
adjective with noun; for example, Cultural relations; Art, French.
4.
phrases; for example, Discrimination in housing.
Some headings may be subdivided.
In each instance guidance is given on how subdivision is to be made and on the form of headings.
Types of subdivisions include:
1.
subdivisions by physical form of the document; for example, Diseases Dictionaries.
2.
subdivisions that show non-comprehensive treatment; for example, Chemistry Societies.
3.
subdivisions that show special aspects; for example, Education History.
4.
subdivisions that show chronology; for example, US History -1783–1809.
Some headings may also be subdivided by place, or alternatively, some places may be subdivided by subject; for example, Agriculture France or Paris — Population.
Sometimes geographical subdivision is in terms of the adjectival form; for example-, Music, German.
The display of these subdivisions in the-list varies.
Some are listed adjacent to the term to which they are to be applied and in the form in which they are to be applied in the main list.
Other, generally applicable subdivisions, are shown in a separate list for easy reference.
Subdivisions that might be applied to certain types of headings (such as places, literatures, and so on) are shown under key headings in the main list.
Key headings exist for persons (for example, Presidents — United States); places (for example , United States, Ohio, Chicago); languages and literatures (for example , English  language , English literature) and wars (for example , World War, 1939 1945).
The three following principles are employed in Sears' for the selection and assignment of subject headings:
1.
Specific entry is generally recommended.
The level of specificity that is desirable in any index is a function of the collection being indexed, its use and its patrons.
The principle of specific entry as applied in Sears' recommends that as  specific a heading as is available in the list should be assigned.
For example, a book on Bridges should be entered under Bridges and not under a broader heading such as Engineering, nor doubly under both headings.
2.
Headings are selected for inclusion in Sears' on the basis of common usage.
Thus popular or common names of subjects are included in preference to technical or specialist jargon.
Unfortunately for the non-American user, the headings consequently correspond to current American usage in both use of terms and spelling, and often need amendment to make them consistent with usage elsewhere.
3.
Uniformity and consistency in application of subject headings is important.
An attempt is made to offer one heading for each concept, a principle which the indexer should try to adhere to consistently.
In acknowledging these principles, Sears' is consistent with traditional ideas on the construction of alphabetical subject catalogues; these are also followed in the Library of Congress List of Subject Headings.
Some categories of headings are deliberately omitted from Sears'.
These include:
proper names; for example, names of persons, names of families, names of places;
corporate names; for example, names of associations, names of institutions, names of government bodies;
common names; for example, names of animals, tools, diseases, and chemicals.
Plainly, to list a reasonable number of terms in each of these categories would expand the list considerably.
The indexer is expected to insert headings into the index or catalogue in these categories as and when they are required.
Such headings should be constructed in accordance with the principles underlying Sears'.
Sears' gives instructions for creating references for insertion in an index or catalogue to show relationships between subjects.
Any terms in light type which are not to be used as headings in the catalogue direct the cataloguer to a ‘used’ heading covering the same or a similar concept.
See, for example, Country churches in Figure 16.1(a).
Most used headings, such as Country life in Figure 16.1(a), will be accompanied by some indication of their relationship to other terms.
A fairly full entry is displayed in the example below.
This extract from Sears' includes two types of guidance to the cataloguer:
1.
assistance in considering alternative headings,(for example, see also Agriculture — Societies; Farm Life; and so on );
2.
suggested headings from which references might be constructed and inserted in the catalogue (for example, Rural life).
References to be inserted in the catalogue may be either ‘see’ or ‘see also’.
Figure 16.1 (b) shows how the instructions in the extract from Sears' can be converted into entries and references in a catalogue.
The references which are suggested are not obligatory and should only be made as appropriate with regards to the item being indexed.
‘See’ references are generally used to link two terms which represent similar concepts, but which are presented in a different form.
These might include references from:
1.
synonyms; for example, Gaels see Celts.
2.
the second part of a compound heading; for example, Dusting and spraying see Spraying and dusting.
3.
the second part of an adjectival heading; for example, Furniture, Built-in see Built-in Furniture.
4.
an inverted heading to the normal order; for example Natural Gas see Gas, Natural.
5.
variant spellings; for example, Color see Colour.
6.
opposites; for example, Intemperance see Temperance.
7.
singular to plural forms; for example, Mouse see Mice.
Such references permit users to extend their search to related subjects.
‘See also’ references link connected subjects which may be coordinate, for example, Vases see also Glassware.
Alternatively, the subjects linked by ‘see also’ references may be a general subject and its more specific subdivision, for example: Crime see also Crimes without victims.
General references, in the form of either ‘see’ or ‘see also’, may also be employed on occasions.
Such references will be used where the entry term is a relatively common term, and where the use of specific entries instead of the one general reference could lead to extensive (undesirable) lists of specific references.
Typically general references may be used in respect of a common subdivision.
16.4 Library of Congress Subject Headings
The Library of Congress subject headings is the pre-eminent authority list for subject headings.
First published in 1909, it is used not only by the Library of Congress but widely across the United States; since the headings are included in USMARC tapes, the list can be consulted wherever in the world MARC tapes are used.
The 13th edition (1990) contains subject headings employed in cataloguing at the Library of Congress since 1898.
Information about new and changed headings is contained in MARC tapes, in LC Subject Headings weekly lists, in the quarterly LCS H in microfiche and in the Cataloging service bulletin.
The entire subject authority file is also available on CD-ROM.
16.4.1 Types of Headings
The list contains both approved and non-approved headings.
Approved headings are listed in bold type, such as Art, Children as artists.
A heading may take one of the following forms:
1.
single nouns, for example, Cats; Poetry.
Homographs may need a modifier in parenthesis to clarify the meaning that is associated with them, for example Cold (Disease)
2.
adjectival headings, which comprise either a noun or noun phrase with adjectival modifier, for example,
Agricultural credit
English Literature.
or inverted adjectival headings, where the inversion is used to bring the noun into the position of the entry element, for example,
Geography, Historical
Maps.
Statistical
3.
Conjunctive phrase headings, with two or more nouns, noun phrases or both, with or without modifiers connected by ‘and’ or ending with ‘etc’, for example,
Literature and science
Debtor and creditor
Bolts and nuts
4.
Prepositional phrase headings, with nouns, noun phrases or both, with or without modifiers connected by a preposition, for example,
Children in motion pictures
Federal aid to youth
 Cataloging of art
Some headings combine these  various forms, for instance, Harp and percussion with string orchestra
Headings may also be subdivided as indicated below.
The heading may have a scope note to indicate the application or meaning of the heading, for example,
Irreligion
Here are entered works dealing with a condition of complete absence of religion
Library of Congress class numbers are also attached to some headings.
Terms that are related to the preferred heading are shown.
Since the 11th edition, these relationships have been indicated with the use of the abbreviations UF, NT, RT and BT. (see p. 251).
For example:
Gravity waves [QA 927 (Mathematical)]
UF Waves, Gravity
BT Gravity
Hydrodynamics
Waves
UF is applied to those terms which are included in order to expand the entry vocabulary.
These terms will be included in the list, but are shown in light face type and the indexer is directed towards the preferred heading.
For example,
Associate relationships are expressed by RT, for example,
General SA (see also) references may also be made to an entire group of headings as an economy measure, for instance,
The Library of Congress subject headings make extensive use of subject subdivisions as a means of combining a number of different concepts in a single heading.
Composite topics may therefore be represented by subject headings followed by a series of subdivisions.
For example, Art — Study and teaching — Italy — Naples
16.4.2 Subdivisions
Subject headings may be further subdivided by form, topical, period and geography.
Some of the form and topical subdivisions are for general application and are known as free-floating.
Subdivisions usually represent a form or aspect of the main subject and not a subordinate subject.
To elaborate a little further, it is useful to examine each of the main types of subdivisions, as follows.
1.
Form subdivisions reflect the form or arrangement of the subject matter, for example, Engineering — Dictionaries
2.
Topic subdivisions are subject subdivisions, for example, Engineering — Research
3.
Free-floating form and topic subdivisions may be used with headings within a given category.
Normally, in order to maintain control over the use of subdivisions, each combination of main heading and subdivision must be approved.
Exceptions are common or free-floating subdivisions.
These are listed at one chosen or model heading and may also be used elsewhere within a category.
4.
Period subdivisions are used to indicate the history of a place or subject, such as,
Period subdivisions appear in various forms and, apart from a small list of exceptions, are not free-floating.
5.
Geographic subdivisions indicate geographical treatment.
Headings may be subdivided by the name of a country or other political entity, a region or a geographic feature.
For instance,
16.4.3 References
There are instructions in the list for the creation of appropriate see and see also references.
The new symbols NT, USE need not necessarily be transferred to library catalogues where traditional entries can still be made.
For example, if we chose to make see and see also references for a work on Gravity waves, the following entries could result:
16.4.4 Other points
Personal and corporate names may be used as headings, and geographic names may be used as main headings and also as subdivisions.
Apart from a few model entries, these are not included in the list but must be established by the cataloguer.
A form that conforms with the recommendations of AACR2R and is consistent with use elsewhere in the catalogue should be sought.
Cataloguers are assisted by the Name authorities (cumulative microfiche edition) which lists the forms of names and corporate headings that might be used in subject cataloguing but which  are not shown in the list.
An important auxiliary aid is the Subject cataloging manual.
subject headings a third edition of which was published in 1989 and updated in 1990.
Despite the appearance of the LC list in recent years, it is important to recognize that the list is not a thesaurus.
A thesaurus offers terms for individual concepts and shows the relationships between those terms.
The Library of Congress list includes many terms which encompass more than one concept.
It offers guidance on the establishment of subject headings which have several layers of subdivisions and which, as such, can only be described as pre-coordinate headings.
In other words, the list operates at a much higher level of pre coordination of concepts than one would expect a thesaurus to support.
Some examples of headings should illustrate this point: The reader is invited to analyse these headings into their component concepts.
16.4.5 Limitations of subject lists
Although traditional subject headings lists are important, they do have limitations.
Both Sears' and the Library of Congress List of Subject Headings have been criticized on the following counts:
1.
Headings tend to be broad and cannot represent complex or specific subjects accurately.
2.
Headings are not constructed and selected systematically.
Scan, for example, the headings listed under ‘Libraries’.
When terms such as‘Libraries, Children's’ are found alongside ‘Business libraries’, it is far from obvious whether terms are being inverted or put in direct order.
Such variations not only confuse users about the forms of headings, but also make it difficult for a cataloguer inserting a new heading for local use to discern the principles which should be heeded to retain consistency of approach.
3.
References are not always constructed systematically.
References may not be recommended where they could be appropriate or useful; in other places, too many references can make for a very tedious search.
4.
Subarrangement under headings is not purely alphabetical.
For instance‘Sculpture — Technique’ precedes ‘Sculpture in motion’.
These limitations of traditional lists of subject headings should not necessarily be taken as faults in their construction.
Some of the criticisms arise from conflicting opinions as to the basic purpose of a list of subject headings.
Nevertheless, the fact  that these general lists cannot serve for every application has triggered a search for more consistent approaches to constructing headings, together with the development of special lists of subject headings and thesauri.
16.5 Thesauri
A thesaurus could be defined as ‘a compilation of words and phrases showing synonyms, hierarchical and other relationships and dependencies, the function of which is to provide a standardized vocabulary for information storage and retrieval systems’.
The thesaurus is an authority list showing terms which may, and sometimes may not, be used in an index to describe concepts.
Each term is usually given together with terms which are related to it in one of a number of ways.
The aims of the thesaurus are, first, to exert terminology control in indexing and, second, to aid in searching by alerting the searcher to the index terms that have been applied.
Although there are standards which provide guidance on the construction of thesauri, until recently there has not been a ‘standard’ thesaurus, or even a thesaurus which is widely used as a norm.
In 1981, the British Standards Institution published its Roots Thesaurus which is intended to be a model thesaurus from which terms may be drawn.
This is discussed in more detail later in this section.
Thus there are many different thesauri, some published and others strictly in-house.
A thesaurus is normally tailored to meet the specifications of a particular application.
Very often thesauri will be limited in subject scope, for example, to music, education or agriculture.
Thesauri have been used extensively since around the 1950s to index special collections of documents, abstracts, bulletins, current awareness tools, Selective Dissemination of Information Systems, online databases, encyclopaedias and a variety of other bibliographical tools.
Since there is no typical thesaurus, we may examine some of the more common features of existing published thesauri.
16.5.1 Key features of thesauri
The main list of index terms is the core of the thesaurus and defines the index language.
This listing must be present in any thesaurus and normally features, in a single all alphabetical sequence,
1.
descriptors or terms which are acceptable for use in indexes to describe concepts, and
2.
non-descriptors or terms which are not to be used in the index but which appear in the thesaurus in order to expand the entry vocabulary (terms through which the user can enter the thesaurus and be directed to the appropriate term) of the indexing language.
Descriptors are normally accompanied by some display of relationships between them and other words in the indexing language.
Most indexing terms in a thesaurus are ‘uniterms’ or single-concept terms, although in some instances a deliberate decision may be made to include some multi-concept terms.
The form of terms, whether they be descriptors or non-descriptors, may be one of:
1.
single words; for example, Horror, Hosiery, Journalism, Counting.
2.
phrases of two or three words, often comprising a noun and an adjective; for example, Country life, Electric meters, Electric power plants.
3.
two words linked by ‘and’ or ‘&’; for example, Joy and sorrow, Boats & boating.
4.
compound phrases; for example, Employees' representation in management, Victim offender relationships.
5.
names of persons, bodies, places; for example, Smith, John, BLCMP, Paris.
(Note: names of persons, bodies and places may be included in the main thesaurus, or they may be the subject of a distinct authority list.)
Concepts are represented by these words or terms.
Concepts should, in general, be described as simply as possible, whilst retaining sought and well-known terminology.
Thus, single-word terms or (failing an appropriate single word term) two word terms are preferred to longer terms in describing concepts.
Shorter terms are more likely to be present in the same form in both the indexer's and the searcher's normal vocabulary for the subject.
Generally the singular form of words is used for processes and properties (e.g. Liquidation, Classification), and the plural for classes of people who perform such processes (e.g. Liquidators, Classifiers).
Multi-word terms should be entered in their preferred form in their natural order.
Abbreviations should only be used if their meanings are known to users.
Index terms do not always stand alone, but are sometimes defined more precisely by the use of both qualifiers and scope notes.
Qualifiers function as an integral part of the index term, so that terms of the form: are created and used.
scope notes on the other hand, may be present in a thesaurus but are unlikely to be transferred to an index.
Scope notes define the scope of the index term by indicating its meaning and clarifying the use of the term in the thesaurus.
Scope notes are sometimes designated by the abbreviation SN (for Scope Note).
So we might have:
Relationships between the terms in an indexing language are also indicated in most published thesauri.
These relationships can be viewed as belonging to one of three main categories: preferential, hierarchical or affinitive:
1.
Preferential relationships generally indicate preferred terms or descriptors and distinguish such terms from non-descriptors or non-preferred terms.
These relationships thus perform the vital function of identifying index terms.
Statements conveying preferential relationships between terms indicate which terms are to be treated as equivalent to one another, or which concepts are to be grouped together under one index term.
Preferential relationships are indicated by statements of the form: A is not authorized, see B instead where A and B are taken to be two index terms, with A a non-descriptor and B a descriptor.
Examples might be:
There are variations on the basic statement of a preferential relationship.
The following statement, for instance, suggests that in indexing or searching for Folk drama, both of the terms Drama and Folk Culture should be used:
The following statement represents another variation on the basic preferential relationship: Programming languages USE Fortran, Algol, Cobol, Basic.
This statement directs the user to adopt a number of more specific terms in preference to the general term.
All statements indicating preferential relationships will usually appear in both direct and inverted forms.
Thus the thesaurus user may approach a term from ‘either direction’.
It would be normal, for instance, for the statement: Games USE Sports, to be complemented, at the appropriate point in the alphabetical sequence, by  Sports UF Games, where ‘UF’ is a common abbreviation for ‘use for’.
2.
Hierarchical relationships are represented in the thesaurus by statements of the form: A is permitted, but consider using B or C or,…,
N instead, where, as above, A, B, C,…,
N are index terms (that is, descriptors) and B and C and so on are related to A via some hierarchy of relationships.
Hierarchical relationships must be indicated in order that users may transfer from a first access term to related terms, and to broaden or narrow the search parameters.
The indication of such relationships helps the searcher and the indexer to select the most specific term available as a label for any given concept in the thesaurus.
The searcher is kept better informed as to related terms under which additional information or documents have been indexed.
Hierarchical relationships take one of two forms, depending upon whether A is subordinate to B, C,…,
N, or whether B, C,…,
N are subordinate to A. Broader terms are generally indicated by the abbreviation ‘BT’.
For example: suggests that Remedial reading is a subordinate topic to Reading.
Narrower terms are signalled by the abbreviation ‘NT’.
Thus, notes that Public libraries are a type of Library.
In most instances it is to be expected that ‘NT’ and ‘BT’statements should be accompanied by their inverse.
Thus the above example would normally be complemented by:
Hierarchical relationships may also take the form of coordinate relationships, in which case they may be represented by ‘RT’ or related term in a similar manner to affinitive relationships below.
3.
Affinitive relationships are a further type of connection between index terms, and thus may be codified by a similar statement to that encountered in respect of hierarchical relationships: A is permitted, but consider using B or C or,…,
N as well or instead.
Although the statements of affinitive and hierarchical relationships are similar, they differ in the nature of the relationships that they signal.
Affinitive relationships that exist between terms are not necessarily connected to one another in any fixed hierarchical manner.
Affinitive relationships are often indicated by the code ‘RT’.
An example might be:
It is usual for ‘RT’ to be reflexitive, the above example concerning Food would be accompanied by a series of inversions of the statement of the form:
It is important to remember that such relationships as are displayed in the thesaurus may not be transferred to the index.
This is an important reason why the searcher should consult the thesaurus prior to the start of a search.
Other abbreviations are encountered in some thesauri.
Amongst them can be listed: ‘GT’ Generic to; ‘SA’See also; ‘TT’Top term in a hierarchy; ‘XT’Overlapping term; ‘AT’Associated term; ‘CT’Coordinate term; ‘ST’Synonymous term; and ‘SU’See Under.
Figure 16.2 shows some extracts from thesauri.
In addition to the relationship display which is incorporated into the alphabetical list of subject terms, thesauri often incorporate other lists which help to show the relationships between terms.
Published thesauri, in particular, are likely to include one or more of the following types of lists:
1.
Hierarchical displays.
Various of the key terms in the thesaurus may be drawn in an alphabetical sequence, with a more complete hierarchical display of the connected terms having more specific meanings.
2.
Categorised displays.
Thesaurus terms are grouped under a series of category headings which correspond to the main subfields within the area covered by the thesaurus.
3.
Permuted lists of terms.
These lists arrange terms under each of the words in a term; thus Industrial management would appear in two places in the alphabetical sequence: under industrial and under management.
Such lists aid access to second and subsequent words in terms.
4.
Graphic displays.
Various imaginative graphic displays have been proposed.
Numbered amongst these are Euler circles, arrowgraphs and the circular thesaurus.
The attraction of such displays is that multi — dimensional relationships between subjects may be shown since any one subject can be displayed in juxtaposition with several others.
5.
A classification scheme.
Thesauro Facet, compiled by English Electric, is a notable example of a thesaurus supported by a full faceted classification scheme.
This format is becoming common in new thesauri, partly because of the recognition of the importance of viewing both relationships and subject terms in one tool.
With such an arrangement, the thesaurus provides direct alphabetical access to a subject and class notation.
The classification scheme shows relationships and facilitates browsing between subjects.
The Root Thesaurus described in the next section also incorporates this arrangement.
16.5.2 The Root Thesaurus
The British Standards Institution Root Thesaurus is an important attempt to provide a standard list of terms from which terms for thesauri and indexing languages can be selected and more application-oriented lists derived.
It is potentially important both with regard to making the compilation of thesauri for specific applications easier, and also with regard to enhancing the similarities between lists for different applications.
Since the Root Thesaurus did not emerge until 1981, it has not had a great impact on existing thesauri to date, but it could well be important in the future.
The thesaurus is available in a printed version or on magnetic tape.
Not all topics are covered, but a broad group of industrial topics are represented, including measurement, environmental and safety engineering, energy technology and communication.
Figure 16.3 shows that there are two lists — classified and alphabetical and demonstrates the relationships between them.
Note that the alphabetical list shows synonyms, broader terms, narrower terms and related terms, but these are signalled by an innovative notation.
The Root Thesaurus designations are also independent of specific language (that is, French, German, Italian).
Thus,
Other refinements are also available which permit the part of the hierarchy from which a term is drawn to be specified.
16.5.3 Multilingual thesauri
A multilingual thesaurus is one which can be used to support indexing and searching in several languages.
There is growing interest in multilingual thesauri for application in international information retrieval networks.
Multilingual thesauri present a special set of problems.
Several parallel editions in the different  languages are to be recommended.
Difficulties may arise where equivalent terms do not exist in all of the languages of the thesaurus.
A switching language, in the form of a notation, may be used to translate terms from all natural languages and as an intermediate between the various languages.
16.5.4 Software for Thesaurus Maintenance
Only a limited amount of software is available for developing and maintaining thesauri.
Milstead reviews some packages for personal computers, while Rowley provides an analysis of packages that are available as integral modules in text information management systems (see Reading list).
Special thesaurus software has a number of advantages over the alternative, which is usually the use of a database package or a word processing package to store terms.
A key feature of the thesaurus database is that it requires specialized management; not only must relationships be recorded and updated, but certain constraints on relationships must be imposed.
A thesaurus module that is integrated into the software used for database creation, maintenance and searching is particularly valuable.
A thesaurus developed with such a module can support the following functions:
1.
validation of indexer input; it controls indexing by rejecting unauthorized or misspelt terms;
2.
addition of candidate terms to the thesaurus during the indexing process;
3.
automatic switching, preferably with notification, from non-preferred terms to preferred terms during both indexing and searching;
4.
review of a term's relationships, so that other terms can be considered either during indexing or searching, and
5.
automatic explosion of searches when requested, to include specified types of related terms.
Software to support thesaurus maintenance should offer certain facilities.
These could briefly be listed as:
1.
Format in which the thesaurus is to be made available.
Thesauri may be printed or available on screen.
Software that supports the creation of printed thesauri needs to cater for layout, typesetting and formatting of the printed page, or else interface with a word processing or desk-top publishing package.
2.
Relationships that can be stored.
Typically ‘broader term’, ‘narrower term’, ‘related term’, ‘use’ and ‘use for’are a basic set.
It should also be possible to indicate scope notes and to store other relationships.
3.
Thesaurus maintenance during indexing.
There needs to be a link between the thesaurus and the data input screens for the database so that new terms can      optionally be included in the thesaurus during indexing, and also reviewed later for completion of relationship indication.
4.
Searching.
The most basic facility is display of relationships between terms during a search session.
This facility is enhanced if it is possible to select specific related, narrower and broader terms from this display and perform a search upon them.
More global searches on related terms are also useful.
5.
User interface.
The quality of the user interface, such as whether it is windows based, is normally a feature of the related text information management package.
The opportunity to display extracts from an online thesaurus in windows is particularly valuable, since it is often useful to be able to view the thesaurus alongside other screen displays in either indexing or searching.
16.5.5 The Future for Indexing Languages
Controlled indexing languages are well embedded in many of the bibliographic and catalogue databases created today.
Only severe economic pressure will eliminate them from these applications.
Nevertheless the controlled versus natural indexing language debate still rages.
Natural language is used widely in full-text databases, as discussed further in Chapter 19.
Many users navigate these databases with the assistance of any available controlled indexing terms; they may even search a related database with controlled index terms first, in order to identify some documents and refine their search strategy before moving on to the natural language of the full-text databases.
The extensive availability of natural language indexing and the ability to search the full texts of documents mean that facilities in search software which support searching based upon natural language indexing must be further developed.
A central feature in improved access via natural language may be a computer-based thesaurus or lexicon that is not used in indexing, but which shows all the word variants and relationships between terms that the searcher might encounter in natural language searching, and is available both for display and to expand and develop search strategies.
Controlled indexing languages also have a contribution to make in the design of systems that offer natural language interfaces, where the searcher can input terms in natural language.
Principles applied in thesauri are becoming relevant in solving problems in computer linguistics or Linguistic Engineering, which is a branch of Artificial Intelligence.
Machine translation, machine abstracting, speech recognition and language understanding are areas in which the principles of thesauri may he useful.
Characteristics of thesauri that are of wider interest are:
mapping of a term's meaning,
mapping and selective definition of semantic and other relations between different terms in a natural language, and
establishment of preferential terms.
16.6 Thesauri and subject headings lists — a quick comparison
The previous two sections have introduced thesauri and subject headings lists.
Clearly both tools record controlled indexing languages, but they are utilized in different environments.
A clearer demarcation might be drawn between the traditional subject headings lists and thesauri by the following summary of differences:
1.
Thesauri are likely to contain terms that are more specific than those found in subject headings lists.
2.
Thesauri tend to avoid inverted terms (such as Sculpture, German).
3.
Headings in thesauri are not subdivided.
For instance Education -Bibliographies would not normally be featured in a thesaurus, whereas headings of this type are common in traditional subject headings lists.
Situations where subdivisions might have had some utility are served by the coordination of index terms at the search stage (see 17.2).
4.
The relationship display in a thesaurus is often more extensive than that in a subject headings list.
5.
Different types of relationships are noted in a thesaurus by the use of ‘RT’, ‘NT’ and ‘BT’, instead of‘see also’which is frequently used to indicate all relationships, whatever their nature, in a subject headings list.
6.
The relationships between the terms listed in a thesaurus will often not be transferred to the index.
Dictionary catalogues usually contain ‘see’ and ‘see also’instructions linking related headings.
7.
Thesauri often boast an additional explicit statement of the structure of the relationships between terms in the form of categorized lists or displays.
16.7 Compiling a thesaurus or list of subject headings
All alphabetical indexing languages must be tailored to the application for which they are intended.
Whilst standard published lists of terms provide useful models and certainly aid the searcher of a large publicly available database, any information worker needing to establish an in-house database, catalogue or index will need to consider devising a local list of indexing terms.
Even in situations where there is a published list covering the requirements of the type of library or the subject area to be indexed, this list is likely to require adjustment in order to make it compatible with local requirements.
A good thesaurus or list of subject headings is not necessarily one that has been carefully presented, printed and published, with a plethora of effective relationship displays, but rather a list that has been compiled to serve in the retrieval environment in which it is called upon to operate.
This section, then, identifies a three-step process for the compilation of a thesaurus or a subject headings list.
Step 1:
Establish the purpose of the indexing language 
Preliminary decisions concerning the anticipated use of the thesaurus must be made before any work is undertaken.
This planning phase involves moving from a vague impression that a thesaurus might be useful to a fairly precise profile in terms of the following parameters:
1.
Subject field to be covered must be determined by making explicit statements concerning the limits of topic coverage and the depth to which various aspects of the subject are to be examined.
Subject field definition arises from the scope of the information service or system that the indexing language is expected to serve.
This, in turn, depends upon users and user interests; it may be necessary to conduct a survey to discover or update the profile of user interests.
2.
Type of literature to be covered may determine, amongst other features, the amount of detail required.
Books, for example, are normally indexed in less detail than periodical articles.
3.
Quantity of literature.
The sophistication of a thesaurus and the specificity of its index terms are usually related to the number of documents to be covered by the indexing system for which the indexing language is being planned.
In simple terms, the essence of subject organization is the division of literature (or references to literature) into manageable or scannable categories, with each category being associated with an index term.
Thus, the more documents that an indexing system is likely to embrace, the greater the number of index terms that are likely to be necessary for convenient retrieval (given that the number of documents which constitute a scannable category does not vary).
4.
Type of information storage system in which the list is to be used may carry implications for the nature of the terms to be chosen.
The system may be essentially pre- or post-coordinate or neither, and may be either manual or computerized.
5.
Resources of the information system will impose constraints upon the nature of the indexing language.
There are two types of resources: those available and necessary for initial design, and those required for the development and application of the indexing language.
Probably one of the most essential resources is sufficient time for initial thesaurus construction to ensure that the compilation is of a high quality.
A good list will save time in later indexing and searching.
6.
Users of the information system may influence the explicitness of detail in a list.
The nature of the users, their background, their work, the frequency with which they use the system and their mode of access to it (that is, through an intermediary information officer or directly) are all factors to be considered.
7.
Use to which the information system will be put impinges upon most of the earlier issues, but there are elements of the nature of use which can be considered in their own right.
The number and types of questions likely to be posed to the system have implications for the amount of effort directed into thesaurus construction that can be justified.
Full consideration of the above factors should form a firm basis for the design of an effective thesaurus or list of subject headings.
Step 2:
Establish the characteristics of the indexing language and the way in which they are to be embodied in the thesaurus or list of subject headings
The purpose of the list will colour decisions concerning the indexing language.
A number of the factors to be considered in this stage include:
1.
The nature of the language.
The relative merits of free, natural and controlled language need to be evaluated.
The comments in this section most readily pertain to controlled indexing languages but, by extension, some of them are equally relevant to natural or free indexing languages.
2.
Specificity of the language must be settled at a level suitable for application.
3.
Exhaustivity.
4.
Level of pre-coordination (see Chapter 17).
In planning the nature of the indexing language, the basic language evaluation devices must be taken into account (see Chapter 12).
5.
Thesaurus or list of subject headings and its structure.
Once the characteristics of the retrieval language have been agreed, the way in which the language will be recorded or printed must be determined.
A straightforward alphabetical list must form the core of the language list.
Some type of graphic or other relationship display may also be helpful, as may separate lists of subheadings, instructions for use, and so on.
The thesaurus may be kept in machine readable form and sections printed only as required.
Step 3:
Start to compile the language
Now the compilation of index terms can begin.
This involves:
1.
Identification of the main subject areas in a more explicit manner than was required in the planning stage.
A description of the main subject areas forms the skeleton of the main list of terms.
Such deliberations on subject scope will normally lead to a preliminary list of significant (especially the more general) terms, with these terms collected into groups that reflect the relationships between them.
2.
Selection of terms to be included in the thesaurus.
Once terms have been accepted for inclusion they must obviously be recorded, so that this stage and the next one must proceed simultaneously.
The preliminary list which was compiled at the last sub-stage must be developed.
Synonyms, related terms and other variants must now be collected, either by human selection or with the aid of the computer.
Humanly selected terms may be derived from a number of sources, in particular other lists of words used in the subject area, including:
(a)
other thesauri, classification schemes and information retrieval tools;
(b)
documents in the subject area, such as periodical articles, databases, indexing and abstracting journals, encyclopaedias and dictionaries; and
(c)
previous knowledge and experience of indexers, index language compilers and users.
The more structured the source of words, the more likely it is that the terms in the source will already be in a standard form ready for lifting wholesale and little modified into a thesaurus.
These sources, which form the basis of the intellectual selection of terms, may be augmented or ousted by the machine selection of terms.
Some or all of the terms in an index language may be derived automatically from the text of the documents to be indexed.
Here again the documents of the subject area, such as periodical articles and research reports, will provide the terms to be included in the language.
3.
Recording of terms.
In a totally machine-selected thesaurus, the listing of terms will be printed or displayed by the computer, and often no further effort is necessary.
If the thesaurus includes humanly selected terms, it is necessary to record the chosen terms.
The most convenient manual format for recording terms is to write each term on a card, and to note underneath any comments about the term that are to feature in the thesaurus or list of subject headings.
Each card will show a term and any necessary scope notes, related terms and synonyms.
For ease of consultation, cards should be kept in alphabetical order in accordance with the main term on the card.
Alternatively, terms may be recorded with the aid of thesaurus software as described in 16.5.
4.
Checking of relationships which are to be  indicated under each of the terms.
Most relationships should be shown in both their direct and inverse forms.
Checks on relationships that must be represented can be executed by examining each card in turn and seeking cards which show related terms.
A more systematic approach involves assessing terms and their relationships in subject-related groups.
These subject groups may be refined by constructing facets and hierarchies relevant to the subject being investigated.
Any new concepts or terms that emerge during this examination of relationships must also be inserted in the deck of cards.
The checking of relationships is very much easier with thesaurus software.
Inverse relationships may even be generated automatically.
However, it is still necessary to examine each term and its relationships.
5.
Finalization of the thesaurus.
Now is the time to conduct the final check on each of the features of the list.
Terms should be reviewed for consistency and appropriate level of pre-coordination, word form and level of specificity.
Classificatory or other indicators of relationships should be checked and recorded in their final form.
If any links are necessary between displays and listings, some notation must be introduced.
All listings for the final thesaurus must be converted to the format appropriate for typing, printing or input to a computer database, and each feature checked, edited and tested on some  examples.
An introduction explaining the nature and scope of the indexing language will enhance its value.
6.
Revision of the list.
The list or thesaurus cannot be static.
It must be updated.
New terms and relationships may be added as they arise, or in batches at predetermined intervals.
Updating an in-house thesaurus is relatively easy.
A published thesaurus or a thesaurus or list which is involved in an international indexing effort may need a more clearly established revision programme.
Each amendment may need to be agreed by users, and equivalent terms in various languages may need to be added to a multilingual list.
Lists of amendments or new editions are possible mechanisms for announcing changes.
16.8 Natural indexing languages
It is difficult to discuss natural indexing languages in general terms.
This is partly because, with natural language indexing, the indexing language is that of the relevant input documents.
In its pure form a listing of all the terms in such a language will only remain current until the next batch of documents is added to the system.
Furthermore, since each system indexes a separate set of documents, each system will have a different natural indexing language.
Thus, the language is derived from the documents input to the system, whether they be abstracts, full text, citations (including titles, periodical titles and so on) or lists of controlled or uncontrolled index terms.
Obviously one of the unique features of natural language indexing is the lack of control of vocabulary.
This permits the entire variety of natural language to be reflected in the indexing, the strengths and weaknesses of natural language indexing deriving from this basic characteristic.
This work tackles two other areas which are relevant to natural language indexing: Chapter 11 discusses the generation of printed indexes based upon the words in titles; it also reviews some of the basic strengths and limitations of natural language indexing in the context of printed indexes based entirely upon titles alone; Chapter 17 considers post-coordinate indexing and online searching of databases.
Natural language indexing is important in searching online databases, especially full-text databases.
16.8.1 Stoplists and golists
In its pure form natural language indexing has some obvious limitations.
Plainly, indexing on the text of a document involves indexing every word, some of which do not convey any subject concepts.
Thus we can easily start to compile a list of irrelevant prepositions, conjunctions and articles such as an, a, the, and, for, to, his, these.
Most natural language indexing operates with the aid of a stoplist which lists all such redundant terms and rejects their inclusion as index entries.
Of course some terms may be difficult to categorize as stop or non-stop.
Think, for instance of machine, lines, plunge.
In some systems these might be useful in indexing, in others they might not.
Thus although it is possible to establish a stoplist covering a number of standard terms not suitable for indexing, this normally needs to be modified to reflect the circumstances of each system.
The use of a stoplist in title indexing is discussed in Chapter 11.
In natural language indexing which uses a stoplist only, the indexing language is open; there is no record other than the index itself of the indexing terms that have been assigned.
The indexing changes gradually with time as the natural language of the documents covered by the index evolves.
The other approach to natural language indexing is to index on both a stoplist and a golist.
A golist includes all of those terms that would create useful entries in the subject area being indexed.
Thus the golist must be machine-stored and is used by the computer in the assignment of index terms.
Like the stoplist, the golist can also be displayed or printed out for consideration prior to updating or other modification.
The golist is sometimes known as a thesaurus and, indeed, is a form of natural language thesaurus.
In the process of indexing each new batch of documents, new words will from time to time appear in the text.
Being new, they will not appear in the golist and the computer will not know whether or not to treat them as indexing terms.
In this case, the human indexer will be provided with the terms not recognized by the computer, and must decide whether to list them in the golist or the stoplist, or perhaps to leave them unlisted so that they will be output for human indexer consideration on each occurrence.
Obviously this last option permits the human indexer some control over the allocation of index terms.
Perhaps it is useful to observe that to the extent that the human indexer selects the terms for inclusion in the golist, the indexing language is controlled.
However, the allocation of index terms and the variety of forms in which concepts or names might appear are not controlled.
16.8.2 Attractions of natural language indexing
The attractions of natural language indexing may be divided into two categories:
1.
Economic factors.
The intellectual input at the indexing stage is minimal even in systems where, in the interests of enhanced consistency, there is some intervention at the indexing stage.
Indexing can thus be achieved at a detailed level, often including many terms per document, with almost no indexing effort.
The effort must be input in another way — in retrieval.
Effective retrieval from natural language indexed databases requires sophisticated search software.
The user must become familiar with the facilities of this search software and therefore may need more training than for the retrieval of information from a database which has been indexed with a controlled indexing language.
For example, search software offers the types of facilities discussed in Chapter 17, including the ability to search on words in pre-determined fields, the ability  to search on word stems and to search on words with variant spellings, and then the ability to rank the retrieved material according to its relative significance.
2.
Language factors.
In some circumstances natural language indexing may reflect more closely the terms used by the searcher.
For instance, if the searcher seeks documents on ‘Greenhouses’ and this is not an index term in the appropriate controlled indexing language, then documents on this topic will be difficult to retrieve directly.
Also, in controlled indexing language databases, there is often an assumption that a user will be prepared to chase strings of references or to consult a sometimes complex thesaurus.
This may not always be the case.
The other problems that sometimes occur in controlled language indexing (but are avoided by natural language indexing) arise from human error.
Human indexers sometimes make inappropriate judgements, misinterpret ideas, have lapses of memory or concentration, and generate omissions and inconsistencies in their indexing.
Although printed indexes tend to be either controlled or natural language, many large databases can now be searched in both ways.
Often, controlled index terms are used to identify a relatively large set of potentially relevant references, and then string searching (or natural language searching) used to identify specific documents from within that set.
To pursue our simple example above: if Greenhouses is not a term in our controlled language, we might search under Glasshouses instead and retrieve a set of documents which had the controlled index language term Glasshouses assigned.
We might then perform a string search on the term ‘Greenhouses’ to discover whether this term appeared in the text of any of the documents retrieved by the original search.
This mixture of approaches is designed to yield maximum retrieval for as many users as possible by combining the different strengths of controlled and natural language indexing.
16.8.3 Circumstances in which natural language indexing is particularly appropriate
1.
Searches that predominantly involve specific words or phrases known to have been used in the source material.
Obvious examples are unique proper nouns, such as brand names and company names, although there can be problems with:
company names that may be either in full or abbreviated; for example, DEC, Digital Equipment
company names that may appear with or without a hyphen; for example Perkin Elmer, Perkin-Elmer
brand names that consist of common words; for example Crest, Tube Investments, and companies known by two or more names; for example GPO, British Telecom.
Most of these problems can be overcome with the use of Boolean and contextual logic.
2.
Slogans, quotations and catch-phrases, which may or may not be indexed under a controlled indexing language; for example interracial adoption.
3.
Geographic names can be very direct labels, but can also cause a number of well-known problems.
These include:
place names which recur in different states and countries; for example Berlin in New Hampshire and Germany;
vague place names; for example Tyneside, the Peak District, and
different levels of specificity; for example West Midlands, Birmingham, Midlands.
To overcome these problems users must think of all the various names that might have been applied, and must understand something of the geography and administration of the locality concerned.
A further problem is the fact that place names may appear in a trivial context.
For example, a headline announcing ‘President Bush at Oxford hears of Second Falkland Crisis’ does not merit retrieval under Oxford but does require to be retrieved under Falkland.
16.8.4 Circumstances in which natural language indexing meets with many problems
Indexers have used controlled language indexing and authority lists of standard forms of terms and names for many years.
These practices have emerged from the fact that natural language indexing is often not adequate, as discussed in Chapter 12.
However, it seems worth rehearsing some of the arguments in this particular context again, identifying specifically how these problems can be negotiated in a database using natural language indexing.
1.
Semantics, including synonyms, variant word forms, autonyms and so on.
The user must consider all the possibilities.
In this he may be assisted by the opportunity to use truncation, alphabetical lists of terms showing word variants, and so on.
2.
Homographs and words where the meaning is context-dependent.
Terms with dual meanings, for example, intelligence (either an individual's analytical and reasoning abilities or information on an adversary) must be recognized as such by the searcher.
Contextual logic may help to eliminate unwanted uses of homographs.
3.
Hierarchical and other relations.
No cross-references can be expected.
Retrieval of documents on a search topic, by using terms for a broader or narrower concept, relies heavily both on the searcher's ingenuity and on any additional relationships that the database indexer might have added to link the natural language index terms.
Figure 16.4 offers a quick comparison of controlled and natural language indexing.