

Analysis of Policy
TAX INCIDENCE: DEPARTURES FROM THE STANDARD MODEL
7–1 INTRODUCTION
The importance of general equilibrium analysis arises from the complex interrelations between the variables in an economic system.
The immediate first-round effects are often offset by subsequent adjustments; and to know the full impact of a tax, one needs to trace through all its consequences.
This is no easy task, as we have already seen.
Not only must one formulate a model of the entire economy, but one must be able to calculate the effect of a change in some parameter, say a tax rate, on the whole system.
As a result, the general equilibrium analysis of tax incidence has, for the most part, been limited to the competitive equilibrium framework described in Lecture 7.
It has typically been assumed that firms act perfectly competitively and that all markets clear.
The need to relax the assumptions of perfect competition, and that the economy has attained equilibrium, is apparent.
The difficulty lies in providing an adequate theoretical framework to analyse the incidence of taxation under imperfect competition and in the presence of disequilibrium.
In recent years, steps have been made to provide a general equilibrium treatment of imperfect competition, but even with relatively straightforward assumptions about strategic behaviour there remain serious obstacles.
There has been a substantial literature on macroeconomic disequilibrium, but there is considerable disagreement about the appropriateness of different models.
It is not therefore possible at present for the public finance economist to appeal to a generally accepted body of theory.
It follows that  the alternative models presented in this Lecture should not necessarily be regarded either as fully satisfactory or as exhausting those that could be advanced.
In this Lecture we consider three main departures from the model of Lecture 6.
The first is the existence of market imperfections.
In Section 7–2 we start with distortions in the factor market, where returns are not equalized in the two sectors of the economy (for example, because of a union ‘premium’ in the corporate sector) and then go on to a monopoly mark-up pricing policy.
How do such distortions modify the conclusions reached in the previous Lecture about the incidence of the corporation tax?
Section 7–3 gives a more explicit treatment of imperfectly competitive behaviour, presenting a model of monopolistic competition and analysing the effect of the tax on the scale of firms.
The second departure is concerned with more realistic assumptions about production.
Section 7–4 examines the implications of the taxation of intermediate goods, allowing for the interdependence of industries (via the input-output table), and describes a simple hierarchical model of production.
Finally, in Section 7–5, we consider the case where markets do not necessarily clear and the incidence of taxation in the presence of unemployment.
The aim of this Lecture is to incorporate some of the important real-world features which are patently missing from the model of Lecture 6.
We have set about this task by seeking to extend the earlier analysis, and much of the discussion takes the form of modifying the earlier general equilibrium equations.
It may be argued that a more ‘root and branch’ approach has to be adopted, and we have considerable sympathy with this view (see Lecture 1).
Again, the limitation is the lack of the necessary theoretical framework.
There is as yet no ‘radical’ theory sufficiently articulated in the areas needed to examine the incidence of taxes and expenditure.
The Lecture should be read bearing in mind this qualification.
The analysis needs to be developed, for example in the treatment of uncertainty, information, and market power, and these factors may have quite far reaching implications for the way in which we view the general equilibrium of the economy.
7–2 MARKET IMPERFECTIONS
In this section we start from the two-sector (X and Y), fixed-factor (K and L) model of Lecture 6, and examine the implications of market imperfections.
For concreteness, we focus on the corporation tax, which has been taken as the main application of the analysis.
Suppose that the government increases the tax on capital in the corporate sector () and that we are interested in the response of the wage rental ratio ().
How do the conclusions need to be modified when there are departures from the  assumptions of perfect competition?
In analysing this, we retain in this section the simplifying assumptions about production (there are assumed to be constant returns to scale and no intermediate goods).
We assume throughout that demands are generated by a single aggregate utility function and that tax revenue is returned to consumers in lump-sum form.
Distortions in the Factor Market
The first situation considered is that where there are distortions in the factor market, so that the returns are not equalized in the two sectors.
This is not necessarily the most important form of market imperfection, but it is a relatively simple case to examine initially.
The example we take for purposes of illustration is a wage differential:
This case has been discussed at length, especially in the literature on international trade (see for example Jones, 1971a, and Magee, 1976), and has been treated as representing the effects of unionization by Johnson and Mieszkowski (1970).
On this basis, the union is able to secure a premium in the X sector () or Y sector ().
It should be noted that the relationship between such a differential and the ultimate goals of the union is not discussed (a point to which we return briefly), and that the premium is taken as exogenous.
The effect of the wage differential may be seen from the general equilibrium equations set out in Lecture 6, modified for the possibility that .
The full employment conditions are (where c ij denotes the input of factor i into industry j):
The product prices are equal to marginal costs:
Finally, demands are given by 
One of these is again redundant by Walras' law.
From the five equations, and the factor market equations (7–1), we can solve for X, Y and four out of the five prices (p x , p y , r, w x , w y ), the other being the numeraire.
This model can be used to examine the consequences of changes in the differential,.
Our primary concern here however is with the implications of  the existence of  for the comparative static results with respect to the change in taxation () The position is parallel with that in Section 6–4, where the existence of other taxes was seen to affect the response to , and we can draw on that analysis.
To obtain the comparative static results, we totally differentiate the general equilibrium conditions, deriving the ‘equations of change’(see pages 167–70): where  i denotes the income elasticities (in the homothetic case) and  is the aggregate demand elasticity; where  denotes the share of factor i in the value of the jth output, and  is the determinant: where  is the fraction of factor i in sector j, is the determinant, ‘x, Y the elasticities of substitution, and 
It is clear that the premium is equivalent as far as factor prices are concerned to a tax on labour in the X sector (for simplicity we take  on the demand side the effects are also equivalent with the simplifying assumptions being made here.
From the analysis of Section 6–4 we can deduce that it is the conjunction of the distortion with non-unitary income elasticities that is especially important.
Applying the results obtained there (Eq.
(6–29)), we can see how  influences the effect of the corporation tax, modifying the size of the factor substitution effect as the income elasticity of demand for the corporate product is greater (less) than unity.
In the case where there are unitary income elasticities, the existence of the distortion does not add extra terms to the expression for the change in the wage-rental ratio (), but it does affect their interpretation.
From (7–5)—(7–7), with , we can solve for 
This is identical in form to the equation with  (see Eq.
(6–17)), but the implications may be rather different.
As we saw in Lecture 6, distortions may lead the ranking of sectors according to physical capital intensity (A*) to differ from that according to factor shares ().
From Eq.
(6–20), may be seen in the present case to have the sign of  
To see the implications, let us take the example where the production functions are Cobb-Douglas, so that  is constant, and where the corporate sector is relatively labour-intensive in terms of value .
We are considering the effect of increasing an already existing corporate tax .
In the absence of the distortion, it is clear from (7–10) that .
Hence going back to (7–9), we can see that the factor substitution effect (first term on right-hand side) and output effect (second term) work in opposite directions.
If the elasticity of demand is sufficiently large relative to the elasticity of substitution in X, then it is possible that () falls — the net return to capital is relatively increased by the tax.
On the other hand, the differential  tends to reduce the right-hand side of (7–10), and there is clearly a value  (greater than I) such that.
The physical factor intensities are in this situation equal, and the output effect is zero.
With this level of distortion, it is not possible for a rise in the corporate tax to reduce (w/r), and this illustrates how the existence of market imperfections may significantly affect the incidence of taxation.
The effect of the presence of the distortion is shown in Fig. 7–1, which is the upper part of the four-quadrant diagram used in the previous Lecture.
The ‘supply’ curve is constructed from the relationship between  and  shown in the left-hand part of the diagram and that between  and  (not shown).
In Fig. 7–1a, we have the no-distortion case with a small tax, and .
It is possible, as shown, for the output effect to outweigh the substitution effect.
We have transferred the demand curve to the left-hand part (via the lower two quadrants, not shown) to illustrate the two effects.
Figure 7–1b shows the case where the union premium is such that (7–11) is satisfied and .
The supply curve is vertical.
The effect of the tax is to raise  (see left-hand part) and .
Exercise 7–1 In a box diagram for labour and capital, draw the loci  and  (see Section 6–4).
How do changes in  affect the equilibrium?
Now examine the effect of an increase in T KX for a given level of distortion.
(Hint: use a large sheet of paper.)
From this analysis, one can see whether it is possible for tax policy to be employed to offset the existence of market imperfections.
Suppose that the differential is immutable.
If the government then levies a tax on the    use of capital in the X sector at the same rate , this means that the choice of factor intensity in that sector is the same as if the factor prices were w and r.
On the other hand, the relative price of product X is higher.
However, if the government levies a tax on the output of Y at the same rate, this means that the conditions of the no-tax equilibrium have been reproduced.
(In effect, this uses the equivalences set out in Table 6–1.)
The wage differential () has been treated as representing the effects of unionization, but this does not seem a particularly satisfactory way of investigating union behaviour.
In particular, there is no clear relationship between the level of the differential and the objectives of the union (whether, for example , it is in the interests of the union members to achieve a higher premium).
A more fruitful approach to this particular distortion seems to be by considering the restriction of factor movement that lies behind the establishment of a differential.
The power of the union then arises from the ability to limit entry.
In the extreme case, there is no mobility of labour at all(as in Jones, 1971b), and the implications of such immobility for the incidence of the corporation tax have been examined in Section 6–4, where we saw that  implies that the return to capital definitely falls (relative to p y ) as a result of the tax.
Again, this demonstrates how market imperfections may change the conclusions.
Monopoly Power
From imperfection in the factor market, we turn to imperfection in the product market.
As remarked earlier, to treat the corporate sector as acting perfectly competitively is a particularly unsatisfactory assumption.
We now explore some of the implications of monopoly in sector X, while continuing to assume perfect competition in the non-corporate sector.
In his original paper.
Harberger (1962) included a brief discussion of monopoly, based on the assumption that the corporate sector is characterized by constant mark-up pricing.
(where we now assume ).
The mark-up acts in this respect like an excise tax T x , and the fact that the monopoly profit accrues to entrepreneurs, rather than as revenue to the government, does not make any difference in view of the assumption about the demand side.
However, as has been noted by several writers (e.g., Ballentine and Eris, 1975), it is not legitimate to apply formulae derived for infinitesimal changes from a no-tax, no-distortion position.
The existence of a mark-up  has to be taken into account when considering the response to a corporate tax.
The situation is simplified if the utility function is homothetic, and that assumption is made in what follows.
In this case, as we have seen earlier, the form of the equations of change (in terms of) is not affected.
Nor, in the case of a monopoly mark-up, is there any reversal of sign between  and , since T x does not enter (6–20).
We have however to be careful about the interpretation.
In particular, the factor shares  refer to shares in the cost of output, not to factor shares in the value of output.
Thus, the observed factor share, denoted by a superscript o, in the value of output including monopoly profit is 
If therefore we examine the effect of the tax, on the rental of capital, the expression for the change in () becomes (from Eq.
(7–9)): where  and , denote the values evaluated at the observed values.
This means that in evaluating the magnitude of the substitution effect and the output effect at the observed factor shares, the existence of the monopoly mark-up needs to be taken into account.
The direction of the correction depends on whether the demand elasticity,, is greater or less than the elasticity of factor substitution in the corporate sector.
The corporation tax has so far been treated as a tax on the rental of capital only, but in assessing its incidence the effect on monopoly profit must also be considered.
If it falls also on monopoly profits, the total yield of the tax is .
With the simple constant mark-up pricing supposed, the tax on monopoly profit makes no difference.
This might well be modified if we made alternative, and possibly more realistic, assumptions.
On the production side, the mark-up may be determined to achieve a post-tax target (as has been assumed in some versions of the cost plus pricing rule); and in this case the price, and hence the output, of the corporate sector would be affected.
Alternatively, if the monopoly profit is supposed to be the return to entrepreneurship or innovation, and these qualities are elastically supplied, output may again be affected.
(On the demand side, if the pattern of demand is affected by the distribution of income, there may again be shifting of a tax on monopoly profits.)
The representation of market power in terms of a simple mark-up pricing rule is crude and has not been related explicitly to the objectives of the firm.
Under certain assumptions, such pricing behaviour could be derived from the behaviour of a single profit-maximizing monopolist facing  a constant elasticity demand curve, with elasticity greater than unity.
It does not however seem particularly realistic to view the corporate sector as a single gigantic monopolist.
As it is put by Harberger,
[the mark-up]is kept down to modest size by the existence of many independent firms within the corporate sector; by the availability, elsewhere in the corporate sector, of reasonably close substitutes for the products of any one firm; and by the perennial threat of new entry into any field in which the monopoly mark-up is large.
[1962, p. 239]
In the next section, we present a model of imperfect competition (based on Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977) which incorporates some of these features.
7–3 MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
The model described in this section is simple but captures the fact that, although there are strong competitive elements within the economy, virtually every firm in the corporate sector has some degree of monopoly power.
The same ma-y also apply to the non-corporate sector; however, we treat its output (Y) here as being produced under perfect competition.
The model is one of monopolistic competition, in which each firm has a declining cost curve, although constant marginal cost.
The scale of the firm, and hence the number of firms, depends on the relative importance of fixed costs, whereas prices depend on marginal costs and the degree of competition.
The imposition of taxes in this model is relevant to the effect not just on prices but also on industrial structure.
Model of Monopolistic Competition
The source of a firm's monopoly power in this model is located in differences in demands — the firms in the corporate sector have differentiated products — and we begin with the demand side.
As before, we assume that demands are generated by an aggregate utility function, which.
we write as  where X i is the output of the ith firm.
In other words, U is separable in Y and r, where the latter is a sub-utility function of the products of the corporate sector.
The sub-utility function is assumed to have the constant elasticity form  
It is assumed that , which means that the function is concave and that  is a possible solution.
The parameter p is an indicator of the degree of substitutability  is the elasticity of substitution between any two products), or of the preference for variety.
Thus where p = 1, the goods are perfect substitutes, but where p < 1, diversity is valued.
In order to give relatively uncomplicated results, we take the special case where U has the Cobb-Douglas form; i.e.,
Denoting by P i  the price charged by the ith firm, the consumer's budget constraint is  where M denotes total income.
The demand equations may be derived directly from the utility maximization conditions: and the budget constraint, which (substituting) gives α = 1/M.
So .
On the supply side, firms maximize profits and entry occurs until the marginal firm can only just break even.
We assume that all firms have identical cost conditions and, given the symmetry in the utility function, all firms in the industry have the same level of output.
We have therefore to determine the number of firms, denoted by n, and the level of output per firm, denoted by X, so .
where X is total output.
In view of the symmetry, and the break-even condition, there are zero pure profits, so that income, M, does not include an element of pure profits (as opposed to the rental of capital).
The profit-maximizing policy involves setting marginal revenue equal to marginal cost.
From the demand condition (7–18),
Moreover,
At this point, we have to make assumptions about the strategic behaviour of firms.
In particular, we assume that firms act in a Cournot-Nash fashion, taking their competitors' outputs as fixed; i.e. .
Second, we have to ask whether firms take account of the indirect influence, via , of the change in their own output (i.e., the second term on the right-hand side of (7–20)).
In Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) this effect is ignored, but here we allow a more general treatment, introducing a parameter γ, so that  implies that the effect is taken into account and  that it is ignored.
Given the symmetry of the equilibrium,.
Substituting into (7–19) and denoting the elasticity by Ε, we have  or 
If , the elasticity is ; where , the elasticity increases with the number of firms and approaches  as n tends to infinity.
In Chamberlinian terminology, this is the elasticity of the dd curve, i.e., the curve relating the demand for each product type to its own price with all other prices held constant.
Where all prices move together, which is the Chamberlinian DD curve, the elasticity is unitary.
On the cost side, we depart from the earlier assumption of constant returns to scale.
Each firm has a declining cost curve, based on a fixed cost, C and a constant marginal cost, c x .
The equality of marginal revenue and marginal cost requires therefore that the price set by all firms is given by 
The second condition for equilibrium is that firms enter until the next potential entrant would make a loss.
If n is sufficiently large that 1 is a small increment, we can assume that the marginal firm is exactly breaking even: where  is determined from the demand curve 
The three equations (7–21)—(7–23) determine the market equilibrium, giving for specified values of c x , C, and M the equilibrium number of active firms:
The number of firms is larger, the smaller fixed costs (C) relative to the  total sales (δM), the greater the preference for variety (), and the more account taken of the indirect effect (γ).
The larger the number of firms, the smaller the mark-up over marginal costs (for fixed  and c x ).
In the Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) case, with  the price is simply , and the scale of each firm is .
This case is illustrated in Fig. 7–2, where it may be checked that the excess of revenue over variable costs (the shaded area) is equal to the fixed cost C, and that a rise in C would shift the equilibrium horizontally.
General Equilibrium
We now embed this model of monopolistic competition in the general equilibrium framework, allowing for the dependence of the costs c x and C on the factor prices.
For the marginal cost of the corporate sector, we write c LX and C KX as the marginal input requirements of labour and capital, and C LO and C KO as the respective fixed inputs per firm.
The assumptions about  the non-corporate sector are as before, so that the factor market equilibrium conditions are 
(where ).
The conditions for pricing are (7–21) and, for the non-corporate sector, and for demands we have (7–23) and  where .
In contrast to the earlier situation, there are seven unknowns (X, Y, p x , p y , w, r and n), of which one is determined by the choice of numeraire.
We have seven equations,(7–21)(7–23),(7–25a and b),(7–26), and (7–27), of which one is redundant.
Given that an equilibrium exists, it can be found by solving these equations.
We are particularly interested in the comparative statics, and for this purpose we write down the equations of change.
The demand equation is straightforward:
(Because of the special utility function assumed, Differentiating the pricing equations, and letting  denote the share in marginal costs,
Differentiating the factor market equations (7–25), where , denote the proportion of total labour and capital used as fixed cost inputs (and   those in variable inputs).
Defining  as the elasticity of substitution in fixed costs, and  as the shares in fixed costs .
Substituting from this and the corresponding conditions for  and  (see Eq.
(6–14)), and subtracting (7–30a) from (7–30b), where a is defined as .
Suppose that we now define  as a measure of the capital intensity of the Y sector relative to the X sector as a whole.
Equation (7–32) may then be rearranged as (using )
Finally, from the break-even condition in the X sector, substituting for P x and differentiating,.
Where  is a measure of the relative factor intensities in fixed and variable costs.
The model is easiest to analyse where  (i.e., the firm ignores the indirect effect) and we concentrate on this case.
The behaviour of (),() and X is then governed by equations (7–28) and (7–29), eliminating (),(7–33) and (7–34).
What in effect is new is the introduction of the terms in .
These depend, as might be expected, on the relative factor intensity of fixed and variable costs in the monopolistically competitive sector via  and ().
Where , then fixed costs are relatively capital-intensive (in terms of factor shares), and a rise in () reduces the size of the representative firm (from (7–34) with ).
This is the case shown in Fig. 7–3, where we also assume  (and ).
The dashed lines show the effect of the corporate profits tax, to which we now turn.
Impact of Corporate Profits Tax
We now consider the effect of a tax at rate T KX on the use of capital in the X sector, affecting both marginal and fixed costs, taking for simplicity the case .
The effect on the three key equations is:
The differences from the competitive case may be seen from these relationships.
First, the pricing policy (where ) involves a constant mark-up on costs, and the tax on fixed costs does not enter.
The analysis is parallel to that in the previous section.
Second, there are now two elements to costs in the corporate sector.
If there were no fixed costs, then we should have the output effect (term in Eq.
(7–35)) and the factor substitution effect (term in Eq.
(7–33')) as before.
As it is, fixed costs influence the outcome, through the additional factor substitution effect (7–33'), which depends on the degree of substitutability in fixed costs, and through the effect on the scale of the firm.
The latter depends in turn on the capital intensity of fixed costs relative to variable costs () and relative to the rest of the economy as a whole () If fixed costs are relatively capital-intensive in both senses, then the first-round effect is for the size of the firm to be increased (see dashed lines in Fig. 7–3) and this reinforces the substitution effect.
If the output effect is still strong enough to outweigh the latter effect, then w/r falls, and in the final equilibrium, is still higher.
Where w/r rises, this tends to offset the first-round effect.
In order to illustrate the analysis, let us take the extreme case where fixed costs are all capital, and marginal costs all labour (so that).
For a specified factor price ratio (), marginal cost is unaffected by the corporate tax and hence there is no change in price (in (7–35)).
On the other hand, fixed costs are increased proportionately by T KX and the average cost curve shifts upward — see Fig. 7–4.
The new curve is shown by the dashed line; and at the previous   equilibrium output,, firms are either making less than the normal rate of profit (if the tax is levied on quasi-rents generated by existing capital) or are finding that replacement investment (if the tax is levied on the purchase of capital equipment) is not profitable.
This leads to exit from the industry (total output X is unchanged since the product price is unchanged) until the new dd curve (denoted by d'd') is tangent to the average cost curve at the new equilibrium output level,.
Corporation tax, by increasing the fixed costs, in effect raises the entry barriers to the industry.
This does not lead directly to higher prices, but the burden has in part been passed on to the consumer in reduced variety.
This account has so far been in partial equilibrium terms.
The increase in , and reduction in n for a given output, leads to a reduced demand for capital (see the term in (7–33')), and this necessitates equilibrating adjustments in w/r .
The direction of change now depends on the considerations discussed earlier, except that any change in () feeds back to .
It may be seen however that  means that w/r must rise (where the coefficient of () is positive), since there is no demand effect in this special case (see Fig. 7–3).
The general solution for the effect on () and on  may be written: where the coefficient D is assumed positive and the definition of D is analogous to that in Lecture 6.
Of especial interest is the effect on the scale of the firm.
Where the parenthetical term in (7–38) is positive (sufficient conditions for which are that  or  the gross factor price of capital in the corporate sector rises (falls), and this increases the equilibrium firm size where fixed costs are relatively capital-intensive ().
If these conditions hold, and they seem quite plausible, then the corporation tax leads to increased scale, and in this sense increases industrial concentration.
The model of monopolistic competition presented here incorporates only certain features of imperfect competition, and the assumptions on which it is based are very special.
This applies for example to the demand side, where the choice of functional forms is more than merely a matter of algebraic convenience (see Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977).
On the other hand, the model does provide certain insights, such as those concerning the effects of taxation on the scale of firms, in a fully articulated general equilibrium framework.
Moreover, the assumptions about strategic behaviour do not seem — within the terms of reference of the model — to be totally  unreasonable.
What the model does not set out to capture, but which is clearly most important, is the small group interdependence of oligopolistic competition.
This requires us to take a substantial step beyond the Cournot Nash assumption to more sophisticated strategies, allowing for collusive behaviour.
Exercise 7–2.
Consider the dynamic adjustment process which might reasonably be postulated for the monopolistic competition model, paying especial attention to entry and exit.
Examine the conditions for local stability and discuss their implications for the comparative static results.
7–4 STRUCTURE OF PRODUCTION
The assumptions made so far about the input-output relations of the economy have been simplistic in the extreme.
Each sector has been assumed to produce its final output using only capital and labour.
A lot of the debate about tax incidence is however concerned with the inter-industry structure.
This applies particularly to indirect taxes and value-added taxation, where significance is attached to the taxation of intermediate goods and the relationship between different stages of production (manufacturing, wholesaling, retailing, etc.).
Input-Output Relations and Taxation of Intermediate Goods
In this section we explore some of the implications of input output relationships and of different stages of production.
Initially, we assume that there is only one basic factor, labour, with perfect competition and constant returns to scale in production.
The pricing relation is  where the cost function has been extended to allow for the fact that X and Y are now used as intermediate goods.
From these equations we can solve for the prices p x , and p y as functions of the wage, which we take to be fixed at unity.
Suppose now that the government levies an ad valorem sales tax on all sales (to final and intermediate users) of the good X. This would clearly provide an incentive for transactions in the X good to be internal to the  industry (vertical integration) rather than market sales, but to the extent that this does not happen, the after-tax prices q x , q y are given by .
Differentiating logarithmically,
Using  to denote the share of intermediate good X in the cost of production of i (similarly ), we can solve  which is strictly positive where labour is used in both industries.
It follows that both final prices are increased by the tax, the extent of the feedback to the price of Y depending on the importance of X in its production ().
What happens to relative prices?
This depends on whether , but from the definition of  so where labour is employed in sector Y, the relative price of the taxed good must increase.
The indirect effect of the tax via  cannot therefore in this case reverse the effect on relative prices.
Exercise 7–3.
Suppose that the government imposes an arbitrary set of taxes and subsidies on the final sale of goods X and Y and on their use as intermediate inputs (the latter denoted by  etc.).
How does the existence of these taxes and subsidies affect the comparative static analysis of the effects of (1) an ad valorem and (2) a specific tax on all sales of good X?
The model described above provides a simple illustration of the effect of input-output relations and the need to allow for the indirect effects.
Even if the relative price effect is preserved, the quantitative impact may be quite different.
Thus, in assessing the impact of an excise on gasoline, both as intermediate and final product, it is necessary to allow for all the indirect effects.
The direct effect discouraging people from driving to the beach may be counteracted if the cost of producing garden swimming pools is increased; the direct effect on the cost of oil-fired central heating may be substantially offset if electricity prices rise.
These lessons have been absorbed in the international trade literature, in the form of the concept of ‘effective protection’; but in the field of public finance they have received less attention.
To see the implications of corporation tax, T KX , we now treat the commodity inputs as circulating capital, on which there is a required rate of profit r.
The pricing equations then become .
As before, we take the wage as unity, and the key element is the determination of r.
Suppose that r is fixed (for example by the balanced growth conditions see the next Lecture).
The non-substitution theorem then applies, and prices are again determined independently of demand conditions.
The effect of the corporation tax is like that of an excise tax, and the considerations we have just discussed apply with equal force.
The tendency of the tax to increase the relative price of the corporate sector is muted by the input-output interactions (see Metcalfe and Steedman, 1971, for further discussion of this model).
Hierarchical Production Model
The analysis so far has treated the technology of the different sectors in a symmetric fashion, but the hierarchical structure is important.
This applies particularly to discussions of retail versus manufacturer's sales taxes (see for example Friedlaender, 1967).
Here we present a simple hierarchical model which also relaxes the assumptions of constant returns to scale and perfect competition, although we revert to the assumption of a single factor, labour, which is taken as the numeraire.
The assumptions about technology and about the form of imperfect competition are in fact based on those of Section 7–3.
Both manufacturers and retailers are assumed to act as monopolistic competitors, charging mark-ups m m , m r , respectively, on marginal cost.
Both sectors have a fixed labour cost ,, respectively, per establishment, and constant marginal cost.
The technology is hierarchical, with the manufacturer producing his output using labour alone (c m per unit) and the retailer — the second stage — using in fixed proportions purchases from the manufacturing sector and labour (c r per unit).
The equilibrium of this model may be seen straightforwardly.
With labour as the numeraire, the cost curve of a single manufacturing establishment is  where X m is the output of the establishment.
With free entry, this must equal revenue.
Since the manufacturer's price, p m , is a mark-up on marginal cost, the break-even condition is .
It follows that the size of the firm is given by .
In the retail sector, the cost is  where X r is the output per establishment.
With free entry, this must again equal the revenue.
The retailer's price, p r , is a mark-up on marginal cost, so .
The equilibrium size of the retail establishment is therefore .
The conditions for equilibrium in the intermediate good market are that  where n m , n r are the number of manufacturing and retailing firms, respectively.
In the labour market, the condition is .
The general equilibrium of the economy involves solving these three equations for X, n m and n r , where we substitute for X m and X r from (7–45) and (7–48).
The solution is:.
As in the monopolistic competition model of Section 7–3, the scale of the firm is determined by the relationship between fixed and variable costs.
For given costs and mark-ups, the number of firms expands proportionately to output.
A decrease in the mark-up in the retail sector leads, other things equal, to a rise in scale in this sector and a fall in the number of establishments (n r is proportional to ).
Impact of Taxation
In order to illustrate the effects of taxation, let us suppose that the government imposes a tax on labour employed in the retail sector, so that and  become  and , respectively.
This is like the selective employment tax operated at one time in the United Kingdom.
This has no effect on the manufacturer's price, which is determined solely by c m , but leads to a rise in the retail price.
If we assume that the input coefficients and mark-ups are unchanged, then the break-even condition in the retail sector becomes  or .
Assuming that the government returns the proceeds of the tax in lump-sum form, the condition for equilibrium in the labour market is unchanged, and the new equilibrium is  (the scale of firms in the manufacturing sector is unaltered).
For a given output, the number of retailing establishments tends to fall (X r is increased) as a result of the tax.
To secure equilibrium, output and the number of manufacturing firms have to increase.
The tax has the effect of reducing the overhead component of retailing and thus increasing total output.
If there were to be a reduction in the mark-up, then this would further reinforce the effect.
Exercise 7–4.
In the context of this model, examine the effect of a manufacturer's ad valorem sales tax.
What conclusions can be drawn about the ‘pyramiding’ of taxes?
How does the tax compare with a value added tax?
(See Friedlaender, 1967.)
The models described in this section have been rather special in their assumptions, and could be elaborated in several respects.
They serve none the less to illustrate the way in which the structure of production may  influence the incidence of taxation in a simple general equilibrium framework.
It is clear that any empirical application, developing along the lines described in Lecture 6, should take account of the input-output structure, and the nature of firm behaviour at different stages of production.
7–5 NON-MARKET-CLEARING
The general equilibrium analysis of tax incidence has to date been undertaken largely independently of the literature on macroeconomics.
Thus, competitive equilibrium models, with all markets clearing, have been used to investigate the incidence of different taxes, whereas a quite separate literature, using aggregate demand/monetary models, has examined the implications of taxes for the level of employment and the rate of inflation.
In other areas of economics, this gap has been narrowed, a notable example being the integration of relative price effects and income-expenditure determination in international economics; but in public finance the separation has persisted much longer.
This section considers some of the issues that arise when examining the incidence of taxation in a model where markets do not necessarily clear, focusing particularly on unemployment.
Wage Rigidity and Unemployment
In order to examine the implications for tax incidence, we need to specify a theory of involuntary unemployment, and here there is considerable disagreement.
A large number of models have been put forward in recent years, described variously as ‘Keynesian’, ‘disequilibrium’ and ‘non Walrasian’.
It is not our intention here to debate the merits of these models, or their relation to the General Theory.
Nor do we make any claims for the realism of the particular models discussed.
The intention is to illustrate how the conclusions regarding tax incidence may need to be modified when markets do not clear.
In this spirit we take a model that has not been particularly studied in the literature but that remains close to the discussion of earlier sections.
We introduce the notion of wage rigidity, represented by the wage bearing a fixed relationship with the product prices: where V i are fixed weights (say, in a retail price index).
If we take good Y as the numeraire, and there is a mark-up m i , in sector i, then the price equations, with constant returns to scale, are .
The price system of the economy is self-contained: from (7–53) and (7–54) we can determine w, r, and P x .
In this sense we are in a ‘fix-price’ world (Hicks, 1965), and changes in quantities do not feed back to prices.
(It does not of course imply that prices are necessarily constant over time.)
This means that we can solve directly for the effect of the corporate profits tax on prices.
Differentiating,.
Hence  and .
The extent of shifting depends on the weight of the two products in the price index to which wages are linked.
In the extreme case , where the wage is rigid in terms of the non-corporate sector output, the corporation tax has no effect on the after-tax return and in this sense is fully shifted.
In this case, and .
At the other extreme,, the rate of return falls and the wage rises, relative to the numeraire; at the same time P x and the gross rate of return still both rise.
The rise in price is given by  and is therefore greater (smaller) than where  according as the corporate sector is more labour (capital) intensive.
Taxation and the Level of Employment
The effects of the tax are not however limited to the price system, and of particular interest is the effect on employment.
This depends on the demand side.
The recent literature on macroeconomics has emphasized the effect of rationing on one market (e.g., labour) on decisions in other markets.
Consumers maximize utility subject to possible quantity constraints.
In the present case, this may be illustrated by the assumption that the ‘representative’ consumer chooses his supply of labour L s to maximize  U (X, Y, L s ) subject to, the supply of capital being taken as fixed.
If however the desired labour supply exceeds that demanded, L D , the consumer is rationed on this market and utility is maximized subject to the constraint L s = L D (the process of rationing is assumed to be such that each worker is employed for the same fraction of the desired L s ).
(For a clear discussion, in a public finance context, see Dixit, 1976c.)
Where there is unemployment (labour supply rationed), the demand side may be represented by the ‘partial’ expenditure function  with the consumer's behaviour being determined by  where e x denotes the derivative with respect to p x .
The former gives, on the right-hand side, the income received, and the latter uses the standard properties of the expenditure function.
To see the effect of an easing of the rationing constraint, differentiate totally: so .
A rise in employment has therefore a ‘substitution’ effect (via ) and an income effect, where the latter depends on ().
Where the consumer is rationed, this is positive, i.e., he would like to work more.
The demand functions may therefore be written  where we have taken account of the fact that Y is the numeraire and that utility depends on w, r and L D .
In writing them this way we have assumed that labour is rationed on the supply side, i.e., that in the factor market .
In other words, at the factor prices ruling, the demand for factors is such that the constraint on capital is binding but not the constraint on labour (we do not go into the dynamic adjustment process by which this rationed equilibrium has been reached).
This is only one of the possible equilibrium situations.
Whether the economy is in an unemployment regime or another regime will depend on the particular values of the parameters.
Let us now consider the effect of the corporation tax.
Assuming that the equilibrium condition (7–60) continues to hold, we can derive, using the same approach as before, the change in employment:.
From this we can see that the effect of the corporation tax on employment operates in three ways:
1.
a direct effect on the use of labour in the corporate sector, which depends on the elasticity of substitution ();
2.
a demand effect, which depends on the relative labour intensities: if the corporate sector is relatively labour-intensive, then a relative rise in its output implies an expansion of employment;
3.
if  there is a further effect, since () rises and hence there is substitution against labour in both sectors.
In the case of the demand effect, it depends on the price elasticities as before, but also on the substitution effects (via  and ) and the income effects (see Eq.
(7-S9)).
The effect of a corporation tax, raising the cost of capital in one sector, depends therefore on the elasticities of substitution, on the factor intensities, and on the reactions of the rationed consumer.
As in the full employment models considered earlier, the direct impact may be more than offset by the indirect, general equilibrium, effects for example, if the demand response is biased towards capital-intensive industries.
It may be noted that, in evaluating the welfare consequences of a change in the tax rate, we need to take account of the effects on employment.
Whereas in the full employment model the indirect utility function depended only on the prices , it now has to incorporate the quantity constraint .
Where the individual is unable to sell all the labour he wishes an expansion of employment contributes ceteris paribus to an increase in welfare.
The model is clearly unsatisfactory in a number of respects; for example, the absence of investment, the failure to allow for the fact that the incidence of unemployment is not spread evenly and of its consequent distributional effects, and the assumption that prices are rigid but quantities are perfectly flexible.
Where consumers are rationed on the labour (or any other) market, the formation of expectations takes on additional significance.
Current behaviour depends not just on current and expected prices, but also on the quantity constraints that people expect to face in the future.
The public finance model needs to be developed in these respects, drawing on the recent developments in macroeconomics.
The purpose of this section has simply been to indicate how non-market-clearing can be handled.
Exercise 7–5 Examine the effect, in the model described above, of an increase in government expenditure on good X. How does the expansion of employment depend on the various parameters of the model?
7–6 CONCLUDING COMMENTS
The conclusions of this Lecture are perhaps concerned more with developments in economic theory than with the incidence of taxation, and we have emphasized throughout the Lectures that the study of taxation can be no more soundly based than the models that are employed (explicitly or implicitly).
This is well illustrated by the subjects covered in this Lecture.
Among the areas where further development is needed before the analysis can be taken further are the objectives of unions (Section 7–2), oligopolistic behaviour (Section 7–3), and satisfactory models of macroeconomic disequilibrium (Section 7–5).
This emphasis on economic theory is important, since many of the controversies concerning economic policy arise from disagreements about the appropriate model of the economy.
Does the assumption of a perfectly competitive economy at full employment provide a good basis for the analysis of the incidence of taxation?
The answer to that question depends in part on how sensitive the results are to the specification of the model, and one can view this Lecture as being directed towards throwing light on this issue.
At a rather general level, the analysis has borne out the earlier lessons.
The theoretical tools that we developed in the preceding Lecture have been shown to be extremely versatile; they enabled us to analyse easily the incidence of taxation in a variety of economies exhibiting different kinds of imperfections.
Moreover, the results have reinforced the belief that the general equilibrium effects are potentially important and can be safely ignored only in special circumstances (this, we shall see, is even more true in the long-run models explored in the next Lecture).
At the same time, the detailed results have, in some cases, proved to be quite sensitive to the specification of the model; and the models have introduced considerations (such as the effect on the scale of firms) that were absent from the simple competitive equilibrium treatment.
The development of the theoretical framework remains therefore of high priority.
READING
It is difficult to provide any general reading for this Lecture.
Reference should however be made to the literature on macroeconomic disequilibrium, where the recent contributions include Barro and Grossman (1976), Malinvaud (1977) and the papers in Harcourt (1977).
For valuable surveys of temporary equilibrium theory, see Bliss (1975) and Grandmont (1977).
TAXATION AND DEBT IN A GROWING ECONOMY
8–1 INTRODUCTION
One of the major concerns about the tax system is whether it discourages or encourages the growth of the economy.
Although the belief in growth as a value in itself, or as the remedy for the ills of society, which seemed to be prevalent in the early 1960s has given way to a more sceptical attitude, it seems clear that an understanding of the long-run consequences of tax and expenditure policy is essential.
We are concerned particularly with two basic questions:
1.
How do adjustments in the rate of capital accumulation alter the results on the incidence of taxation derived in the previous Lectures?
2.
How does the tax system — and other governmental policies, including the social security system — affect the long-run pattern of growth in the economy?
To answer these questions, we have to formulate a theory of the determinants of growth.
In Section 8–2, we outline the one-sector equilibrium growth model that has been used in most treatments of the dynamic effects of taxation.
The application of this model to the question of incidence is discussed in Section 8–3.
We then turn to a model where the motives for capital accumulation are set explicitly in terms of the life-cycle savings theory treated in Lecture 3, and compare it with alternative approaches (Section 8–4).
The implications for one major question of dynamic incidence — the burden of the national debt — are developed in Section 8–5.
Nature of Growth Theory
Before embarking on the exposition of the theoretical model itself, it may be helpful to consider briefly the nature of the theory of economic growth, how it should be interpreted, and some of the sources of controversy.
A substantial part of the literature has been concerned with the properties of steady-state or balanced growth.
This is a situation where the rate of growth (by which we shall always mean the proportionate growth) of all relevant magnitudes remains constant over time.
Thus capital, labour, output, and total consumption all grow at constant rates (in the most straightforward case these rates are equal).
Where such steady-state paths exist, then we can examine how they are influenced by changes in the parameters.
What however is the relation of steady-state paths to the behaviour of the economy?
Suppose that we begin with the competitive model of Lecture 6, where the full employment equilibrium of the economy is determined (we assume for the moment uniquely) for given levels of capital and labour.
The changes over time in capital and labour then govern the equilibrium path followed.
The question we now have to ask is whether the equilibrium path converges to a steady state.
Suppose, for example, that the labour force grows exogenously at a constant exponential rate, 11.
(This assumption is made throughout the analysis.)
The rate of growth of capital depends however on the level of savings (on the equilibrium path, planned savings are equal to planned investment); and whether or not there is convergence to steady state rests on the properties of the savings function.
Examination of the behaviour of equilibrium paths in simple models suggests that convergence to a steady state may or may not be assured.
Moreover, the time required for the economy to approach the vicinity of a steady state may be quite long — longer than it may reasonably be expected that the parameters remain unchanged.
In this sense the steady state may be a poor approximation, and we should study the full equilibrium path.
The position is further complicated when we allow for disequilibrium behaviour.
As we have seen in Lecture 7, equilibrium in the factor or output markets may not be achieved, and we have to examine in the context of a fully specified disequilibrium model whether the economy converges to an equilibrium path, which in turn may or may not be tending to a steady state.
It is quite possible that the economy may converge to a steady state not characterized by equilibrium, e.g., where capital and the labour force are growing at the same rate, but there is a constant level of unemployment.
The significance to be attached to steady-state and equilibrium paths has been much debated, and indeed the whole subject of growth theory is  surrounded by controversy.
In part this is concerned with the omission of key features of reality, such as uncertainty, the role of expectations, and market imperfections, which have been discussed to some extent in earlier Lectures.
In part it is directed at particular features of the standard treatment — notably the assumption of an aggregate production function.
In the main part of these Lectures, we work with the ‘orthodox’ Solow (1956) model, in which malleable capital is used to produce a single output according to an aggregate production function, with a higher ratio of capital to labour being associated with a lower competitive rate of profit.
Thus, in Section 8–3 we compare steady-state economies with different tax rates, and use the aggregate production function to relate the differences in capital labour ratios, k, to differences in rates of profit, r.
Now this steady-state comparison is a good example of a case where the criticisms of the orthodox model are well taken.
The relationship between k and r is one that cannot be guaranteed to hold when we allow for the heterogeneity of capital, as the debate on ‘'reswitching’ has brought out (see for example Bliss, 1975, and Harcourt, 1972).
Thus, the findings are not ones for which generality can be claimed.
This important qualification, together with the points made earlier about the status of equilibrium paths, needs to be remembered when interpreting the results.
It is none the less consistent with the purposes of the analysis.
We are not seeking to provide a definitive, exhaustive account of the effects of policy; rather, we are using the models as a source of insights and as vehicles for illustrating mechanisms that may not otherwise be apparent.
For example, we show that a tax on investment income may, in the malleable capital model, be shifted via a rise in the gross rate of return, with its redistributive potential being consequently reduced.
This conclusion may not remain universally true when we allow for heterogeneous capital; none the less, the possibility remains that shifting may take place and we need to check when considering policy proposals the likelihood of this actually happening.
It is in this spirit that we use the orthodox model.
Taxation and Balanced Growth Incidence
In analysing the impact of taxation on steady-state and equilibrium paths, there are several effects that are of particular interest:(1) on the rate of growth in the long run;(2) on the level of per capital income and consumption;(3) on the distribution of income among factors; and (4) on the distribution of income among individuals.
We shall be considering the first three in this Lecture, paying particular attention to the case of a tax on capital income.
The last aspect is discussed in Lecture 9.
As in the static model, the basis for comparison is of critical importance, and the question may be posed in several ways.
We can, for example, examine the consequences of increasing a particular tax, with the proceeds being spent on current government expenditure, which does not affect savings decisions, there being no other change in government policy.
On the other hand, just as in the case of short-run macro-policy we consider offsetting changes which keep the level of aggregate demand unchanged, so in the long-run growth context we may want to compare situations where the aggregate capital-labour ratio is unchanged.
The government has instruments, particularly monetary and debt policy, with which it can offset the aggregate effects of taxes.
In a sense, as we argue later, debt policy provides a lump-sum redistribution between different generations; within limits, any depressing effect on savings caused by tax policy can be offset in a non-distortionary manner.
An alternative notion of incidence to use in this context is therefore what we call balanced growth path incidence, where the rate of interest is kept constant by debt policy.
Even though the government is undertaking compensatory actions to keep the interest rate constant, this does not mean that the tax-cum-monetary policy change has no effect (as we shall see).
8–2 AN AGGREGATE MODEL OF EQUILIBRIUM GROWTH
In this section, we describe the one-sector equilibrium growth model in the absence of taxation.
Assumptions of the Model
The production side is assumed to be represented by an aggregate production function relating output, Y, to total (malleable) capital, K, and labour, L: where F is a twice differentiable increasing concave function, homogeneous of degree one.
Initially we assume no technical progress.
The homogeneity (constant returns to scale) assumption means that the production function may be written in the intensive form: where  is the capital-labour ratio and the assumptions described above mean that .
If in addition we require that  the production function is said to satisfy the Inada (1963) conditions, but we do not necessarily want to impose these restrictions.
The output may be defined as either gross output, or output net of depreciation.
The supply of labour is assumed to be a fixed fraction of the total population, to be exogenously determined, and to grow exponentially at rate n: or  where u denotes time, and L the derivative with respect to time.
The case of an elastic labour supply, where the labour services supplied per person change with the wage rate, is treated by Feldstein (1974b).
He shows that the labour supply response has no effect on the steady-state wage and interest rate (with constant returns these depend not on the absolute size of the labour force but only on its rate of growth).
At each moment capital is also inelastically supplied; over time its growth depends on savings and on depreciation.
The gross savings rate out of output Y is assumed to depend on the capital-labour ratio (the nature of this dependence is discussed below), and we take the simple case of a proportionate rate of depreciation, y, often referred to as ‘radioactive decay’.
This means that  or .
On an equilibrium path it is assumed that both capital and labour are fully employed.
From the production and factor supply equations, we obtain the basic growth equation.
Differentiating (8–1), i.e., the weighted average of the growth rates of labour and capital.
If we write g x for the proportional growth rate of variable x, and let   we have (using (8–4')) and if we let  denote output per capita,(this needs to be modified where there is technical progress — see below).
These relationships are purely technological, and do not assume anything about the degree of competition.
With perfect competition, factor payments are equal to the value of marginal products:(With perfect competition, α is equal to the competitive share of labour.)
The state of the economy is then completely described by the capital-labour ratio.
Dynamic Behaviour of the Model
The first question we need to ask is whether there is a steady-state solution.
This requires that capital and labour grow at the same rate; i.e., and .
From (8–4') and (8–5'),.
Balanced growth requires that gross saving per worker just offsets depreciation and the capital-widening necessary to allow for the growth of the labour force.
There is no capital-deepening.
The simplest case is where s(k) is a constant, s.
The existence of a steady-state solution depends then on the extent of possible variation in the output-capital ratio, i.e., whether for all values of s. n, and y there exists a k such that.
It is sufficient for the existence of a solution that the production function satisfies the Inada conditions and that .
This is shown in Fig. 8-la.
There is a unique value of k, denoted by , such that(8–12) holds.
On the other hand, neither uniqueness nor existence is guaranteed in more general cases.
Suppose that , which seems a possible situation.
In this case we may have either no steady state (Fig. 8–1b) or two steady states (Fig. 8 — 1c).
From the diagrams we can readily trace the full dynamic path of the    economy, and examine whether equilibrium paths converge to a steady state.
Suppose that the initial capital stock is k and  in Fig. 8–1a.
This means that  and hence .
The economy follows a path with rising capital per man (see arrow), and approaches asymptotically .
Conversely, if , the economy approaches  from above.
There is therefore a globally stable long-run equilibrium at .
In the more complicated case of Fig. 8–1c, the equilibrium  is locally stable in that there is an interval around it such that the economy tends to converge; but it is not globally stable.
The final outcome depends on the initial capital stock: if , the economy converges to  if , k tends to zero.
The model may be seen as describing the dynamic development of a simple general equilibrium system of the kind discussed in Lecture 6.
At the same time, the structure of the model is considerably less rich.
On the production side we have in effect collapsed the two sectors into one.
This allows us to by-pass a number of problems that have been discussed in the literature on two-sector models, including the uniqueness of momentary equilibrium (see, e.g., Dixit, 1976b, Ch. 6).
Uniqueness is typically assumed, but is by no means guaranteed, as we have seen in Lecture 6.
On the demand side, we may treat the two goods as corresponding to investment and consumption goods (identical in production).
We have not however given a very careful treatment of the allocation of demand the savings decision — and we turn now to this, and to two other features of the model that need elaboration.
Savings Behaviour
Starting from a disequilibrium perspective, the accumulation of capital depends on the specification of ex ante investment and savings functions and the mechanism by which they are brought into equilibrium (this being the kernel of the instability problem posed by the Harrod model).
The study of equilibrium growth paths, on the other hand, takes as given that investment and full employment savings are equal, and proceeds typically by analysing development over time in terms of the behaviour of savings.
This procedure, which is that adopted in the model described above, is quite legitimate; it does however underline the limitations of confining attention to equilibrium paths.
The equilibrium assumption allows us in effect to abstract from the determinants of investment — and the role of uncertainty, expectations, ‘animal spirits’, etc. — but at the cost of assuming that disequilibrium phenomena are unimportant for the purpose at hand or are transitory.
Since the mechanism by which equilibrium is attained is not in general specified (although see Tobin, 1955, Solow, 1956, and Meade, 1961), it is a heroic assumption.
Within the confines of an equilibrium model, the specification of the savings function needs careful consideration.
In much of the literature, savings are assumed to be based on rules of thumb.
The proportional savings case is an instance of this.
Another common assumption is that of ‘classical’ savings, where there are different propensities to save by type of income or class.
In the former (Kaldor, 1955) version there is a propensity to save s r out of profits and s w out of wages.
In the latter (Pasinetti, 1962) version the differential savings propensities are associated with capitalists and workers.
The foundation for the Kaldor view has been discussed in Lecture 3, where we brought out its relationship with the company sector and the extent to which individuals see through the corporate veil.
(The underlying assumptions about corporate financing and the relationship with the considerations discussed in Lecture 5 — are an aspect in need of more elaboration.)
Where the savings relationship is of the classical (Kaldorian) type, the condition for steady growth becomes  (8–13) In the extreme case where there is no saving out of wages,(8–14)
The steady-state rate of return is given by the rate of growth and the propensity to save; indeed, where all profits are saved, the rate of return (net of depreciation) equals the rate of growth.
A quite different approach to the specification of savings is based on household utility maximization (as discussed at some length in Lecture 3).
In general, the rigorous derivation of a savings function by this route is likely to be complex, but in Section 8–4 we consider a simple two-period life-cycle model illustrative of this line of argument.
Technical Progress and Natural Resources
The easiest way to introduce technical progress is to assume that factors become more effective over time, e.g., that one worker can do the work that two did a decade ago.
Where this factor-augmenting technical progress is going on at constant exponential rates, the production function may be written  (8–15) where K denotes the rate of capital augmentation and  the rate of labour augmentation.
Differentiating logarithmically.
It can however be shown (see, e.g., Dixit, 1976b, p. 74) that steady growth with strictly positive factor shares is not possible unless technical progress can be written in a purely labour-augmenting form.
The next step is to make technical progress endogenous to the model.
Both the direction and the rate of technical advance are likely to be influenced by economic variables, including taxation and government expenditure.
The direction of technical change has been explored in a series of papers initiated by the work of Kennedy (1964), von Weizsacker (1966) and Samuelson (1965).
They assume that there is a trade-off between labour-augmenting and capital-augmenting technical progress, and that firms maximize the instantaneous rate of unit cost reduction (i.e. firms are myopic, or are able to appropriate returns for only one instant) This ‘innovation possibility frontier’ captures the notion of choice but leaves open a number of questions, notably the determination of its shape and location, which must in part result from the deliberate allocation of resources to research and development.
This can be thought of as an investment — an expenditure today for which there is hoped to be a return in future years in the form of a lowering in the costs of production (for a process invention).
Since raising the rate of interest lowers the present discounted value of returns, a higher rate of interest would tend to be associated with a lower rate of technical progress: we would have  with .
A rather different view of endogenous technical advance sees it as the product of experience or ‘learning by doing’(Arrow, 1962).
Where the stock of past experience is proxied by the stock of capital, the effect operates like increasing returns to scale.
Finally, if there exists a finite supply of an exhaustible, non-renewable natural resource, then the rate at which it is depleted affects the rate of growth of the economy; but the rate at which it is exhausted depends on (and influences) the rate of interest.
Comparing steady states, a high savings rate is associated with low interest rates and low rates of resource depletion, and hence with higher growth rates than economies with lower savings rates (Stiglitz, 1974c).
The introduction of a second asset means that we have to take account of the capital market equilibrium condition: the return from holding stocks of the natural resource must equal the return to physical capital.
With this extension, the convergence of the equilibrium paths to the steady state becomes problematic (Hahn, 1966).
Moreover, since the return to holding the natural resource is the increase in its relative price, it depends crucially on the way in which expectations are formed.
In what follows we remain within the confines of the basic model with exogenous labour-augmenting technical progress and no natural resources.
The reader should however bear in mind the way in which the analysis may be changed by these factors.
In particular, the long-run rate of growth of output may no longer simply be determined by the growth of effective labour.
Where the rate of technical advance, or the rate of depletion, is endogenous, then it may be possible permanently to raise or lower the rate of growth through tax or other measures.
8–3 GROWTH AND TAXATION
We now examine the effects of taxation in the basic model outlined earlier.
A variety of taxes is considered, although the simplified structure of the model reduces the effective range of instruments.
Since labour is supplied inelastically, a wage tax and a lump-sum tax on earners are equivalent; since all assets are assumed to earn the same rate of return, a tax on capital and a tax on the income from capital are equivalent.
It is assumed that technical progress is purely labour-augmenting.
If we write k for the ratio of capital to labour measured in efficiency units (i.e., capital per effective man), then the basic equation governing growth over time (the analogue of (8–11)) is 
The rate of technical progress is assumed to be determined exogenously, which means that the steady-state rate of growth of output is unaffected by taxation (it is equal to .
Government policy may however affect the level of capital, and output, per man.
Suppose, for example, that taxation reduces s(k).
As shown in Fig. 8–2, this leads the steady-state, capital-labour ratio to fall from  to  (the steady state is assumed unique).
The long-run per capita income is therefore lower.
Whether the before-tax competitive share of labour is increased or decreased depends on whether the elasticity of substitution between capital and labour is greater or less than unity.
What happens under perfect competition to the after-tax distribution of income may therefore be ambiguous.
Incidence of Capital Taxation
In order to explore this more fully, we focus on a tax on capital at rate t assuming initially that the proceeds are used for current government expenditure.
The tax influences the dynamic behaviour of the economy via the savings function and we write .
The impact on the steady-state growth path, assuming one exists, may be seen by differentiating the condition  with respect to t c : where .
and s t denotes the derivative with respect to t c Where the steady-state path is locally stable, the coefficient of  is negative, and k rises (falls) if s t is positive (negative)— as indicated by Fig. 8–2.
Suppose s t is negative.
The fall in k leads to a rise in the gross return to capital and a fall in the wage; to this extent the tax is ‘shifted’.
Is it possible for the net return to capital to rise?
Writing r for the net return, and .
Using the definition of the elasticity of substitution .
This depends on the strength of the response of savings () as well as on the characteristics of the steady state.
In order to make further progress, we need to specify the savings process.
Turning to special forms of the savings function, we can see that the effect is straightforward in the case of the extreme classical savings function (with no saving out of wages).
Then  i.e., the net return is unchanged and the tax is fully shifted.
When the capital stock has adjusted to its new steady-state level, the rise in the gross rate of return is just enough to offset the tax, and it is the wage rate that is reduced.
This provides a striking example of how the long-run incidence may differ from that in the short-run.
In the more general classical savings case, with , the steady growth condition is .
This can be re-arranged to give (using ).
. Thus in the Cobb Douglas case, with  and , a 50 per cent tax causes the net return to fall by only a quarter.
There is therefore a considerable degree of shifting.
Exercise 8–1.
Analyse the incidence of a capital tax in a model where there are two classes of individuals with different savings propensities.
The capitalist class receives no wage income and saves a fraction S r .
the working class receives all wage income and capital income proportionate to its capital, and saves a fraction s w .
How do the results with this Pasinetti model compare with those from the Kaldor version described above?
(See Pasinetti, 1962, Meade and Hahn, 1965, Samuelson and Modigliani, 1966.)
Exercise 8–2.
Examine the savings behaviour where accumulation is governed by an infinitely lived ‘representative’ individual, who maximizes an additive utility function of per capita consumption at each date, discounted at a fixed pure rate of time preference, but weighted by the population alive at each date.
(Assume no technical progress.)
Show that this leads to the same behaviour in steady state as the extreme classical assumption.
(See Stiglitz, 1970a.)
A Redistributive Capital Tax
If the tax on capital leads to a fall in k, this means that part of the burden of the government expenditure is being shifted.
Suppose now we consider an  explicitly redistributive tax, with the proceeds  per capita being used to finance a lump-sum transfer to workers.
Is it possible that this too will be shifted so that the redistributive goal is not achieved?
The effect on the level of savings may in the classical savings case be represented simply by T:.
Differentiating the condition for steady growth, and using  to denote the weighted average savings rate (), or  where the steady state is locally stable, D is negative, and the tax plus transfer lowers the capital-labour ratio (since ).
The gross wage falls.
Differentiating the net income of wage-earners with respect to T,(using the definition of ).
Now for small taxes (i.e., evaluating at ), the steady growth condition means that, if , then  and local stability implies .
An increase in the net income of the wage-earners is therefore assured.
On the other hand, the effective transfer from $1 tax may be considerably less than $1.
Taking the Cobb-Douglas example, with  the right-hand side of (8–29) equals 0.75; if , the ratio falls to 0.5.
The effective transfer may therefore be a lot smaller than the nominal tax, particularly when there is a large difference between s r and s w .
In the extreme case where , the steady growth condition is   and the effective transfer (evaluated at ) is zero.
The redistributive policy is in this case quite powerless.
Balanced Growth Incidence
We now consider the concept of balanced growth incidence, where changes in taxation are accompanied by offsetting adjustments in monetary policy to hold constant the capital-labour ratio.
First, we need to introduce the monetary instruments.
Money or government bonds provide alternative stores of value, a means by which individuals can hold their savings.
On the other hand, the introduction of money causes the complication that changes in the price of money relative to real capital affect individuals' incomes (capital gains should be included in disposable income) and savings (the increase in the value of an individual's assets is, in effect, savings).
Moreover, the distribution of money (say in the form of transfer payments) increases individuals' incomes.
In the subsequent analysis, we sidestep these issues and assume that the government only issues short-term bonds paying the going rate of interest.
From the individual's point of view, bonds and equities are assumed to be perfect substitutes.
Thus, the price of bonds (relative to capital or consumption goods) remains fixed (say at unity).
If we denote total government bonds by B, bonds per capita by b, and use T c to denote the total tax paid on capital income (including bond interest) measured per worker, the classical savings model yields the capital market equilibrium condition .
For simplicity.
we ignore depreciation and technical progress, so .
If the development of capital accumulation (k) is to be unaffected, we require that the sum of the underlined terms be zero.
The government budget constraint is   so that we must have  or .
Moreover, in steady state  and from (8–32).
Combining these, the steady-state transfer is .
Using the condition , the denominator may be shown to be proportional to , which in steady state is strictly positive for .
Where there is saving out of wages a positive transfer is possible; and balanced growth incidence implies an improvement in the income of the wage-earning class.
(In the extreme classical savings model, with , there is no way in which debt policy can be used to offset the effect of T c .)
Summary
In the model used in this section, the steady-state rate of growth is determined exogenously by population increase and technical progress.
The analysis has therefore concentrated on the effect on the capital labour ratio and on competitive factor returns.
In particular, we have shown examples where a tax on capital income may be shifted completely, and have demonstrated that in less extreme cases the effective redistribution may be very much reduced in the long run as a result of adjustments in the capital stock.
Where the model is extended, these results need to be modified.
Suppose, for example, the rate of technical progress is a function of expenditure on research.
Such expenditure, and hence the long-run rate of growth, may well be affected by capital taxation.
Alternatively, in a model with natural resources, a tax on capital income may affect the capital market equilibrium (see Exercise 8–3).
Exercise 8–3.
In the context of the model with natural resources described in Stiglitz (1974c), examine the effect of a capital tax on the return to physical capital (i.e., exempting the capital gains on natural resources), taking different assumptions about the way in which expectations are formed.
8–4 TAXATION IN A LIFE-CYCLE MODEL
The assumptions made about savings in the previous sections were either entirely ad hoc(the proportional savings assumption) or based on the class savings hypothesis.
The latter may provide a good approximation to actual savings behaviour, but in this section we consider for purposes of contrast the rather different approach based on individual life-cycle savings decisions, discussed at some length in Lecture 3.
We take a discrete time model where the individual lives for two periods, working in the first, using savings from the first to provide for retirement, and there are no bequests.
This is the Samuelson (1958a) consumption loan model, applied to public finance questions by Diamond (1965).
Model of Life-Cycle Savings
As in Lecture 3, the individual consumes c 1 in period 1, and c 2 in period 2, of his life, and he faces the budget constraint .
We need to identify carefully the different generations.
For the generation born in period u, the relevant wage is w u and the relevant rate of return .
We can therefore write  or per capita savings (assets) as  (8–37).
All individuals are assumed identical, and there are (at this stage) no bonds For simplicity, we ignore depreciation and technical progress.
The total capital available in period u+1 is therefore the savings of the preceding generation of workers: or (since the population is assumed to grow at rate (),.
It may be noted that savings depend on expectations concerning the interest rate in the next period.
We begin by describing the steady-state behaviour.
From (8–37) and (8–38) and  and by varying k we can trace out the possible steady-state consumption levels.
The curve has slope  which may be re-arranged substitution: using the definition of the elasticity of substitution:.
The curve need not be downward-sloping.
Where, for example,(8–41) the curve slopes upwards.
Moreover, the downward slope is greater or less than () according as r is greater or less than n.
In particular, the point G is the ‘golden rule’ steady state with , and slope equal to ().
In Fig. 8–3 we show for purposes of illustration the Cobb Douglas case.
As we move up the curve, k rises and r falls, until the latter reaches  and   the slope is vertical at point Q. Beyond this, further increases in k cause r to fall; it reaches n at G.
In the competitive equilibrium, the individual's marginal rate of substitution between c 1 and c 2 must equal ().
Through each point on the c 1 c 2 curve in Fig. 8–3 we can draw a line with slope (), noting that r falls as we move up the curve.
For a competitive equilibrium, this line must be tangent to the individual's indifference curve.
It may happen that the indifference curve is tangent to the c 1 c 2 frontier at G (the golden rule), but in general we would expect to find a situation such as P in Fig. 8–3 where  (as drawn ).
Re-arranging (8–38), we have in steady-state  where s is the propensity to save ().
This may give values of r greater or less than n (Diamond, 1965, p. 1135).
Whether such a steady state is locally stable depends on the assumptions made concerning expectations.
Suppose that the expected rate of return is written as .
Differentiating (8–38), For local stability we require .
If individuals have perfect foresight, then , and it is necessary that, evaluated at the steady state (the coefficient of  is assumed positive (see Diamond, 1965, p. 1132))
(Question for the reader: what difference would it make if individuals have static expectations so that ?)
Incidence of Taxation
We now introduce the tax on capital income examined before, together with lump-sum transfers T 1 and T 2 to the two generations (workers and retired, respectively).
The individual budget constraint is then: where  and the c 1 c 2 frontier is given by .
Suppose first we consider the case where the revenue from the capital tax is used to pay a lump-sum transfer to the older generation; i.e. .
From (8–45), it may be seen that, for given k, the tax terms cancel, so that the frontier is unchanged.
On the other hand, the after-tax interest rate corresponding to a given k is reduced by the tax, so that the previous equilibrium no longer holds.
To see what may happen, consider the case of a Cobb-Douglas production function, as illustrated in Fig. 8–4 (the same figure as before, with the pre-tax equilibrium at P).
For given k, the after-tax return falls, so that the slope of the budget line rotates to the dashed line.
Fairly weak conditions are sufficient to rule out a rise in k as a result of the tax.
Suppose that the new equilibrium were at P'.
At that point f' (k) is less than f' (k p ), and the budget line is made flatter by the tax.
The indifference curve through P' must therefore have a slope less than at P. A sufficient condition to rule this out is, for example, that consumption is a normal good.
The effect of the tax may be explored more fully by using the steady-state condition:(8–46) where w is a function of k and r is a function of t c and k.
Differentiating totally,.
If the local stability condition (8–43) holds, the coefficient of dk is positive.
In order to see the implications of the right-hand side, we make use of the notation introduced in Lecture 3: where M denotes the first-period present value of income (wealth) including transfers, is the elasticity of c 1 with respect to M, and we are evaluating at .
Similarly, where the second step in (8–50) makes use of Eq.
(3–10) in Lecture 3, and  is the elasticity of substitution in consumption between c 1 and c 2 .
We consider first the case where the proceeds of the interest tax finance a lump-sum transfer to the older generation (as in Fig. 8–4), evaluating at .
The revenue condition implies .
Substituting into the right-hand side of (8–47), and using (8–49) and (8–50), it may be seen to be proportional to .
The local stability condition (8–43) implies therefore that the capital labour ratio is reduced where there is a strictly positive elasticity of substitution between c 1 and c 2 .
Where the revenue is given in lump-sum form to the first generation, the results are different.
Again taking an infinitesimal tax, from the revenue constraint, and the right-hand side of (8–47) is proportional to (using (8–48) and (8–50).
If, for example, the utility function is of the Cobb-Douglas form (), this is clearly positive.
The tax on capital, used to make a transfer to the younger generation, raises k (where the local stability condition (8–43) holds).
In contrast to the redistributive capital tax  considered in Section 8–3, the indirect effects reinforce the transfer.
This may appear somewhat surprising.
However, the life-cycle savings model is the polar opposite case from pure classical savings.
There, the capitalist class had the larger savings propensity, and a transfer to wage-earners reduced the rate of accumulation.
Here, the wage-earning generation are the only savers, and a transfer to this generation raises savings.
Balanced Growth Incidence
As in the previous section, we may introduce government bonds and examine the case where monetary policy offsets the effects of taxation on the capital labour ratio.
With the introduction of debt per worker b, the steady-state growth condition becomes .
In steady state, the level of bonds per worker is constant, so that the new issue of debt each period is nb per worker (i.e., to allow for the population growth).
This must equal the government deficit after allowing for interest payments; i.e., per worker  (where tax is paid on debt interest).
This may be rewritten as .
First, we may note that consumption plans are determined by the present value of lump-sum transfers ().
On the other hand, savings equal .
Suppose therefore that we reduce T 2 by dT 2 while increasing T 1 by , so that the present value is unchanged.
Total savings per retired person then rise by .
This is equivalent in terms of the effect on the total physical capital stock to reducing b by , and we can see from (8–56) that such a reduction would have an equivalent effect on the government budget constraint.
We can see therefore that in this model government debt is equivalent to a fall in T 1 accompanied by a rise in T 2 so as to leave the present value of lump-sum tax payments unchanged (Diamond, 1973b, p. 222, and Bierwag, Grove and Khang, 1969).
This bears out our earlier statement that debt policy is equivalent to lump-sum redistribution between generations.
It has in turn important implications for the question of the burden of the national debt discussed in the next section.
Exercise 8–4 How would the above analysis change if the government issued bonds which were tax exempt'?
If we now differentiate the steady-state growth condition (8–54), and the government revenue constraint, evaluating at  we obtain: and .
Balanced growth incidence requires that , and from these equations it is possible to examine the effect of different combinations of taxes, taking account of the equivalence set out in the preceding paragraph.
Exercise 8–5 Examine the balanced growth incidence of a capital tax used to pay a lump-sum transfer to the working generation (where ).
What is the relationship between the size of the transfer and the revenue raised?
Different Views of the Accumulation Process
In this section we have examined the view that savings decisions are based on the utility-maximizing calculations of households planning to spread consumption over their lifetimes.
As we have noted, this is at the opposite pole from the extreme classical view that wage-earners save little, and that the primary source of accumulation is saving out of profits.
This polarity of views may be represented in terms of the differential propensities sr and sw.
Going back to the analysis of Section 8–3 (Eq.
(8–23)), we can see that the proportional savings function provides a benchmark case.
If one assumes that the dominant motive is accumulation out of profits, then , and the shifting of the profits tax reduces the effective redistribution.
On the other hand, if one assumes that the main source of savings is through wage-earners making provision for retirement, then  and the indirect responses (via increased k) reinforce the effect of the transfer.
8–5 BURDEN OF THE NATIONAL DEBT
The question whether financing government expenditure by borrowing rather than taxation imposes a greater burden on future generations has  given rise to a great deal of confusion among laymen and, at a more esoteric, if not more useful, level, among economists.
Popular misconceptions often stem from assuming that the national debt is analogous with private debt, which is true for external government debt but not for internal debt:
A nation owing money to other nations…is impoverished or burdened in the same way as a man who owes money to other men.
But this does not hold for national debt which is owed by the nation to citizens of the same nation….
‘We owe it to ourselves’.
[Lerner, 1948, p. 256]
Given this essential difference between internal government and private debt, in what sense can the burden be shifted through internal debt finance?
The answer clearly depends on what is meant by ‘burden’ and how the existence of debt affects the behaviour of the economy.
Debt, Aggregate Consumption and Capital Formation
The first definition of burden is that of a reduction in aggregate consumption, a definition that underlies the ‘Keynesian’ view which gained currency in the 1940s and 1950s.
According to this, in a closed economy with full employment, the resources used for government expenditure must be drawn from other current uses of resources.
As it is put by Samuelson, ‘To fight a war now we must hurl present day munitions at the enemy, not dollar bills, and not future goods and services.’
A closed economy cannot dispose of more goods and services than it is currently producing, and the reduction in resources available for current non-government use is independent of the method of finance.
If debt rather than tax finance is adopted, then future taxpayers have to pay interest on the debt, but this is purely a transfer payment.
The assumptions made in the Keynesian argument may however be questioned.
There are ways in which current decisions affect future output: for example, by reducing the stock of natural resources, via a lower rate of technical advance, and by decreasing the stock of capital.
In what follows we focus on the last of these — the possibility that debt finance may shift the burden by passing on a reduced capital stock — but the reader may like to consider the other two aspects.
That a switch from tax to debt finance may affect the rate of capital formation has been argued by Modigliani (1961) in the context of a simple life-cycle model.
Each person consumes all his income over his lifetime.
With a stationary population and technology, there is a constant level of aggregate assets, A, although there is continuous reshuffling of ownership from dissavers (such as retired persons) to savers.
Initially, there is no government debt, so that total real capital, K, equals A. At time u there is an increment in government expenditure dG.
If financed by debt, savings are unaffected but the debt displaces private capital in household portfolios and this reduction in the stock of private capital is permanent.
On the other hand, if the expenditure is financed by taxation, it reduces the lifetime income of all those alive at u.
They spread this reduction in consumption over their lifetime, so that total savings fall initially by sdG (where ).
As time passes, private capital increases, and by the time the last person alive at u has died, K has returned to its original value.
There is therefore a different pattern of aggregate consumption with the two methods of finance, and output is permanently reduced by the debt policy.
This model provides considerable insight, but is not complete.
No allowance is made for the changes in factor prices consequent on the fall in capital; nor is any account taken of the financing of the debt interest.
In order to explore this more fully, we begin with an explicit general equilibrium model, but based on simple assumptions about savings.
The model is in fact that set out in Section 8–3 when examining balanced growth incidence.
From the equations given there (ignoring depreciation and technical progress), and the government budget constraint  where T c is the tax levied on capital, T the lump-sum transfer to wage-earners.
We begin by considering the steady-state conditions: and .
In contrast to the balanced growth incidence analysis, we now allow k to vary and we are interested in how it responds to changes in the level of debt, with the taxes being adjusted to secure budget balance.
What we are in effect considering are the implications of debt resulting from earlier decisions about financing.
At some distant date in the past, the government chose to use debt rather than taxation; the consequences of the tax reduction have died away, but the debt (constant in per capita terms) remains.
Does this impose a burden in terms of the capital-labour ratio being lower?
From the condition  and (8–32'),.
Hence  implies   In the proportional savings case, implies a lower steady-state capital labour ratio than b = 0, but k is not a monotonic function of b (Phelps and Shell, 1969).
This is shown in Fig. 8–5.
With debt b 1 there are two possible steady states, at P 1 , and  at Q 1 ; if the level of debt is increased, then  falls but  rises.
On the other hand, if the government holds b constant, then the behaviour of the equilibrium path is such that the equilibria P 1 and P 2 are locally stable, but Q 1 and Q 2 are locally unstable.
The diagram shows the global comparison of different levels of debt, but how does this relate to Modigliani's marginal change in b?
Differentiating (8–60), setting ,(8–61) A dollar of debt displaces at the margin a dollar of private capital (the case taken by Modigliani) if and only if f'= n.
If the capital stock is below the golden rule level (), then where , the reduction in the capital stock is greater than Modigliani argued.
This arises because we are taking account of the fact that the interest payments (f'b) exceed the new debt issued (nb).
(Phelps and Shell, 1969, show that this, basically an envelope result, holds in a much wider class of steady-state models.)
In the case of classical savings (), the steady-state condition also includes the term , and this brings out a significant point.
One cannot discuss the effect of the national debt without specifying the other accompanying adjustments in fiscal policy.
The impact of debt depends on the nature of the taxes employed.
Suppose first that T = 0, so that the excess of interest over new debt is financed by a capital tax.
Equation (8–60) may then be re-arranged so that the underlined term is .
The effect works as before, with S r replacing s.
On the other hand, with T c = 0, the underlined term in (8–60) becomes .
In this case, the taxes necessary to finance the debt () have the effect of transferring income from those with a lower propensity to save (s w ) to the capitalist classes.
The taxes employed have therefore an impact on savings, and this may (where r is large relative to n, or s r close to 1) reverse the direction of the effect of debt.
The lesson to be drawn is that the impact of debt depends on the other instruments open to the government, a point that is brought out even more clearly in the life-cycle model.
National Debt in the Life-Cycle Model
In the steady-state analysis of the life-cycle model in the previous section, we showed that an increase in debt is equivalent to a lump-sum transfer to the retired financed by a lump-sum tax on the younger generation.
This means that any effects of the government debt may be neutralized by the appropriate combination of lump-sum taxes and transfers.
The existence of the debt can only be said to be a ‘burden’ if the government is constrained in its use of lump-sum taxes.
The burden of the debt is indeed a misnomer, since the burden arises only because of the existence of constraints on tax policy.
In order to see what such a constraint might mean, we assume that the lump-sum transfers have to be employed in fixed proportions (), and that there is no capital tax.
From (8–57) and (8–58), we have (evaluating for infinitesimal taxes and debt), and  where the coefficient of , denoted by D, is positive for local stability (under condition (8–43)).
From this, we can see how the Modigliani analysis is modified in this more complicated model.
In effect he took account of the terms  on each side of (8–57), which imply .
This ignores the change in factor prices induced by the change in k (other terms in the coefficient of ) and the taxes necessary to finance the debt (positive where ).
From the earlier analysis, the effect of the taxes via the first parenthetical term on the right-hand side of /8–57') depends on  where we have used (8–48) and (8–49).
Thus, where all taxes are levied on the first generation (), as assumed by Diamond 11965).
the above-mentioned term is positive where c 2 is normal, and the tax effect reinforces the reduction in k (for ).
On the other hand, where all taxes are raised from the older generation, that term is negative, and the effect reversed.
This demonstrates once again the sensitivity of the conclusions to the choice of taxes to make up the rest of the package.
Finally, it should be emphasized that the constraint , is an artificial one; the main purpose of introducing it is to bring out the consequences of the assumptions made in different studies.
The life-cycle model provides a convenient vehicle to discuss the alternative notion of the ‘burden’ of the debt being the reduction in lifetime utility.
Thus, Bowen, Davis and Kopf (1960) define ‘the real burden of a public debt to a generation as the total consumption of private goods foregone during the lifetime of that generation’(p. 702).
This they consider ‘a more accurate representation of the everyday notion of burden [and]a more sensible concept for deciding if the real cost of a certain project can or cannot be postponed to future generations’.
In terms of the model considered above, the change in the steady-state lifetime utility is given by the indirect utility function V (w, r, T 1 , T 2 ) The calculation of the effect, making use of the fact that , is left as an exercise.
Exercise 8–6 In the case , show that , evaluated at  , is proportional to  (8–63).
How is the expression altered if ?
(See Diamond, 1965.)
From (8–63), we can see that, with , the existence of debt lowers steady-state utility where  and the local stability condition () holds.
It should be noted that this reduction in utility is not caused by deadweight loss associated with taxation.
As has been argued by Meade (1958), and others, the taxes necessary to finance the debt may have an excess burden.
Here, however, we have assumed that the taxes are lump-sum, so that this is not the source of the utility loss.
Indeed, it can be seen that, where  in the no-tax equilibrium, then steady-state utility could be raised by setting  (or equivalent variations in lump-sum taxes).
The no-tax situation is not a first-best benchmark, since it may not correspond to a desired intertemporal distribution — and this may provide grounds for government intervention.
Moreover, when considering the intertemporal distribution, it is necessary to look beyond simply the changes in steady state utility.
Debt and Bequests
The analysis described above has been criticized for treating debt and taxation asymmetrically.
Individuals are assumed to take account of current taxes but ignore the future tax liabilities created by the issuing of debt: ‘society fools itself into consuming more, thinking that possession of government paper provides for its future’(Tobin, 1965, p. 681).
This has led to the argument that there is no essential difference between debt and tax finance.
This position has been called ‘classical’ or ‘Ricardian’, on the grounds that it goes back to Ricardo's discussion of the capitalization of the tax burden of financing debt:
[He]argued that the fully rational individual should be indifferent as between paying an extraordinary tax of $2000 once-and-for-all and paying an annual tax of $100 in perpetuity, assuming an interest rate of 5 per cent….
[If]the government borrows $2000 and commits taxpayers to finance interest payments of $100 annually.
the  individual…will fully capitalise the future tax payments where the debt is created, and he will write down the capital value of the income-earning assets which he owns by the present value of these future tax payments.
[Buchanan, 1960, p. 52]
If all individuals are infinitely-lived, and if the capital market is perfect, then this is correct.
Total taxes payable at time u are , and the present value at interest rate r is given by (discounted to time 0).
Integrating by parts, this equals .
Provided that in the limit the last term tends to zero (as with  and , then the present value of taxes equals the initial bond issue.
The case where individuals have finite lives, but are linked across generations by bequests, has been studied by Barro (1974).
He shows that, where there is an interior solution for the amount of bequest or gift across generations, then the Ricardian result holds for small variations in debt.
Where debt finance is used, each generation takes account of the reduction in subsequent utilities caused by the taxes necessary to finance the debt, and increases its bequest.
Providing there is an interior solution for intergenerational transfers (which may be made in either direction), the general equilibrium of the economy is unaffected by tax and debt policy.
(This is an application at the economy level of the Modigliani-Miller theorem, discussed in Lecture 5.)
The assumptions underlying this argument are strong, as was indeed recognized in Ricardo's discussion.
First, there may be an absence of altruism from parent to child; perhaps more importantly, there may be an absence of altruism from child to parent.
Thus, one generation may be able to redistribute towards itself from succeeding generations only by coercion (government policy).
Second, there is uncertainty about survival, private risk of ‘extinction’ being greater than the social risk.
Third.
even if there is perfect symmetry in the utility function between antecedents and descendants and no uncertainty, there still may be constraints on the private transfer of income (wealth) among generations.
These constraints arise from the non-existence of a perfect annuity market and the nonexistence of perfect rental and mortgage markets.
The consequence of this (and the unpredictable timing of death) is that individuals may leave more to their heirs than they would have left had there been perfect markets.
Accordingly, if the government varies its debt policy to increase the tax burden on future generations, this will not necessarily be fully offset by changes in bequests.
The extension of the life-cycle model to take account of bequests is obviously important, as are the incorporation of uncertainty and market imperfections.
It is however an open question whether the infinite family plan implied by the Barro model is a better guide to the effects of debt than the shorter horizon model used earlier.
It may well be that different representations of savings behaviour are necessary for different groups in the population.
Indeed, the model needs to be extended to take account of differences between individuals in wealth.
The distribution of the burden of the national debt may be as important as its aggregate impact.
8–6 CONCLUDING COMMENTS
This Lecture has had two primary objectives.
The first has been to show that the long-run incidence of taxation, or other government measures, might be markedly different from the short-run incidence.
In assessing the impact of policy, one must remember that what seems fixed and unalterable can in the long-run be adjusted — as the designers of the window tax discovered.
In this Lecture we have illustrated this by reference to the taxation of capital income and the impact of the national debt.
In the case of the capital tax, the long-run incidence is critically determined by how the tax affects aggregate savings, and this in turn depends on the particular assumptions concerning the determinants of savings within the economy.
For instance, if a constant fraction of profits (and none of wages) are saved, or if the savings behaviour of the economy can be described in terms of an infinitely-lived representative individual (with an additive utility function and a fixed rate of pure time preference), then in the long run the after-tax rate of return is determined independently of the tax rate.
In contrast, if saving is seen as the outcome of lifetime utility maximization, with workers saving for old age and passing on no bequests, then the results may be quite different.
The conclusions may depend sensitively on one's view of the accumulation process.
The effects of the national debt, and similarly of social security schemes (transferring resources between the two generations), are equally governed by the savings behaviour.
Whether the existence of government debt diverts savings and leads to a reduction in real capital accumulation depends, for example, on whether people take a long-term view of the liabilities of succeeding generations and adjust bequest behaviour.
The impact on the steady-state capital stock, and level of utility, depends on the quantity of capital accumulated in the no-tax no-debt situation — whether in the  absence of government intervention there is a desired intertemporal distribution.
The second purpose of the Lecture has been to bring out the need to consider a complete ‘package’ of tax changes.
Thus, a tax on capital income may reduce saving and lead to a rise in the gross rate of return; on the other hand, it may be possible by the use of other taxes and/or monetary policy to offset the effects (as seen in the discussion of balanced growth incidence).
How far debt finance reduces the capital stock inherited by future generations depends on the choice of taxes; and the use of terms such as the ‘burden of the debt’ obscures the fact that debt policy is only one of a package of instruments for attaining a desirable intertemporal distribution.
The models employed in this Lecture have provided a useful framework to illustrate some of the long-run effects of taxation and debt policy on the rate of capital accumulation, and its consequences for the general equilibrium of the economy.
At the same time, they provide only a limited basis for understanding the determinants of the long-run rate of growth, particularly technical progress and entrepreneurial activity.
The assumption that the rate of technical advance is exogenous has meant that tax policy affected only the steady-state levels of the capital-labour ratio, wages, etc.
In a fuller analysis, we should consider how taxation may discourage — or encourage — the long-term rate of growth of the economy.
READING
There are a number of excellent textbooks on the theory of economic growth, including Solow (1970), Jones (1975), Dixit (1976b), Burmeister and Dobell (1970), and Wan (1971).
The life-cycle model is based on Diamond (1965, 1970).
A convenient source of different views on the national debt is the collection of readings edited by Ferguson (1964), reviewed by Tobin (1965).
DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECT OF TAXATION AND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE
9–1 TAXATION, SPENDING AND REDISTRIBUTION
In previous Lectures we have examined the incidence of taxation by factors or classes we have asked whether a tax is borne by those receiving capital income or those with wages.
The subject of this Lecture is the distribution among individuals.
How does fiscal policy affect the inequality of incomes?
Does the benefit from public spending go mainly to those with low incomes.
and who bears the tax burden?
These are questions that have long been of concern.
As long ago as 1869, W. S. Jevons prepared a memorandum for the British Treasury, estimating that the tax rate was 10.1 per cent for a family with expenditure of 40 per annum compared with 9.0 per cent for a family with 500 (Roseveare, 1973).
In this Lecture we examine some of the present-day distributional issues.
These include the incidence of the tax system, the allocation of the benefits from public spending, the dynamic impact of policy (allowing for its effect on accumulation of capital), and the extent of intergenerational redistribution.
This examination raises a number of issues, both conceptual and empirical.
Although it is obvious that tax and expenditure policies affect individuals differently, measuring the extent of the differences is much less straightforward.
If we are concerned with the variation in taxation and benefits according to‘ability to pay’, then there are a number of difficulties in the choice of index to measure this.
Even an ideal concept of income or consumption does not necessarily represent differences in opportunity sets; and when we allow for the deviation of observable income, or consumption, from the ideal measure, the problems become still more severe.
These aspects are discussed further in this introductory section.
In order to assess the redistributive impact of a particular policy, a  comparison has to be made between the situation with the tax or expenditure in existence and that without, and this introduces a second major class of issues.
In the simple framework described at the end of this section, individuals are assumed to have fixed endowments of capital and earning capacity, and the wage and rate of return are assumed exogenously determined.
This however only gives the first-round effect.
The tax or expenditure is likely to lead to changes in endowments and may well affect the general equilibrium of the economy.
Thus a tax on capital income may have second-round effects on the accumulation of both physical and human capital.
The incidence of taxation has been discussed in earlier Lectures; here we incorporate the main considerations — in simplified form into two distributional models (Section 9–2).
The models allow for accumulation, inheritance, the transmission of earning capacity, and the role of chance or ‘luck’.
As such, they do not include all the varied elements that influence the distribution of income, but we have supplemented the formal algebra by a qualitative account of the most significant mechanisms that remain to be incorporated.
The models are used in Section 9–3 to explore the effects of public policy, where particular attention is paid to taxation and to its indirect — and possibly disequalizing — effects.
The final class of issues arises when we seek to implement the model empirically.
The observed data on income, wealth, etc., do not correspond accurately to the theoretical constructs; the empirical procedures have to rely on proxy measures; assumptions have to be made about the extent to which people benefit from different public programmes and about incidence.
In Section 9–4 we describe briefly the main results on the redistributional effect of the government budget in the United States and comment on the difficulties in their interpretation, focusing particularly on the question of incidence.
Concepts of Ability to Pay
In theory it is typically assumed that we are concerned with the distribution of taxes and benefits among individuals according to their ability to pay (the normative basis for this is not discussed here — see Lecture 11); in empirical work, this is typically taken to mean measured money income.
There is a considerable distance between these two concepts.
The widely accepted ‘ideal’ or ‘comprehensive’definition of income is that of Haig and Simons:’
Personal income may be defined as the algebraic sum of (1) the market value of rights exercised in consumption and (2) the change in the value of the store of property rights between the beginning and end of the period in question.
[Simons, 1938, p. 50]
It is however apparent that differences in comprehensive income measured in this way do not necessarily correspond to differences in ability to pay, defined in terms of opportunity sets.
People with identical opportunity sets make different decisions, because of differences in tastes, and as a consequence have different measured incomes.
Thus, everyone may have the same wage rate, w, per hour and the same unearned income, M, but there may be differences in the tastes for leisure leading to differences in hours worked, L. As a result, measured income  may vary — even though all individuals have the same endowments and market opportunities.
Conversely, people may have different opportunity sets but the same measured income.
Suppose that the labour supply function has the form .
Earned income is then the same for all (), even though those with higher w clearly have superior opportunity sets.
This has led to suggestions that we should consider ‘full’ income, which includes the imputed value of leisure income (Becker, 1965, and Musgrave, 1976).
If () is the amount of leisure, then full income would be .
It would reflect the differences in options open to people, being less (more) unequally distributed than money income according as the rich work harder (less hard) than the poor.
On the other hand, this poses problems both in the definition of a measure of inequality defined over full income and in its implementation.
The case of leisure is an example of the general issue of ‘observability’ which we have discussed at a number of points in these Lectures.
There are items that augment opportunities — and may well come under the Haig-Simons rubric — but are intrinsically unobservable because they do not correspond to market transactions.
Two clear examples are capital gains that have accrued but have not yet been realized and production for home consumption.
These generate income according to the comprehensive definition, but are not typically included in measured income.
Similarly, there are benefits from government expenditure.
Cash transfers are clearly part of comprehensive income, but so in principle is the benefit derived from outlays by the state on goods and services.
The imputation of such benefits raises a number of issues, including the correct identification of the beneficiaries.
The second question concerns the treatment of uncertainty.
Two people may have identical opportunity sets ex ante but have different ex post outcomes.
Our feelings about this depend on the concept of equity.
If we are concerned with ex ante possibilities, then actual incomes may not be a good guide.
The fact that a wealth tax bore heavily on someone who turned out to lose all his capital would not on an ex ante basis be regarded as indicating a regressive impact, but in terms of measured income (allowing  for the loss) it might appear that way.
Conversely, if we are concerned about ex post outcomes, we would not be happy about treating the person as receiving the average, or actuarial, benefit from government spending (e.g., on health), and would want to try to measure the actual provision in relation to need.
This leads on to a third aspect — the redistributive effect over a person's lifetime, rather than just in the current period.
It can be argued that we are interested not in transitory variations in income week by week, or year by year, but in normal or permanent income (Friedman, 1957).
Similarly, a lot of government expenditure is designed to transfer income between different stages in the life cycle.
This has led to proposals that the redistributive impact be assessed in terms of lifetime income.
Assuming that there is a perfect capital market, so that the individual can borrow or lend freely at an interest rate r (about which he has confident expectations), a person's expected lifetime discounted income is measured by , where W u and M u are expected wage income and capital receipts at time u, and P u denotes the survival probability.
The capital receipts refer to bequests and gifts received, not to investment income (which is taken into account in the discounting).
On this basis we would assess the impact of, say, a state pension plan in terms of the present value of contributions relative to the present value of pensions over the lifetime, and the answers are likely to be considerably different from the pattern of redistribution in terms of current incomes.
From the individual's lifetime budget constraint, it follows that the present value of receipts is equal to the present value of expenditure (leaving aside for the moment the effect of uncertainty).
This has been used to support proposals to move from income to expenditure taxation.
Thus, at the end of a person's life, Q, we must have  where C u denotes consumption and g u wealth transferred (including any final bequest or debts).
A proportional tax levied at each date on consumption plus wealth transfers would therefore have the same base as a tax on lifetime income: and the same would not be true of a tax on current  income (), where A denotes assets held.
(See the discussion of the equivalence of taxes in Lecture 3.)
The expenditure base defined above includes wealth transferred, but it has sometimes been argued that the base should include only consumption, which would be equivalent to entering only receipts net of transfers on the left-hand side of (9–2), as one would if one treated the dynasty as an integrated unit.
This alternative version is referred to below as a lifetime consumption base.
From the lifetime budget constraint, one can see the equivalence of an expenditure base and lifetime receipts; it is important however to note that the timing is different, and hence any taxes levied will be liable at different dates.
Suppose a person has an increase in W u , but expects this to be later offset by a reduction, so that Cu is not changed.
With an expenditure base tax liability is unchanged, but with a receipts base the tax liability is brought forward (although with the same present value).
This highlights the key role played by the perfect capital market assumption.
In reality, individuals may not be able to borrow and lend freely at a given interest rate.
There may be a gap between borrowing and lending rates, and quantitative restrictions on borrowing.
In an extreme case, a person may be quite unable to borrow.
There may be differences in interest rates between individuals; indeed, this may be an important way in which endowments differ.
In these circumstances it is not possible to summarize a person's opportunity set by the measure of expected lifetime income.
We have to consider explicitly the flow of receipts and the market opportunities, and no simple indicator is likely to be appropriate.
Unit of Analysis
In empirical work, the unit of analysis is typically taken as the nuclear family or household, and the distribution based on all such units in existence at a particular date.
On the other hand, the lifetime approach seems more relevant to individuals.
A person may belong to several different families during his life, and it makes little sense to regard him as changing identity on leaving or entering a nuclear family.
Moreover, the family unit obscures transfers between husband and wife, between parents and children.
Does the tax system discriminate against women?
Does the benefit from education accrue to parents or children?
(Calculation of income, allowing for intra-family transfers and the imputation of taxes and benefits.
clearly poses substantial problems in practice.)
This leads on to a further point.
In addition to the overall distributional impact of policy, we may be concerned with the effect on particular groups of individuals.
Thus, we may ask whether the expenditure system benefits particular regions, ethnic groups, or types of household (e.g., those with large families).
The extent to which we aggregate individual units in this way depends of course on the purpose at hand.
Once the unit of analysis has been identified, we need to define the population.
This is relatively clear-cut when examining current redistribution, but with a lifetime approach we need to consider the issue of intergenerational distribution.
Typically, discussion of lifetime income focuses on the experience of a particular generation (an age cohort born, for example, in a certain decade).
This has the advantage of being manageable, but it ignores the very substantial redistribution between generations.
Thus, it is relevant that those retiring shortly after a state pension scheme begins may be subsidized by younger generations.
Conversely, the octogenarians of today, whose prime earning period coincided with the Depression, may be financing through indirect taxes the education of the eight-year-olds who will enjoy the fruits of the twenty-first century!
Finally, the definition of the unit is relevant to the allowance to be made for differing circumstances or needs.
We are typically concerned not with income per se but with income in relation to the needs of the individual or family.
The identification of these needs and the allowance that should be made is a normative issue, but we may want to deduct items from the definition of income (e.g., for the expenses associated with illness or disability) or to calculate income per equivalent person (e.g., allowing for differing family size or age).
For further discussion of these issues, see Atkinson (1975b).
A Simple Framework
We now describe a simple framework intended to link some of the conceptual aspects discussed above to the theoretical and empirical sections that follow.
To this end, we introduce the following notation.
Individual i in the generation that started life u years ago has lifetime capital receipts (discounted to his birth) of  and lifetime earning capacity .
With a constant wage rate, w his lifetime income is  (9–3).
The mean for all individuals in the generation is given by  (9–4) and the variance by  (9–5) where var [X]denotes the variance, and cov [X, Y]the covariance.
If we introduce the notation V x for the coefficient of variation of  and corr [X, Y]for the coefficient of correlation between X and Y, then  where .
In other words, the dispersion of lifetime income depends on the inequality in endowments, the correlation between them, and the shares of wages and capital in total income.
The coefficient of variation is quite commonly taken as a measure of the degree of inequality.
Although such summary measures need to be treated with caution (see Lecture 11), and the coefficient of variation has particular shortcomings (it is especially sensitive to changes in high incomes), we can use it for purposes of illustration.
then measures the inequality of lifetime income among those in generation u.
If we further take account of intergenerational differences, then the coefficient of variation over all generations, denoted by , is the weighted sum of individual  plus the coefficient of variation obtained if everyone had the mean income of their generation (the ‘between-generations’ inequality).
The measure  takes the lifetime approach to its logical conclusion; at the other extreme, the empirical studies are based on aggregation over generations but m this case taking current income, not lifetime income.
This departs from the measure based on lifetime incomes, on account of systematic life-cycle factors and of transitory variation in incomes.
Similarly, analysis of public policy will be different to the extent that government actions alter the life-cycle pattern of income (e.g., via pensions) or modify short-term fluctuations (e.g., via unemployment insurance).
These aspects of the use of a current income measure are taken up again in Section 9–4 when we discuss the empirical evidence; in the theoretical sections we concentrate on the lifetime measure.
A preliminary view of the effect of taxation may be seen from Eq.
(9–6).
Where endowments and factor returns are fixed, the effect of a change in taxation depends on the relative importance of capital and earned income, on the dispersion of these two components and on the extent to which a high capital endowment is correlated with high earning capacity.
Suppose, for example, that a redistributive tax on inheritance reduces , while leaving  unchanged (as might happen if the tax proceeds were used to finance a negative capital tax).
This can be seen to reduce the coefficient of variation of lifetime income where (dropping the u subscript) Where capital and labour endowments are positively correlated, or independent (corr = 0), this is clearly satisfied.
More generally, suppose that the government imposes taxes t i and t w on inherited capital and wage income respectively, and makes a uniform lump-sum payment, G, to everyone, so that net lifetime income becomes  with moments .
Hence  where α refers to pre-tax income.
and  is mean pre-tax income.
This expression yields some straightforward results.
For example, a proportional income tax with no grant () has no effect on the relative degree of inequality (), and the squared () terms cancel.
A purely redistributive tax leaves , so that where there is a straight income tax (), the coefficient of variation is reduced by a factor ().
Where t i , t w differ, the impact depends on the relative contribution of the different factors.
Suppose, for example, that endowments are uncorrelated.
The government levies a capital tax with the proceeds being used to subsidize wages, so that and .
Differentiating the variance of Y and evaluating at , this policy can he seen to reduce the coefficient of variation if .
For example, if V I were twice V N inequality would decline as a result of the redistributive tax on capital as long as the share of capital in total income exceeded 20 per cent .
If the endowments are positively correlated, and the share of capital is less than 50 per cent, the inequality-reducing effect is larger.
Exercise 9–1 Calculate the formula corresponding to (9–11) when  endowments are correlated, and examine for likely values of the parameters the effect of the redistributive tax.
How do the results change if one evaluates at ?
In this framework, inequality in lifetime income arises basically from differences in endowments.
Individuals inherit from their parents, or others, different amounts of capital, both material and human, and different earning abilities and aptitudes.
In the next section, we examine how the inheritance process works in an explicit intergenerational model and the role of such factors as family size, marriage and the division of estates.
9–2 MODELLING THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME
To assess the impact of the tax system on the distribution of income and wealth, we require a theory of the determination of the income and wealth distribution.
Let us begin by assuming factor prices are given.
Then each person's income can be related to three broad categories of factors:
1.
Endowments.
Ability, gifts of ‘human capital’ from parents, gifts of wealth: these determine the individual's opportunity set.
2.
Tastes.
The individual makes decisions about how much to work, how much to save, how to invest his savings (in safe versus risky prospects, etc.).
These decisions reflect his ‘tastes’, in terms of attitudes towards leisure, saving, risk-taking, etc.
These attitudes may be moulded by parental influence (and hence positively — or negatively — correlated across generations) and may be influenced by the social climate.
3.
Luck.
The outcomes of the decisions of the individual are stochastic, so that two individuals who have the same opportunity set and the same tastes, and thus make the same decisions, may still have different incomes.
Some people work for a firm that goes bankrupt; some people invest early in Rank Xerox.
Public policy affects each aspect of this income wealth-generating mechanism.
In earlier Lectures we saw how taxation can change before and after-tax incomes of different factors, how the opportunity sets of individuals are affected, and how this influences the decisions they make.
These decisions in turn may alter the endowments of the next generation.
The effects may be cumulative — or offsetting.
We present below two explicit models of the development of the distribution from one generation to the next, and of the factors influencing lifetime inequality.
The formal models concentrate on differences in endowments, which are endogenous, and on the role of random factors.
We try to indicate qualitatively however the possible influence of differences in tastes.
The Transmission of Wealth
We consider first the extent of accumulation for bequests and then its division among the next generations (these decisions may of course be interdependent).
There are many motives for passing on wealth (we refer to bequests but include under this gifts inter vivos).
First, bequests may be unintended.
Given that annuity markets are imperfect, people may leave substantial estates even though they have no altruistic feelings towards their heirs.
This is especially likely with assets that in practice are indivisible.
These ‘unplanned’ bequests introduce a random element into the relationship.
Second, bequests may arise because parents wish to share their lifetime wealth, including their own inheritance, with their children.
The most common treatment of the bequest motive is to assume that bequests enter the lifetime utility function (e.g., Yaari, 1964, 1965).
The level of bequests then depends on the nature of preferences; for example, whether bequests are a ‘luxury’ good (Atkinson, 1971).
In the special case where the lifetime utility function is homothetic, bequests are proportional to lifetime wealth: where r and w are assumed constant throughout the lifetime.
As before, we use the notation  to denote the value of a variable for individual i in generation u, where a generation is assumed to last one period and there is no overlapping of generations.
The second parenthetical expression on the right-hand side of (9–12) may be thought of as ex ante expected lifetime income.
If we allow for a stochastic element in lifetime income, then individuals may respond rather differently, having for example a lower propensity to consume out of windfall or ‘entrepreneurial’ gains.
The motives for bequests have been discussed in Lecture 3, where we noted that the formulation underlying (9–12) provides no explanation as to why bequests enter the utility function.
If individuals are concerned about the welfare of their children, and possibly other descendants, then the level of bequests will typically take account of the expected income of future generations (see for example Meade, 1966; Becker, 1974: Stiglitz, 1978b, and Shorrocks, 1979).
This approach allows in particular for bequests resulting from expected wage differences between parent and child.
If there is regression towards the mean (see below), an individual with high earnings may expect to have children with a lower earning capacity, and hence share his own higher earnings by making bequests.
(An obvious example of this phenomenon is where parents make special provision for children who are handicapped.)
These different elements may be brought together in the following generalization of (9–12): where r is the (exogenous) constant rate of interest.
The second term allows for a ‘forward-looking’ bequest relationship, taking account of the earnings of the next generation (assumed to be known).
The third term represents the effects of random chance, both via ‘unintended’ bequests (in an imperfect annuity market) and via saving out of the uncertain element of lifetime income.
The variable  is assumed to be distributed independently of I and N (and of other random terms), and across generations, with constant mean and variance.
The total bequest is divided among the heirs to give the inheritance of the next generation (we assume that all wealth passes linearly one generation at a time).
This part of the process depends on the inheritance rules governing the division of estates and their interaction with family size.
If we consider , as representing the combined wealth of the husband and wife in the next generation, then the pattern of marriage may also be very significant.
The unequal division of the estate among children can result in considerable inequality.
Suppose, for example, that each family has () boys and () girls, and that only the eldest son inherits (primogeniture).
The eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son, etc., will have considerable wealth, whereas the second born has  in all families.
If  primogeniture involves the wealth passing to the eldest child , then the process of concentration is intensified, since some heiresses marry heirs.
Where wealth is divided among both male and female heirs, the pattern of marriage is relevant.
Suppose, for example, that the family divides its wealth in fractions  to boys and () to girls.
The distribution in the next generation depends on the correlation between the wealth of husbands and wives.
Where marriage is ‘random’, the division () is equalizing.
However, in the extreme case of ‘class marriage’, where the wealth of husbands and wives is perfectly correlated, then the distribution is independent of .
It is in fact just like each boy marrying his own sister: no averaging of estates takes place.
The fact that the number of children is itself a random variable introduces a further stochastic element into the wealth — income generating process.
Moreover, family size may be a function of capital or income.
In the main model we make one particular set of assumptions: that there is equal division among sons (alternatively class marriage) and that  family size is fixed (at ).
We also consider an ‘alternative model’ where there is primogeniture (and again fixed family size); this is discussed later.
With equal division, the wealth inherited by the next generation is  It should however be remembered that the process by which wealth is divided may be considerably influenced by public policy.
Legislation restricting freedom of bequest is found in a number of countries.
Taxation may be designed to encourage the division of estates.
Education policy may affect the degree of assortative mating.
Family size may be influenced by policies that affect the cost of children (e.g., child benefits or tax deductibility of education expenses).
Determination of Earnings Capacity
The wage that an individual receives is determined by his inherited ability, his human capital and the extent to which he can get his abilities recognized.
Inherited ability, in turn, is related to that of his parents.
In the formal model, we follow the history of a family through, say, the male line, but this is only for convenience.
In the transmission of ability, we assume that there is ‘regression towards the mean’: children of above-average parents have abilities that are above average, but less so than their parents.
There are several reasons for this ‘regression towards the mean’; it could be based on a genetic process, or it could be because a father (mother) who is above the mean in ability marries on average someone who is less able than he (she), and so the child, reflecting the ability of both parents, is less able than the father (mother).
If the latter is the case, the speed of ‘regression towards the mean’ depends, to some extent, on mating patterns.
The more that marriage is based on ability (the more likely able individuals are to marry other able individuals), the slower is the process of regression towards the mean.
The amount of human capital that an individual acquires depends on both public and private decisions.
The nature of state education is clearly important.
The private decisions are likely to be influenced by the level of parental wealth, which allows spending on private education (transmission of human wealth in this way may be encouraged by the taxation of material inheritance).
Actual earnings are related only imprecisely to the productivity of the individual, given imperfect information and other real-world features of the  labour market.
Thus, one of the functions of parents sending their children to elite schools is for them to be identified as more able.
This screening function of education is distinct from the human capital function.
The access of individuals to jobs is also likely to be affected by parental earnings and wealth.
Thus entry to certain occupations may be influenced by parental occupation (e.g., medical school), and an important role may be played by ‘contacts’ and the family social network.
The different mechanisms are represented in simplified form by the relationship  where .
The first term represents the genetic transmission; the second the advantage provided by parental wealth (relative to the mean); is the stochastic term distributed independently of N, B (and Β), and across generations, with constant mean and variance.
Behaviour of the Model
We examine here the behaviour of the model for fixed factor prices.
It is governed by the difference equations (from (9–13),(9–14) and (9–15)), It is assumed that the random terms, and , are independent across individuals, and that the population is sufficiently large that we can replace sample moments by the corresponding population moments, in this way moving from a stochastic to a distributional model.
This assumption is not necessarily an appropriate one, and we might, for example, expect the random terms to be correlated across individuals (e.g., reflecting the state of the economy).
The working of the model is set out schematically in Fig. 9–1.
The mean values are then governed by   
The assumption  ensures convergence of earnings capacity to .
The condition that the mean lifetime wealth converges is that , which requires in effect that the intrinsic growth of capital () should be less than the growth of population.
This condition is assumed to hold (its relation to the general equilibrium of the economy is discussed below).
The mean values converge therefore to  and the relative shares in lifetime income are  i.e., it depends on the intrinsic growth of capital, the rate of population growth, and the relative means of the random terms in the two equations.
A policy that affects only the distribution of after-tax wages and not its mean (e.g., a redistributive wage tax) will leave the capital stock unchanged.
Other policies that influence savings rates or redistribute income from capital to labour will in general change .
This will be important in the subsequent discussion, since when  changes the change in the coefficient of variation will not be the same as the change in the variance.
Our main concern is with the distribution of wealth and consumption.
For simplicity we focus on the male line; i.e., we do not allow for the fact that, as the model stands, women have neither wealth nor income.
This should not be taken at face value; our ‘individuals’ might better be thought of as neuter, reproducing themselves unaided.
The behaviour of the distribution is characterized in terms of the second moments.
These are more complicated, and to illustrate the analysis we concentrate on the simplified case where  (i.e., bequests are not influenced by future earning capacity) and  (i.e., N represents ‘raw’ earning capacity, and there is no influence via parental wealth).
In other words, the relationship represented by the dashed line in Fig. 9–1 is left out of account.
We proceed by first setting out the difference equations for the variables  and  in this case.
From these, we can derive (using the assumptions about the random terms) the difference equations for the second moments (variances and covariance), and then solve for the steady-state values to which they converge.
From these, the distribution of lifetime consumption can be obtained, and we can see how it depends on the parameters of the model.
The difference equations for the basic variables are: where  and .
From these we can calculate, using the assumptions about the random terms, that the second moments are given by:.
From (9–20b) it is clear that  ensures that the variance of earnings capacity converges to .
Similarly  implies that the covariance converges to  Finally, the same conditions ensure that the variance of B converges:
In this simplified version of the model, the equilibrium variance of wage income is that associated with the random component, and this also feeds into the variance of wealth.
Since , the variance of B is larger, the closer the intrinsic growth rate of capital () is to the rate of population growth.
It also increases with the extent of inheritance of earning capacity (a,) and with the variance of the random term.
From these moments of the distribution, we can calculate the in-equality of lifetime income or consumption, as measured by the coefficient of variation.
Taking lifetime consumption, this is defined as  where the last term represents the present value of wealth passed on (r being taken here as the interest rate per generation).
Hence .
In equilibrium, where  and the variance is given by .
The coefficient of variation of consumption is therefore, substituting for   and cov[B, N].
. In the case where  and , which we use particularly in the next section.
where  is the coefficient of variation of earnings.
The extent of inequality depends on the variation in N and , magnified by the serial correlation induced by al in the former case, but moderated by the term .
The solution for the general case follows the same approach, and is left as an exercise.
Exercise 9–2 Examine the behaviour of the model where .
What is the indirect effect of parental wealth, via a 2 , on the variance of bequests?
How does forward-looking bequest behaviour () modify the distribution of lifetime consumption?
General Equilibrium Considerations
The model to this point has assumed fixed factor prices, an assumption that might apply to a small open economy (although even then constancy over time is unlikely), but that in a closed economy leaves out of account the general equilibrium effects discussed in earlier Lectures.
If we assume that aggregate output is a function of the mean inheritance and mean labour capacity, and that the latter has converged to its equilibrium value (which we can then normalize at unity,), then output per man at time u may be written as .
We assume that the distribution of income to factors is such that  is a declining function and  is an increasing function.
This allows for imperfect competition, e.g., with a constant monopoly mark-up.
The development of the aggregate equilibrium is then governed by (from 9–17a) where r and w are functions of .
A necessary condition, where   for a steady state is that .
This then vindicates the use of this condition earlier, in that it must be satisfied at any steady-state equilibrium.
The aggregate behaviour in this model is independent of the distribution of inherited wealth or wages.
This is a consequence of the linearity of the basic equations with respect to the variables that differ across individuals.
As we have noted, the linearity assumption should be relaxed in a more general treatment.
For example, the marginal propensity to make bequests out of lifetime income may rise with the level of income.
In this case, the aggregate behaviour would depend on the distribution of wealth.
The same applies where there are differences between individuals in the savings functions.
An Alternative Model
In the model described above, the distribution of income converges to an equilibrium state where inequality is attributable to differences in earning capacity, generated randomly by the genetic process, and to the stochastic element in income and bequests, interpreted either as entrepreneurial gains or uncertainty with regard to life expectancy.
In this context, inheritance plays a rather different role from that usually envisaged in discussions of the distribution of wealth.
In essence it ‘averages out’ variations in incomes or consumption, as may be seen from the fact that in Eq.
(9–26) is a declining function of the rate of saving a 3 (an aspect discussed further below).
In view of this, we present an alternative model where there is inequality in the equilibrium distribution resulting from the inheritance process.
In order to focus attention on this, we assume that there is no variance in N or , so that the model is deterministic.
We replace however the equal division assumption by that of primogeniture, with estates being passed on intact to the eldest son (a model first analysed in Stiglitz, 1969a).
In steady state, with fixed factor prices, the equilibrium distribution may be characterized as follows (we have taken  and assume : The proportion with inherited wealth greater than or equal to I j is then .
From the definition of I j .
In the same way .
Eliminating j  which gives .
The equilibrium distribution is therefore of the Pareto type II form (Atkinson and Harrison, 1978), approaching the standard Pareto distribution for large wealth.
The mean wealth per person is, as before in equilibrium, and the condition  is once more implied by the steady state of the general equilibrium.
This condition means that the Pareto exponent  and we may note that a rise in s 1 reduces the Pareto exponent.
For example, values of n = 0.5 and s 1 = 1.1 (for a 30-year generation) imply; = 4.3, whereas a rise to s 1 = 1.2 implies  = 2.2.
The main feature of this alternative model is that in equilibrium inequalities may be observed even though there are no differences in wages and no random influences on income.
The implications for taxation are discussed at the end of the next section.
Exercise 9–3 Consider a model where people live for at most three periods and plan to spread their consumption equally over the three periods.
Half the population die at the end of the third period, leaving no wealth; the other half die at the end of the second period, leaving an ‘unplanned’ bequest.
(There are no annuity markets.)
Show that this can generate a steady-state distribution with a Pareto tail.
(See Stiglitz 1978b, Section X.)
9–3 DISTRIBUTIONAL INCIDENCE
The model described in the last section provides a framework within which we can examine the effect of the government on the long-run development of wealth-holding.
By considering the intergenerational transmission process, and by focusing on the equilibrium properties of the distribution, we are taking a long-term view.
In practice, this equilibrium may well not be attained; since convergence may be slow.
the parameters may shift in response to exogenous events, and government policy may be changing.
The analysis should therefore be seen in the same way as the steady-state results of the previous Lecture as an indicator of the effects rather than as a prediction.
There is however an important difference, in that the qualitative properties of the steady state, and hence the comparative static conclusions, may depend critically on the assumptions of the model.
In the main model of the previous section, based on equal division of estates, the equilibrium is characterized by inequality arising from differences in wages and random chance.
In contrast, in the alternative model there is an equilibrium with inequality arising not from such differences but from the practice of primogeniture.
The role of inheritance and consequently of policies designed to influence inheritance — is quite different in the two models.
Intergenerational Transmission and Public Policy
Before investigating in detail particular tax measures, we consider some of the more general ways in which public policy may influence the intergenerational process.
First, the transmission of earning capacity is influenced by a number of social variables.
We have already referred to marriage patterns.
If social change leads to less random marriage, as may happen as a result of educational policy, then the rise in a, results in a smaller coefficient of variation of earnings, and from Eq.
(9–26) we can see that the coefficient of variation of consumption would be decreased (in the case , B = 0).
This somewhat paradoxical result illustrates one of the aspects of the model: that the variance and coefficient of variation may move in opposite directions.
The rise in a, raises the variance by a factor , but the squared mean by , so that the latter dominates.
Two qualifications to this result should be noted.
The change in a, may well give rise to a change in savings behaviour (savings being influenced by the degree of regression to the mean), and this may modify the conclusions.
Moreover, it has been assumed that the mean and variance of v is not affected, but this may not be the right normalization.
Second, it may be that earnings are not intrinsically related to capacity, N i , but rather that there is a partially random screening process for a given  earnings distribution.
On this interpretation, one might see a, as a measure of the degree of inequality of opportunity.
An equal opportunity policy, reducing a, would, for given earnings inequality , reduce the inequality of consumption.
From (9–26) we can see that  would fall (in the case, and ), and the same result holds more generally.
Third, the extent of inherited wealth influences the distribution.
From Eq.
(9–18) we can see that, where  and , the ratio of inherited wealth to wage income is .
The variance of lifetime consumption may be written: If there were no inequality in wage income (), then the condition for a rise in inheritance to magnify the variance of lifetime consumption is that .
For example with r = 1.5, n = 0.5 (with a generation of 30 years), this means that  (or a saving rate out of the present value of income of 36 per cent).
On the other hand, if  the mean consumption is reduced by a rise in a 3 and it may be seen from (9–26) that the coefficient of variation is decreased.
In the opposite extreme, if , a sufficient condition for the variance of lifetime consumption to increase with a 3 is that  and .
With the numbers taken before, this means , which may or may not be satisfied (the degree of heredity is a controversial area).
Even if it is satisfied, it may be seen that (with ) the coefficient of variation of consumption is a declining function of a 3 (from 9–26)).
The relationship between r and n brings out the role played by the ‘intrinsic’ rate of capital accumulation, on one hand, and the division of estates (in this equal division model) on the other.
If r = n, then it can be seen that the variance of lifetime consumption is definitely a decreasing function of a 3 .
A prohibitive tax on bequests would increase the variance.
These results follow from the fact that, as we have stressed earlier, inheritance serves the function in this model of averaging the random fluctuations in lifetime income.
Where the savings rate is high, a large proportion of windfall gains is passed on to subsequent generations whose expected gains are lower.
Finally, we may note the effect of the variance in Β, which may again reflect policy measures.
On the interpretation in terms of entrepreneurial or windfall gains, the variance may be reduced (e.g., by regulation of speculative activities or controls on land use) or increased (e.g., by zoning legislation, by frequent changes in policy or tax rates, etc.
). On the  ‘unplanned bequest’ interpretation, the variance may be reduced by measures to improve the capital market (e.g., schemes for owner-occupiers to convert the equity in their houses into annuities) or by social security schemes.
If  and , the coefficient of variation is increasing in var , the effect depends on the relative coefficients of variation in N and Β, allowing for the serial correlation factor in the former case.
We would probably expect the dispersion in Β to be considerably larger than in N; on the other hand, this may be offset by its lower degree of serial correlation.
In other words, the range of prizes is bigger in entrepreneurial activity but they are less likely to be repeated across generations.
Incidence of Taxation
From the preceding analysis, it is clear that taxation may influence the distribution of wealth, income and consumption in three distinct ways:
1.
Redistributive taxation may directly affect the coefficient of variation of after-tax wages or after-tax windfall gains.
2.
Behavioural coefficients, such as the savings rates, may be altered by taxation.
3.
Relative factor returns, w and r, may be affected both directly and indirectly through the general equilibrium repercussions on the capital-labour ratio.
We illustrate the effects of taxation by considering several examples.
Since the general equilibrium effects can be obtained from the earlier analysis, we leave these to the reader.
The first tax considered is a proportional tax on lifetime income at rate t, with the proceeds being used to finance current government spending.
The coefficient of variation of wage income is unchanged.
If we suppose initially that the savings propensity is unaffected, then the coefficient of variation of consumption (where ) depends on var .
If the income tax is levied on Β, this term is unaltered, and the proportional tax has no effect on inequality (this is the analogue of the case discussed in Section 9–1).
On the other hand, a tax that exempts all or part of Β (e.g., because it consists of capital gains) leads to an increase in inequality.
If we now allow for variation in the savings proportions, then we can apply the earlier results.
In the case where s 1 (assumed equal to s 3 ) is reduced by the tax, then we have seen earlier that (with ) the inequality of lifetime consumption is increased.
Conversely, if the tax encourages savings, then inequality is reduced.
Exercise 9–4 Examine the effect of a proportional lifetime income tax, where the proceeds are used to make a uniform payment to all.
What would be the effect if the tax were levied solely on wage income?
The second tax considered is an estate (and gift) tax, which reduces the amount inherited from  to , where , with the proceeds being used to pay a uniform capital grant (G).
The basic difference equations may be written (where we have set  and ):.
The tax term does not enter the equations for the mean values of B and N. The equations for the variances become:(that for var[N] is unchanged).
Suppose that, when the tax is introduced, the economy is in equilibrium.
When the first tax is paid, this reduces the variance of B (via the first term).
At the next time of passing, the first term is smaller again (since var[ ]is lower) and the covariance is reduced, reinforcing the first effect.
There is therefore a steady approach to a new equilibrium, with  and  which are decreasing functions of the tax rate (increasing functions of T e ) The coefficient of variation of lifetime consumption is given by (with ): It is clear that the tax reduces the coefficient of variation of lifetime consumption.
In the limiting case where  (i.e., a 100 per cent tax on bequests), the inequality is that due to the variation in the income of the current generation (and var[Β]), moderated by saving (if ).
Moreover, expression (9–37) is similar to (9–32), when multiplied by , with a 3 T e replacing a 3 .
Using the results obtained on page 279, we can  examine the effect of changes in a 3 induced by the tax.
As we saw in Lecture 3, the effect on savings could go either way; this could strengthen or diminish the equalizing effect on the coefficient of variation of lifetime consumption.
The second-round effects of the estate tax may be seen in other areas.
In particular, a tax on the transfer of material wealth may well make other forms of transfer more attractive.
Thus, parents may seek to provide advantages for their children via increased earning power rather than direct transfers of capital.
(In order to analyse this, we need to go back to the general model with .)
It is also possible that it leads to a change in the Pattern of bequests.
Taxation in the Alternative Model
By way of contrast, we now consider the effects of taxation in the alternative model, where inheritance, and the unequal division of estates, leads to concentration of wealth.
In the equilibrium state of the primogeniture model, the distribution of inherited wealth is given by Eq.
(9–30).
The first point we may note is that the coefficient of variation of lifetime consumption is (where finite) an increasing function of the extent of inheritance.
The coefficient is given (where ) by  (where we have used (9–31)).
For ease of analysis, let us approximate the distribution (9–30) by the continuous version:(where we have replaced .
The variance may then be calculated as: where we have assumed that the Pareto exponent exceeds 2, so that the variance is finite.
Substituting into (9–38) shows that  is proportional to  where the denominator is positive by assumption.
The coefficient of variation is an increasing function of a 3 , and when  it becomes infinite.
The impact of a redistributive tax in this model may be seen directly.
The youngest sons now receive the lump-sum capital payment, and the bequest is moderated at each stage by a factor T e where .
Exercise 9–6 Examine the effect of the redistributive estate tax on the equilibrium distribution of wealth in the alternative model, and on the coefficient of variation of lifetime consumption.
9–4 EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF THE REDISTRIBUTIVE IMPACT OF THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET
The theoretical models discussed so far provide insights into the distributional impact of policy measures; but for practical implementation the analytical skeleton needs to be clothed with empirical evidence on the actual distribution of endowments and on individual behaviour.
This is far from easy.
In this section, we outline the main methods and findings in the United States.
We then draw attention to the strong assumptions underlying the studies that have been made, the limitations in the sources employed, and the problems in interpreting the results.
These in turn indicate some of the ways in which the work may be developed.
Empirical Studies of Fiscal Redistribution
In the United States there have been a number of major studies of the redistributive impact of the government budget, including in recent years that by Musgrave and associates (1974) and Who Bears the Tax Burden? by Pechman and Okner (1974).’
The latter, as the title suggests, deals solely with taxation, and we concentrate here on the Musgrave study, which covers both taxes and public spending.
Musgrave et al.start from a distribution of income by ranges, and then allocate taxes and expenditures to these ranges.
Thus, if the range $12500-$17500 receives total income of $200 billion and is allocated $70 billion of taxes and $60 billion of expenditure, its tax rate is 35 per cent and its ‘net’ position is -5 per cent.
The income distribution by ranges is derived by Musgrave et al.from the Brookings MERGE file, in turn based on tax data and the Survey of Economic Opportunity.
The distribution of taxes depends on the assumptions about the incidence, discussed below, and on the allocation  series.
The latter are taken from a variety of sources, including tax data and surveys on consumer expenditure.
Thus, the excise tax on tobacco is allocated according to average expenditure by income range (from survey data), and the gift, estate, and death taxes are allocated to households with capital income whose total income exceeded $25 000 (in 1968).
The Pechman and Okner study is more refined in that it uses individual observations from the MERGE file rather than income ranges, but similar procedures are applied (for example, excises are allocated using consumer expenditure survey data).
The expenditure side is more complicated, and two classes of spending are identified.
The first consists of goods where particular beneficiaries can (in theory) be identified —‘allocable expenditures’— or of broadly publicly provided private goods (e.g., highways and education).
The second group consists of ‘public goods’ that cannot be directly allocated to particular individuals (e.g., defence).
For allocable goods, the procedure adopted by Musgrave et al.is similar to that for taxes.
For example, unemployment insurance benefits are allocated according to receipts from that source (given in MERGE file), education expenditure is allocated to the families of students, using data from the Census of Population.
The second group of public goods are simply allocated on three assumptions:(1) in proportion to total income,(2) in proportion to taxes, and (3) equally to all persons.
The results of this exercise for 1968 are shown in Table 9–1, which is based on the ‘benchmark’ assumptions (see below) about incidence and assumption (1) about public goods.
Taxes paid as a percentage of total income (pre-tax but including transfers) vary little over the income range.
The pattern is not greatly different from that reported by Jevons for Victorian Britain — the family on $35 000 paying, if anything, a lower percentage than the household on $10000 a year.
For the two-thirds of families between $5700 and $35 500, the tax ratio varies only in the range 32.4–33.9 per cent.
In contrast, the effect of expenditure appears to be progressive, with cash transfers being sizeable at the lower end.
The allocated benefit from public spending for the lowest group is more than 100 per cent of total income (including cash transfers), and the percentage falls quite sharply with income, the median family benefiting to the extent of some 20 per cent.
The final row shows total spending, including the ‘public goods’ category, allocated in proportion to income (i.e., adding a constant percentage).
Similar studies have been carried out for other countries, although the methods vary, reflecting the differences in availability of data and in fiscal systems.
In the United Kingdom, the estimates published annually in    Economic Trends use individual data, rather than income ranges, from the Family Expenditure Survey, but the coverage of public spending is less extensive.
The results are broadly the same.
Limitations of Redistributional Studies
There is clearly a wide gap between the indicators of redistribution implemented in the studies described above and the theoretical concepts outlined in Section 9–1.
First, the studies are based on a current measure of economic status.
They therefore take no account of the considerable lifetime — and intergenerational — redistribution effected by the government, notably through social security.
The impact of a state pension scheme in terms of current income is predominantly to transfer income to lower income people from the better-off working population.
The implications for lifetime income may however be quite different, and a pension scheme may involve no redistribution.
The analysis of the lifetime impact is however far from straightforward, and may depend critically on the assumptions made about the degree of imperfection in the capital market (Polinsky, 1974).
The analysis of intergenerational redistribution (whether, for example, the generation now retired has had a better or worse deal over their lifetime than those currently in the labour force) poses still more severe problems.
Second, the studies adopt income as a measure of resources.
This may be a quite defensible choice, but alternatives such as current expenditure need to be considered.
Third, the studies are based on families, and take rather limited account of differences in needs.
As we have noted earlier, the lack of any data on transfers within the family means that we cannot look at some of the interesting questions concerning the distribution between individuals (e.g., between men and women).
The empirical investigations relate to the current income of families, but even accepting these terms of reference there are substantial difficulties.
This may be seen if we compare the definition of income with the comprehensive, or Haig Simons, approach.
First, there are matters of principle.
These include the treatment of capital transfers, of charitable contributions, and of capital gains arising from interest rate changes.
Arguments can be made for excluding or including these.
Second, there are those types of receipt that are intrinsically unobservable because they do not correspond to market transactions — such as capital gains that are accrued but not realized, and home production.
These should in theory be included in the measure of current income.
Third, there are items that are not measured because of shortcomings of the data sources.
Thus, the use of tax records means that  income may be missing because it is not taxable or not declared (the adjustments made to reported income are discussed by Pechman and Okner, 1974).
Finally, there is the important question of inflation.
If the Haig-Simons definition relates to real income, then adjustments need to be made to the return to all assets and to the interest paid on all liabilities (i.e., the real cost of borrowing is r — p, where p is the rate of inflation)— see Diamond (1975a) and Aaron (1976).
The measure of income employed is therefore an imperfect indicator of comprehensive income, and this in turn is not truly equivalent to ‘ability to pay’.
This does not in itself mean that the analysis is invalid, and some of the deficiencies may be of little quantitative significance.
It is however important to assess the possible magnitude of the different factors and the sensitivity of the results to alternative assumptions (e.g., about the adjustment for inflation).
The next set of problems concerns the nature of the comparative statics exercise implicit in the redistributive studies.
In effect, they involve a comparison of the general equilibrium of the economy with and without the government budget.
As we have noted in Lecture l, the ‘no government’ economy is a purely hypothetical construct, and several writers (e.g., Prest, 1968) have argued that the global comparison is for this reason of little interest.
This is not entirely fair, since the hypothetical alternative state may provide a useful reference point — as in the theoretical discussion.
On the other hand, this should be clearly stated by those using this approach, and it should be recognized that for policy purposes it is marginal changes in taxes or expenditure that are of most interest.
Even with marginal changes, assumptions about incidence are crucial and these are discussed in more detail below.
Having decided on the incidence assumptions, the procedure adopted is to select an indicator of the effective tax liability or benefit, which is then used to allocate taxes and expenditure.
Thus, Musgrave et al.assume in their benchmark case that the corporate income tax is borne half by consumers, allocated proportionately to consumption, and half by capital income recipients, allocated proportionately to capital income.
This allocation poses empirical problems in that the necessary data may not be available in the original source or may be unreliable.
Thus, capital income is typically less accurately reported than other items of income (such as earnings), and consumption is not reported in the tax data, so an extraneous source (the consumption survey) has to be employed.
Public expenditure poses particular difficulties.
With publicly provided private goods it may not be easy to identify the beneficiaries (who visits museums?) and the correct allocation may be open  to debate (what benefit should be allowed in the case of education?)
Pure public goods raise in acute form the question of valuation.
The three procedures outlined above are ad hoc.
Aaron and McGuire (1970) derived from assumptions about individual utility functions and the procedure determining public goods supply an explicit allocation formula, which values the ith person's consumption of the public good at his marginal rate of substitution between the public good and income (using the conditions for the optimum supply of the public good discussed in Lecture 16).
The underlying assumptions (e.g., those concerning the level of supply of the public good) are however open to question (see Peacock, 1974; Brennan, 1976; and Ulph, 1979).
Finally, there is the assessment of the results.
Typically, these involve the comparison of the pre- and post-distributions of incomes, sometimes summarized by a statistic such as the Gini coefficient.
The limitations of summary statistics are well known, but less attention has been paid to the changes in ranking between the two distributions.
Thus, we need to know not just the shape of the pre- and post-distributions but also the location of families within the distributions.
This may be viewed as a transition matrix mapping pre-tax income positions into post-tax positions (Atkinson, 1979), and it is unlikely that this matrix is diagonal.
For example, differences in consumption patterns coupled with differences in excises are likely to lead to changes in ranking, as is the differential treatment under the income tax of different sources.
One of the few studies to take account of this is Pechman and Okner, who give the variance of tax rates within deciles (1974, Ch.5).
Assumptions about Incidence
The empirical work may be seen broadly as implementing the simple framework set out in Section 9–1 (applied to current rather than lifetime income).
The endowments and behaviour of households are taken as given, as are all pre-tax factor prices and producer prices.
The effect of the income tax is assumed to be to reduce post-tax income; the effect of indirect taxes is assumed to be an increase in the consumer price.
These assumptions have been criticized as being unrealistic, not recognizing the mechanisms by which taxes are shifted (for example.
the possibility that higher rates of income tax are merely reflected in higher gross salaries).
Some writers have argued that they are inconsistent.
Thus, Prest has claimed that the assumption about indirect taxes can be justified only where the supply is perfectly elastic (leaving aside the case of totally inelastic demand), whereas the assumption about income tax can be justified only when factor supplies are completely inelastic.
He concludes that ‘calculations of the incidence of direct and indirect taxes are based on conflicting and contradictory assumptions’(Prest, 1955, p. 242).
These criticisms may be evaluated in two ways.
First, we can investigate empirically the consequences of alternative assumptions about incidence, and this has been a feature of the work of Musgrave et al.(1974) and of Pechman and Okner (1974).
Thus Musgrave et al.contrast the ‘benchmark’ assumptions used in measuring tax incidence in Table 9–1 with ‘progressive’and ‘regressive’variants.
These are defined in Table 9–2.
The results are illustrated in Fig. 9–2.
With the progressive assumption, the percentage paid in tax rises quite sharply from 20.3 to 63.2 per cent whereas with the regressive assumption it falls slightly — from 31.9 to 26.9 per cent.
On the other hand, over the range of middle incomes, the percentages again remain broadly constant.
Alternative incidence assumptions appear, on this basis, to be most crucial at the top and the bottom of the income scale.
Rather similar conclusions are reached by Pechman and Okner (1974).
Such empirical studies of the sensitivity of results will no doubt be further developed.
Indeed, almost any investigation is likely to lead to results conditional on a range of alternative assumptions.
At the same time, the second approach via theoretical considerations — is also valuable in assessing the question of incidence.
Thus, we may use the models discussed in previous sections to evaluate the possible consequences of alternative assumptions and to suggest different approaches.
The standard incidence assumptions may be related to the simple fixed-factor, two-sector model discussed in Lecture 6 (Section 6–5), where there   are two classes of consumer (with homothetic utility functions).
This allows us in particular to consider the criticisms made by Prest.
Suppose that we consider an infinitesimal excise tax, T x , on sector X; the other sector, Y, is untaxed and there are no other taxes.
(The assumptions about government revenue are those in Lecture 6.)
In general, the tax leads to a change in relative consumer prices ().
From the analysis of Lecture 6, this is given by (from Eq.
(6–11’)) where  is a measure of capital intensity defined in terms of the factor shares.
Whether there is any induced change in factor prices depends on the demand effect, which from the earlier analysis (Eqs (6–42) and (6–43)) is  where X/Y is the ratio of the two outputs, is the elasticity of substitution in demand, is the relative consumption of class i and k i is the share of capital in the income of group i.
The supply side equation (from (6–16)) is  where  is a measure of capital intensity defined in terms of physical factor inputs.
The assumption made in empirical studies is that a selective excise is passed on fully, and that there is no change in factor incomes, which in the present context means , and .
The change in factor Incomes is given by  where r denotes the coefficient of the distributional term in square brackets in (9–42).
Unless , factor prices in general change.
This in turn causes the change in relative prices to depart from  unless .
It appears that the error introduced by the conventional assumption depends on the extent of differences in factor intensities across sectors.
From the data presented for 19 industries in the United States by Fullerton, Shoven and Whalley (1978), the value shares appear to vary markedly.
These changes may be related to the indicator of the differential effect on the welfare of the two classes introduced in Lecture 6 (Eq.
6–45)): where m i is the marginal propensity of group i to consume good X. The conventional approach may be taken, as far as changes in welfare are concerned, as assuming either  (no factor price changes) or that the square bracket in (9–45) is zero.
These appear to be the assumptions that Musgrave had in mind: ‘that the size distribution of income originating in various industries is the same [or]there is a random relationship between the distributional origin of expenditures on any particular product and the distributional destination of factor payments’(Musgrave, et al., 1964, p. 201).
The condition on endowments and consumption patterns (that in the square bracket, generalized to n goods) may be more plausible than that on  physical factor intensities, but it needs to be investigated empirically to assess the likely magnitude of the error involved.
As a second example, we take a general tax on labour in both sectors, T L The first effect is parallel to the excise tax:.
The second effect is on the supply side:.
The assumption made in the empirical literature is that  (no effect on consumer prices) and  (tax borne in full by labour).
The traditional justification is that the supply of factors is totally inelastic, and — in contrast to the previous case — this is consistent with the assumptions made here.
On the other hand, this treatment is correct only if there are no redistributive effects on demand: for example, if , then there is a change in the gross factor price ratio (/r), and the standard assumption is not correct.
If labour income is disproportionately spent on a good that is labour-intensive, then some part of the tax is shifted via the rise in (); conversely, if it is spent on the capital-intensive good, the initial impact is magnified.
This discussion brings out the care that is necessary in specifying assumptions about incidence, and the need for an explicit rather than an implicit model.
We have however considered only a highly simplified view of the economy.
The earlier Lectures have shown how the conclusions need to be modified to allow for market distortions, imperfect competition, unemployment, the accumulation of capital over time, etc.
Thus, the effects of taxation may be seen only in future periods, as where they affect the accumulation of capital (see the discussion of the national debt in the previous Lecture).
Conversely, future taxes and government expenditure may influence current incomes, as where they are capitalized in asset values.
In the theoretical sections of this Lecture, we have described how taxation may affect the development of endowments over generations, taking account of the transmission of earning capacity and the inheritance of wealth.
There is however a very large distance between these long-run theoretical considerations and empirical implementation.
Not only is there the question of the availability of data on lifetime income, but also we know little about key relationships of the model such as the bequest function and the intergenerational association of earnings.
9–5 CONCLUDING COMMENTS
We have stressed the considerable gap between theory and empirical work.
On the one hand, the empirical work has yet to incorporate many of the  concerns that arise in the theoretical literature, as illustrated by the treatment of incidence; on the other hand, many of the theoretical models are far removed from being empirically implementable, and leave out of account important factors (such as the implications for production of the heterogeneity of labour).
This leads one to ask how the gap can be narrowed.
One obvious development is for the empirical studies to incorporate behavioural relationships.
The analysis of the impact of taxes on households should allow for the labour supply responses and for changes in the pattern of consumption.
This can draw on the kind of research we have described in earlier Lectures, although it is likely to be easier in some areas than in others.
For example, the modelling of the corporate sector, particularly allowing for imperfect competition, is likely to pose formidable problems.
Moreover, the attempt to build-in behavioural response highlights the need for taking a more fully integrated view; for instance, in the personal sector, saving, housing tenure, and labour supply decisions need to be considered in conjunction.
When extending the analysis to model the response of households and firms, we need also to consider how fiscal policy itself is determined.
The redistributive impact of the state has been analysed in terms of the effect of a specified set of taxes and expenditures, but no attempt has been made to examine how particular types of policy came to be adopted.
If it is true that, today as in 1869, low-income families pay broadly the same percentage of their income in tax as do middle-income groups, then one needs to explain why a supposedly ‘progressive’ tax system has had this result.
READING
The theoretical sections draw particularly on Stiglitz (1969b, 1978b), Meade (1964, 1976), Conlisk (1977) and Atkinson (1980).
Important references on the empirical studies in the United States are Musgrave et al.(1974) and Pechman and Okner (1974).
For a general criticism of the approach, see Prest (1955, 1968).
THEORIES OF THE STATE AND PUBLIC ECONOMICS
10–1 INTRODUCTION
Throughout the previous Lectures we have stressed the importance of the assumptions made concerning the structure of the economy.
We have presented different models of household behaviour, discussed the implications of different forms of corporate structure, and devoted considerable attention to the general equilibrium incidence of taxation.
We have however said little about the behaviour of the state.
Public decisions have been treated as exogenous variables, with the government able to alter tax rates and public expenditure at will.
Yet such a view is contrary to the spirit of much of the rest of this work, where we emphasize the limited control that the government has over the private sector.
Just as the response of households to a tax increase has to be taken into account, so too one needs to consider what political constraints the government faces in making such decisions and what machinery is necessary in order to put them into effect.
This Lecture may be seen as seeking to ‘close’ the system, by incorporating explicitly the behaviour of the state.
The need for this has been argued strongly by economists critical of mainstream public finance, notably in the work of Buchanan.
He contrasts the ‘highly developed theory of market interaction’ with the simplistic treatment of the public sector: ‘the ‘public choices’that define the constraints within which market behaviour is allowed to take place are assumed to be made externally or exogenously, presumably by others than those who participate in market transactions’(Buchanan, 1972, p. 11).
We need to consider how people respond to tax changes in terms not just of their labour supply and savings  decisions but also of their actions as voters.
How far are government decisions influenced by the preferences of the electorate?
What constraints are imposed by representative democracy?
How do people behave as voters, legislators, or bureaucrats?
The study of the state has a long history in the social sciences.
Indeed, by comparison with the central place accorded to the subject by political theorists, philosophers and sociologists, the contributions of modern economists have been remarkably limited.
In certain fields, such as voting theory, there have been significant advances, but the broader questions have tended to be left on one side.
This Lecture is open to the same objection in that it focuses on a very limited range of issues.
Our concern is primarily with the government's fiscal activities, and as emphasized in Lecture 1 — this is only part of its impact on the economic system.
Perhaps more fundamentally, we take as given the basic framework of political institutions.
We do not attempt to examine the economics of political constitutions, how certain political machinery came into existence, or the rationale for particular processes for political decision-making.’
Rather, we assume that the characteristics of the political system are those typically found in Western democracies, and examine within the context of those assumptions (e.g., majority voting) the behaviour of the electorate, the government, and the bureaucracy.
As the title of the Lecture indicates, we are primarily concerned with the economic aspects of government behaviour, and there is a multiplicity of such theories.
A number of different models have been developed (with varying degrees of thoroughness), and we have chosen to describe three main approaches:
1.
voting models, viewing public choices as the outcome of an explicitly specified political process, typically majority voting;
2.
bureaucratic models, emphasizing the limited control of the electorate over many aspects of public decision-making and the goals of those who administer government policies;
3.
interest group models, including as an important special case Marxist models based on class interests.
Many readers will find some degree of truth in all three of these views, and, as we comment later, there is no real test of their validity.
On the other hand, one's belief as to which provides the ‘best model’ may be critical in determining the view taken about government policy.
Suppose, for example, that the indirect tax structure could be reformed by introducing differential rates of tax on different commodities (so that , say, necessities bear a lower percentage), and that this could be done so as to make everyone better off  (or no worse off).
With a pure majority vote, this would presumably be enacted.
Suppose however that there is a representative democracy, with political parties the providers of much of the information available to the electorate.
Will the parties have an incentive to provide the information that this policy option exists?
Suppose that the administration of the policy is in the hands of a government agency.
Would the Bureau of Indirect Taxes resist such an addition to the complexity of their task?
Suppose that interest groups are influential in the enactment and administration of the legislation.
Would this lead to the principle of differentiation being accepted but used for different purposes, so that the goals of interest groups, rather than social welfare, dictate which commodities are taxed at a lower rate?
It is clear that the view of the state has profound implications for the normative analysis of Part Two, and this Lecture, together with Lecture 11, should be seen as a bridge between the two parts of the book.
Structure of the Lecture
In examining the behaviour of the state, we consider individuals as playing three main roles: as voters, as legislators and as administrators.
The relationship between the roles is set out schematically in Fig. 10–1.
Depending on the form of government, the voters express their preferences with regard to public decisions.
These preferences may or may not weigh with the legislators who take decisions.
The decisions are put into effect by administrators, who may be more or less effective in their execution.
Thus, A. Smith may vote for, or lobby, Senator D. Ricardo to pass a bill reducing the income tax, since he would prefer a lower tax rate with the lower associated level of public goods.
Senator Ricardo may enact such a bill so as to increase his chance of re-election, or he may oppose it because he favours public spending on ideological grounds.
J. Mill of the Internal Revenue Service is instructed to collect the income tax at the lower rate but   he may seek to maintain revenue, and hence the status of his agency, by closing loopholes.
In what follows we consider these links in turn.
Section 10–2 is concerned with the relationship between preferences and decisions.
It begins with a direct expression of preferences, as in Athenian democracy, where legislators play no role, and examines the nature of a majority voting equilibrium.
It examines the conditions under which a voting equilibrium exists; and then goes on to representative democracy.
Overall, we attempt in this section to give some flavour of the results that have been obtained in the field of mathematical politics, by political scientists as well as economists.
Section 10–3 is concerned with the process by which decisions get translated into actions.
Here we start from the parallel between public and private institutions.
This can be pursued at two levels.
First there is the degree of decentralization.
As in Musgrave's theory of the ‘public household’, one can consider the division of functions between different government agencies, and the operation of these agencies as units playing the same role as firms do in the market.
Second, there is the internal organization of the agency, typically hierarchical in structure, and the ways in which the incentives faced by individuals within that organization influence their behaviour.
What latitude exists for bureaucrats to exercise discretion?
These are issues that are discussed more in the literature on administrative science than in economics, but that are clearly of considerable importance to understanding the working of the government.
The same applies to the subject of Section 10–4: the impact of special interest groups and class conflict.
The discussion so far has treated the analysis as being conducted in terms of individuals.
Individuals decide how to vote, and the objectives of the individual bureaucrat guide his behaviour in carrying out decisions.
Group action may however be highly significant.
Pressure, or special interest, groups may seek to influence voter behaviour, to win over legislators, and to modify the administration of public policy.
Classic examples would be consumer movements and welfare rights activists.
In this section we discuss the role of such interest groups, and particularly that of class interests emphasized in Marxist theories of the state.
These three approaches to the theory of the state (which are summarized at the end of Section 10–4) have rather different origins and have tended to be formulated in quite different terms.
The precise mathematical formulation of voting models may be compared with the historical approach of much Marxist writing.
We do not try to put them into a common framework, and it is difficult to conceive of any satisfactory empirical tests.
We do however consider in Section 10–5 the implications of the different approaches for the size of the public sector, and discuss some of the econometric investigations that have been made of the determinants of public spending.
Conflicts of Interest and the Role of Information
Since the three theories are rather different, it may be helpful to bring out here two common themes.
The first is the conflict of interests.
We have emphasized in earlier Lectures the importance of differences between individuals.
If everyone had identical tastes and endowments, then many public finance questions would lose their significance, and this is particularly true of the behaviour of the state.
If the interests of the members of society could be treated as those of a ‘representative’ individual, then the role of the state would be reduced to that of efficiently carrying out agreed decisions.
The existence of differences is therefore essential to the analysis of the public sector.
Only by explicitly modelling such differences can we treat the state in its key role of a mechanism by which conflicting interests are resolved in collective decisions.
This is most apparent in the Marxist theories, which see the state as part of the arena in which class conflicts takes place, different interests reflecting different positions in the process of production.
Equally, the function of the electoral mechanism is the resolution of conflict (if there were unanimity, no vote would ever be necessary).
Where voters have different tastes (e.g., with respect to public goods) or different endowments, then their preferred fiscal policies are likely to differ, and voting is a procedure for arriving at a collective decision.
Whether it is successful depends on whether there exists an equilibrium of the particular voting process, and on whether the outcome is accepted.
The voter may of course reject the outcome; e.g., with local public goods he may migrate to another community (in this sense, the minority may have an element of veto power — see Lecture 17).
Finally, there are conflicts of interests between individuals in different roles.
The legislator may be constrained by the preferences of the electorate (e.g., through the need for re-election), but his goals may differ from those of his constituents.
In the bureaucratic models, the objectives of those who administer legislation may diverge from those of voters or politicians.
The aim of such models is to explain how the constraints and incentives implied by the institutional structure affect the working out of divergent objectives.
The second theme is the role of information.
We have stressed the need to set out explicitly the assumptions made about the information available to decision-makers.
Thus, in Lecture 2 we discussed the extent of knowledge about the budget constraint and individual perceptions of marginal tax rates.
In discussing the theory of the firm, we referred to the differential information available to shareholders and managers.
In the case of public decisions, imperfect information is even more significant.
With the simple voting framework, the voter has to form a judgement about the trade-offs between different objectives, for example, the level of taxes needed to finance a proposed spending programme.
To obtain such information is costly and  there are people or groups with an incentive to provide only partial or distorted information.
In the bureaucratic model, there is a close analogy with the theory of the firm.
Those who administer a programme inevitably have more information than the legislative branch, and this is institutionalized in such procedures as congressional hearings.
The differential information limits the ability of legislators or voters to take decisions or to monitor the performance of government agencies.
(Moreover, since it is costly to acquire information, it may be socially desirable to allow an element of slack.)
These two aspects — conflicts of interest and imperfect information — take us into areas that are far from fully treated in the case of the private economy.
We cannot therefore appeal to a widely accepted body of theory, and much of the discussion is qualitative in nature.
10–2 VOTING AND DECISIONS
This section is concerned with the electoral process and its relationship with decision-making in a constitutional democracy.
The most straightforward version of this process is that of direct democracy, as in New England town meetings or Swiss municipalities, where decisions are taken directly by individual voters rather than indirectly via elected representatives.
Although of limited relevance to modern societies, it serves to introduce some of the crucial questions.
Direct Democracy
We consider initially a single decision, which we take to be the level of government spending, G. This is financed by a pre-specified tax system, assumed to be a uniform poll tax, T. If the utility of individual i depends only on G and disposable income , then the preferences of i can be depicted as in Fig. 10–2.
The effective budget constraint generated by different values of G is such that each extra unit of public spending costs  where P is the size of the population.
If the indifference curves are strictly convex to the origin, then there is a single preferred value of G for individual i, denoted by G i and given by the tangency at Q. If the quantity of public goods were smaller, then the individual would be on a lower indifference curve, and the same applies at higher quantities (see the dashed indifference curve and points R and S).
The individual utility is, given convexity, a function of G which is  -shaped.
There is a single peak.
(As drawn, the peak is interior to the interval [O, PY i ], but it could be located at the endpoint.)
If everyone had the same preferences as individual i, the same pre-tax income Y i , and the same perception of the tax required, then there would be   no disagreement over the level of public spending.
Where these conditions do not hold, then the preferred levels differ see Fig. 10–3, for the case of three individuals, h, i, j.
In the case of private goods, the existence of differences in preferred quantities poses no problems; each person can choose his desired quantity.
The essence of the public choice problem is that only a single decision can be made and the conflicting preferences have to be reconciled.
One obvious solution is to let a single individual make the decision.
The public decision is then the level of G preferred by this (enlightened or unenlightened) despot.
This is however of limited interest in a positive theory of the state.
Of greater relevance is majority voting.
Suppose first that we have pure majority voting one man, one vote.
We also assume that there is an odd number of individuals and that they vote ‘sincerely’; i.e., they do not strategically misrepresent their preferences.
In the model of a single decision described above there is a majority voting  equilibrium, which is the level of public goods preferred by the median individual.
This may be seen heuristically by considering a vote between G and , where  G is an infinitesimal positive increment.
All those whose preferred value of G is strictly to the right of G support such an increase (given the preferences shown).
If we begin with , everyone votes for an increase, but the majority falls successively until we reach G m , the most preferred point of the median individual.
Any further increase would be opposed by a majority.
In this case we have the simple result that the preferences of the median voter are decisive.
The median voter model can be applied directly to yield predictions about the determinants of public expenditure.
Suppose for example that people differ only in pre-tax income, and that the preferred level of public goods is a monotonic (say, increasing) function of income.
The majority voting equilibrium is then the public goods quantity demanded by the person with median income, and — if tastes are unchanged — we should expect the level of spending to vary with median income.
It is clear that the equilibrium depends on the method of finance.
If, for example, the poll tax were to be replaced by a proportional income tax, this would in general change the tax burden on the median person, and hence — assuming that he remains decisive change the voting outcome.
There is of course no reason to expect the same person to be the median voter as policy changes; the identity of the median voter may alter.
Exercise 10–1 Suppose that everyone has a utility function , where T i denotes taxes paid.
Show that the majority voting equilibrium with a poll tax is such that , where Y m is the median pre-tax income.
Show that if the tax employed is proportional, there is unanimous agreement on , where Y denotes the mean.
What happens if the tax is progressive?
The median voter model provides strong predictions; it does so however at the expense of strong assumptions (including that voting is sincere and that there is a single dimension to the decisions being taken, aspects discussed later).
We should stress in particular the very considerable informational requirements.
The voter has to be able to assess the benefits from public spending (typically ex ante) and to form a view of the implications for taxation.
For example, the increase in the income tax rate needed to finance an expansion of government spending can be predicted only on the basis of the assumed response of households.
Given the costs to the individual voter of acquiring this kind of information, it is not surprising that intermediaries have emerged.
Direct democracy has tended to be replaced by representative democracy, and political parties, pressure groups and others have sought to provide the information needed by the electorate.
Existence of Voting Equilibrium
The median voter model has been widely used in both theoretical and empirical (see Section 10–5) work; it does, however, rest on the assumption that a majority voting equilibrium exists.
This depends on the pattern of preferences.
In particular, those shown in Fig. 10–3 have the ‘single-peaked’ property.
Where this condition (or slightly weaker versions — see Kramer, 1973) fails to hold, the celebrated voting paradox may arise.
To illustrate this, we modify the model and suppose that the public good is an alternative to a private good.
An obvious example is education, where a child attends either a state school or a private school.
In the latter case the family is still liable to the tax, but may choose the private school because the level of expenditure is closer to that preferred.
The pattern of preferences is now illustrated by Fig. 10–4.
For levels of government expenditure below G o individual i chooses private provision (see Stiglitz, 1974a, for further discussion of this example).
Suppose now that there are three (equal-sized) groups, rich, average and poor, and that there are three possible levels of expenditure, high (H), medium (M) and low (L).
The rich in this range always prefer private provision, so that their ranking is as shown in Fig. 10–5.
The only effect of an increase in government spending is to increase their taxes and they are opposed.
The poor do not choose private provision, and their ranking is assumed to be M preferred to H preferred to L (see Fig. 10–5).
The average group however choose private provision when G is low or medium, hence preferring the lower level of state spending, but switch to public provision when G is high, this being their overall preferred level.
It is then clear that there is no determinate outcome to majority voting; it depends on the order of voting between high (H), medium (M) and low (L).
In a vote of L versus M, L wins (preferred by rich and average); in a vote of L versus H, H wins (preferred by average and poor); in a vote of H versus M, M wins (preferred by rich and poor).
In the situation we have just depicted, there is no majority voting equilibrium: there is no decision that can win a majority against all other options.
This famous voting paradox, noted as early as the eighteenth century by Borda and Condorcet, has given rise to a voluminous literature.
In particular, it has been asked whether there are political mechanisms, other than dictatorship, that, without restricting the nature of the preferences of voters and the choices that they can make, do not give rise to the non-existence problem.
It is the very considerable achievement of Arrow (1951) to have shown that under fairly weak conditions no such alternative political mechanism exists.
These conditions may be summarized as follows:
(U)
the mechanism must work for all logically possible individual preference orderings;
(P)
if everyone prefers x to y, then society must also prefer x to y (the weak Pareto principle);
(I)
social choice over a set of alternatives must depend on the orderings of the individuals only over these alternatives and not on ‘irrelevant alternatives’;
(D)
there should be no individual such that, whenever he prefers x to y, society prefers x to y irrespective of the preferences of everyone else (no-dictatorship).
The Arrow Impossibility theorem showed in effect that there exists no social ordering (social welfare function) satisfying these conditions, where there are at least three alternatives.
Translated into the context of positive political decision-making, this can be shown to mean that the only voting methods that can guarantee the existence of an equilibrium under every possible pattern of individual preferences are dictatorial (for a precise statement, see for example Wilson, 1970, and Kramer, 1977b).
Majority voting satisfies conditions P, I and D. Where it breaks down is that it does not satisfy U, as we have seen with the example of the voting paradox given earlier.
Suppose therefore that we consider one of the alternatives: ‘rank order’ voting.
This yields a determinate outcome.
For example, with the case shown in Fig. 10–5, we have:
The outcome is a tie (not depending on the order of voting).
However, it does not satisfy condition 1.
Suppose that we consider the choice between L and M, ranked equally with the preferences shown, but that poor individuals decide that they prefer H to M (see ranks in brackets).
Their ranking of L and M is unchanged, but low is now preferred by the rank order voting method.
(With sincere majority voting the choice between L and M would be unaffected.)
The burden of the Arrow theorem is, therefore, that there exists no mechanism for making social choices that satisfy the four specified conditions simultaneously.
This has naturally led to the search for ways in which they can be relaxed.
In the case of majority voting, we have already seen one line of approach — to restrict the range of preferences.
The property of single-peakedness exhibited by the first model has been shown (Black, 1948) to ensure existence of a voting equilibrium.
However, the example of private education demonstrates that absence of single-peakedness is far from pathological, and once we move to two dimensions the corresponding conditions are extremely restrictive: they are ‘probably not significantly less restrictive than the condition of complete unanimity’(Kramer, 1973, p. 296).
The source of the difficulty is illustrated by the case  of two public goods in Fig. 10–6.
The indifference maps there generate the voting paradox.
Individual i with a peak (preferred combination of G 1 and G 2 ) at Q 1 ranks the three policies w, y, z in that order.
Individual j with peak Q j ranks them in order z, w, y, and individual h has ranking y, z, w.
There is therefore no determinate outcome to majority voting.
The conditions equivalent to single-peakedness essentially fail to hold if the marginal rates of substitution of any three voters differ (Kramer, 1973).
Since it seems quite apparent that social decisions are likely to involve many dimensions (e.g., multiple expenditure programmes, different parameters of the tax system), this is an important result.
Other attempts to restrict preferences of voters seem equally to have had limited success.
Thus, conditions have been put forward limiting the distribution of voters' preferences (e.g., Plott, 1967), but these are also very restrictive.
Similarly, it has been assumed that voters consider only alternatives in a small neighbourhood of the current position.
Under fairly  weak conditions, with only one decision variable, such a ‘local’ equilibrium can be shown to exist (Kramer and Klevorick, 1974), but whether it provides a persuasive resolution to the ‘majority voting paradox’depends on the extent to which choices are limited to small perturbations of the existing situation.
(Many would argue that, since the fixed costs of change are large, it is only significant departures that are usually considered within the political process.)
Finally, a set of restrictions that ensures existence in the case with several public goods is provided by Slutsky (1977).
Basically, he reduces the multi-dimensional case to one dimension by imposing a linear restriction on the levels of the different public goods.
Again it is not clear how far this is a relevant restriction.
What happens when a majority voting equilibrium does not exist has been explored in a number of studies.
These have emphasized the importance of controlling the agenda (i.e., determining the order in which votes are taken) and of strategic voting (i.e., voting that may not represent one's true preferences).
Thus, it may be argued that, after all the potential policies have appeared in at least one vote, then the outcome of the last vote will be accepted.
There is therefore a determinate outcome (ruling out ties); e.g., in the education example, with the order of voting (L against M, winner against H), the outcome is H. In this case, the determination of the order of voting — and the termination rule -is clearly crucial, and the indeterminacy may simply be pushed one stage further back.
Strategic voting may be a way of altering the agenda.
If we go back to the education example, and suppose that the first vote is between L and M, then if the rich vote sincerely L wins, and in the second round H defeats L. On the other hand, if the rich had voted for M in the first round, then M would have gone on to win in the second round.
The rich group can therefore secure a preferred outcome (M rather than H) by misrepresenting their preferences.
Such strategic voting has been examined by Farquharson (1969), Gibbard (1973), Satterthwaite (1975), and others.
In particular, it has been shown that the conditions for a voting procedure to be strategy proof (i.e., no one has an incentive to vote strategically) are equivalent to the Arrow conditions.
Hence there exists no (non-dictatorial) voting procedure that is strategy-proof.
(The reader should also consider the possibility of ‘log-rolling’ or ‘vote trading’see Buchanan and Tullock, 1962; Wilson, 1969; and Tullock, 1970.)
Representative Democracy
To this juncture, we have discussed the aggregation of individual preferences directly into a public decision.
With few exceptions, almost all  decisions in the public sector are taken by elected representatives or civil servants.
Occasionally, a referendum imposes direct constraints on the actions of the representatives, but this tends to be the exception in most countries.
Let us suppose that representatives belong to political parties.
If party competition may be represented along a single spectrum (e.g., ‘left-right’), if individual preferences are single-peaked, and they vote sincerely, then as before a majority voting equilibrium exists.
On the other hand, the behaviour of the political parties is itself endogenous and we have to explain the way in which each chooses its position on the political spectrum.
Suppose first that parties are interested solely in winning elections, not in policies as such.
Thus, in the Hotelling-Downs (see Downs, 1957) model of two party competition, the parties — just as in the case of spatial competition choose the midpoint, i.e., the preferred point of the median.
A party that did not choose this platform (e.g. for ideological reasons preferring less government spending) would be defeated if the other did.
In the determination of government spending we would not expect — in this simple model the replacement of direct by representative democracy to change the results.
An empirical study based on the preferences of the median would still be valid; and there would not be any need in equilibrium situations to introduce party political dummy variables (a party whose ideology took it away from the median would not be victorious in an election and its policies would not be observed).
The result described does however depend on strong assumptions.
Although the move to representative democracy may reduce the dimensionality, there may remain more than one dimension (e.g., ‘Liberal-non-liberal’ as well as‘left-right’).
In this case no pure strategy equilibrium in general exists for parties; i.e., there is no vector of strategies such that, given the strategies of others, no party wishes to change its platform.
Various approaches have been suggested, including mixed strategies, for example where there is a set of policies each played with strictly positive probability (Shubik. 1970).
or where there are stochastic abstentions (Hinich, Ledyard and Ordeshook, 1972).
Alternatively, one can seek to model disequilibrium behaviour.
For example, Kramer (1977a) assumes that in each election the incumbent party defends its established policy, whereas the opposition chooses its policy freely to maximize its vote.
(The hypothesis supposes that voters have a short memory: they expect continuity only from the incumbent.)
The view of political parties as simply organizations for winning political power is clearly only a caricature.
Party platforms are influenced by ‘ideology’.
A socialist party supports government provision; a big business party opposes taxation.
Alternatively, parties may be dominated more by individuals than by issues, and the process may be one of competition for political leadership (Schumpeter, 1954).
On a third view, parties may be seen as alternative ‘managerial teams’ for running the economy and providing public services.
In such a case, it is not so much differences in values as differences in judgements about managerial competence that are the main determinants of elections.
The representative democracy model also raises a number of questions concerning the behaviour of voters.
In particular, how does the voter obtain information about the likely performance of the parties, and what determines whether or not he votes?
These issues have been extensively discussed by Downs, who identifies several key steps in a ‘rational’ voting process, including gathering information relevant to each issue, forming factual conclusions about alternative policies, appraising the consequences in the light of voters' goals, and aggregating over issues into a net evaluation of each party.
In this process.
there is an asymmetry between the incumbent and the opposition parties: ‘the incumbent's policies and personnel have been put to the test of very recent practice at the time of election, while the oppositions’ probable performance can be inferred only from its statements of intention and its previous performance in office’(Kramer, 1977b, p. 699).
This representation makes clear that the activity of voting may involve the individual in non-trivial costs.
If he acts solely from self-interest, then there are good reasons for expecting him not to participate in the democratic process.
Suppose first that he has clearly formed preferences and all necessary information.
Then he may still not vote for his preferred alternative if there are positive net costs to voting.
This may be seen as a special case of the ‘free-rider’ problem, discussed later in conjunction with public goods.
In that situation, a person may choose not to contribute to a public facility on the grounds that others will pay enough to cover its finance (and he can have a ‘free ride’).
In the voting case, he may choose not to vote because he calculates that he is unlikely to be decisive (i.e., there will be a majority for one outcome independently of his vote).
The infinitesimal probability of being the decisive vote, coupled with the significant costs of voting, may indeed mean that no individual has an incentive to vote, even on issues of considerable importance.
The assumption of individual self-interest also applies to the acquisition of information.
For the reasons just described.
people may not have an incentive to assemble the information required to vote intelligently.
At the same time, it is clear that the information provided by the parties is not purely informative, and that the transfer of the process of providing information.
to the parties does not mean that it is costless.
Those financing the advertising of parties expect to receive a return on their outlay.
The benefits do not have to be of a strictly pecuniary kind; individuals may enjoy the status of high office, even if they do not benefit financially from it, and advertising is a method of purchasing the status.
(The cost of providing the information is then financed by the ‘rents’ from political office.)
Nevertheless, there is a widespread view that much of the benefit accruing from the support of a party are of a strictly financial kind; this is particularly true of industry lobby support.
In such cases, the payment of supporters may involve measures that distort the operation of the economy.
For example, the enactment of import quotas, designed to compensate particular industrial supporters, may impose substantial additional costs.
The elected government is unlikely to be fully ‘efficient’ in its pursuit of the national interest.
There is therefore a quandary.
If individuals are motivated by self-interest, then they have no incentive to acquire information, and this has to be supplied by the political parties and other interested organizations.
On the other hand, the latter may require enough ‘slack’ in the political system to allow vested interests to obtain a return for their investment, implying that certain decisions may be contrary to the national interest.
This clearly has implications for the design of the political structure.
The assumption that individuals act out of self-interest, narrowly defined, is of course open to question, and Downs himself sought to explain electoral participation as the basis of ‘each citizen's realization that democracy cannot function unless many people vote’(Downs, 1957, p. 274).
There may be a variety of social sanctions which lead to a high level of participation.
Similarly, for political parties ideology may play a significant role (it is also a means of reducing information costs, allowing voters to predict party response).
The incorporation of such behavioural considerations is clearly a necessary development of this approach.
Finally, we have not discussed the way in which elected representatives themselves reach decisions in the legislature and its committees.
In part this involves issues similar to those discussed with regard to direct democracy; in part it is concerned with the control of the legislative branch over the bureaucracy, to which we now turn.
10–3 ADMINISTRATION AND BUREAUCRACIES
The administration of legislation is typically entrusted to a bureaucracy (where the term is used more in its Weberian, rather than its common, pejorative , sense).
Expenditure programmes may be executed by the Department of Defense, by the State Highways Board or by agencies such as the Office of Economic Opportunity or the National Institutes of Health.
Many different approaches can be adopted to the analysis of bureaucratic behaviour, and much can be learned from the work on administrative science and political sociology.
For economists, who came late to the study of bureaucracy, it has been natural to start from the parallel with the private sector of the economy.
Public and Private Organizations
Public and private bodies are often regarded as quite different; they are commonly regarded as polar solutions to the problems of designing economic organizations.
For instance, a distinction may be drawn in terms of the nature of objectives.
In a private firm, it may be argued, the problem of executing policy involves only that the individual concerned takes the actions that maximize (expected) profits.
In public administration, on the other hand, objectives are more complicated, with the intentions of legislators being much less straightforward and those in charge having discretion in implementing policy.
Although governments may attempt to avoid these problems by framing legislation more specifically, the cost of doing so is not only greater complexity but also less adaptability, both for coping with new situations and for unforeseen cases.
A contrast is also drawn with respect to the internal structure of the firm and the incentives faced by individuals.
It is argued that within the private sector the method by which the firm ensures that individuals behave so as to maximize profits is to pay workers the value of marginal product.
In contrast, in the public sector workers are instructed to perform certain tasks under direct control, and their performance has to be monitored to ensure compliance.
This polarization gives an over-simplified picture.
As we have emphasized earlier, the objectives of the firm become much more complex once we allow for incomplete markets and for differences between shareholders in their beliefs and objectives.
In such circumstances one cannot assume that there is a single goal, such as profit maximization, that represents the interests of the firm.
There may be conflicts of interest between managers and shareholders, and the managers may have latitude to interpret the wishes of the owners and to pursue their own objectives.
The same applies to the incentive structure within the firm.
Many workers in the private sector receive some payment as a fixed fee independent of the value of their marginal product.
As in the public sector, it is often difficult to ascertain the value of the individual's marginal product (e.g., on an assembly line).
For this reason private firms may not be able to rely on implicit control systems based on observed output but may have to monitor performance directly.
We should therefore see private firms and public agencies as enjoying certain common features.
Both are responsible to ultimate decision-makers (shareholders and legislators), but there is a degree of ambiguity about objectives which allows latitude to those managing the firm/agency.
Both have an internal structure of direction and supervision, which affects the degree of control exercised by the managers.
These similarities mean that in analysing the behaviour of bureaucracies we can draw on the parallels with the theory of the firm notably on the separation of ownership and control, and on the economics of internal organization.
At the same time, there are critical differences, notably in the ‘market structure’.
In the public sector there is likely to be decentralization, and this is discussed below; but typically, within any government jurisdiction, there is only one department engaged in a particular activity (e.g., issuing automobile licences).
This has several implications.
First, it means that, viewing citizens as customers, they do not usually have a choice of alternative suppliers.
In Hirschman's terminology (1970), if they do not like what they see, they cannot ‘exit’— they can only use ‘voice’; while in the market, both options are available.
In this respect, local public goods represent an intermediate case where exit is indeed possible via migration.
Second, the legislative branch has a weaker basis of comparison (than shareholders in a market firm) on which to judge the efficiency of the present administration.
In the market, shareholders in one automobile firm can observe the profitability of the competitors to obtain at least a rough idea about the managerial quality of the given firm.
(However, this may also apply in the public sector if there are overlapping agencies — see below.)
Closely related to this is the difficulty of entry.
If Mr X believes he can produce a better automobile, and is willing to risk his funds, he can start producing them; he may or may not succeed, but the decision about whether he should have the opportunity to produce them is personal.
But if he believes he can manage a licence bureau better, he must convince those within the bureaucratic channels.
Similarly, there is no scope for take-over bids.
In the market, a person who can perform certain activities more efficiently may be able to take over a firm and capture the rent accruing as a result of greater efficiency.
On the other hand, the creation of new agencies is a possible move by the legislature, and the establishment of agencies with overlapping functions may be a mechanism of control.
Thus, social work agencies may be a check on the efficiency of the social security department: the Fleet Air Arm and the Royal Air Force may perform similar functions.
We can therefore in analysing the public institutions make use of the parallel with the private sector, but it must be tempered by consideration of the monopoly position of the government agency and the limitations on entry.
In what follows, we first consider the behaviour of the agency as an entity, parallel to the firm; then we examine the implications of its internal structure.
The Public Household and the Individual Agency
The view of the state described by Musgrave is that of the public sector as a ‘household’, with different members of the household assigned different tasks.
He identifies three major branches of the household sector: the redistribution branch, the allocative branch, and the stabilization branch.
This division of the functions of the public sector has proved extremely useful as an analytical device, and it is indeed one that we have followed in  this book (by abstracting from stabilization policy).
From a normative point of view, of course, the separation of function is debatable as a principle.
As we show in Part Two, there are likely to be many cases where we need to consider jointly two or more objectives.
For instance, it may be possible only under very special conditions to consider separately the optimal supply of public goods and the redistribution of income.
From a positive standpoint, however, the view of the state as decentralizing its functions captures an important feature of reality.
State agencies do act with a considerable degree of autonomy, and take limited account of their interaction with other branches of the government.
We have therefore to consider the motives of those in charge of the decentralized units, and the control that can be exercised by the central executive.
In examining the motives of those in charge of government agencies, the analogy with the private sector has been influential.
Just as modern theories of the firm have suggested that the managerial utility function may include the size and rate of growth of output, so too it has been argued (notably by Niskanen) that bureaucrats seek to maximize the size of their agency:
Among the several variables that may enter the bureaucrat's utility function are the following: salary, perquisites of the office, public reputation, power, patronage, output of the bureau, ease of making changes, and ease of managing the bureau.
All of these variables except the last two, I contend, are a positive monotonic function of the total budget of the bureau.
[Niskanen, 1971, p. 38]
The argument is open to question.
For example, there appears to be considerably more mobility between agencies than there is of managers between private firms, so that their interests are less closely linked.
None the less, the Niskanen model provides a suggestive starting point.
The implications of size maximization depend on the control mechanisms open to the central executive.
Niskanen assumes that the agency possesses a monopoly advantage: ‘although the nominal relation of a bureau and its sponsor is that of a bilateral monopoly, the relative incentives and available information, under most conditions, give the bureau the overwhelmingly dominant monopoly power’(Niskanen, 1971, p. 30).
This is clearly too sharply drawn, since a number of control devices can be established (at a cost), including direct monitoring, establishment of overlapping agencies and transfer of personnel.
These features may be formalized in a number of ways (one is illustrated in Exercise 10–2 below).
Here we simply give some examples of the ways in which independent agency objectives, coupled with limited control, may affect the behaviour of the government.
First, the agency may seek to expand a given government programme by systematically overstating the benefits or understating the costs.
If the executive attempt in turn to monitor budget requests, this adds control expenditure to the cost  of provision.
Second, if the agency has an overall budget, used as the instrument of control, but enjoys some discretion within that budget, then the pattern of expenditure may reflect the preferences of the agency rather than those of the legislators (for an empirical study, see McFadden, 1975, 1976).
As a result, to achieve a given level of spending on a particular public good, it may be necessary to expand the budget above the minimum level required if there were complete control.
Finally, if agencies are able to ‘control the agenda’ by offering only one expenditure programme as an alternative to the ‘reversion level’if the plan is not accepted, then variations in the reversion level may have a perverse effect on spending.
In particular, the adoption of zero-base budgeting, so that the reversion level becomes zero spending rather than that previously agreed, may lead to an increase in the agency's ability to pursue its own objectives — rather than the decrease commonly supposed.
Exercise 10–2 A government programme is administered by an agency that aims to maximize the scale of provision.
The agency's plan has to be approved by a majority of the electorate.
If the plan is not carried, then expenditure reverts to a pre-specified reversion level.
Analyse how the agency determines the level of spending.
What are the implications of a reduction in the reversion level?
(Reference: Romer and Rosenthal, 1977.)
Hierarchical Agencies and Individual Incentives
Many public sector agencies are hierarchical in form with each ‘front-line’ worker being responsible to a supervisor, who in turn reports to a superior, and so on.
This form of internal organization arises from the need to maintain direct control of the activity of employees, indirect control via incentive schemes not being possible (we refer below to some of the issues that arise in the attempt to devise such incentive structures).
The simplest assumptions about the hierarchical organization are that there is a fixed span of control, ø, and a fixed salary differential, between grades.
If the agency has () grades, then there is 1 director, ø assistant directors, ø 2 department heads,…, and ø h front-line workers.
If the output of a spending agency is proportional to the number of front-line workers (for convenience we take the factor of proportionality as unity), an output of G requires an organization with () grades where  If the salary of the front-line worker is denoted by w, then the total labour cost involved in administering the output G is   where h is given by (10–1).
If we assume, as seems reasonable, that the total salary bill declines with the grade in the organization, this implies that ; in turn this means that the average cost approaches  as G tends to infinity.
With a span of control of 5 and a salary differential of 25 per cent, this implies a ‘mark-up’ over the front-line costs of ⅓ to allow for the hierarchical ‘overhead’.
This provides a measure of the cost of control.
The existence of a vertical hierarchy arises from the need for supervision, and this raises issues about the design of organizational structures and the role of incentives.
These all illustrate the general problem of indirect control.
The head of an agency cannot typically ensure that his subordinates behave in a way that is exactly specified; he can only design a policy to which they respond, and his perception of their response shapes the design.
Thus, the efficiency of workers may be a function of the degree of supervision and of the salary differential (promotion being assumed to be a reward for efficiency).
Similarly, the payment schedule has been assumed to be independent of efficiency, but incentive schemes can be introduced where there are observable measures of output.
The individual's behaviour is a function of the incentive schedule, and the schedule must be designed with this taken into account.
(Moreover, the behaviour of the agency director in designing the schedule is itself a function of the incentives he faces.)
This leads on to some general considerations about decision-making in a bureaucracy.
Much of the activity of government officials appears to be directed at avoiding ‘mistakes’.
To the extent that they are thus led to perform well this is obviously desirable; the problem is that, in attempting to avoid noticeable mistakes, they ignore the costs that must be borne by the public.
Thus, the red tape that so often seems to characterize bureaucracies need not be a manifestation of bureaucrats' love for due process.
It reflects the fact that the private costs are not borne by them, and the red tape ensures that, if a mistake occurs, blame is not borne by any particular individual but is shared among the bureaucracy.
Second, what appear ex post to the legislators, or electors, to be ‘mistakes’ are often associated with taking large risks; that is, it is usually difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish a ‘good’decision, which in the end turns out to be a failure, from a bad decision.
One cannot know completely either the information that was available or the value that should have to be associated with obtaining more information prior to the decision being taken.
Thus, since it is large ‘failures’ that are easily detected and that, as a consequence, reap penalties, methods are sought to ensure that large risks  that entail high probabilities of failure are not undertaken or, if undertaken, that responsibility does not rest on any single individual, for example by requiring consultation among a number of individuals.
Those forces that make agencies fail to generate change also make them slow to respond to changes that are thrust upon them from the outside.
Indeed, viewing society as a whole as an organization, we see that bureaucratic structures may generate a self-confirming equilibrium.
That is, since the various parts of the bureaucracy fail to generate innovations, other parts are less often faced with the need to respond to changes.
Hence the need for adaptability is reduced.
Finally, an important aspect of administering legislation is the application of the same provisions to a variety of people with different characteristics and the consequent need to use ‘discretion’.
This has a number of consequences.
One is that it provides scope for corruption; e.g., in the placing of government purchases, the allocation of commodities in excess demand, and in regulatory activities.
A second consequence is that malperformance is particularly likely to be revealed by differential treatment (in the case of corruption it is of course assumed that it is not revealed).
There may therefore be internal pressures within the administration to secure horizontal equity.