

PART THREE
TWENTY-THREE
The first time I saw Mrs Colonel Goreng she was in that jeep.
Skimming along the water-front with the peculiarly flat ride jeeps give when they're not lurching on one wheel over lumpy terrain.
She was chauffeured but was otherwise without a military escort.
She wore a scarf over her head and dark glasses.
It was a green scarf but let me quickly say that it was bereft of religious significance.
She was in fact a Christian, not a Muslim.
The scarf was simply to protect her hair-do in that open vehicle as it bowled along at a business-like sixty kilometres per hour and, with the sunglasses, conferred upon her a touch of the Jackie Kennedy chic to which she was innocent enough to aspire.
Like all the other officers' wives she wore a uniform of their own devising, pale-green skirt and shirt.
It wasn't compulsory by any means — there was nothing to prevent them wearing civilian fashion — but they chose to advertise their solidarity with their husbands, to demonstrate esprit de corps and, as it happened, even at home in malai land as well as here in occupied territory, it was to their advantage to show who they were.
Prices came down in the street and as for having a purse snatched, well, such things didn't happen to army wives.
She was throwing back her head and laughing.
Now you may find that unremarkable, but in the context it was startling.
A woman by herself, laughing, in public, sharing a joke with a menial.
Any one of those things would have been unusual in itself; jointly, and in a humbler personage, it would have verged on the scandalous.
I can remember staring after the fatal chariot until it was a dot on the new road.
The mount for the .50 calibre machine-gun was still on the vehicle but the malais had found a use for the Browning elsewhere, I think because they also used the jeep to drive foreign journos around and it would have vitiated the claims to have pacified Danu if they'd left it on.
Mrs Goreng was safe anyhow.
Later, I asked her if she wasn't frightened to ride around like  that.
She laughed the same way as when I'd first seen her.
‘No, Adolph, not with a dangerous guerrilla like you to look after me.’
‘I mean before we met, my lady.’
(I have to translate in this clumsy fashion and to the best of my limited ability the native title of respect by which, on my own insistence, I addressed her.)
She showed her beautiful teeth again — perhaps one of the reasons why she liked to smile so readily.
‘I am a brave woman who is frightened only of the dark and her husband.’
In fact, she did possess mettle, though going round alone in the jeep was — I believe — just feminine carelessness, like the terrible state she'd leave her room in for her maid: powder everywhere, pink for face, white for body; her long, strong, glossy hairs in the sink, so you would have thought the orang-utan had been availing himself of the facilities and not a pretty young woman of thirty-one.
But…like all malais (do forgive me for this) her backside had been innocent of paper all her life.
It was the left hand and a ladle of water.
(You didn't pour the contents of the ladle down your crack — that was for getting the shit out from under your nails.)
I think it was one of the reasons why you didn't see so many malai women with long fingernails.
She still liked to type, so they would have got in the way of that, anyhow.
Mrs Goreng, the wife of Colonel Goreng, had been…a journalist.
This took me aback somewhat.
The only representative of the species I'd met till then had been Jean Carmichael, with her hairy legs, head for hard liquor, and golden heart.
Mrs Goreng couldn't have been more different.
But she hadn't been a hardnosed grubber after facts (or compiler of falsehoods, for that matter).
Even if malai society had allowed such a role to the female, her family would never have permitted it.
She'd worked on a woman's magazine.
She liked to show them to me about every three months, each time as if it was the first.
Knowing who was servant and who mistress, I entered into the spirit of the farce.
I felt embarrassed for her.
The cheap paper and poor colour of this tawdry imitation of the Ladies' Home Journal or Harper's were so plainly unworthy of her.
She'd written about a new restaurant or hotel in one of the issues, a ‘puff’ being the expression, I think; gone on an inter-island cruise; star piece, always shown first, was her interview with their president's wife.
This was a slavish, mind-numbingly trivial recitation of cliches and banalities about family and nation.
The photograph of her with the older woman was well done, though.
Mrs Goreng came from an aristocratic family.
They'd been minor royalty in some petty, pre-Independence kingdom.
It didn't really mean a lot.
But she'd spoken a different baby language from her husband, the Colonel: a kind of upper-class malay with thirty different words for ‘you’ and ‘me’, depending on the grade of the person speaking and their mutual relationship, that kind of thing.
Colonel Goreng, a rural thug with ribbon on his chest and scrambled egg on his cap, was somewhat in awe of the antecedents of his young wife.
Which enabled her to get away with many things.
She was very bored.
What an undesired posting it must have been!
Away from the traffic-jams, the night-clubs, and chilly, marbled hotel lobbies of the malai capital, its metropolitan glamour, such as it was.
She'd enjoyed a wide circle of friends, a coterie of the bored wives of the rich, except that when together their collective boredom was no longer ennui but just time-wasting.
We would flick through her photo-albums, moments of conviviality glassily preserved.
There had been a trip round Europe.
This class of malai never did anything by themselves but always in a party of at least ten.
To judge by the photographs, on this occasion it had been as many as twenty.
Rome, Vienna, Frankfurt, Paris, Barcelona, London.
Neither she nor the Colonel had paid a cent.
There was a rich woman who picked up the check for her friends — in short they were an entourage.
I bit back the word.
‘Oh, she is a very kind woman,’ my mistress said.
‘She makes all her friends so happy.’
I looked hard at the photograph.
The generous friend's eyes were red because of the flash.
She looked Chinese to me.
Mrs Goreng had been in Danu ten months, every one of which seemed a year to her.
There'd been no women before then, in the sense of a community.
Girls for the brothel, yes, recruited from malai land.
They'd not favoured local women for security reasons.
But there had been no families.
The men made a six-month tour of duty.
Now they spent a year and the officers were allowed to bring their wives.
This was part of the policy of ‘normalisation’ for the territory, which they'd begun as they started to register  decisive military successes.
The other prong of the fork was ‘Danu-isation’ of the war — of which more later.
The Gorengs made their home in the former diplomatic quarter, the area which had, to the glee of the Chinese in the Toku-ru warehouse, been accidentally shelled by the malai navy on invasion day.
I'm not sure whose house it had been.
It was not far from where Raoul's father had lived, the same kind of two-storey place with a walled garden, ornamental trellis gate, and roaming dogs.
(Colonel Goreng kept three German shepherds.)
I was officially the gardener, but had come to fulfil also roles of secretary, comptroller of household, translator, interpreter, and stool-pigeon (which they had always intended me to be).
Finally, I was also paid companion and professional flatterer.
I'm not proud.
There were distinct advantages for me in the relationship.
Apart from the obvious one of self-preservation, I'd had nearly four years taken out of my life.
That time was a black hole of nothingness.
I had been an animal, not a reflective human being.
Of the outside world, I had more or less no knowledge.
The ‘man of the world’ had become if not a rude caveman, then a sorry Rip Van Winkle figure.
My physical hunger could be quite quickly assuaged, my mental starvation was a different matter.
That's why I was quite happy to peruse my lady's jottings.
In the middle of the trivia, the stuff that could easily have been 1930 or 1960, there was information for the gleaning.
It wasn't by any means a straightforward process.
The articles of direct newsworthy interest in her magazine were as few and far between as the flecks of gold in a prospector's pan.
What you had to do was listen for the echo not the report itself.
So there would be stray references and allusions in the feature articles to events of great consequence or intrinsic interest of which even the bird-brained wives of the garden suburbs of malai-land were cognisant but not 1, Adolph Ng, BA (Hons) Toronto.
Thus I learned that Chaplin was dead and so was Elvis (I'd thought the former long since gone but this intelligence of Presley startled me), that Iranians had held Americans hostage, administered show trials and televised humiliation; that a geriatric cowboy had become President of the mightiest nation on earth all in all, show biz news.
I couldn't, even with my mistress, be seen reading their newspapers or turn the radio on.
Mrs Goreng, I think, guessed at this hunger of mine, but would tantalise, only dropping the knowledge a fragment at a time, like mother bird stuffing nourishment down the throat of fledgling.
She was a journalist, but she was also a tease.
There were only nine or ten other wives; most officers had chosen not to bring their spouses to what was still a danger zone.
Mrs Goreng was by no means the youngest but, unfortunately, the women of her age were married to officers of a rank far junior to her own husband and — therefore — herself, while the youngest colonel's wife was forty-three, as I ascertained.
She'd far rather have enjoyed the company of her contemporaries and, in fact, Colonel Goreng didn't forbid her consorting with them.
What happened, though, was he ordered one of the captains on a dangerous mission-just how dangerous I knew — on which he'd been wounded and the young wives hadn't forgiven her for it.
The older women were kindly souls, as maternal as their husbands were ruthless murderers, but honestly they weren't much fun for Mrs Goreng.
So I was something of a godsend for her.
I was always her property, but I could make an evening, or an afternoon for that matter, swing for all the ladies.
Swimming?
I knew the best spots.
The fact that we had an armed guard lowered no one 's spirits; made everyone feel a lot more comfortable, including, if they only knew it, the ex-FAKINTIL chief sapper himself.
Mrs Goreng would take off her jazzy (does that word date me?) little halter and shorts to reveal a swimming costume underneath whose intrinsic modesty was in inverse proportion to the daring of the shorts and top as relative items of apparel.
That was her all over: the tease that failed to deliver.
The other wives would tut-tut, taking sidelong glances at me.
(The soldier in uniform they didn't consider as other than a walking rifle.)
Well, don't concern your-selves about me, ladies, I thought.
I'd walk off to a respectful distance — I had no desire to listen to their conversation, there was nothing useful to pick up from that babble.
About the third time we went to the beach (I took them to the one known since 1945 as ‘Staging Post B’), as soon as I rejoined the group I realised she'd told them.
Bitch.
No, I didn't care.
What was it to me?
Their Smiles, the slight but palpable sense of relief, the failure to meet the eye, the stifled giggling, all told me they knew I was not a  threat.
Next time all but the fattest felt free to wear their costumes.
Then mah-jong parties became all the rage.
Two of them knew how to play already.
I taught the others, hanging discreetly round the table to advise the tyros.
They didn't appear to mind me playing a double game, allying with each in turn, then becoming their opponent at the next round.
Of course, I had an eagle's eye view of developments, knowing far, far more about their strengths and weaknesses than they individually could.
Sometimes, I'd have to take a turn if someone failed to arrive, enthroning myself at the green baize table and stuffing myself with shrimp rolls and pickles, me, the killer who'd lived on bugs.
If we heard the Colonel's car draw up, of course I had to drop my bricks and run.
It wouldn't have done for him to see me there.
TWENTY-FOUR
I owed my life to Martinho.
The malai junior commanders in the field were not of the smartest.
It was nearly impossible to get them to accept a surrender.
We'd known that in the mountains and in due course I was to see it myself from the other side of the fence.
The bloodthirstiness of the malais only helped FAKINTIL and, in particular, Osvaldo.
They'd have had four times more FAKINTIL deserters if they'd shown as little as a quarter extra clemency.
To leave the enemy without hope is to make him more dangerous in the way that a cornered rat, the kind of vermin that robbed our granaries, will leap a fantastic height into the air to sink his incisors in your cheek.
Rebus, belatedly, had realised that, but the message had never truly been absorbed by the lieutenants and sergeants at the sharp end.
They'd seen too many of their comrades tread on something nasty or gut-shot in a FAKINTIL ambush.
And even those captives who'd got back to Danu, the town I mean, had been merely mice — helpless and squeaking — rolled this way and that as the cat pleased.
So they had been theoretically rehabilitated, set at liberty — some mere shells after interrogations as fearful as one's most perverted imaginings might devise — only to be pulled in again  just as their taut nerves had said, yes, they were free of the cord.
The neighbours would hear the truck draw up in the middle of the night, the rattle of the tail-board, the despairing slurry of the prisoner's feet on the dirt.
And some just disappeared, vanished never to be seen again, taken who knew when or where — though by whom was no mystery.
Rebus was no longer on the island.
That ogre of FAKINTIL demonology had been recalled.
I liked to think it was because they thought he'd failed, that our survival in the mountains had been his humiliation, but I would have to admit this might have been mere wishful thinking.
The malais believed in quick rotations for Danu.
He had no successor, in the sense of someone doing an identical job.
His functions were now split between several officers who specialised in counter-insurgency.
Had he been around at the time of my capture I don't believe I'd have made it very far.
I owed my life to Martinho.
There was no question of that.
Looking up into his concerned brown eyes, I had felt an inexpres-sible sense of relief.
This wasn't the flawed, haggard Martinho I'd latterly known but a clean, composed, god-like creature, the perfect Martinho of the peace-time Praça.
He bestrode me like some stalwart saint of old, defending my prone body with buckler and flaming sword.
The malai lieutenant, a firebrand six months out of officer training school, shouted angrily at him.
He still had his pistol out.
Martinho didn't budge a centimetre.
The malai shoved him in the chest with his free hand but he pointed the gun at the ground behind him.
Martinho shook his head.
‘This one is valuable,’ he said firmly.
‘You don't touch a hair of his head.’
The malai's men were crowding around now, with bad intent.
Martinho kept his head.
He said, ‘Colonel Goreng will require this prisoner.
You are responsible to him for your actions.’
Well, even then, not knowing Goreng and with two toes blown off as cleanly as if the surgeon's knife had done the job, a mangled calf, and shrapnel resident two centimetres from the balls, I could recognise Martinho had played a masterly hand.
So did the malai, for he pulled up short.
Martinho was, as I learned later and surmised then, himself vulnerable — he had his uses, and therefore power and influence, but as soon as he became dispensable he'd reap the consequences of any ill-considered actions, such as this.
In short, he'd become a Chinese.
The malai's face showed his predicament.
There was no way he could risk incurring the wrath of a superior but he didn't want to lose manhood in front of his uniformed thugs.
‘Tuan,’ I said, ‘please do not kill me.’
An NCO answered this plea by stepping on my foot.
I screamed, of course.
There was nothing in the least feigned about this howl of anguish.
But at the same time I revelled in the unlovely sound because it might be the saving of my miserable life.
For the more I yelled, the lower I made myself and the greater the sense of mastery and control the malais around me could enjoy.
Kids, the cruel little monsters, like to poke Teddy in the gut, don't they, to hear him squeak?
I gave them a good show, with my writhings and moanings.
Martinho, too, sensing what the rules of disengagement from the deathbed were going to be, allowed them to have their fun, or the priestly hypocrite he'd been in the jungle — got his kicks out of the spectacle, what he might regard as my just deserts for my equivocal behaviour toward him in those nightmare days.
After a while the lieutenant stopped things.
He wasn't particularly sadistic, for a malai, though he would have lost no sleep that night if he'd terminated me.
I figure he thought his men would get out of control if it went on any longer.
I was frisked, my belt and Seiko taken from me, and, as an afterthought, kicked in the ribs.
Which was almost a relief after the agony of my abused foot.
When I gave them a grenade they hadn't found, I got another kick.
It was one of the tiny, egg-sized types, but it was still careless of them.
After that, they put me into Martinho's care.
Well, in the next few weeks I sang like a canary.
I wasn't proud, not me.
I knew I'd give in under whatever duresses Goreng had up his sleeve for me, so what was the point of resisting?
That wasn't my notion of myself at all.
Nor did I need to buy time for anybody.
I knew my former comrades would be long gone from the latest of the encampments before the malais ever got near them.
It was recent history Goreng was most avid for.
Martinho had told them of everything up to the time of his own escape.
They got his version constantly; he was a walking thesaurus on FAKINTIL.
Now I became the second edition.
Every day for three weeks I'd be taken from my cell in the old colonial prison, from the cool, noisome darkness into the harsh day of Danu.
Three or four times  they varied the system to pull me from my palliasse at a dead hour of the morning-about three-thirty or four a.m.
I'd say — and interrogate me in the cell itself with shouted, rapid-fire questions, punctuated by slaps in the face and, just once, hair-pulling.
You couldn't help but contradict yourself from time to time.
They deliberately looked for inconsistencies where they basically knew I'd told them but two aspects of the truth, in the hope that I'd blurt out the real truth about something else in my fright and confusion.
I could see the primitive method; that didn't stop it from being effective.
The main sessions took place at Goreng's HQ, which was a new tin-roof construction which post-dated my departure from Danu.
At first I had the blindfold and loud noise treatment but that pretty soon stopped.
They realised I told a better story when I was composed.
They put me in the same category as Martinho.
In some ways the malai could be deeply caste-conscious, a souvenir of the days of the Hindu kingdoms.
For the most part they were nominally Muslims now but they appeared to have an idea of torturable classes.
Being an intellectual or bourgeois didn't help that much in itself but those of their own journalists and professors they'd sent to the remote prison island of their archipelago, Guru, hadn't been systematically tortured; just neatly excised from society for twenty years or the stay of their natural existences.
In their eyes Martinho had some mystique, as well as usefulness.
He'd survived where they had eliminated some of his followers because they took him at his own estimation, a man of the cloth.
And the fact that I was Chinese, like many of the top brass's personal financial advisers, for once helped.
Yet I was careful to ration what I told them.
Like Scheherazade, I always had one more tale, one more piece of information, to titillate the imaginations and jaded appetites of my Islamic captors.
It was Arabian Nights in the mountains, my thousand and one relations of the exploits of the great Osvaldo.
And, unlike most story-tellers with an involvement, I was at pains to minimise my own part; the last thing I did was boast.
How many machine-guns did we have left?
Mortar tubes and bombs?
Where were the main gardens?
Who was Osvaldo's chief assistant these days, X. Ray or the Corporal?
Who was Osvaldo's rival?
Were there different cliques?
These were Goreng's constant questions.
And, ‘How's morale?’
Martinho suddenly asked one afternoon.
‘Everyone happy, are they?
Getting enough to eat?’
I caught his eye.
Dangerous as it was to betray the smallest complicity before Goreng and his goons, we both started to laugh.
I said, ‘They'd surrender many of them, if they knew they wouldn't be shot or mistreated.’
Goreng said, ‘You're alive, aren't you?’
I said, carefully, ‘There's what happens and there's what they think will happen.
Some of them are only fighting because they think they've got nothing left to lose.’
I waited a little and after weighing it in my mind continued, ‘They think if they're not shot at once, then they will be when they're no longer useful.
That's what keeps them fighting in the hills.’
Goreng said, ‘Then they're right.’
Knowing him for the hard-hearted son of a bitch he was, I was still shaken.
I don't think Martinho liked it too much, either.
After that I got us on to less dangerous ground, and I gave him a few tit-bits of intelligence, which was probably what he'd been after.
Twenty-three of those who'd escaped with Martinho still survived.
In the indiscriminate gunfire of that day, more had died.
Martinho said the malais had very quickly stopped shooting at them and that most of the casualties had come from our own fire.
Goreng had been with his forces that day.
Martinho had had to do some quick talking but none of them had been executed on the spot.
It was afterwards.
As I say, the malais had this habit of letting people go home, then pulling them in six weeks to six months later.
Five of those who'd come in with Martinho had disappeared subsequently.
None of us slept very easily, I have to say.
We regarded ourselves as more hostages than prisoners.
A few months after my return Goreng found a use for the less obviously subtle or versatile of his captives, which while turning them to material advantage also catered for a certain desired degree of planned redundancy.
He didn't mind the natural wastage, at all.
Martinho's men were to form the nucleus of a Danuese battalion which would take the brunt of the war against FAKINTIL.
That is, they would have the worst jobs, occupying the positions of most danger against their old comrades.
I believe it was canvassed as a first stage towards total ‘Danu-isation’ of the conflict, internalisation of the war.
The malai propaganda machine had always lied about the scale of casualties in our earlier Civil War.
That way they could minimise the extent of their killings, particularly those on invasion day and the month afterwards.
If they'd murdered four thousand Danuese but said three thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine had been killed by ourselves in the Danuese Civil War, then it meant they had killed only one.
It was that kind of statistical perversion.
And it worked, it was something to say in the international talking shops.
Now they could claim that Danuese was fighting Danuese again, with their assistance.
I believe that they were also becoming concerned about the steady casualties they were taking.
Their country was overpopulated; the leadership had little care for life.
But it was becoming a political factor.
They were nothing if not astute, those mild-seeming old men with their erect bearings, gentle manners, and hands reeking of innocent blood, their own victims at home as well as the Danuese.
While the surviving ex-guerrillas occupied the positions of responsibility, the rank and file were drawn from their old IP opponents of the Civil War, those who had no reason to love Osvaldo.
That was one way of looking at it-modern political opponents.
But, of course, overlaying and underlying this trans-parency were the old tribal and family feuds and enmities which had put most of the followings into the rival camps in the first place.
Personal opinions had been modern luxuries for the leaders.
Martinho had lost no time in recounting the true details of Osvaldo's moment of weakness, the point at which he'd flipped his lid for the first and last time in his career, that murderous aberration which had been the doom of old friend and new foe alike.
Rebus and his successors had not been aware of the true details of this massacre of prisoners.
About four weeks after Martinho's capture — or his escape from Osvaldo, whichever way you like to look at it — he'd taken Goreng to the spot.
It had been a big thing, photographers, malai officers, local chieftains, city Danuese of all walks and classes, dogs, trackers (for sign that was five years old!), cherry berets, and helicopters making self-important passes overhead.
Goreng had been worried it might be a set-up — paranoia and distrust were that army's staple  — and he'd assured Martinho that he'd be the first to go if that was the case.
Poor Martinho, almost his portly self again, had spent the whole time with at least one gun in his back.
‘I tell you, Adolph,’ he confessed, ‘I was sweating.’
The most nerve-racking part in the end had been to locate the site of the graves.
It had been a long time ago and the jungle had reclaimed its own.
Martinho had led them from one identical spot to another, sure each time it was the place, blundering through the heat and humidity with a fresh excuse burbling from his thick lips.
Boredom took the place of apprehension in Goreng's mind; he began to take it out on people.
Martinho was beside himself with anxiety and frustration.
‘It's here, Colonel,’ he assured Goreng.
‘It was here.
I haven't made it up.
I swear the bodies are somewhere near here.’
‘They had better be,’ Goreng said.
‘Or there will be new ones.’
Soares was one of those along.
He'd lost a cousin and some good friends in these reprisals.
He believed Martinho OK.
He'd taken the lead up here — fear of ambushes or not — poking the roots with his chieftain's stick of authority.
And in the end it was he who turned up a bullet case (7.62 mm x 51 and therefore probably FAKINTIL).
The dogs did the rest.
Well, it wasn't as gruesome as it might have been had the bodies been five weeks rather than five years old, but it hadn't been a pretty sight by any means.
The malai photographers had made a good job of it, this genuine FAKINTIL atrocity.
The skulls and one complete skeleton in rotting clothes had leered out of magazines.
Those of the dental classes had been identified by their records, Soares's cousin included.
‘And Raoul?’
I asked.
‘You found him?
His body I mean?
You reburied him?’
Martinho shook his head.
‘I didn't trouble with that,’ he said with decent honesty.
‘It was a long time ago.
What good could it do?’
In any event the find had been the making of Martinho with the malais.
He hadn't looked back since then.
As for the Danuese battalion, the Sons of Death, as they called themselves, a few still had revenge on their minds.
The others didn't want to know and, in fact, soon after my capture, a whole platoon deserted to Osvaldo under an Africa cadre, complete with their 5.56 mm automatic  weapons.
For this, Goreng shot three of the other cadres, defini-tively encouraging the others.
He had it done in front of Martinho and myself in the courtyard of the prison, the men made to kneel rather than shot upright against a wall.
I trembled for hours afterwards, so Goreng's medicine was effective.
It concentrated my mind at our interviews again; I'd been relaxing.
Just before the men were shot — they'd had two weeks inside so their beards had taken on something of the authentic rag-tag FAKINTIL glory, as opposed to the clean-shaven image they had presented in their neat malai-issue camos — one shouted out the name of Osvaldo.
The youngest of the trio — he was a-twenty-seven-year-old ex-seminarian who had been greatly under the influence of Molloy before going to Africa — began to sing, in a terrible, faltering voice, probably the most unmelodious I ever heard from a Danuese what sounded like the first lines of ‘O, Mighty Mountain!’
The gunshots soon ended that.
The awful, abrupt finality of a man pitching forward, so easily, so arbitrarily terminated — the convenience of it to the killer: they were things to which I could never become habituated, however many times I saw it.
I never got hardened, that way.
As we left, Martinho whispered angrily, ‘The fools!
They just showed Goreng he was right to do it.
It only makes things more dangerous for us!’
When I had recovered from my immediate repugnance, I had to concede he was merely correct.
It did show Goreng what all Danuese thought, deep down.
But then he would have had to have been more obtuse than he was not to have known already.
I met the Colonel's wife while I was waiting for Martinho outside church one sunny afternoon.
I had a mouth full of red betel juice.
Not desiring to defile the wall of the consecrated place, I went round the corner to spit into the gutter.
When I came back Mrs Goreng was coming down the steps with her chauffeur, who was a one-armed sergeant with a pistol.
I hoped for her sake he had been naturally left-handed.
She was immediately recognisable, though she'd had the scarf on as she sped past me the only other time I'd seen her.
I took my hands out of my pants pockets and bowed, expecting her to go by.
She didn't.
‘You are Japanese, are you?’ she asked.
Taken aback, I could only stammer, ‘No.’
‘Ah,’ she said, ‘it's just that they bow a lot.’
The armless NCO glared at me as they went past.
I don't know why women like to taunt me, but they seem to grow fonder of me by doing so.
If I had done Mrs Goreng a favour, she'd have forgotten me speedily enough.
Because I'd been the butt of her wit she remembered me.
I guess Colonel Goreng would rather his wife had been less unconventional.
It might have made for easier dealings with superiors and a better example for juniors, but then it was a major part of her sexual thrall over him.
The irritation was dissipated by the balm of her bedroom personality.
I guess it made a stimulating change for him not to be surrounded by fawners and flatterers the whole time.
Maybe she tied him up and gave him soft whip.
Who knows?
I do know she was the subtlest of nags.
It took about three months for me to realise how she did it.
The Colonel wouldn't know in a lifetime.
She undermined his private notion of himself.
The flattery and deference of his subordinates and his entourage (two different groups) didn't count; he wasn't enough of a fool for that.
Like many men, deep down he was unsure of himself.
He didn't have that steadiness or grasp of the self of Osvaldo, X. Ray, or, I am sorry to say, Rebus.
She exploited that.
By looking for faults in his behaviour, by constantly diminishing him with little criticisms — he neglected their boy (at school in Randung), he was cold, he was selfish, he was an inadequate and clumsy lover (did she dare), he never listened to other people, he had no sense of direction because he was always getting her lost in foreign capitals — she made him feel a kind of leper, different from and inferior to the run of men.
There was no objective standard for him to measure himself by — there never is in this kind of case, either you have the confidence in yourself, or you don't-all he could do was see himself reflected in her eyes, and it was not a pleasing portrait.
The deference of his courtiers did nothing for this — that was a piece from a different jigsaw puzzle he had already solved.
Alone with her, he floundered; she kept pushing him under water, teased him with planks that didn't float.
That merciless, bloody-handed malai (and he was a good and ruthless professional soldier) was subject to the slow water torture every day of his life.
I watched with interest — it was like observing the gyrations of an alien species, a praying mantis  or something.
It made me glad to be what I was.
Of course, in front of his associates, before subordinates, she treated him like God.
She, therefore, recognised me when our paths crossed once more.
By then I had been released to the Toko-ru on my own recognisance, that is an abject willingness to betray my comrades and help the malais in every way.
I was lending a hand in the store of one of my compatriots; for which I received a miserly stipend and a corner of a room in the warehouse already occupied by two young Chinese.
I was accorded a degree of respect appropriate to a man who had been under arms, which was as well as, after  rumours of my predilections spread through the warehouse, there were not many willing to share with me.
They needn't have flattered themselves.
Mrs Goreng was returning a hand-held blow-drier to the shop which the proprietor, an elderly Chinese, had had the temerity to refuse earlier from her house-boy.
When he saw Mrs Goreng disembarking from her jeep, he at once made himself scarce, retiring through the back of the shop to his living-quarters and instructing me to deal with this dissatisfied, difficult, and, in all likelihood, dangerous customer.
Something told me not to get ruffled about Mrs Goreng.
In any case, I had already decided to give her a refund and a-new drier.
They weren't my goods.
She only took her sunglasses off when she was inside the dark little shop but even then it took a few moments for her eyes to adjust.
I had the advantage of her for that much unobtrusive study.
I saw nothing that made me dislike her.
A little arrogance, yes, some petulance, but nothing extra that went beyond what her position in that place and at that time would have encouraged in her.
You would have had to be superhuman not to be a little corrupted by the power she had.
I didn't see spite.
More than anything, I thought I discerned boredom, intelligence, and energy denied an outlet.
Then she was able to see again.
‘Ah,’ she said, ‘you again.’
‘We Japanese are everywhere,’ I said.
You know, I had to say something clever — to win her, to set me apart, to make her see me as an individual — but wit is normally aggressive.
I had to say something humorous without being a smart-ass or putting her  down in any way.
My feeble little quip was self-diminishing, it might raise a smile, it paid a homage to her own earlier remark, and it gave us a shared history.
And it worked.
Mrs Goreng's laugh tinkled round the shabby store.
We exchanged a few pleasantries; I used words which would give her an idea of my station without patronising her.
I could watch her face as she made repeated revisions of her assessments of me of only a few moments before.
Surely a storekeeper in this barbarous place wouldn't have a vocabulary like that?
Even a Chinese storekeeper.
My dear Mrs Goreng, I felt like saying, you would have been surprised to come across a hotelier who'd read Thomas Mann.
We got about six sentences too deep in our conversation for her to institute personal questions about my background, without appearing offensive (she had to treat me as a person now and not a peon), even for Asians who delight in asking pertinent questions as to age, income, etc., unthinkable for more backward Europeans.
Well, finally she left, and I saw her to her jeep with the new hair-drier which I found I had to press her to keep.
The old Chinese now came shambling from the kitchen, agog to hear everything.
I was distant with him.
Mrs Goreng was back a couple of days later, with some excuse about a plug malfunctioning.
She was bored, poor girl.
This time she started to interrogate me from the very beginning.
Me, I was forthcoming with the details.
‘And what have you done since your hotel closed?’
I told her and her hand flew to her mouth as her eyes widened.
Yes, I enjoyed startling her.
Under the fear of death, the shadow of the disappearance squads, I still drew pleasure from causing an effect.
The queen in me, would have been poor, dear, dead Maria's acerbic comment.
Well, we spoke some more after that but we stayed clear of FAKOUM and FAKINTIL.
Next time I saw her, she was with the Colonel, this time in his sedan, leaving the old diplomatic quarter.
I saw her speak to her husband, clearly about me.
He turned, and I bowed, ever so humbly, an innocuous (I trusted) figure receding in the minor dust-storm of their exhaust wake.
I got the job in the Colonel's household a week later.
She must have gone to work on him, probably saying he'd get more out of me that way.
I was very glad of the protection.
By going to the  household I was kind of taking the salt; I was realistically enhancing my prospects of survival.
And I made sure I blabbed a bit to her, even contradicting in inessential details some of the earlier relations to the Colonel, so that he might think he was getting better quality intelligence this way.
It was a gamble between being bumped off for lying earlier or allowing him to think he was gaining no advantage by my presence in the household.
Either way the consequences were terminal for yours truly.
TWENTY-FIVE
No Rosa.
Of my old crony there was not the smallest trace.
Soon after my release from the old jail I'd gone looking for the creche in which the Organisation for Working Danuese Women had made its home.
There'd been a lot of changes under the malais, I'll give them that, even if most of the development was for reasons of military necessity and accomplished, like the Japanese for whom they had more than a sneaking admiration, with forced-draft labour.
I thought it might have amused X. Ray to see it and hoped one day he would, but not under the hostile circumstances in which I had the misfortune to discover myself.
Going out to the outlying part of town in which the creche had been situated you now travelled along a metalled road.
Not only that, it was lit by electric lamps.
Of course, this wasn't simple philanthropy on the part of the malai military, although there was the element of impressing locals and making propaganda with such foreign visitors as there now were, but a tactical requirement.
It happened to lead from the old barracks (still used for housing a garrison) up to the hill pass above the town.
They needed a strengthened carriageway for their armoured personnel carriers and lighting to make sabotage difficult, not that the demoralised citizens had the nerve to inflict mass reprisals upon themselves.
I looked down in some wonderment at the shiny blacktop, therefore, nevertheless noting that  unevennesses were already manifesting themselves.
I felt like someone out of a pop song, revisiting the haunts of childhood, going  to see an old sweetheart, not knowing if they would still be there or not, hoping against hope that they might.
I hadn't asked for Rosa, that was for sure.
I'd tried waiting for the natural course of events to bring me the way of the creche, some errand Mrs Goreng might send me on, but it hadn't worked out that way.
After some while I got tired of waiting.
My curiosity I could check, but not the little notions my brain threw up, such as: she will be dead before you get to see her.
And it was true, over the long term you were finished if the malais took it into their heads that you were the wrong kind of Danuese.
You might get through a few months, gross good luck see you to a year, but from then on the odds against survival lengthened considerably.
See Rosa while you can, said a little bird to me.
And I was eager to see her, the desire built itself up from nothing, as desires do.
I could not endure the irony of missing her now.
I invented a task for myself, which would take me that way.
I'd get wild orchids for the garden, I told Mrs Goreng, knowing some had grown near Rosa's.
She clapped her hands.
‘It will please the Colonel to see them at the breakfast-table in the morning,’ I-said.
‘But we won't tell him until they have established themselves in our soil.’
I was also smart enough to wait three weeks, so it was at her request I departed in the end.
I needn't have troubled.
Limping down that glossy road, the yellow brick road to my fantasy land of the past, I was consumed with an expectation which would have been delightful save for the physical effect of breathlessness.
I could see the place some way off.
Smoke rose from the yard, which encouraged optimism within me.
The building was still occupied, then.
As I got nearer, I saw they were young people, mostly in their late teens and early twenties.
This caused some puzzlement.
I mean, surely the waifs and orphans, not to mention the bona fide seedling sons and daughters, could not have sprung into these young oaks in such a relatively short space of time?
It was well under a decade; they'd still be kids.
Yet whatever common sense suggested or arithmetic dictated, I half-believed these were the children of the women Rosa had tried so hard to have live up to her Spartacist ideals.
I wanted my old friend to be there; I prayed for nothing to have changed.
And as I drew nearer I steadfastly rejected any contrary observation, the persistent negating evidence of my own senses: the lack of older women, the mound of rubbish Rosa would never have tolerated, the general air of apathy and neglect.
I could see the people lounging in the yard now.
Strangely enough, for such a filthy place, there was a lot of washing on lines; at least, they didn't look like the mere rags one might expect.
The smoke I'd seen earlier was from a bricked-in fire under a cauldron, in which more garments appeared to be bubbling.
Eager for information as I was, I was careful not to stare, looking at the roadside straight ahead, or at the sea from time to time.
‘Senhor Ng!’ someone called.
Well, I cringed at the fellow's stupidity; my neck went right into my shoulders.
‘Senhor Adolph!’
There was no ignoring it.
I turned with what I hoped was an innocent smile on my face.
‘Remember me?
I'm João, from the hotel.’
Well, I didn't, not at all.
And if I'd known he was going to turn out a stupid and objectionable youth I'd never have employed the foolish boy.
I looked at him closer; trusted that he was not one of those (not so many) that I'd pleasured myself with.
No, I would have had to have been snatching them from the cradle then.
‘Ah, yes,’ I lied, ‘how could I forget?
But you have grown so tall and handsome.’
I could see his friends grinning among themselves; probably there were more who had better cause to remember me.
‘And what do you do now, João?’
‘We're the laundry,’ he said in surprise.
‘We launder the soldiers’ clothes.’
‘Ah,’ I said.
Yes, I could now see most of it was olive green, with the odd camo suit.
I wondered if blood was hard to get out.
‘It must be hard work,’ I said, neutrally.
He grinned vacuously.
I think he was a good-natured but very unintelligent boy.
I offered him a slice of areca and we both masticated with enjoyment.
After a while I had to spit.
Life being life, the wind blew (it was a good drying day for them) and a large red splotch appeared on a malai vest.
A girl ran up angrily, removing it for fresh soaking and ignoring my apologies.
João kept grinning.
‘You can see how old I am,’ I said.
‘I remember this place when it was the next best thing to an orphanage.
Now what was the name of the woman who ran it?
Rina?
Rinalhi?’
João did not cue  himself in.
However, a few of his friends came by.
Young people have always liked me.
After a while João got told to go work by the angry girl.
He still wore his expression of vacuous merriment, which must have been habitual rather than assumed in my honour.
Following the usual exchanges I enquired how long they'd been there.
More than three years came the answer.
‘Oh, what was before then?’
A kind of club.
For soldiers?
No, for women.
They started to wear that blank face all us Easterners are so good at assuming when we are uneasy.
Yet I persisted.
Had it been closed by the authorities (I used that word, not ‘the malais’)?
They didn't know.
Well, what I knew was I would get no more.
After further inconsequential chat, which I deliberately spun out to fifteen minutes, I made my excuses.
Fifty metres down the road, I heard the insecure flap of rubber sandals.
It was the girl I'd annoyed with my carelessness.
‘You forgot your areca-box.’
‘Many thanks,’ I said, genuinely grateful.
She waited, instead of turning straight back as I'd expected.
Then she said, ‘The woman you knew, the one who ran this place, you won't find her.’
Tears came to my eyes — truly surprising me.
I blinked.
‘But she had a baby.’
For a second I was hopeful — Rosa with a child!
No, never!
It must be someone else she was talking about.
She must have seen my surprise, for she then used a native word for an unwanted or deformed child, or one born out of wedlock, much uglier than the word ‘bastard’.
It had a shock effect on me.
‘They keep the children on a prison island.’
Then without a backward look she nodded and returned to her piles of steaming clothes.
I continued aimlessly down the road for a while more.
I could walk as fast as I ever did but I tended to roll my shoulders and turn my three-toed foot in as I did so.
A group of burly malai soldiers came jogging in full combat gear from the other direction, the little sergeant who was trotting beside them bestowing on me a suspicious glare.
That brought me to my senses.
I didn't feel like passing the laundry once more— don't ask me why.
But it was  difficult to return by another route.
I tried going through the undergrowth and looping round — my sense of direction had far improved from peacetime — but the saw-toothed grasses left me bleeding like a scored steak.
Then I spotted them — superb orange orchids of a kind I had never seen in Danu.
Gently, I extracted them from the soil with the trowel I'd brought more as alibi than implement.
Then I packed moss and earth round the roots.
A banana-leaf from a fruitless palm accomplished the rest.
By the time I passed the old creche again it was getting darker and the insects were out.
The launderers were at their evening meal — I could see their backs at the windows.
I started to worry about the curfew.
Even if, as a servant of the Gorengs, I could likely avoid punishment, there was a real risk of being shot on the spot by some itchy-fingered malai.
I did not appreciate the irony of being knocked dead on my back with a bunch of flowers clasped to my chest.
It was OK, though.
I got in through the back gate without being challenged.
Colonel Goreng was already home.
Mrs Goreng had missed me.
She came out of their lounge with irritation written all over her; I think if she hadn't liked me she would not have been annoyed.
She had got bored by herself — and, if I flatter myself, there was a tinge of concern for me.
I put my finger to my lips and widened my eyes.
I beckoned her to the kitchen.
The orchids were in a pot with some water.
Her annoyance vanished and we became conspirators.
‘But you are bleeding, Adolph!’
I shrugged, as if I thought them honourable scars to be gained in my lady's service.
‘We'll have to see if they live or die,’ I said.
‘If they live, we can transplant them into the garden.
If not…he won't know.’
She touched the flowers, looking at them with the steady, close, and intent gaze that Annie Laval also reserved for such an occasion.
Was it a weakness intelligent women allowed themselves?
Maria had worn them in her hair at her wedding.
‘Thank you, Adolph,’ Mrs Goreng said.
Whatever the ups and downs of life in the Colonel's household, I was spared the ordeal of coming under the fire of my old friends.
Serving in the Danuese battalions was a living hell.
At least in the  hills with FAKINTIL the enemy was obvious and you had your freedom.
We had no compunction about killing malais.
But I understood that many in the battalions — some of Soares's people apart-soldiered even more poorly than their already mediocre training and leadership might have led an expert onlooker to anticipate.
If they possibly could, they avoided contact; their shots went wide — high I think they already would have been.
As I said, Goreng had to shoot some after a desertion so large that it could not possibly be ascribed to the category of MIAS.
Oddly enough, the malais were not at all eager to admit that the desertions in twos and threes were such, preferring to list them as missing presumed killed.
I think the Danuese battalions were the idea of someone high up at home and they didn't wish to offend him by indicating that his brainchild was, as Mr Burnett would have said, a white elephant.
It was bad for Martinho's people, caught between Osvaldo and the cherry berets.
Whether it was the reluctance of the cannon-fodder or FAKINTIL'S growing weakness, engagements became increasingly few.
A big probe, Operasi Dragon, failed to encounter large-scale FAKINTIL resistance.
The malais began to think a triumph was just around the corner.
Goreng's superior was coming to the end of his tour of duty.
He badly wanted to believe he had beaten FAKINTIL — it would have eased a move into their crony politics for him.
The pressure came on to Goreng from above.
Normally he would have been too shrewd.
In turn, the heat was applied to Martinho and then myself.
Martinho wanted to please them, so he passed the buck to yours truly.
I said, ‘The bandits will not be beaten until you have Osvaldo's dead body.’
That was about as welcome as a stick of shit in the tub-water.
Martinho blanched.
The General glared at me.
Goreng looked at me in some surprise.
He was about to say something; then decided not to.
The General said, ‘Then my men will bring it to me.’
I said, ‘It is only a matter of time, tuan, but maybe the time is not quite yet.’
I was treated to the full force of the General's disapproval, which was not negligible.
Just out of the line of his sight, Martinho mouthed furiously at me.
The General said: ‘I shall know who to blame if treachery helps the bandits.’
In English the words sound weird, but — believe me — it was the logic which was  bizarre.
Did I say they were a subtle people?
I got the message OK.
I just shut up.
On the way down the corridor Martinho hissed in my ear, ‘You want to get us all shot?
Let him think what he wants.’
He was mightily pissed off with me; perhaps he wished he had just let them shoot me on the ground.
I said, ‘Martinho, I'm sorry.
I was thinking of both our heads.
And I was thinking of the future.’
‘Think of now,’ was his terse retort.
What I thought was: ‘You are very like your brother in this one respect, my friend.
You only think of here and now.’
But I left it at that.
Things continued quiet for some while.
Sweep after sweep came up with nothing.
The Broncos would return with guns unfired, their ordnance dumped at sea or on top of old FAKINTIL sites, notoriously long deserted.
Word spread: Osvaldo had died of malaria; he'd been shot in the back by X. Ray; he'd fallen down a cliff.
Or — this was a really good one — he had fled to the Northern Territory by boat sent by Aussie sympathisers.
Someone claimed to have heard him on the radio from Darwin — but it was always someone at a third hand remove; someone who had heard it from someone who had heard it from someone.
I can truthfully say I never believed it.
I would not be at all surprised if the story had been put out by Goreng or his superiors.
Morale rose in the Danuese battalions.
Teixeira, the old I P leader, tried to get put in command of them, having up till now succeeded in putting as much distance between himself and those dangerous embarrassments as he could.
He wanted control of guns.
He had seen what had happened before when FAKOUM had enjoyed this and he hadn't.
He wanted some greater degree of power for himself, always within a political reality where the malais ultimately called the shots.
Yet, strangely enough, it was Martinho the malais appeared to favour.
It was clear to me that they had spared him in order to groom him for their own uses.
He was a weaker and more intelligent man than Teixeira.
That suited them.
One dank afternoon I was summoned to the Gorengs' lounge.
Mrs sat behind the Colonel.
From her encouraging smile I realised  she had suggested me for something.
I was unable to smile back.
I just hoped whatever it was would prove to be neither inconvenient nor dangerous.
‘So, Chinaman,’ the Colonel said, ‘how stupid are you?
Very or only a little?’
I looked to Mrs for guidance; she looked amused, so I surmised it was not the inception of a punishment for my earlier and inconvenient frankness.
‘I am a smart fool, tuan,’ I said, with my eyes on the ground.
‘I think you are too clever for your own good,’ the Colonel said, ‘but my wife says otherwise.
And a wise man listens to his wife.
We will be having visitors shortly.’
‘Tuan?’
I said, wondering if I was being told to make A. Ng a scarce commodity.
‘Not now, silly,’ said Mrs. She and he laughed.
I was happy to be the butt.
‘There will be journalists coming,’ said the Colonel.
‘From many countries…’
‘All from the West,’ Mrs interrupted.
The Colonel nodded; he seemed not to mind.
I was at once interested but I did my best to suppress the instant flicker in my eyes.
I did not succeed in evading the notice of either of them as they had the advantage of knowing what would come next.
It would have been better just to let the natural reaction show through.
‘See?’ said the Colonel to Mrs. ‘The Chinese don't show what they're really thinking.’
She waved her hand.
‘I know what Adolph thinks.’
(I thought this very over-optimistic on her part but let her persist in the delusion.)
‘We need,’ she said, ‘an intelligent Danuese to talk to these newspaper people.
And I thought of you.’
But how kind, I thought.
I decided not to say so; it might sound ironic.
‘There is Mr Oliveira, of course, and Mr Teixeira, and maybe another one or two, but you could play a part, too.’
‘Thank you, nonya.’
‘You see, you are not involved directly, like the others.
You haven't got…what is the expression?’
‘An axe to grind.’
‘I don't know that.
But your testimony will be a good one.
You can tell them the true way things stand.’
I thought that was one thing I'd better not do.
‘Don't get any clever ideas,’ the Colonel said.
‘We'll tell you what to say.
And you say what we want to hear, or you take a long walk.
The Australians can't take you with them, you know.’
‘Whatever pleases you, tuan,’ I said.
So that was it-an extended press conference on the grand scale!
They'd answer the outside world by giving their own authorised version of the intervening years.
They intended to make a prophecy that would be self-fulfilling in its entirety.
By saying the war was over, the territory pacified, they would make it so.
It wasn't just hot air — it was a blow against FAKINTIL that was as deadly in its way as a Bronco strike.
If all the press reports chimed the same note at the same time it would be a brave and stubborn fool who would go against them.
What they had in common would become irrefutable, objective verity, the stock-in-trade of general knowledge for the educated and interested (few enough in all conscience) of the metropolises of the West.
Where they contradicted each other in inessential points there might be room for debate and uncertainty.
The malais weren't fools — they knew no one would buy a uniform screed.
A few minor inconsistencies and divergences would give the appearance of verisimilitude.
And it also served to draw stings: it ensured the main issue got cloaked in unimportant wranglings.
Get people talking round a subject.
There's nothing like it for losing sight of the real point.
Whose idea was it?
Maybe it went even higher than the Generals.
What I did know was that I discerned in the detail the cynical hand of the practising hack.
Maybe not even cynical, maybe just female practicality which can stoop with clearest conscience below the level of the lowest stratagem.
Yes, I think Mrs had a guiding part in what she called ‘these media arrangements’.
We had about two months to prepare for the seven of them; a period useful not only for the co-ordinating of the PR assault but also, I believe, a safety gap, a firebreak, a time in which the military could take stock, an interval in which Goreng could see if there was to be a resurgence of the lost FAKINTIL in the hills.
The cherry berets did the scouting; they didn't trust the Danuese battalions with this.
Meanwhile Mrs hatched her plans, abetted by the man of the world.
How we'd house them, the way to pamper, what facilities  to offer.
Mrs Goreng had the ideas; I put them into practice for her.
And was that not my destiny, with my past of libraries and hotels?
That was what I had come to.
Mrs Goreng read herself into her visitors.
The fact that she had expected to be  cosseted by the subjects of her own journalistic attentions in the past had made her no warier of the reporters she was inviting.
You couldn't say the free food and drink or the luxuriously appointed cabins had bought her, but it had affected the tone of her pieces.
I guess it was like the primitive interrogation techniques both malais and FAKINTIL were not above resorting to: you could see the stratagem but that didn't stop it from being effective.
Booze we had in abundance.
The majority of the malais were Muslims but that didn't stop the senior military enjoying their glass of whisky — Bourbon rather than Scotch, for the notorious malai sweet tooth extended to tastes alcoholic as well.
Mrs Goreng used her husband's influence to impound every bottle on the island, as well as a stupendous quantity of crates of beer.
The Colonel was a little surprised, amused too.
He said, ‘This is like Al Capone.’
(He could surprise you sometimes with the bits and pieces of his knowledge.)
‘You think they drink this much?’
Mrs smiled at her husband.
‘They are as bad as sailors, Colonel,’ she said.
He liked that one.
I agreed with my mistress.
I remembered those sessions at the Lusitano with Jean Carmichael.
They drank like fishes, those guys.
Bill Mabbeley was the only one who could keep up with Jean.
Funny how it had been malai policy to murder him and, earlier, the young men in the television crew, and now it was policy to stand them, or their kind, a round at the bar.
And, I was forced to admit, both times it was the correct policy for them.
Mrs Goreng laid on a school, a rally, a football match, the army hospital, and a model village for the journalists.
This was liberally interspersed with launch picnics, swimming, the services of a chef flown specially from one of the malais' two five-star hotels back home, and ‘ethnic entertainments’.
I got more of a role in the whole thing than the Colonel had figured on — I don't know if my mistress had intended it from the start.
As the idle beings they were in a group, the malais were used to last-minute arrangements and  alterations, spontaneous changes and improvisation; so it wasn't as big a deal as if he'd been, say, an Israeli or a German officer.
Still, it was lucky for me everything went well.
I could easily have become a scapegoat.
Maybe that was what Mrs Goreng intended all along.
Driving to the sterilised zone in which the malais had reconstructed a thatched Danuese village complete with miniature ricebarns, one of the two Americans turned and said to me: ‘Sir, tell me, truly, do you think the Integration has been a good thing for your country?’
The dumb fuck!
Of all the ass-hole questions!
I guess he thought it safer to ask me there over the noise of the engine and in the babble of conversation than in some quiet spot alone, where we might be bugged.
If so, he was right.
But did he think I could give an answer?
Did he want me to eat shit or the words stick in my throat and choke me?
What he really wanted to do was show what a smart, concerned guy he was.
The question didn't pertain to me; it related to him.
He asked me in a very slow and serious voice, looking at me with solemn eyes.
He was asking me to respect him for an astute and informed observer, an impartial and honest man.
It was one step up from small talk; it was aggrandisement.
‘Tuan,’ I said, very slow and serious, too, ‘it is a good thing, but the cost has been high.’
He nodded sagely.
I could see the nape of Mrs Goreng's neck in the front seat; she'd put her hair up.
I hoped she could hear.
They'd chosen the journalists very carefully, of course.
Rather, they'd selected newspapers which, while endowed with authoritative reputations, were sympathetic to the malai government — in a nutshell, quality right-wing newspapers which weren't soft on Communism.
Mrs Goreng depended on the editors to send the right people.
For her to have vetted the reporters on an individual basis (which would have been the first instinct of the malai military left to their own devices) would have caused offence to the point where the exercise would have been counter-productive.
The day after their arrival they got a full-scale historical briefing on Danu.
There was a lot on the early history, less on recent events.
Mrs Goreng was able to make it sound quite romantic — good copy for the female journo from the up-market us ladies' magazine-so  we heard about the Spice and Sandalwood Trades, the black Portuguese, and then an interracial love story which Mrs Goreng had invented herself.
She told some lies about the close relations between the old malai half of the island and ours which had, she said, made them indistinguishable for all practical purposes: for example, it was not an invasion but a reunion.
Jesus, it was one island, that was true, but the terrain made the halves more remote from each other than if they had been two islands separated by a sea channel: you couldn't skip across our jungles and mountains in an outrigger.
There was a common inheritance of language and culture, she claimed.
That was baloney.
A whole series of lies about the Revolution, FAKOUM, the IP and the Civil War followed, centring on the deaths caused by the IP-FAKOUM conflict which she magnified by a factor of one hundred.
That was nothing, membership of the pro-malai party she increased by thousands.
Not that the journalists let her get away with quite everything.
They were not incompetents, I'll give them that.
The German asked about the atrocities on invasion day — these were known abroad.
Mrs Goreng had something up her sleeve for this.
She admitted there had been excesses.
She said they were deeply regretted.
But war was war.
Sometimes men get out of the control of their officers.
She shrugged at the American woman — it had happened in Viet Nam.
Then she looked the German squarely in the eye.
‘A whole nation does not have to carry the guilt of a few wrong-doers into perpetuity,’ she said.
The guy flinched.
I don't think a Chinese could have taught Mrs Goreng anything about the black arts of dissimulation.
The honest confession on top of the bag of lies was masterly.
She gave the impression of candour, of surrendering a point.
But that point was indefensible anyway.
She turned weakness into strength, for if she had tried to dismiss those accusations it would have made everything else she said suspect.
She'd wanted to keep the army out of it as much as possible.
She was wise enough for that and so, I think, was Colonel Goreng.
But the General wanted a piece of the action.
I guess he'd seen American officers on TV the whole time during the Viet Nam war.
He didn't want Mrs Goreng's husband stealing all the glory.
The cruder stuff was his idea.
Like the crowd at the airport and in the  main street of Danu waving the malai flag of green and white.
These were strictly extras; he didn't even trust the IP people not to make a demonstration of some kind; these were non-Danuese from a couple of malai islands one hundred kilometres north-east.
Would the foreigners know the difference?
Would they, shit!
Even I wouldn't realise until they opened their mouths — which was only to sing the malai national anthem.
And, in fact, at the airport standing at Mrs Goreng's side — me, this time, already returned, waiting to greet other people arriving, the emissaries of the greater world — yours truly didn't understand the deception for some time.
Mrs Goreng was on safer ground with the schools.
Native Danuese kids — if their parents wanted them to go to school at all, and they were mostly I P big shots — had to study the principles of the malai constitution, bow to the flag, learn the kitchen malay which was the official language throughout the malai islands.
They wore the same green and white of malai children all over that archipelagic state.
There was nothing wrong with the noble creed they were taught-it was just that it played no part in the actual operation of the military dictatorship.
Well, the seven journalists went round the classrooms, looking at the well-scrubbed, well-fed, well-clothed children.
The ‘teacher’ was one of the younger army wives — not so classy as Mrs Goreng but not bad.
She had her arms round a boy and girl, who were regarding the open book on her lap.
As we came in, she brought her head close to the little girl's.
I watched the strange smile on the American woman's face — like the smile students wore in the movie-house at Toronto when they were watching some particularly syrupy moment from a corny trailer, extorted smiles, full of shame and self-consciousness, but the suppressed emotion sincere enough and shown unguarded in the darkness, except I was playing the voyeur.
That's what the feature-writer from the American ladies' magazine looked like she was no fool, but once again crude and simple was the name of the most effective game.
At the hospital, it was more of the same.
Malai military doctors treating Danuese, again mostly kids.
For me, it was the hardest thing to watch.
My eyes filled with tears, that took me as unexpectedly as one of the Corporal's ambushes.
And I cursed my weakness, dashing the back of my hand over my traitorous eyes, for I saw  the American woman look at me.
She thought I was moved by the kindness of the malais!
Oh, Maria, my darling!
How you would have despised me!
Mrs Goreng didn't miss this.
As we stepped into the street, behind the others, as grateful for the iced Cokes in prospect as they were, she whispered to me: ‘You are doing well, Adolph.
Keep up the good work!’
It was a strange moment, and I had to grapple with conflicting sensations.
In fact, this was the only spectacle which Mrs Goreng had not had to contrive for the benefit of her guests.
The malai army doctors really did hold a little surgery for our children.
Not for a moment must you imagine that this philanthropic gesture was anything but calculated on the part of the occupying military.
It was about the only piece of hearts and minds they did.
But the fact remained, the doctors were a different sort of person from the regular army officers; they wanted to do the good works they did; that they would have done it anyway, without being ordered, is my certain opinion.
Within the material constraints of the situation they did what they could for the kids.
And it was in their spare time — they didn't get leave from the official rota.
At a personal level it was noble; professionals plying their skills without a thought of personal advantage.
They were decent people, the malai medicos.
I guess, if he'd known, Osvaldo would have made it a priority to kill them all.
Mrs Goreng came up with a good one.
The American lady was fumbling for words.
She was wanting to describe the nature of the malai government but didn't want to use the first words which came to mind, which were ‘military dictatorship’.
Mrs Goreng came to the rescue.
She nodded.
‘The army,’ she said helpfully, ‘plays an important part in our national life.’
I was hard put to know what I thought about our guests — I mean since, as well as then.
The senior American, and the New Zealander, were right-wingers of a purity I'd thought extinct, little imagining that the vogue for radical chic — which had been the orthodoxy of the day in Toronto — was now no more than the memory of an ebb tide.
Before I'd been salvaged by Martinho and Mrs Goreng they'd had a Frenchman and a Philadelphian about three years previous who'd written uncomfortable stuff about  starving kids, flattened villages, and summary executions.
This time the malais were especially careful about the New Zealander and the American.
Apart from their views, these two had in common a great physical height, towering above average mortals, let alone the diminutive peoples of the Orient.
I called them De Gaulle and Wellington.
Wellington, the Kiwi, never actually troubled himself to speak to me during his stay.
He was the defence correspondent of his paper and I wasn't surprised to hear he'd served in the military.
I think he might have been a security man of some kind, although I couldn't prove it to you.
He wore a blue suit of safari cut, a non-military colour but a safari-suit nonetheless.
He was constantly taking notes — on a special pad which didn't disintegrate in the rain, a feature of some interest both to yours truly and his colleagues.
I heard him refer to the Danuese as ‘natives’ and myself once as a ‘Chinaman’.
He had a very loud, metallic voice, a little like Arsenio's in a strange way.
The others were wary of him, and slightly intimidated.
His views were simply and inflexibly held.
He justified everything the malais did because FAKOUM had been terrorists.
Martinho encouraged him in this opinion-he liked to make out that the organisation had been moderate until hijacked by extremists who believed in violence.
With his vowels short as his hair, it was easy to mistake Wellington for an Afrikaner.
I believe he had friends in that community.
He had an argument with the American lady on the subject.
She disagreed with the system of apartheid.
Wellington's riposte was that she had never been to South Africa, while he had and was therefore in a position to judge properly.
The woman said, ‘I've never been to the North Pole, Mr MacKenzie, but I know it's cold there.’
This was the only time I heard anyone get the better of Wellington.
De Gaulle was an altogether subtler animal, with a good intellect, equal to the better teachers at Toronto.
At least I'd say his reasoning was good but the conclusions suspect.
He was, like Wellington, well over six feet tall but where the New Zealander emphasised his height with his erect bearing, De Gaulle stooped slightly.
You wouldn't have caught the late French President doing that, even when being shot at, and my De Gaulle also wore spectacles all the time, but the nose and toothbrush moustache were the same.
His brand of conservatism was more cerebral than Wellington's temperamental and instinctive belief in hierarchy, although, as with all of us, it was emotion and not reason at the bottom of it in the end.
It was De Gaulle who asked me the dumb question in the van-his condescension brought him down to what he imagined was my level.
He did have more of an interest in what was going on around him than Wellington.
What he saw wouldn't change Wellington's thinking: it hadn't in fifty years, so why should it now?
But given three months, I flatter myself I could have modified De Gaulle's thinking on the malais and Danu.
As it was, the week he spent on Mrs Goreng's tour confirmed him in the ideas he had brought with him.
He was a means justifies ends man.
The author of what I later discovered to be a scholarly, if tendentious, account of us foreign policy since Korea, he expressed a fastidious regret for the instruments America had to work through but justified the excesses of the client governments by reference to the worse alternative of Marxist dictatorship.
I thought it dishonest-comparing facts with a hypothesis.
However, even if I'd had access to the book at the time — he gave a signed copy to Mrs Goreng when he left and another to the American woman journalist, which I accounted a waste-it would not have been wise to argue.
I think De Gaulle was an OK guy.
At least, at the personal level there was some decency about him.
It was just that he had strange ideas which took him into bad company.
With Wellington, much of it was showing off — he liked to antagonise, to shock the liberal lobby back home.
De Gaulle, I think, regretted alienating people.
The journalists were granted an interview with His Grace, the Bishop of Danu.
This was no longer the wily old ecclesiastical politician from the metropole who had first closed down Martinho's seminary news-letter and then later, seeing which way the wind blew, had made an unholy, if tacit, alliance with Caesar in the shape of Osvaldo.
He'd gone home after about a year of occupation.
This wasn't because he didn't care for a hardship see, or because the malais had intimidated him.
Danu had never been that easy for him, even though the people had taken to the saints and images of Catholicism with the usual zeal of the pagan at heart.
He was a tough old fellow when it came to it-his older  brother had been an artillery colonel — but his health was failing and I guess he felt a younger man would serve his flock the better in the iron times to come.
Typically, he didn't care that the abdication might be interpreted in terms that were not personally flattering.
The new man was a Danuese, Monsignor Teixeira.
And he wasn't-how can I put it? perhaps best in the terms of FAKINTIL — a substantive bishop but an acting one.
He was the bishop designate, in expectancy of the see, but Rome hadn't confirmed him.
How clever of Rome.
In fact, the anomalous status gave him greater leeway.
From his pulpit thundered the most extraordinary denunciations of violations and abuses.
The position was clever.
He did not attack the fait accompli of malai occupation.
He merely condemned the actions which preserved that regime, and then only the worst.
At the beginning, the malais had wiped out whole villages.
Monsignor had not compromised.
Not only did his broadsides provide the only small check there was against wholesale malai excesses, they alerted the population to what would have been kept secret.
His pulpit was the only source of news in Danu.
And he was fed the information from myriad channels, to be dispensed with the holy water on Sundays.
Every month he'd read a list — it was a list of names of young men, and some women, who'd vanished from the face of the earth.
In his strong voice, redolent of anger just kept in check, he'd read those names, among which had figured that of my friend Rosa Soares, christened Maria.
And the list grew longer every time, for he didn't just read the new names but began with the first and proceeded to the newest, the tension in his cathedral growing as he reached the end of the litany of those whose names were already familiar and, without pause, added those of the latest.
Many who had no belief, I among that number, packed into the house of God to hang on the words of his servant.
The malais dared not harm him.
It was the visitors who pressed for the meeting.
The malais would never have initiated it.
Mrs Goreng walked right into the German's trap — he'd wanted to pay her back — when he'd asked her as they walked down to the edge of the beach for a post-picnic swim, ‘And are the people religious?’
‘Oh, yes, very,’ she answered, eager to inform on a harmless, non-specific matter, to say the  Danuese were really good people, and to look down on them jointly, since she already knew Herr Speich was an atheist.
Kapow!
The journalists then wanted to talk to the ‘Bishop’, as he was such a vital figure.
Mrs Goreng had back-tracked desperately.
He wasn't available.
Why not?
He was ill.
Then they would see his deputy.
No, he didn't want to receive them.
They'd like to ask him themselves.
Really, he was very hostile to foreigners.
Oh, we are quite thick-skinned, the journos chorused.
It became apparent they weren't quite the compliant, bought and paid for hacks the malais hoped they were.
The more Mrs Goreng tergiversated, the greater grew the ardency of the reporters for an interview with the Monsignor.
From being shifty Mrs Goreng started to become nervous and then irritable.
‘Why you want to see this stupid man?’ she snapped, her grammar deteriorating with her temper.
‘But Mrs Goreng,’ the German said with a mild surprise that only a paranoiac could think assumed, ‘you don't have to ask, surely?
You are also a journalist.’
Well, she had to bite the bullet.
They got what they wanted.
Monsignor was only too pleased to receive them.
I went along for the ride; Mrs Goreng needed moral support and a straight guy to conduct an emergency dialogue with, if the need arose.
The journos were all on their best behaviour, the American woman in stockings and a long dress, the men in long shirt sleeves.
Going up the seminary hill to his Residence-I don't think one would be justified in calling it a palace, gracious old house that it was — I felt giddy.
Not with height, but the changes I'd seen, not just in my own life but in the fortunes of Danu.
We had to put the vehicle into second gear most of the way as we proceeded slowly but with great steadiness and sureness up the steep incline, the hill Arsenio and Osvaldo had walked to their lessons as boys, up which Martinho had run to Fr Molloy the day they burnt the FAKINTIL files while Danu lay concealed in smoke below, the hill Rosa  claimed with scorn never to have walked in her life, except she was strongly there, too, in spirit.
The Bishop designate's secretary received us and asked us into his presence.
He was a very small, very dark man, with straight hair, not at all mestizo-looking.
I saw the American woman kiss his hand; so she was an RC, too.
No refreshment was offered, not because Monsignor wished to be inhospitable but because he didn't feel it was appropriate to the place and time.
He didn't trouble with small-talk, or asking if the visitors were comfortable, or enjoying their stay.
He didn't talk about the weather.
He began by saying that people were starving to death, and it got more pessimistic from then on: the resettlement camps, the ensuing dislocation which meant people could no longer grow their food, the dying children.
Finally, Mrs Goreng could bear it no longer.
All her hard work was coming down around her ears.
‘Monsignor means the people are spiritually hungry,’ she said with a bright and desperate smile.
I winced — inwardly, of course; my outer expression was that of the adeptly dissimulating Chinaman, i.e., nothing showing.
But Mrs Goreng then got help from an unexpected quarter; although maybe not totally surprising.
Wellington, that is MacKenzie, the New Zealander, said, ‘That's right, padre,’ and I again winced, ‘you talk a great deal about material things.
Wouldn't it be more appropriate for you to concentrate on the spiritual welfare of your people?’
Monsignor Teixeira said simply, ‘If your belly is empty you think of your hunger, not God.
Man cannot lead a spiritual life unless he is free of his body's demands.’
He betrayed neither irritation nor sharpness.
Wellington said, ‘Well, that's a novel piece of theology, Father.
I don't know if it's the view of the Church, though.’
A silence followed.
I could see the American woman was angry, but she didn't come to Monsignor's support.
Monsignor indicated he was prepared to answer questions.
Some desultory queries followed, the more intelligent ones from the German.
At length Mrs Goreng terminated proceedings by saying, ‘Well, we have taken up too much of Monsignor's time already.’
Her whole manner said, ‘told you so.’
Monsignor looked grim.
He nodded to the journalists, putting  his hands behind his back.
As we were clattering down the worn red tiles of the corridor, a junior aide bumped into De Gaulle, apologising with great profuseness.
I think we all felt more relaxed outside.
Somehow — God knows why or how — it had turned into a victory for Mrs Goreng.
There remained another two nights of their stay.
Colonel Goreng was to entertain them at home that evening.
The Colonel was many things, but he was no hypocrite.
He knew who he was and what he stood for, and he was not ashamed of it.
He was himself before the journalists — which the General hadn't been — and because of that he came over well, that is unaffectedly.
He unaffectedly frightened yours truly.
After a buffet rijstafel of gargantuan proportions-thirty dishes concluded with a chewy sweet much beloved of the malais which resembled nothing so much as toenail pie — the Colonel served Tia Maria which he and his wife thought the last word in cosmopolitan sophistication.
The scenes of destitution which the journalists could not be prevented from glimpsing-it is impossible to put someone in a hermetic bubble all the time, even for ten days — had not apparently impaired their appetites.
Each new delicacy was greeted with mock consternation and genuine appreciation-'What more?’— but finally we retired to Colonel Goreng's ‘den’.
I'd never been in this room before.
He kept it private; I liked to imagine for showing his cronies stag movies, but probably just for men's talk.
In we filed, yours truly with some hesitation.
This beast's lair was lined with the heads of beasts — tiger, rhino, and other exotics interspersed among the more usual deer trophies.
Wellington's eyes lit up.
He began to talk to the Colonel with animation I'd not seen before about hunting deer from helicopters in the South Island.
He'd used an Armalite semi-auto on the creatures as they stampeded from crag to crag.
Colonel Goreng smiled.
I kept my face still.
They don't shoot back at you, my friend, I thought.
Not that a rifle round could beat gravity sufficiently to threaten a helicopter at five hundred metres.
The Colonel was thinking along the same lines as me.
‘Hunt men make more interesting,’ he said, with a smile.
The American woman was looking at the rhino.
‘You've been to Africa, Colonel?’ she enquired.
He shook his head.
‘Shoot at  home,’ he said.
They all looked incredulous.
Mrs Goreng was able to volunteer them some (absolutely correct) tourist information.
‘We have tigers and rhinoceros in our country,’ she said.
‘We do not have to go to Africa.’
‘Very small rhino,’ the Colonel said.
We examined it in detail.
It was indeed small, as a species rather than because it was a young animal, but unmistakably a genuine one hundred per cent authentic rhino's head.
The German raised his eyebrows, but the Colonel didn't notice.
After a while Mrs Goreng led the American woman out, leaving us males by ourselves.
I don't think the female journalist would have gone if she'd known, but by the time she realised it was too late.
The Colonel broke out whisky, which I wasn't offered.
Wellington encouraged him to talk about his hunting exploits, not to flatter but out of genuine interest.
Going to a locked cabinet, the Colonel pulled out a handsome rifle with a telescopic sight.
I'd never seen a weapon like that before — only military rifles.
The journalists, Speich included, hefted it with appreciation.
‘English gun,’ the Colonel said politely.
He turned to Wellington, ‘How many animals you kill?’
Wellington hesitated.
I guess he didn't actually know his bag.
Colonel Goreng said with an earnestness that took away all boast, ‘I kill two thousand more.’
We digested the information.
Speich said gently, ‘And men, Colonel?
How many men have you killed in your life?’
Colonel Goreng said without hesitation, ‘Seventy-nine.’
‘With your own hand?’
This was De Gaulle.
Goreng held up his right hand.
He wagged his trigger-finger.
‘This my own good hand.
And two with knife-our knife.’
He pulled open a drawer in which a dozen antique  krises were displayed.
They really were beautiful objects.
The foreigners all exclaimed.
‘Magic knifes,’ the Colonel said.
‘Kill many men, make more stronger.’
He shut the drawer and turned the key.
Unlike the British rifle, these were not to be touched.
Speich said, ‘You have killed for pleasure or necessity, Colonel?’
Goreng looked him in the eye.
‘The same,’ he said.
De Gaulle laughed nervously.
‘Would you kill us if you had to, Colonel?’
Goreng looked him in the eye, which was the answer.
It was a  crass question — and an honest answer — but then there is nothing to say that very clever people can't be stupid when it comes to everyday human exchange.
I stood by the door, making myself inconspicuous.
I could sense the Colonel had got himself into a capricious and dangerous mood.
I thought of him as the rhino: myopic, short-legged, thick-skinned, not too bright but with a mean temper, a surprising turn of speed over a short course, and, above all, a keen sense of smell.
The Colonel gestured to me: I was to refill the glasses.
No one refused.
The Colonel started to talk about 1965–66, the terrible slaughter of Communists and Chinese by the army and their thug friends in sarongs.
He said it was in response to a coup.
A handful of Muslim Generals had been assassinated by the radicals — he himself, a captain then, had narrowly escaped such a fate when a gang with knives and spears had broken into his home.
He had climbed over two garden walls.
I thought the whole thing had been a set-up — to get rid of the old President and his Communist allies.
But I kept my big mouth shut.
The Colonel was getting loquacious, relating his part in the anti-criminal campaign in malai-land two years back.
I'd been in the jungle then.
They'd targeted known hoodlums, sent plainclothes snatch-squads round-who wore cherry berets — and ‘disappeared’ the culprits.
‘No more social problem,’ the Colonel grinned.
I was surprised he knew those words; he must have acquired them from his wife.
Salon talk and murder.
In his pleasure at recounting his hunting exploits the Colonel had become indiscreet.
The analogy was there to draw between what they were prepared to do at home and what they might contemplate doing out of sight in a subjected territory.
I started to feel very uneasy.
Speich, the German journalist, it had become clear, was the best at his job.
He chose to sit still and let the Colonel run on.
Any interruption might stop the flow, and if it gave the Colonel pause for thought, and the brain behind the little piggy eyes a chance to work, it might result in an enraged charge.
Colonel Goreng was moving away from the details of the operation to talk about the Western concept of ‘human rights’, to mock it, to say what a ridiculous shibboleth it was when it stopped you defending the rights of those who weren't criminals, when Mrs Goreng  knocked on the door.
Had she guessed?
Did she know her husband well enough to come to rescue him from the consequences of his own indiscretions?
She could certainly see his face was flushed with liquor, in that typical Asian way.
‘Oh, Colonel,’ she said, ‘Mrs Frewin is getting bored and so is Mrs Goreng.’
They all laughed, rather more heartily than the witticism warranted; so I was not the only one who felt awkward.
We went into the garden, where Mrs Goreng showed them her flourishing orchids.
‘But Adolph is the gardener,’ she said.
I did my level best not to look shifty.
‘Where did you find them?’ the American woman asked, expressing gracious interest.
‘Oh, around,’ I said.
‘He doesn't want to give away his secrets,’ Mrs Goreng said.
‘You are right, nonya,’ I answered.
Well, the evening dwindled into an exchange of inconsequentialities, skirting the more dangerous topics.
At a relatively advanced hour, our guests were driven back to their hotel, probably alarming the Danuese in their beds, for the sound of motors in the curfew never augured well.
Next morning De Gaulle had a bombshell for Mrs Goreng, or what he thought would be a bombshell.
We generally got to their place just as they were finishing breakfast.
They'd be on cup three or four amid the toast fragments, still relaxed but just beginning to wake up to the day's promise, when Mrs Goreng and myself would join them for what was left of the luke-warm coffee.
Today Mrs Goreng had bestowed her usual dazzling malai smile of white teeth on the Danuese teenager who had brought her a clean cup when De Gaulle said, ‘Mrs Goreng, may I have a word with you?’
‘Yes, of course, Dr Smithson,’ she replied.
‘What is it?’
Well, Mrs Goreng had a pretty good grasp of English-and her French was improving, too — but she was not well versed in the nuances of behaviour.
De Gaulle meant, as you would realise, that he wanted to take her out of earshot and have a whisper.
Naturally, he wanted to impress his colleagues, set up a little frisson, as he'd have put it.
He was the kind of guy who liked to appear remote; aloof but capable of pulling strings.
He must have enjoyed it when he was scoring off his pupils in his days as a college professor.
He could, for instance, quite easily have taken Mrs Goreng aside later  in the day and no one would have noticed.
Now he tried to smile a discreet and ironic little smile.
You could see he had altered his plan and would get her to herself later.
The details of it all were a little mundane to him and he did not necessarily want to be implicated in them.
But his colleagues had their curiosity whetted; they wouldn't let go.
Most people wouldn't — what can be more tantalising than a secret mentioned then withheld?
It's one of the things that don't change from childhood to adulthood — but worst of all for De Gaulle, his companions were, unlike him, real journalists.
Speich, for instance, was a genuine investigator with some coups behind him, and they had the scent of something hot now.
The pack wouldn't let go.
‘Okay, okay,’ De Gaulle said.
He handed a twist of paper to Mrs Goreng.
Speich barely restrained himself from grabbing it out of her hand.
She held it this way and that, frowning.
I knew she had this little vanity that she didn't like people to see her with her spectacles on.
‘Adolph,’ she said, ‘I cannot understand this.
Can you read it?’
‘With pleasure, my lady.’
And then I, too, found myself squinting and peering at it, turning the scrap this way and that.
‘Ja, ja, permission.’
Speich snapped the paper out of my fingers.
His eyebrows rose.
After a while he said, ‘However, it is in Latin.’
De Gaulle was starting to enjoy himself again.
He had an inkling he was the only one who could decipher the code.
But aid came from an unlikely quarter.
It was Wellington.
It turned out he had had the rudiments of classicism flogged into him as a schoolboy.
He said the first verb he'd learned was ‘to love’ and the first noun ‘a table’, bizarre beginnings to a vocabulary with no connection between the parts.
‘Oh, I wouldn't say that,’ I thought to myself, but kept quiet.
‘Okay,’ said Speich impatiently.
‘But you can read this for sure?’
Wellington was quite laid back, for him.
He didn't say, ‘Get lost, Kraut,’ but just asked if he could borrow Speich's note-pad and ball-point.
(Someone, probably a junior malai officer who knew the jungle, had stolen his impermeable paper earlier.)
‘The secret is to be logical,’ Wellington said.
‘Like all empire-builders,’ I couldn't resist adding.
He ignored this.
‘If you can find the subjects for the verbs, then their objects, everything else will agree with them, or not as the case may be.’
And to aid this he began numbering the main verbs.
Ten minutes later we had a garbled appeal to the outside world from a Danuese patriot, mentioning injustices, famine, and the burning desire of a people to be free.
‘Who gave you this?’
Mrs Goreng asked sternly.
De Gaulle said, ‘It sounds like Tacitus or Polybius, doesn't it?
Strange how some things don't change.
I like the list of happenings.’
‘Dr Smithson, you must tell me who gave you this.’
De Gaulle smiled.
‘It was given to me by someone who feels deeply on the subject,’ he said.
Mrs Goreng was in no mood for intellectual badinage.
She was a woman; she was a third worlder.
That is, she was pragmatic by sex and had no time to waste on cerebral subtleties.
De Gaulle obviously expected her to say something like: ‘So much is evident from the content.’
Instead she said grimly, ‘Where did you get it?’
He just grinned again.
Speich said, ‘Mrs Goreng, you know that a good journalist always protects his source.’
Speich was serious — being German but he was also serious because he could see what was coming over the horizon looked like a storm.
Mrs Goreng was relentless.
She knew what she wanted and intended to get it.
She ignored the games of men, of clever men from the world where they indulged in mind games for the sake of them.
Her needs were basic and true.
‘Who was the man who gave it to you?
Was he maybe a woman?’
De Gaulle was starting to look a little harassed.
He'd been stupid enough not to expect anything so crude, or so relentless.
He didn't get much help or sympathy from the others.
After a while Mrs Goreng seemed to drop it.
You could see De Gaulle fervently hoped it wouldn't be broached again.
Some chance!
Mrs Goreng was just thinking, and her thoughts were hard and mean.
They were scheduled to pay a visit to another model resettlement village that morning — their last official tour.
The malais attached a lot of importance to the foreigners going away thinking these places of starvation and imprisonment were little paradises of plenty and contentment.
As the others were climbing into the van, Mrs Goreng said, ‘Dr Smithson, Colonel Goreng will grant you an interview.’
Those were the words she used.
‘Grant’ and ‘interview’.
Well, I saw De Gaulle's eyes widen in panic.
What flashed through his mind?
Did he think they were going to terminate him?
Pull his fingernails out?
‘I…ha…,’ he actually stammered.
‘We have a car here,’ Mrs Goreng said.
‘Adolph will guide your colleagues.
We can all meet for lunch together at the beach.’
If De Gaulle was expecting help from the others, he was deceived.
I think he was thinking of saying something as bad as, ‘Please don't leave me.’
Speich said, ‘But this is not to be fair.
He gets a scoop!’
He laughed nastily.
He didn't like De Gaulle at all.
Why he said that, it wasn't as a protest; it was to land De Gaulle in the shit.
They all got in, quite quickly.
De Gaulle was too embarrassed to make a scene of it.
I mean, people generally are.
It's only the immediate, definite prospect of harm which will dissolve inhibition.
If men with guns had come up to seize him, he'd have cried out shamelessly in his terror.
But, real though his dread was to him, he was unwilling to make a fool of himself quite yet.
I sneaked a look behind as we went off in a cloud of dust.
Mrs Goreng was talking to him quite normally.
To cut a long story short, they did rejoin us at lunch-time, De Gaulle no longer looking shit-scared so much as downright shifty.
He and Mrs Goreng sat down to the al fresco buffet without volunteering anything.
But they weren't going to let him get away with it.
The lady journo said, ‘Come on, what happened, buster?
Share a little news with your friends.’
Speich said, ‘The Colonel has been showing you his human heads, yes?’
(I didn't find that so funny, though no way was I going to tell them about how this least amiable aspect of Danuese traditional warfare had been continued by FAKINTIL.)
De Gaulle grimaced.
Mrs Goreng, instead of keeping quiet, said, ‘Dr Smithson has not abused his position as our guest and we are grateful to him.’
‘We are all the guests of your government, gracious madam,’ Speich said, ‘and we do not forget that fact.’
He looked slyly at the others, ‘How could we?’
After a week the first cracks were appearing within the group and between the group and its organisers.
Which was just why Mrs Goreng had not made the trip any longer.
She knew.
She'd done it.
After a while — pleading the heat  — she abandoned a sketchy meal for the shade of the beach hut reserved for senior malais and their friends.
That gave the journos their opportunity to hound De Gaulle without restraint.
It began half-jokingly, then turned unpleasant.
Finally, Speich said, ‘It was from one of the priests, I think without doubt?’
De Gaulle reacted like a sullen schoolboy; the august professor had gone for a while.
‘Think that if you want.’
‘So I am correct?’
‘That's not what I said, and you know it.’
But Speich's arrow, fired I won't say in the dark but certainly the gloom, appeared to have hit its mark.
De Gaulle looked agitated.
‘You told them who gave the note to you?’ the American lady asked in a tone of high disbelief.
Speich had decided to do a double act with her, for he remarked, ‘Ja, that he has done.
So why the big scruple to tell us?
We don't shoot him.’
‘You bastard,’ she said, ‘you bastard.’
She got up and walked away.
Speich went with her.
After a while all of the others, except Wellington, followed.
Wellington always had a large appetite; he'd piled fruit simultaneously on to his plate with the meat and rice, instead of having it separately as a dessert.
And he kept chewing, though he didn't look at De Gaulle.
I kept my head down and pretended to be consuming the scraps left on my dish.
I don't believe Wellington stayed to give De Gaulle moral support.
He wanted to eat and he didn't give a damn two ways anyhow.
De Gaulle had, indeed, incriminated one of Monsignor's aides, the one who had knocked into him.
I guess he'd picked De Gaulle as the most sympathetic and scholarly-looking.
He would have done a lot better with Speich, but the burly, moustached German didn't look very sentimental.
They could have done without De Gaulle's sentiment.
He'd told Colonel Goreng everything in under five minutes.
Well, why?
I tried to figure him out; he was by no means the worst of the bunch.
I didn't come up with a theory immediately, though I had hunches which were difficult to put into words.
There were two separate actions: disclosing the note and then informing on its author to the malais, though the young priest was doomed the moment he selected his man with his eyes.
I think De Gaulle produced the note because he was bored, firstly, but  mainly for self-aggrandisement.
He wanted to be the centre of the group's attention.
It was a dramatic gesture, a revelation; it put him in a position of power, if only for a moment, but he liked that position and his primacy had been denied in that group of irreverents.
You might think I'm adumbrating the psychology of three-year-olds in the kindergarten.
Believe me, intellectual age has little to do with emotional maturity.
The behaviour of the clever is far from complex; it's simple, if you see through the glosses.
As to snitching on the donor, he excused himself to the others later, in my earshot, by saying his loyalties really were to his hosts.
Besides, he was against Communism.
I buy that, to an extent.
He was also intimidated by Goreng — especially the previous evening.
I knew how it worked.
The subtle mind used against itself by the simple mind.
Maybe the Colonel had intimated how easy it was to have an accident on the awful Danu roads.
And the malai Colonel, with his dead animals and knives and his talk of the men he'd killed, was scary.
Goreng had dominated him with his will.
Funnily enough, De Gaulle was one of the better behaved of the gang in all other respects.
Group comportment had deteriorated by the day, with yours truly bearing the brunt of the collective delinquency.
In a nutshell, they behaved like spoiled kids.
Mrs Goreng had been too kind to them in the sense of what to expect.
It wasn't New York; it wasn't the Florida Keys, but they expected the standards of those places.
Complaint after complaint I had to deal with: the bed too hard, the air-conditioner whistled (me, I was surprised it worked), a spider in the goddamned bath.
If she had taken a tougher line with them at once, they would have known where to stop.
But granted total freedom, they made pains in the asses of themselves.
Individually, they were mature, intelligent human beings; collectively, they were the fifth grade in Disneyland.
And I was not in the position to show the sternness which would have nipped it all in the bud.
They'd just have complained to Mrs Goreng about me, and then there would have been hell to pay.
I would have been the scapegoat for anything bad they wrote afterwards.
I just had to grin and bear it.
So I was not sorry to see them go.
De Gaulle, who had never murmured about leaking taps or malodorous drains, remained somewhat out of favour with the group for the short time remaining.
He bore his unpopularity with the stoic dignity of a consul discovering himself amidst epigones in a barbarous province.
Just before they left, Speich called me to his room.
He had been unhappy about efflorescent damp.
But this time it was to shove fifty U S dollars into my hand.
‘Tuan,’ I said, with unfeigned feeling.
I forgave him instantly for changing rooms three times.
‘You like me to take a letter to any friend?
Or a message for anyone — anyone you know?’
I knew what he was saying.
I did trust him; I thought he was tough but straight.
But I didn't like the terrible risk.
‘No, tuan,’ I said.
He looked at me and understood.
I didn't think I saw condemnation in his eyes.
I turned at the door and said, ‘Just write the truth, tuan Hans, that will be the message.’
It was what I'd said to Bill Mabbeley.
Speich said, ‘Truth is relative, Mr Ng.
Like beauty it is in the eye of the beholder.’
TWENTY-SIX
On the seminary hill a strange edifice had been constructing over the last previous months.
First to be built was a concrete block-house, reinforced with metal struts, which it soon became apparent was a large pill-box to protect whatever it was that was going to go up.
They dug solid foundations, spending a lot of time pouring concrete into four pits.
I found it odd that they were building on the most exposed and inconvenient site on the hill, though the view was no doubt prodigious.
Then a lot of girders arrived, by the monthly cargo ship, the Lumba (meaning ‘dolphin', though there was nothing in the least sleek about its ugly, orange-streaked lines).
The lorries toiled steadily up the hill, occasionally shedding part of their loads.
One girder sailed straight over the sheer drop at a bend where Rosa used to make my heart enter my mouth, plunging for all the world like some bolt of Jehovah's vengeance a metre into the earth of the football field below where its shaft stuck up  angrily for some days.
Yet, barring the little mishaps, always a feature of Danu life, the work progressed.
After a while we realised that the girders were not a skeleton for something fancier but the thing itself.
It was some kind of an observation post or mast.
By the half-way stage it was apparent to the dimmest Danuese that it was a communications antenna.
The man of the world was not as interested as he should have been; I had become quicker in some respects, mostly practical, but the price for this had been to lose the ability to make other connections.
I thought it was military to allow the top brass at home a more direct control.
Other Danuese, particularly the ex-FAKINTIL in the malai battalions, thought it was to help planes to home in more accurately.
And we were all wrong.
It was a TV mast.
The General had decided to put malai transmissions into the island.
At a stroke he was lifting the ban on radios and newspapers.
No half-way house: from silence to incessant blare.
Mrs Goreng passed the news on to me.
She was plainly delighted.
‘Civilisation, Adolph!’ she said.
‘We are bringing Danu into the twentieth century.’
Now where had I heard that before?
But I humoured her; and, in truth, I was a little pleased myself.
I guess it was kind of a bribe to the populace from the malais; most important, it was a sign of normalisation, of assimilation.
Martinho was not pleased.
He saw it as a deliberate insult to the Church, a kind of Satanic Cross on the hill.
Nor was he at all anxious that ‘corrupting’ programmes be beamed at the impressionable population of Danu.
He thought it a punishment for the note the young cleric had tried to smuggle out via De Gaulle.
Not that he harboured any sympathy for that foolish act.
He said to me, ‘It's all over, Adolph.
We have to make the best of what we have.’
That summed up my attitude, too.
On the other hand, unlike him, I was not proud of the motto.
It seemed a poor thing to have descended to.
I knew the completion of the antenna would not go unmarked by a celebration.
By nature the malais were heavily into festivals, and this was a landmark in the history of their presence.
It was the extent of the thing which surprised me.
They were still security conscious, but it wasn't possible to  disguise the progress made on the mast.
I mean, you could see it going up on the hill above you.
They couldn't put a cloth over it, you know, like I had that night when the Corporal rushed, parang drawn, into my room at the O. T. X-Ray.
Some five days after the last girder had gone up — it was more than fifty metres high — Mrs Goreng came to me, eyes alight and finger on her lips.
‘Adolph, he is coming!
The big man!’
After a few seconds' thought I realised that she meant their President, that is the former General who was dictator with the continuing consent of their other commanders.
Well, thought I to myself, isn't this something.
That put the cork in the bottle, so far as the Danuese were concerned.
Mrs Goreng said, ‘It's a secret, Adolph.’
I could see she was feeling she shouldn't have told me, but I knew she trusted me better than anyone else.
More than she did the other army wives.
‘Nonya,’ I said, ‘you can rely on me.’
‘Oh, I know that, Adolph,’ she said, half-apologising for hurting my delicate faggot feelings.
It was a strange relationship we had, half-slave, half-best friend and confidant.
She went the whole way now: ‘He'll pull the switch for the first television transmission to Danu, and that will also be the moment Danu is absorbed into the republic as the fifty-eighth province.
The whole proceedings will be filmed here and transmitted simultaneously all over the archipelago.’
‘Holy shit!’
‘I beg your pardon, Adolph?’
‘Nothing, nonya, I was just surprised a little.’
‘Things are changing, Adolph.
You know, something can begin badly but end well.
Everyone makes mistakes.’
Mistakes!
The atrocious deeds they'd committed!
But I remembered who and where I was.
What she'd said was the nearest to regret and apology I ever heard from a malai.
So I bowed my head.
They couldn't keep it airtight, of course.
The extra security alone showed that an important event was brewing.
Personally, I'd not have made any heavyweight preparations but avoided giving any clues until the last moment.
But that was just the way I'd learned to think in the mountains.
I didn't think like a malai regular.
Two days before the President's visit they began to dress the mast like a Christmas tree.
Long strings of coloured bulbs wound  back and forth through the girders.
They fixed a podium, stands, and some banners.
The day of the opening of Danu to the emissions of the outside world, a couple of ancient boats gurgled alongside the wharf, bearing a crowd of stage extras from the outlying, historically malai islands.
They were making a bundle of money these days, one way or another.
The Danuese allowed to participate were few in number and rigorously selected, mostly the same ‘chiefs’ who had voted for assimilation into the malai republic in the show referendum of a few weeks back.
Well, they marched them to the top of the hill and they marched them down again.
And when they were down they were down, and when they were up they were up, and when they were only half-way up they were neither up nor down.
It was nothing; it was a bluff; it was a dress rehearsal.
It was all of those things.
I doffed my cap to Goreng and his superiors.
They had wanted to lure FAKINTIL into showing its hand.
And nothing had happened.
They weren't quite so stupid as to believe wholly their own propaganda.
This had been a safety-check.
Thirty-six hours later the Big Man himself arrived by Air Malai DC-10.
No announcement.
We saw the big white bird bank over the town, and then land at the new military airfield.
I don't believe Mrs Goreng had known either, until she saw the jet.
You never saw such a frenzy as her frantic rush to dress herself, me pulling outfits from the wardrobe, she rejecting them as fast as they landed on the bed, trying on and discarding until she stood there in a stew of irritation and indecision in nothing but bra and panties.
Well, that was one for the album: the ex-FAKINTIL sapper together with the malai Colonel's wife, half-naked in her boudoir.
Finally, she left for the airfield in a pale-green safari suit, which marked her a soldier's wife but distinguished her from the lesser spouses.
‘You look fine,’ I reassured her.
‘Only fine?’ she remonstrated, half-seriously.
After she had roared off, it was one of those days when I had the house to myself.
The other servants were at market or running errands.
On these days I never snooped.
The idea of breaking into the Colonel's den never occurred to me — it was just too plain terrifying.
Instead, I cut back some of the more boisterous forest plants in my garden.
It was a riotous success now.
You expected  Tarzan to come swinging through the bushes after Jane.
I guess I was fairly content — bored sometimes, but happy to be alive and eating properly.
All that would change.
I wasn't on the hill that evening but Mrs Goreng sent me to one of the big communal TVs they had set up on poles in the Praça.
I half-hoped, half-dreaded the mast would go up in sparks and a bang when the Big Man pulled the lever; that FAKINTIL had found a way to wrap half a dozen shearing charges around the legs.
But no; watching in the big square, simultaneous with the lights suddenly sparkling like unsupported, autonomous constellations way above us, the fuzz of the TV screen resolved into the big, broad, beaming face of the malai President.
There were three malai personnel carriers in the centre of the Praça and a company of troops at one end.
But the revelation of the Big Man's round features above us might have been the full moon appearing to a pack of wolves, for the bolder souls watching started to bay abuse in Danuese.
This was incomprehensible to the malai captain, though he was left in no doubt of the crowd's sentiment, for he frowned and fingered his white baton.
It was a difficult choice for him.
A year earlier and maybe even yesterday, he'd have been more likely to fire into the crowd than order tear-gas or a charge.
But tonight of all nights they had to act against their immediate inclinations.
Firing in the square below would not have impressed the President overly.
And the General and Goreng would likely have shot the itchy-fingered culprit themselves.
Crowds possess great wit; the group throws up nicknames of an aptness and ingenuity the clever individual by himself could never invent.
So it was now.
We knew we were safe, so long as they couldn't spot individuals and target them for later, and in the darkness the Danuese let the malais know what they thought of them.
Someone sang ‘O, Mighty Mountain!’
And other voices joined her.
It wasn't until two a.m. that I saw the Gorengs.
I didn't spoil their evening by mentioning what had happened in the Praça.
She was glowing; bright-eyed and excited.
I think she'd had something to drink.
And the Colonel was smiling.
The President had congratu-lated him.
The First Lady hadn't been there or Mrs Goreng would have been reintroduced to her.
But she had flirted with the Big Man.
At least that's what she hinted to me.
And the Colonel had  grinned and encouraged it.
‘What about you, Adolph?
Did you like the Tv?’
‘It was wonderful, nonya.’
I was lying, of course.
Most of the transmission had been pictures of malai soldiers back home in malai-land, strumming guitars in their uniforms, singing with their arms round each other, carrying kids, helping old ladies.
It made you want to puke.
‘So that's the first time you've seen television?
It's the first time he's seen television, Colonel.’
Now I could tell she was really quite drunk.
I wasn't even offended; just disgusted with her.
The pictures others carry of you — it's not even funny.
Well, the TV we had wasn't our own.
We were just picking up the malai national programme.
There was no studio in Danu, not even for a little fifteen-minute slot on Sundays.
I know Martinho had been hoping for a religious programme.
He didn't even get that.
Every evening there'd be jostling in the Praça to get the nearest pitch to one of the big sets.
This wasn't North American type viewing in the privacy of your own living-room but a communal participation.
The audience no longer heckled the malais but enjoyed the programmes, calling out comments, arguing with each other.
And the malais on duty, in white helmets, white gloves, and white gaiters, they also hung around the back of the crowds to sneak a look, instead of doing a beat of the whole square.
What a great success it all was.
Three weeks later the Gorengs' son arrived.
I believe the Colonel now thought things so pacified that it was safe and expedient to bring his oldest child out for a vacation.
It put his dick where his mouth was, if you'll be kind enough to excuse the expression.
He hoped it would be his last sharp-end posting; that he'd get a nice political appointment with the chance to make a lot of bucks.
Before then, he wanted Junior to see Dad's moment of glory.
He wanted him to see his Father in a shooting war.
Goreng, I should have said, in common with his peers, lagged fifty years behind the rest of the century in his sense of the male sex.
I'd realised that long ago, but it took the arrival of the boy to truly bring it home.
We flunkeys were all at the front door to receive the family from the airfield.
Master Goreng was eleven and a half years old.
‘This is Kaptan, Adolph,’ his mother said.
‘And, Kaptan, shake hands with Adolph.’
The Colonel looked indulgently on all this.
‘Is he a servant, or what?’
Kaptan asked and, in malai, I said, ‘I am the servant of your father and mother, Kaptan, and your servant, too.’
When I say that ‘Kaptan’ did not mean ‘captain' but meant ‘hawk’perhaps I have told you all you need to know about the Colonel's attitude to his son's upbringing and his expectations of him.
If those primitive attitudes hadn't also been the determining factor in my own fate I would have found it as ludicrous and pitiful as I do now.
In fact, Kaptan was not such a bad boy.
It wasn't his fault that powerful and doting parents had systematically brought out the worst in him.
He was as capricious and manipulative as his mother could be on her bad days and as violent and arbitrary as his father.
Then, at moments, he could also manifest his child's natural sweetness.
As Raoul would not have been ashamed to put it, he was like a wild young colt.
However, these were not to be total days of vacation for him.
Both the Colonel and Mrs were insistent that he do well at school — his father had the elite military academy at Randung in mind for him and maybe America later, too.
Mrs, for her part, didn't want a culture-less idiot for progeny but someone she could talk to as an adult: i.e., she didn't want someone too like his father.
The homework lessons he'd brought with him didn't find a great deal of favour in her eyes.
There was quite a quantity of useless crap in there, based on the malai five constitutional principles of justice, tolerance etc.
Mrs Goreng didn't want Sonny wasting his time on that nonsense; she knew it was a pile of meaningless shit, though she couldn't actually say so.
Kaptan was to apply himself to something useful.
I would give him English lessons.
Mrs Goreng presented the idea like she was doing me a big favour, giving me the chance to teach the future malai President.
‘What's wrong?’ she enquired, noting my lack of alacrity.
‘You don't want to?’
‘Oh, no, nonya,’ I hastened to say, ‘I would be honoured.
It's  just that I don't think my English is so good any more.
It was years since I was in America.’
‘Nonsense.
Dr Smithson told me it was perfect, much better than Herr Speich's or even poor Mr MacKenzie's.’
Did he now, I thought.
‘Anyway, I thought it was Canada where you studied.’
‘You are right, nonya, it was Canada.’
So that was how I came to sit at the Gorengs' dining-table with Master Goreng and Longman's standard conversational texts before us.
Mrs Goreng had not wanted Kaptan to learn American English.
‘Don't worry,’ I said, ‘I was taught by a Balliol man.’
Mrs Goreng didn't ask what that was, and I am damn sure she had no idea.
At first, Kaptan was unwilling to give his attention.
He threw one of the books on the floor.
I resolved to assert my authority from the beginning, or I would be trampled underfoot by even this most junior member of the Goreng clan.
‘Pick it up,’ I said.
‘Why?
You can't tell me to.’
‘Because if you don't, I'll tell your mother.’
Kaptan did not look impressed.
I thought again.
‘You pick it up, or I'll say you wet your bed.’
‘But I haven't.’
‘No, but I'll make it wet.’
‘I'll tell Ma.’
‘She won't believe you.
And I'll also let a spider into your room.
There.’
Kaptan digested this.
Lies and blackmail, overt blackmail, were new to him from an adult.
So, after all, I was educating him.
I said, ‘Be a good boy and we can do our lessons at the beach.
Now pick the book up.
That's right.
Then we have made a new start.’
I got Mrs Goreng's agreement on the lessons, after an initial wavering.
‘It's conversation, nonya, not grammar,’ I argued.
‘Let it take place in a natural environment.’
‘All right, but don't tell Colonel Goreng.
And Adolph…’
‘Yes?’
‘You must not, you know, touch Kaptan.’
‘Nonya! 'I exclaimed — and my outrage was genuine.
‘Oh, all right, I'm sorry, Adolph.’
So to the beach Kaptan and I would go, or walk around the garden, pulling out weeds, me trimming back the undergrowth while he handed spare tools up the ladder.
All the time we would talk in English.
‘The men who bring the water, Kaptan.
Not the mens which bring the waters.’
He'd grin and refuse to repeat the correct words, but he'd get it right next time he used them.
That wondersome facility of the young.
Later, I heard Mrs Goreng coaxing Kaptan to say a few foreign sentences in front of his father.
‘You see,’ I overheard her say through the half-closed door, ‘I told you he could be useful.’
This semi-audible remark made me uneasy — that there had been debate at all on my utility — so much so that I wished I had never heard it.
I tried to convince myself that she had said, ‘I told you it would be useful,’ referring to the accomplishment rather than the teacher.
I wondered if it was so smart to allow Kaptan to make such good progress.
There was another problem: he was becoming quite attached to me, in the way that children-especially the privileged children of the East do become attached to their servants.
It is more common with female servants and younger children but far from unknown with older kids like Kaptan.
I think the problem was he couldn't get close enough to his father at an important time in his life; he was frightened of the Colonel, and I don't blame him.
He was at that hero-worshipping age.
He particularly admired his mother's one-armed chauffeur.
This soldier had let him load his pistol and point it empty.
I thought how Kaptan would have loved Arsenio.
Now that would have been interesting.
But, in the absence of anyone more suitable, he transferred his attachment to the unlikely figure of yours truly.
What was it Maria had called me?
‘One of life's scoutmasters’?
I was Unca Donald and I had a new junior woodchuck.
TWENTY — SEVEN
The mast had been up three months and Kaptan still had one week of his vacation left when Osvaldo made his move.
True to form, he attacked at an unexpected moment.
He chose daylight.
Six years ago he'd attacked the town by darkness, the night he'd stolen Maria and me.
I guess he figured the malais would be less alert in the torpor of the mid-afternoon, while darkness was still not so far away that it couldn't cloak his escape.
I don't know if he realised it either, but the Danuese would not have taken kindly to having their programme wiped off the air-waves midway through.
Mrs Goreng was at a mah-jong party at the c. -in-c. 's residence.
At half past three Kaptan and I should have been reading from one of the textbooks but, in fact, I was lying in the Colonel's hammock while Kaptan, with his inexhaustible energy, was trying to catch frogs.
Four sharp explosions rent the air overhead with their tearing cracks.
I had my feet on the ground as the echoes came back.
I hadn't had to think.
The old reactions died hard, if they would ever perish at all.
And I knew at once what had happened.
I ran into the house and upstairs into Mrs Goreng's dressing-room, which commanded the best view.
On the seminary hill was no more mast.
Just a settling cloud of dust.
It looked as if it had gone straight over the side and into the valley.
‘Cordtex,’ I said to myself.
‘What is that, Adolph?’
‘Nothing to concern you, young Master.’
I began to think of other things.
‘Come away from the window, Kaptan.’
‘Why?’
‘Just do as I say.’
‘Is there going to be fighting?’
‘I hope not.’
‘I hope so.’
The other servants were twittering like Danu sparrows down-stairs.
I ordered them to fasten all windows — much good that would do — draw the curtains, and stay out of sight.
Myself, I peered out of the front gate, and acknowledged the two white-helmeted sentries in their box.
They looked on edge.
I decided to keep away from them.
Then I let the dogs off their chains.
A few minutes later came the first gun-fire.
It was some distance away.
I found the staff lying on the floor.
Kaptan was wearing a plastic G I'S helmet and putting a roll of caps into a toy gun.
I took the hat off his head and placed the gun in a drawer.
‘Stay quiet and everything will be all right,’ I told the staff.
I fervently trusted that would be the case.
As usual, the sound of the shooting gave you no clear picture of what was happening; the bursts, however heavy, and the ragged, irregular intervals between them were quite meaningless.
I thought that if FAKINTIL were confining themselves to bringing the mast down, then they would be just escaping now, shooting their way out of town.
But the reports were getting louder.
I hoped it was my imagination.
There was nothing imaginary about the shooting which erupted in the street outside.
We all stuck our noses that much deeper into the Colonel's Sumbanese rugs.
The maid crept under a wicker sofa.
There followed an explosion, and another a few seconds later.
The windows shook.
Grenades, I was certain.
The firing stopped.
I could hear the gate being kicked.
It seemed to resist.
Three evenly spaced single shots.
It creaked open, and the sound was worse than the bangs.
I lay like a fool, my heart pounding into the floor.
The front door opened.
I had forgotten to lock that.
Then I became angry.
And even as I did I was astounded at myself.
I wasn't angry with the attackers, not with the malais, not even with my stupid self but with the whole situation.
I knew that if I did not act, things were set so that we would be annihilated with no time for questions or replies.
The grenade would come in and then they'd spray what was left of us.
I got up, without excessive trepidation, and opened the door of the room.
The others just looked at me as they lay.
I called out quickly, ‘Don't shoot, don't shoot.
There's no one armed.
I am a Danuese.’
Silence followed.
I could imagine them looking at each other.
I said again, my voice a little higher, ‘There are no malais here, just us servants.
Don't hurt us.’ get the hell out of it.
I accompanied them into the street where they rejoined the boy who'd been standing look-out.
The sentry box was burning on its side from the phosphorus grenade they'd posted into it.
There were two bodies, one helmet, still pristine white, lying in the road.
We trotted along the side, under the shelter of the trees.
It was still a very pleasant suburb.
The Corporal had Kaptan by the arm.
Once Kaptan turned to look at me, his eyes full of appeal, but he stumbled and the Corporal pulled him roughly up.
Dumb kid.
What was I supposed to do?
We were heading into town again.
I caught the Corporal up and pointed this out.
He was a Bacalhau man, of course; didn't know this part of Danu at all .
‘Bear right here,’ I told him.
My breathing was not too good — I'd led a soft life these past months.
‘You can get to the high ground this way without going into town again.’
The two boys agreed; they were very nervous.
In their place I would be too.
It was strange to see them grown older, and more familiar with the Corporal, whom they'd always feared, than me, their old mentor.
Now I led the way — which was not so bright, after all.
I'd be first to catch it.
And I hoped the Corporal had noticed I'd said ‘you can get to high ground’ and not ‘we can get to high ground’.
I now knew the last thing in the whole world I wanted was to go into the mountains again with FAKINTIL.
I'd rather be a slave in comfort than endure those conditions of freedom.
Until now I'd never consciously posed that choice to myself.
I might even have griped about my existence with the Gorengs and thought wistfully of alternatives.
That life seemed sweet enough now.
The Corporal and his boys were armed with M-16s, not our old G3s.
I guess they must have used all the NATO calibre ammo by now and have replenished with 5.56 mm weapons, either supplied by deserters in the Danuese battalions or captured.
More likely the former.
The Corporal was also carrying his trusty parang.
I figured they'd infiltrated into Danu in ethnic costume, though their appearance was that of wild men from the outer reaches.
The bizarre thing was, I don't think they realised this.
There was no one around.
The townspeople had learned the hard way that curiosity killed the cat — you stayed indoors if there was trouble.
We padded through those quiet, leafy roads in utter  silence.
There'd been no shooting for a long while.
That I didn't like.
A little further on the quiet was broken by the rumble of a truck.
We scrambled into the drainage ditch.
‘Kaptan,’ I whispered into his ear, ‘please stay quiet.’
‘That's right,’ the Corporal growled, not understanding the words but knowing very well their import, ‘keep your face shut.’
He put his dirty hand over the frightened boy's mouth.
Kaptan resisted, because it was unpleasant, but I shook my head and he subsided.
The vehicle passed the end of the road but it didn't turn toward us.
It was an armoured personnel carrier with a 20 mm weapon fit in a turret.
We came out of the ditch, moving now with a lot more urgency.
Very soon after, a file of malai troops passed at the other end of the road.
We dove again.
I was starting to get that unreal sense, the dream feeling I'd had on invasion day all that time ago; the idea that it wasn't really me who was going through all this.
For sure, I was terribly confused.
With all my heart I hated the malais.
Yet I didn't feel part, either, of this desperate band, fleeing through these quiet suburbs.
I wanted to find myself a quiet corner and curl up in it.
Just as we scrambled out of the ditch again, one of the woodchucks dropping his black rifle and barely managing to grab the sling as it slid back into the foul water, a straggler from the malai patrol crossed the road a hundred and fifty metres away, looked to his left and saw us.
He didn't react at all strongly.
In fact, I think he was turning to look the other way.
Maybe the disguise was better at distance than I was prepared to believe.
Unfortunately, the boy who had dropped his rifle now brought it smartly to his shoulder and loosed off three shots, incidentally missing with all of them.
The malai jumped a mile-you could see he'd nearly had a heart-attack — before heading for the ground, shouting our number and whereabouts to his friends.
As we tumbled into the ditch again, half the contents of his magazine went overhead, knocking paint, rust, and sparks off the gate of the house behind.
We scurried along the ditch, doubled over.
It was good protection, but for how long?
The Corporal stopped, ordering the boy who'd fired to go back to the spot and engage the malais as they came down the road.
You got us into this, was my uncharitable thought, now you hold the fort while we climb out of it.
The boy looked shit-scared, but obeyed.
From the other end of the road came a truly dismaying sound: the powerful motor of an APC being revved.
The Corporal's face said it all.
I wasn't prepared to die in a ditch, though.
I shouted, ‘Over the wall, on each other 's shoulders.’
Behind us, the boy who was our rearguard had opened fire, in well-schooled three-round bursts.
I pushed Kaptan up the bank with my palm in the seat of his pants.
Under the circumstances I think his mother would have permitted it.
We were at the corner of an ‘L’ formed by the two roads down which the malais were coming.
I could see the boy holding the post would be flanked by the APC which would be able to put in fire straight down the line of the ditch.
I took the Corporal's rifle and crouched down.
He was extraordinarily light on my shoulders.
His black toes flexed and he was up.
It was a good thing there was no broken glass embedded in the concrete.
I passed his M-16 up.
Then Kaptan baulked at the wall.
I shook my head: ‘Your father's people can't see who you are.
They'll shoot you, too.’
He hauled himself up, refusing the Corporal's arm.
I was damned if I was going to be last.
I gestured to the remaining woodchuck to crouch.
He staggered as I clambered on, but stayed upright.
The Corporal was still on the wall, all credit to him, legs astride as if he was riding a motorbike.
He offered his right leg to the woodchuck.
The firing from our rearguard had stopped.
Holding the wall carefully, I leaned across and saw he was not dead but changing magazines.
‘Please, Senhor Ng.’
It was the boy under me.
I took his rifle.
I was surprised he remembered my name.
He took a run at the wall and missed the Corporal's leg.
Panic welled up in his eyes.
The Corporal swore as only he knew how.
‘Run up the wall, son of a bitch, and grab my foot.’
The boy's run up was limited by the ditch behind, but this time he managed to plant a foot on the wall and grab the Corporal.
As he came to the parapet, the APC turned down the road.
I dropped off the wall.
Simultaneous with that, the malais opened fire, hitting the boy still on the wall.
The impact of the rounds knocked him over on top of Kaptan.
I could hear Kaptan whimper  as he pushed the dead woodchuck frantically from him.
When he stood there was blood all over the white shirt his mother had dressed him in that morning.
Still sitting as if he was in the saddle, the Corporal loosed off a defiant burst, then swung over and down to us.
He'd timed it right, for the whole of the top of the wall then disintegrated in a shower of fragments and dust.
The noise of the 20 mm cannon was deafening.
We made it round the side of the house, unlocked the back door and got into the street behind.
No malais.
I was aware of the firing in the road we'd left, mostly the muted thunder of the APC'S automatic cannon drowning any small-arms fire.
I was leading now, the Corporal hopelessly lost.
I put fifty metres of road behind us, then turned left down a footpath, figuring the best thing was to jink cross country, not lay a straight path.
I looked behind.
The Corporal had two M-16s by the carrying handles in his right and was holding Kaptan's hand with the left.
It looked like Father taking Sonny for a walk.
I slung the woodchuck's rifle on my own shoulder.
It was so light, compared to the heavy duty G3, that I'd been able to forget I was carrying it.
It felt familiar — the reassurance of a weapon on the shoulder.
I assumed there were a few rounds left in the magazine.
The firing behind us had stopped.
I guess the boy had been no match for the APC.
Into a garden we plunged, across a low wall, into another.
‘Where are we?’ the Corporal asked hoarsely.
‘There is a main road soon, which goes up to the pass, but it has no cover.’
The Corporal digested this.
I had a closer look at him.
He didn't look well, his eyeballs were an unhealthy yellow.
I wondered if he had hepatitis.
The era of Maria was long past for them.
But I thought also — this is not the first time I have fled for my life with this man, who is brave if he is also stupid.
Kaptan seemed in better shape than either of us.
‘You are doing well, Kaptan,’ I told him, which was a strange thing to say, when this was no co-operative venture but a kidnapping in which his complicity and enthusiasm were hardly assured.
But he brightened at these words of encouragement, for their kindly tone more than their meaning.
The Corporal said, ‘We will have to lie low and wait for dark.
It won't be long.’
‘Here?’
‘Why not?’
‘No, O K, it just seems strange — someone's garden.’
He shrugged.
I don't think he had any idea what I meant.
Cover was cover.
I was glad to stay and rest at first, but after a few minutes I became unbearably nervous.
Movement acted as a kind of therapy.
When we heard dogs barking the Corporal's nerve cracked too.
Away we went, the Corporal talking about getting into a drainage ditch to hide our scent.
It was a bad move.
The roads were swarming with malais.
We were now on the glossy blacktop that led towards the army laundry, Rosa's old creche.
We got under a flat little concrete bridge that was the driveway into someone's garage.
From its shelter the Corporal and I stuck our snouts up.
A squad was coming our way.
We got into the shadows.
The Corporal was gasping.
For some reason he was more scared than I was, and I was very frightened.
I guess the surroundings were more familiar to me.
He held the parang to Kaptan's throat, drawing a finger across his own.
I could see his diseased eyeballs glowing in the gloom.
Poor Kaptan.
I heard the malais' boots overhead.
We held our breath.
They went on, without breaking step.
After a few minutes we all started to move along the ditch.
The sun was now down but there was still plenty of light.
We crawled out of the drain, saw the coast clear, and ran down the road together.
Rosa's old place was a couple of hundred metres away.
After that, it was straight on and up to the hill pass.
We trotted on.
Just as we were coming up to the laundry, Kaptan broke free of the Corporal and ran down the side of the building.
The Corporal was after him at once.
There was a lot of washing on the lines, which they had to dodge around.
Kaptan tripped on a green hosepipe, and went flying forwards on his face, and the Corporal, trying to stop too quickly, also skidded and fell on his side, the two rifles he was carrying sliding across the bald lawn.
He drew his parang, lining Kaptan up with his clenched left fist for the blade blow with the right.
I was behind a dripping blanket folded in half over the line.
I shouted, ‘Stop!’ and almost immediately pressed the trigger of the M -16.
Nothing happened.
The Corporal looked at me in amazement.
I also froze.
Then he dropped the parang to fumble in his sarong.
I looked for the bolt of the gun desperately, ham-fisted with the unfamiliar weapon.
The Corporal drew a pistol and fired twice.
The bullets thumped into the wet blanket in front of me, making it jump like there was a bear inside.
I cleared the gun and fired at the Corporal, the burst hitting him in the chest and knocking him backwards into a line of sheets which he brought winding down around him.
My hands were shaking.
I put the gun down and passed my hand over my eyes.
All the birds flew screeching out of the trees as the shots echoed over the wasteland.
I stepped round the side of the blanket-there were no holes in it- and picked Kaptan up.
He was crying.
I put my arms around him.
‘It is all right now,’ I said.
‘It is all right now.’
Over his shoulder I looked at the sheets covering the Corporal, the bloodstain widening.
He lay motionless.
There were running feet.
As I knelt, I put Kaptan in front of me, holding him round the waist, my chin on his shoulder.
‘Tell them who you are, Kaptan.
Be quick.’
And he didn't let me down.
As the malai officer ran round the side of the building, Kaptan shouted, ‘I am the son of Colonel Goreng — don't shoot!’
I think he was pretending we were in a TV movie.
We were lucky it was the officer.
He was quick with the situation, turning round at once and checking the men behind.
Otherwise we'd have got blown away.
Even so, the cherry berets threw me to the ground, kicking me in the ribs as they frisked me for weapons.
‘Don't hurt Adolph!’
Kaptan cried.
‘Don't hurt him!’
‘I've saved the boy's life,’ I said desperately.
The answer was a kick on the eyebrow which I almost mistook for being shot.
‘No!’
Kaptan cried.
He broke free of the lieutenant and threw himself on top of me.
I was on this side of consciousness, just, feeling very sick, with a huge head.
‘He saved me!’
The cherry berets pulled me to my feet.
I said thickly, ‘Help me, Kaptan, tell them.’
The lieutenant was leading him away.
‘Don't leave me, Kaptan,’ I begged the little boy.
The lieutenant turned and he said, ‘Bring him.’
They were the best two words I ever heard in my life.
TWENTY-EIGHT
So much happened so fast in the next few days.
I'd thought I was going to rest on my laurels.
I thought we were in for some stability.
But that had just been the beginning of the turmoil.
Physical disruption, fear, the adrenalin events — they were only part of it.
What was more disturbing, and could never be truly exorcised, was the way a whole history of friendship, a lifetime of amity, could be nullified in a moment.
It seemed what mattered, what defined, was the acute moment at the end, not the long, unfeigned relationships which had subsisted before.
I am, as you know, not a religious man, but my version of a prayer is to contemplate those placider days, as if by doing it often enough, telling the beads in my mind, I can confer upon them a greater significance, sufficient to obliterate the terrible moment.
The moment, I guess, of a powerful but partial truth.
I was taken straight back to our house.
Kaptan insisted we go there.
The malai officer had wanted to take us to a superior.
He wanted to pass us up the line of responsibility.
But Kaptan would have none of it.
The pettish, wilful side of him came out, the Colonel's spoiled son.
I was very glad to see that side of him again, I can tell you, and gladder still that I had not succeeded yet in eradicating it.
Lost in the malai chain of command, shuffled round from captor to captor, I would not have given a great deal for my chances.
They'd have terminated me just to get rid of a nuisance.
‘You take us home,’ Kaptan said stoutly, ‘or my father will be very angry.’
His mother, too, the formidable Mrs Goreng, I thought (but was too wise to compromise my chances by saying).
She'll rip you to pieces if you keep her cub from her one minute longer than necessary.
Eventually, the young officer weighed up the pros and contras and made the correct decision, for him and for yours truly, by delivering us to our front door.
There was a roadblock set up with no less than three machine-guns.
We got through this in no time.
As we skimmed along the last hundred metres, I said to the  lieutenant, ‘Tuan, have you something the boy can put over his shirt?
His mother will faint if she sees him like this.’
You know, I didn't give a shit what fit Mrs Goreng would throw.
I wanted to make certain I was leaving the jeep with Kaptan — I wanted to establish my connection with the family, give a hint of trouble I could solve (without making it look like a threat), and put myself into the frame without a hint of asserting myself.
The lieutenant thought a bit, then nodded.
He had a hard, ruthless young face.
I think if I'd opened my mouth to say something irrelevant or personal to myself I would have been in jeopardy.
He passed over a camo poncho, which I told Kaptan to put on, after I removed his blood-stained shirt.
I could see the boy was thrilled.
I held on to his hand as we went through the gate.
Mrs ran through the door.
She flung herself on him.
‘Oh, Kaptan, Kaptan,’ she kept saying.
I thought she could have been a little more original than that; I mean, she was a journalist.
The Colonel came home briefly, just before midnight.
She'd got through a call to him on the radio-phone that Kaptan was safe.
He hadn't had to suffer as much as her — I don't so much mean that, like fishes, his pain threshold was higher than a human being's (although I don't doubt that was the case) as that he'd been aware that his son was missing for a shorter period than his wife.
Mrs had got home in her jeep with just chauffeur and one extra bodyguard, defying the pleas of the other wives, some half an hour after Kaptan and I had left with the Corporal, but she hadn't been able to get the Colonel on the military net for nearly two hours after that.
Whether it was the high volume of radio traffic, FAKINTIL sabotage, or his underlings keeping it from him, I'll never know.
Mrs, I think, suspected the latter and it showed in a permanent coldness to them thereafter.
So he had only had to cope with the loss for slightly over half an hour.
I was mean-minded enough to wish it had been for longer.
He wasn't so effusively grateful as I could have wished.
Mrs, my friend, Mrs Goreng was all over me after she'd sobbed a bit over Kaptan.
He had to tell the story umpteen times, getting a little further into the tale each time, whereupon she'd ask to be taken from the beginning again.
By the time Colonel Goreng brought us into his den, we'd got quite good at telling it together, feeding each other cues and lines.
I liked it  when Kaptan described his moment of deliverance, the point at which I tried to shoot my old comrade in arms in the back, then the desperate fumble to see who'd get their shots off first.
‘Ka-prap!’ went Kaptan, imitating the snarl of the M-16 and spinning sideways to the carpet.
I wanted the Colonel to hear that; he couldn't hear it too many times for my liking.
How I had gloriously saved his son and heir.
I was even glad now I'd had trouble with the M-16; didn't want him thinking I was too handy with weapons.
‘So he shot at you first?’ the Colonel enquired, trying to get the whole picture straight to his satisfaction.
I didn't want him thinking I'd only fired in self-defence.
I explained how I'd attempted to fire at the Corporal as Kaptan lay on the ground and how the gun had malfunctioned; it would be more accurate to say I'd been first to aim but the Corporal had got his shots off first.
It sounded like some cowboy duel.
Most of all, the Colonel was intrigued that the wet blanket had absorbed the energy of the pistol shots.
He made a moue but said, ‘No, I believe you.
Allah was with you.’
‘He was with me,’ I agreed.
The Colonel could only spend half an hour with us.
When he went he shook my hand.
That night I didn't sleep too well.
It wasn't just adrenalin.
I wasn't allowing myself to think too much, but below the conscious level all kinds of adjustments were going on in my head.
A great deal worse was to come.
In the next two days everyone in Danu was put under terms of strict confinement.
No one was allowed out.
The cherry berets made meticulous house-searches, even digging up the floors of some places, going into roof spaces with torches.
Everyone had to produce an identity card, including those actually in the internment camps!
I was in some doubt as to whether the Corporal had stumbled upon us accidentally on his way out of the town or if he'd been deliberately tasked.
If he'd just been trying to clear the hell out, then it meant there were probably other FAKINTIL escapers at large who hadn't been able to make it back to the mountains either.
I had a feeling they'd been blocked off by the malais and hadn't been able to go by the quickest route they wanted.
I didn't like to ask the Colonel, even with the credit balance I'd now established.
The attack had happened Thursday.
Monday, the Colonel came back to lunch with a big grin on his face.
He couldn't hide his satisfaction.
But he shut the door of the dining-room, so we flunkeys couldn't hear what he said to his wife.
He also sent Kaptan out of the room.
Kaptan, big-eyed, tried to eavesdrop like the rest of us.
That evening a jeep, that jeep, came to the house.
I will tell you I was not happy to drive into the night.
Still less to see the flood-lit walls of the prison.
I thought: surely even he wouldn't kill the rescuer of his son?
Two cherry berets took me through the first gate.
As we went down some steps and along a dark passageway, open to the sky, I recalled Maria's visit to this terrible place, the night they'd had Raoul here, the night Arsenio had wanted to kill Raoul and Osvaldo had forgiven him.
I wondered who would forgive Goreng.
I blinked in the big exercise yard.
It was like day, except for the silveriness of the light.
There were three APCs in the yard, with their light cannon trained on the far wall.
There also stood four machine-guns fixed on sustained fire-mounts.
All this bristling weaponry was aimed at a line of about forty men standing against the wall.
Goreng was with some junior officers at the side of all this, talking to a captain who had a clip-board, with corded pencil dangling.
More than the heavy weapons, this banal accoutrement of a rudimentary accountancy scared me shitless.
I knew what I'd witnessed last time I'd seen one of those in the possession of a malai officer.
I then received two shocks in quick succession.
From the open door of the nearest APC, three white men emerged.
They were dressed in military olive greens.
Despite the heat, one of them, who had bright red hair, wore a sweater with cloth patches on the shoulders and elbows and still shivered violently.
None of them had headgear or bore any sign of rank or unit.
The one in the sweater looked pretty sick.
After them came Rebus, the Devil himself.
Well, I'd say seeing the white men was the biggest surprise and Rebus the worst shock.
My heart seemed to stop beating, then kick reluctantly into life again, like those temperamental old generators of colonial Danu.
I put my head down, slowed my walk to try to put my escort in front of me.
Very foolish, as it merely postponed  the inevitable and could serve only to irritate my guards.
Martinho came out of a door in the ‘administration’ wing of the prison, walking very quickly.
He was wearing dark sunglasses; why, I don't know.
Behind him came the c. -in-c. and his staff.
Goreng said to me, ‘We can use your help tonight.’
When Rebus joined the group I began to tremble nearly as badly as the red-haired foreigner.
Rebus didn't appear to recognise me; but that didn't mean anything.
Goreng said, ‘These men are going to approach one at a time.
If you know them as FAKINTIL you will identify them at once.’
‘Where have they come from?
Are you sure they are FAKINTIL?’
‘That is for you to tell us,’ Goreng said.
He was less severe with me than he would have been normally, but I saw I could not expect great leniency from him.
I imagined they'd picked up their prisoners in sweeps of the town.
Anyone without I D papers was in serious trouble.
‘By the way,’ Goreng said, ‘there will be two of you on this parade.’
He gestured to Martinho.
‘You will be checking on each other.’
I looked uneasily at Martinho, who no doubt wasn't too happy either, except I couldn't see his eyes.
I thought we were going to walk down the line of men, touch them on the shoulder maybe, like some cop programme on TV, but that wasn't it at all.
Martinho and I were separated, then put back to back at about twenty metres, very much like pistol duellists from the old time.
In fact, for one crazy moment I thought this was what Rebus had in mind.
The suspects were then brought up by number, a single man at a time (and as I heard them begin with ‘one’, the skin of my neck tightened in anticipation of gunfire which never came).
Martinho saw them first, before they came along to me.
That way, you see, we couldn't collude (assuming we wished to) in passing through people who were known to us.
We had no way of reading the other's mind.
And if one identified someone the other had let through, the culprit was doomed.
To be safe, you had to finger everyone.
And, it occurred to yours truly, even then you weren't safe; for you might genuinely forget a face the other was able to remember.
Still worse, he could imagine he recognised a face which wasn't a FAKINTIL man at all.
I began to wish it wasn't Martinho who was my partner in this deadly game of doubles.
I didn't trust his nerve.
His imagination might  start to play tricks on him.
And in all this system, these rudimentary ploys, these crude but, oh, so effective mind games, I discerned the hand not of Goreng but of Rebus.
From behind, the first prisoner was brought up.
He was an old countryman with a betel-ravaged mouth, the cancerous tongue sticking helplessly out like a crimson prickly pear.
I shook my head.
The cherry berets dragged the bewildered old montagnard away with a brusqueness which inspired no confidence in me for his future prospects.
Next up was a hard-looking fellow I remembered as one of the surviving Africa veterans, a prodigal who'd been seduced by Martinho but had redeemed himself by daring and sacrifice under Osvaldo — I was surprised he was still alive.
From his demeanour, fierce and uncompromising, I knew he'd already been denounced by Martinho.
I nodded, and he spat in my face.
The malais removed him without punishing him especially; I guess he was permitted to spit on me.
The next was a city man, a former civil service clerk who'd been in FAKOUM from the early days.
He looked scared to death, and he had reason to be for he was doubly identified by both of us.
And so they processed, the defiant and the hopeless, the resigned and those who pleaded with a silent desperation.
At length I heard urgent but whispered conversation to the rear.
I was able to resist the temptation to turn.
A tall, luxuriantly bearded man, with steady eyes stood before me.
It was Osvaldo.
‘Who is this?’
Rebus asked.
For him, that was a mistake.
His eagerness betrayed him.
If he wanted a real, one hundred per cent unprejudiced check he should have kept quiet.
I knew from this that Martinho had already identified his brother.
Then Osvaldo startled me.
He said, ‘Bom dia, Adolph.’
In other words, ‘Hi!’
I said, ‘Hello, Osvaldo.
I am sorry.’
He said, ‘Don't be.’
I was stunned.
He'd thrown away his last hope, flipped his cards brazenly on the table.
The malais had him securely.
Rebus had the same smile as when he'd repossessed the Hotel Oscar Tango X-Ray and its flush toilets.
Goreng was on the fringe.
He wasn't unhappy by any means, but not quite so pleased with himself as Rebus.
I suddenly realised they didn't like each other; that they were rivals.
Martinho was  watching, with that ‘I've got nothing to do with this’ look that he put on when he'd fucked things up good.
It was the same expression he'd had when backing away from the struggle around the campfire just before Osvaldo — his beard still smouldering — had put him under arrest.
Osvaldo stumbled — I watched him intently although he appeared uninjured and the malais weren't noticeably ill-treating him.
It wasn't a casual roughing-up Rebus had in mind for him.
The two cherry berets kept him up; then I saw Osvaldo hook his bare foot round a malai's boot and the two of them went down.
Osvaldo came to his knees, holding with his tied hands his groin, which was wrapped up in his grubby, checked sarong.
He groaned.
Martinho hurried up.
I believe Martinho thought he could secure his brother a position not unlike his own; save his life at least.
I doubted that.
Rebus then grabbed Osvaldo by the hair; he looked disappointed in his prisoner.
Osvaldo came up as he had to, his face contorted with the tearing pain.
He stood close to Rebus, looking down on the smaller man, fixing him in the eye.
Then he started to say something.
Rebus's face changed; he recoiled in horror, but Osvaldo had his thumbs hooked in the malai's belt.
Osvaldo never finished his sentence.
In the next instant came a great flash.
I threw myself backwards but those around the exploding grenade had shielded me.
I was not conscious of hearing the blast, but my ears buzzed.
Rebus and Osvaldo had been blown away from each other some three metres.
Their bodies were the worst mutilated.
Most of Rebus's face had gone.
Osvaldo had lost both arms to the elbows and the stumps of his arms lay outspread.
He was on his back.
Martinho lay on his side.
After a while he got to his hands and knees.
He began to crawl uncertainly around.
His shirt had been as cleanly stripped from him as if he had never been wearing it, although his skin appeared uninjured.
That was the freakish effect of blast for you, so powerful, yet capable of being deflected by the flimsiest thing, always choosing the line of least resistance.
His shades had gone, however.
His mouth kept opening and shutting as if he was trying to say something.
Goreng had escaped injury entirely, being just outside the radius of harm.
The two cherry berets with Osvaldo had been quite badly chewed up, though one still moved.
People started to run up.
A gunshot went off, stopping  them all in their tracks.
Then one of the machine-guns opened up, hurling five or six of the prisoners against the wall, flinging their limbs around as if they were scarecrows and as they fell in a heap that was what they were.
The line wavered like a branch in a breeze.
Goreng screamed ‘Cease fire!’
The captain with the clip-board ran over to the offending gun-team, yelling abuse.
I reached Martinho, my friend.
He was whimpering with pain, moving on all fours into the line of gunfire.
I dropped beside him.
‘Stop.
It's me.’
‘Oh, Adolph, my eyes!
I cannot see!’
When he put his head up to the sound of my voice I could see the mess.
‘Try to be still, if you can.
Movement will make it worse.’
I put my arms around him.
He fumbled for my hand, which I gave him.
‘Where is Osvaldo?’ he asked.
I hesitated; I didn't want to add to his shock.
Then I said, as gently as I could, ‘He is dead, Martinho.
I am sorry to say Osvaldo is dead.’
‘What?’
He was still deafened.
I told him more loudly this time.
Then I bent close to his ear and said in as big a voice as I dared, ‘He's taken Rebus with him.’
Martinho's hand tightened on mine.
I squeezed it back.
I was jumpy.
Things looked very tense — as if they could swing either way.
It was the nasty period when it wasn't quite certain yet.
The white men were talking to Goreng.
It was the sick one — exhibiting all the symptoms of the fevers which used to cut such a swathe through the FAKINTIL encampments — who actually appeared to be their leader.
I should dearly have liked to know whether they were Europeans or Americans, but I couldn't hear the accents.
They appeared to be arguing.
I hoped the white men weren't telling him to eliminate all witnesses because I don't believe it would have needed much persuasion.
However, I think these guys didn't carry the weight with Goreng they should have done because they were Rebus's associates.
Rebus, I now suspect, was part of a plot by a faction of military intelligence to usurp credit for the suppression of FAKINTIL from the regulars.
And these foreign spooks, these non-existents on the pay-rolls of any Western army, were part of that scheme.
I wanted to get close to Goreng.
Right then I thought that was the safest place to be.
But Martinho, through his pain and his panic, the horror of being unable to see, said, ‘Don't leave me, Adolph.’
It was what I'd said to him, near enough.
I didn't want him to hear the reluctance in my voice, so I squeezed his hand again.
Goreng was giving the captain orders.
These turned out to be to take the prisoners into the cells.
The corpses they threw into the PC.
You could see the prisoners looking back at the two bodies in the centre of the carnage; there was a lot of blood now, spreading in pools.
I was amazed each time by how much.
They didn't want to look back; they knew it was dangerous; but they still did.
Goreng went away with the foreign advisers.
I had wanted to enjoy the protection conferred by his proximity, but I was very, very pleased not to be drawn to the attentions of the spooks.
I contrived to get Martinho beside Goreng's jeep and laid him against a wheel.
Then we waited.
Martinho didn't complain or fret, just sat there, only gasping a bit now and then.
I found him a clean scarf to hold over his face.
When Goreng emerged half an hour later, he troubled himself to take Martinho to the military doctor.
I believe he was in a very good mood.
There wasn't much they could do for Martinho.
If they could have restored his sight I am sure they would have.
But the damage to his eyes was irreparable.
I saw the look the malai doctors gave each other and I knew then he would never see again.
As I have had reason to observe before, the malai medics weren't such bad guys.
They didn't tell Martinho what the situation was for a while, and then they preferred to get me to break it to him.
Martinho had the air of a man who was permanently waiting for a question to be answered.
I don't mean for his fear to be confirmed — that he was sightless; the unspoken query which hovered over us for those few days.
I mean the way that thereafter he would cock his head, slightly sideways.
He had to make greater use of his sense of hearing in order to compensate.
In an awful way (you didn't even like to think it) this improved him, made him less superior.
So far as the malais were concerned, it also made them like Martinho more, in the political rather than personal sense.
It was the nearest thing they could get to having a castratus; he was already a political eunuch, him and Teixeira both.
Now he was quite helpless, yet still alive and still Martinho.
Nor had the malais done the damage to him, but his own side, his own  brother.
He stood for damaged Danu; he got your sympathy.
They thought he could be used at some time in the future even better internationally than locally.
I spent a lot of time with him.
Mrs Goreng had no objection if she did, maybe the Colonel overruled her.
Even now I don't account it time wasted.
I was glad to do what I could for my friend, the only survivor of the Praça days.
Martinho was a good man and remarkable in his way; the time and place were wrong for him, that's all.
He was very quiet; I did most of the talking.
When he did speak, it was mostly of the very distant past, remembering his brothers as boys.
The youngest three brothers he hardly knew; he hadn't grown up with them.
He had already been a first-year seminarian when Eduardo was five.
He said Osvaldo hadn't seemed special as a boy.
Joaquim, the next oldest after Martinho, had been the leader in their various scrapes; even Rogerio (who had died with Joaquim on the pillion in a motor-bike accident) had seemed more remarkable than Osvaldo.
Osvaldo, said Martinho, had only really bloomed in his last year at the seminary and — truly — in Africa.
I said he shouldn't derogate Joaquim and Rogerio; maybe they really had been more gifted than Osvaldo and we would never know.
I said how surprising it was that even in a small society like ours we should be able to throw up any number of superior people to replace those lost in the normal or abnormal attrition of life.
There always seemed to be someone else to hand over to.
‘It gives you faith in human beings,’ I said.
Martinho corrected me.
He said, ‘You are mistaking the hand of God for the work of man.’
I couldn't say anything to that which would not have been construed as offensive.
We sat in silence for a while, but a friendly silence.
Then Martinho started talking about the seminary journal.
I got the impression he regarded his editorship as the high point of his life.
I encouraged him to talk about those days, to focus on something positive.
I thought it would be beneficial for him.
I didn't want him becoming morbid.
Obviously, that was in his interests, but I have to admit it was also in mine.
Did I want to be brought down?
Call me selfish, but life was hard enough as it was, without someone  else demoralising me.
I guess I didn't want to realise how depressed he was.
He bore his affliction with a great dignity.
I was happy to admire this.
There wasn't a shred of self-pity there.
You could say at the last he had his brother's fibre, but it was manifested in fortitude instead of daring — which is a more admirable thing.
I thought he'd find a way for himself in the end.
How self-centred I was.
Colonel Goreng broke the news to me, making no effort to cushion the blow.
If things had been otherwise, perhaps that's how he would have liked to hear of his son's death.
‘Your friend is dead,’ he said.
‘He hanged himself yesterday evening.’
I closed my eyes for a second.
Then I took a deep breath.
Goreng's face gave me no clues; there was no information there; sympathy I didn't expect.
Then he made a big concession.
He said, ‘You can take it from me — he hanged himself.
That's what happened.’
I mumbled, ‘Thank you, tuan.’
I believed him and I still do.
Apart from anything else, he wouldn't have bothered to lie.
Martinho would have accounted his act a mortal sin.
Of that I have no doubt, but I am equally certain that it was his own hands which fastened his belt around his neck and fumbled for the window bar.
And I believe his motivations would have encompassed things other than his own predicament.
I do believe it wasn't just inability to cope with a terrible handicap.
He didn't say anything of great consequence the last time I left him.
I said, ‘I'll see you tomorrow.’
‘You will see me tomorrow,’ he answered, and we shook hands as we had taken to doing.
About a fortnight before that, and ten days after the night at the prison, I had been passing along the road, with my arm through Martinho's, when I had cause to do a double-take on a group of beggars by the roadside.
Goreng had given us two guards — whether to protect us or to stop us getting up to mischief I'm not sure: maybe both.
These soldiers dogged our faltering steps.
I halted, before realising my mistake.
The guards, being malais as well as red-bereted killers, were quite nonchalant for the moment, but they'd start getting suspicious and edgy after a while.
I pretended to take a stone out of my shoe.
(I could no longer wear thongs.)
As I knelt, I looked up.
I hadn't been wrong.
I was looking at Xavier Ray Xaneros himself.
And I think behind him had been one of the older woodchucks and João the electrician, except they'd made themselves scarce commodities.
But X. Ray stood his ground, regarding me with his usual grave and steady expression.
He saw what had happened to Martinho.
I dropped my eyes to my foot, straightened out the tongue, and stood up.
I apologised to our escort.
Then we walked on, at no brisker a pace than we had come.
I knew far better than to turn my head, but I had the feeling my old builder stayed squatting by the roadside.
It has always been my hope that he didn't trouble to bestir himself even when we had gone out of sight.
Martinho never asked why I'd stopped.
I think he had no inkling at all, though I stared at him.
I could do that without his noticing, of course.
As we walked, I was quiet.
Martinho let me think.
He could be considerate like that.
I was trying to put myself into X. Ray's head.
Had he expected me to shout and betray him?
Did he stay still because he was resigned?
Martinho and I must have seemed a bad pair to him.
Or did he know what my inclination was?
(Then he knew better than me.)
Perhaps he relied on our personal friendship to override whatever my political views or personal interest had become.
Whatever it was, he'd served me with his final invoice and I'd paid it in full.
And then I thought again of Osvaldo, of what he'd said in the silver light of the prison yard, his smile and the ‘Bom dia!’ with which he had favoured me, knowing even then the terminating choice, the course that lay before him.
There was that difference in their characters, the imperturbability of one, the charisma of the other.
X. Ray stayed quiet because he had a chance, as would Osvaldo in his place.
But there was also the question of Osvaldo's grace on that evening, his special calmness; his natural generosity and his ruthless decisiveness in tandem at the very last.
I think he wanted to get Rebus closer, for he was his primary target.
He saw the excitement of the malai and he exploited it.
Bound, starved, beaten, he was still the master of himself.
That was his primary motive.
But final though the action was, it was no abdication either.
He thought of the future which no longer contained him  but which he could still control.
He knew what happened to men and women whose notion of themselves had become degraded; he'd seen how traitors worked with a special spite, with a fury that was reserved for themselves as they twisted the knife in the wound.
He didn't want to waste yet another that way; he didn't want to make me a betrayer; he wanted to keep me, as far as he still could.
And so he made it easy for me.
He denounced himself.
And if in the flamboyance of the act, the studied casualness of the greeting, he found a certain bitter amusement, why, he was still able to relish an irony and a situation.
That was Osvaldo Oliveira and his greatness.
And at the last Martinho participated in it.
TWENTY-NINE
After Kaptan had returned to school, Mrs Goreng became the victim of anti-climax.
She stayed in the sitting-room a lot, reading in the cool shade with the french windows to my garden thrown wide.
She was not the only one.
In the town the populace was subdued.
The death of Osvaldo was a devastating blow to all Danuese patriots.
It took something away from everyone, whether they'd been IP in the past or not.
Even if they had never contemplated the smallest act of resistance themselves, the notion of FAKINTIL in the hills with their leader had offered the possibility of freedom one day.
It had been a remote possibility, but it had existed.
And this possibility had been closely identified with the figure of Osvaldo himself.
To eliminate him had also been to destroy a dream.
And now they didn't even have TV.
I had a dream as well.
But it had the presumption to concern myself.
Eighteen months previously I would have been content merely to be alive.
To have enough to eat was a luxury of extravagant proportions.
But we grow discontented in Eden, which Danu was not.
My expectations rose with the quality of my life.
I hardly dared formulate my ambition to myself.
One morning I saw Mrs Goreng's chauffeur grinning as he went  about his chore of servicing the jeep.
He had a kind of surf-board on roller-skates which he used to lie on to slide under the chassis, propelling himself with his padded stump.
As his usual expression was a scowl, particularly for me, I was interested.
We used to feud about the oil-leaks which would drain down the side of the.little courtyard and get under and into my flower-pots.
I would have to bite back my angry words — that better men than he had driven the jeep but that I knew he would share their fate.
It was pitiful.
Did I think they were my flowers?
Did he think it was his jeep?
I had acquired the true menial mentality.
He whistled, this piratical chauffeur, while he shot back and forth under my feet like a stiff in a mortuary drawer.
The whistling had a peculiarly aggravating quality.
When I went into the house, the domestics refrained from looking at me.
The truth dawned.
Everyone knew something yours truly didn't.
I went off to milady's boudoir.
‘What's going on?’
I demanded.
Note I didn't say, ‘Nonya, what's going on?’
‘Going what?’
From her flustered expression and the fact that I wasn't instantly told to mend my manners, I knew she felt guilty.
‘Come on,’ I said.
‘Everyone else knows.
Why don't I?’
‘I don't know what you're talking about, Adolph.’
Well, the queen sulked after that.
He didn't want to brush milady's hair, or put flowers in it.
Finally, Mrs said crossly, ‘All right then, have it your way.
It was meant to be a surprise.
We're going to Dili.
Are you happy now?’
I kept my face blank.
Dili was the malai island of romance, the most beautiful spot in the archipelago.
It was a place to associate with bare-breasted maidens, the bohemian European artists of the thirties who immortalised them, floral garlands, towering cloud-capped peaks.
Many a Hollywood blockbuster had been shot there.
It had also been the scene of the worst communal massacres of the sixties, and parts were now an Aussie-designated budget-tourist hell on earth.
‘Dili?’
‘You'll like it.
It's only a temporary posting for Colonel Goreng.
You could say it's a reward.’
‘Dili,’ I said to myself.
I didn't like it at all.
You might have thought that, in the abstract, the immediate prospect was attractive.
But it wasn't, if you cared to put yourself in my position.
I didn't even have to think about it to dislike the idea; my repugnance was instinctive.
Here, in Danu, I had a meaning; it was where I had been born and lived.
Not through choice, not by a long way, but it was where I'd made my destiny, even if as an alien.
And, most importantly, it was where Colonel Goreng had a use for me.
Outside Danu, I was nothing.
I'd be retained purely as a servant, subject to the whims of an above averagely capricious employer with a short memory.
Only my wiles as a courtier would preserve me, and I'd prefer to have something between me and the Colonel's wrath that was more substantial.
Put it this way: in Danu, even with FAKINTIL on the way out, with my history it was like I possessed a personal qualification: doctor, lawyer, accountant, except I was not one of those but a traitor.
Let me put it poetically: in Danu I was a garden plant with roots in the soil that would sustain me indefinitely.
Removed from my natural environment, I was a cut flower in a vase of water.
I might be interesting, I might be decorative, my exoticism might be diverting, but sure as hell my span was finite.
And so I looked at my uneasy mistress with an anxious and angry eye which she was unable to meet.
I think she, too, had an inkling.
But she continued, ‘It won't all be a holiday for you.’
She turned from the mirror now, with a smile on her face and I wondered if her unease had just been an illusion of my own.
‘You can help the Colonel with business dealings.
I've told him how clever you are.
Can you speak Chinese as well?’
Her smile had a kind of crazed brightness about it.
I didn't take offence, nor did I think her last question the non sequitur of a schizophrenic — Chineseness had everything to do with financial acumen — but she was treating me with the politeness she would accord a stranger who was her equal.
I couldn't put a name on her treatment of me, no word existed for what she was trying to do, but I knew I was being manipulated under the guise of deference and consideration.
‘Nonya,’ I said, with what I trusted was dignified reproach.
I left the room.
Well, things were quite advanced by now.
Mrs Goreng had no reason to conceal anything from me any more.
She walked round the house, planning what she would take: this ornament to be  packed in a shoe-box stuffed with wood-shavings and placed in the top drawer of that chest, that cane-chair to be left behind for the benefit of the Colonel's successor, those curtains to be carefully arranged when the time came, with not more than one fold.
Yours truly followed, notebook in hand.
‘What about the sofa-covers, Adolph?’ she asked.
‘Will they go with the red and grey marble?
That's what the floors of the new place are, you know.’
I suddenly realised that she really didn't want to lose me.
I'd tried to safeguard myself by worming my way into her heart and confidences.
And I'd succeeded all too well.
She depended on me for company; I was a better companion than Colonel Goreng.
If I was honest with myself, I liked her, too.
In a better place and time, we'd have been friends.
(She'd have appreciated Maria, if not Rosa.)
But now she was a ball and chain around my ankle.
I said, ‘Not all interior designers are queers.’
She sighed.
We went on compiling the inventory.
After a minute she grabbed the notebook and pencil from me.
I turned and stalked away to the servants' quarters.
My few possessions mocked me.
I was going to garden for some active therapy but when I got there I thought better of it.
With deliberation, I pulled up all my orchids and threw them, strewn with crumbs of earth, into the wheel-barrow.
I left them there for her to see.
Let her make of it what she would.
I think my plan was to make her like me less.
I was not altogether explicit about it to myself at first, but the tactics clarified themselves in my mind.
My relations with her became cold, but correct.
She bore it with a little smile of amusement that began to enrage me.
I'd meant her to lose control and give me an opportunity, but it was proving the other way around.
This went on for two weeks.
I had no idea when we might be going to Dili, so I was unable to time my campaign, to know when to bring it to a climax, to know when I could afford to cool things down, to be nice to her, for I didn't want to be thrown out of the house there and then, did I ?
I was operating in the dark; I was deprived of intelligence.
And we know what happens to commanders bereft of good intelligence.
But one morning she came into the bare-looking garden to say, ‘We're going on Sunday.’
That was in two days' time.
‘You and Sogono are going,’ she said.
Sogono was the arm-less chauffeur.
‘The others will have to stay.’
‘I am not going,’ I declared.
Now she did lose her temper.
She stamped her foot.
‘You are a fool.
Where else can you go?
If you stay here you will be dead in a year.’
That was the first time she'd acknowledged the truth of the malai presence; we'd never mentioned the disappearances.
‘You can be safe with us.
Am I so bad to you?’
‘No.
You are good to me.’
‘Well then.’
‘It's not that,’ I said.
I decided to try to be open for once in my life.
I would be frank, say directly what I wanted, and to hell with it.
‘What can it be then?’
‘Ely,’ I said (that was her name and the first time I'd ever used it), ‘I want to be free.’
She looked stunned.
I don't think she'd considered this.
It was like a trap-door had opened at her feet.
Then she looked embarrassed.
I could almost feel sorry for her, she had gotten herself into such a false position.
It never pays to treat servants as people.
Look where it had got her now.
She said something about no one being free, it was all relative.
I just looked her straight back in the eye, as if to say, ‘Don't give me that bullshit.’
‘It's just not possible, Adolph,’ she said.
‘I would like nothing better personally…’
At last I had to say it.
‘I saved your son,’ I said.
‘Does that count for nothing?’
She shrugged, not dismissively but as if to say she was helpless.
I was a fool now; I was gambling.
I, who was so prudent, was recklessly throwing all my cards into the game.
To mention Kaptan was to devalue the exploit.
It could be used once.
I said, ‘You malais are all the same.
I should have let him shoot the boy.’
My bitterness was real, but I had not spoken wildly; the words were uttered with calculation.
I had never used the word malai in her hearing; now I'd applied it to her.
I wanted to hurt and shock.
I succeeded.
‘You are all the same,’ I had said — reducing her from an individual to a stereotype, lumping her in with the worst of the cherry berets.
I turned on my heel and left the room.
If she'd been in any doubt as to the strength of my feelings, she had no excuse any longer.
As I started to cool down, I didn't regret  what I had said.
I was sure she would not denounce me.
I was certain there was very little risk on the downside, whereas the prize was great.
I was right.
She had a conscience — or rather she had what was an Asian's limited version of a social morality, the strong sense of a favour done and an obligation to requite.
She couldn't pass over that.
The bad side of it was all the things which afflicted the malais: nepotism, corruption; the good side of it was the desire not to show ingratitude.
‘Do unto others as you would be done by’ was a more positive social prescription of societies like Toronto but ‘Scratch my back and I'll scratch yours’was a workable Asian substitute.
She came to me, quite timidly for her, as I was cleaning the mirror in the hallway that afternoon.
‘Adolph,’ she said.
I ignored her.
I didn't believe she had anything to say to me — not anything that I'd want to hear.
She was just saying something, anything, my name, to establish communication.
I glared at a fleck in the mirror, dabbed at it, then wiped furiously.
After a while she went away.
I kept looking at myself in the glass.
It wasn't such a young face any more.
Maybe it was the hardship in the mountains.
At least I had a good head of hair, even if one or two were gray.
I wished I could get it permed again.
In the evening she sent her maid for me.
She was in the lounge, with one of the ancient U S Vogues in her lap.
She had an almost beatific expression on her pretty face.
She was perfectly genuine in her feelings but expressing them by playing a role — I think maybe Bette Davis nobly renouncing a married lover.
Not specifically our situation, you will appreciate, but the same range of feeling.
‘Adolph,’ she said, ‘I understand things better now.’
I inclined my head in acknowledgement; I understood that the terms of the game were that she was the one with the power, but I was the one being wooed.
‘I will help you with all my heart, but you must be patient.’
‘I have been patient a long time, nonya.’
‘And you must be patient a little longer, my dear Adolph.
It is not simple.
You have to come to Dili with us.
From there it will be a lot easier to arrange things.’
I thought about it.
She was speaking the truth.
An exit from Dili would indeed be a lot easier.
‘Help me to help you, Adolph.
You must come with me.’
I decided she was right.
In any case my nerve was going.
Did I really want to be left in Danu without a protector?
‘I agree, nonya.’
She left the sofa and embraced me.
I felt her spearmint breath on my cheek.
Without wishing to be over-familiar but not to be stand-offish either, I put one hand on her shoulder.
We looked at each other from a very close distance.
I was reminded of Annie Laval.
She smiled, disengaged herself and patted my cheek.
‘You will see, Adolph.
Everything will turn out just right.
Trust me.’
Well, in the short term things were not quite how I imagined.
The Gorengs flew to Dili, courtesy of the malai air force, in the relative comfort of an old Russian turbo prop.
We saw them off at the airfield, we being Sogono and myself.
Up to virtually the last minute I'd assumed that we, or at least yours truly, were going on the plane as well.
Not so, my friend.
We were to go by sea.
This wasn't even by the rusty old tramp which brought stores to Danu once a month, but on a smaller wooden vessel, captained by a cut-throat old Bugi from Makassar, whose bilge pumps were perpetually squirting a drooping arc of water from the sides.
It stank to high heaven of salt-fish and shit, the aforementioned by far the more offensive.
When I saw her my heart sank.
‘You little bitch,’ I thought, referring to Mrs Goreng rather than the Patna.
The Gorengs' effects made the sea-passage with us; or rather we made the passage with the effects, for that was the whole idea.
She didn't trust the captain, so we were there to ensure her vases were carefully loaded and no pilfering went on.
I chewed betel with the barefoot skipper in his wheel-house until, as the old tub began to roll in the outside channel, I realised that had been a mistake.
I was as sick as a dog.
And while I was leaning over the side, Sogono tapped me on the shoulder and said, ‘How many soldier you kill, Chinaman?
How many?’ and kicked me behind the knee.
I didn't even notice the pain.
And before the nausea anaesthetised me, did I feel nostalgia, did I feel regret, did I feel the sense of something ending as the island slipped below the edge of the sea?
No, I did not.
I was too bound up with the problems of the present moment to enjoy the luxury of retrospection.
There was a ten-ton truck supposed to be waiting for us at Dili  but it wasn't there.
When we got in touch with the Colonel a surprisingly easy task, the military communications network superbly efficient — it turned out we had been landed at the wrong port.
Sogono and I sat on the dock beside the cargo — the crafty old Bugi way out to sea — before restoring ourselves on sticks of shrimp satay and bowls of turquoise ice, yellow maize, red beans, and syrup.
Having emptied my stomach into the Banda Sea, I had a raging hunger.
I was a little anxious as to payment, which would have been only a few coppers except we had none.
Need I have worried?
The question never arose.
The vendor didn't even look for remuneration.
Did I refuse to consume the food gained by the uniform and gun?
I did not.
I was quite happy to reap the benefits of being a fully fledged malai killer.
At length the big green truck arrived and we were bumping off to an anxious reception from Mrs. Anxious about her fragile porcelain, I should say.
She was childishly excited about their new place.
Of course, it was much better than Danu as postings go.
And their house was really grand.
She was thinking of houseboys in a saffron uniform she'd design herself.
When I looked at Sogono, in his olive greens and boots, he looked a fish out of water.
I thought his days were numbered.
There were also some wealthy French in a villa further down the hill.
I would encourage that particular connection; I wasn't at all jealous.
For a while I kept quiet.
I'd let her settle into the new surroundings — that way I'd seem more supernumerary.
I was also a little curious about the place myself, to tell you the truth.
After three weeks I broached the subject.
She was evasive.
I could read her like a book.
She had genuinely meant to facilitate my exit from Dili; at the time she'd made her little speech to me she'd been perfectly sincere.
It was just that in the intervening period she had changed her thinking a little.
I threw a carefully modulated tantrum.
Several, in fact.
I moved her nearer the point again.
This time she had a gambit.
‘Adolph, I would like nothing better than to give you the chance to start your life again, but Colonel Goreng…he's the cautious one.
He's worried for you.’
I was completely certain she'd never mentioned anything of the kind to the Colonel, but quick as a flash I said, ‘Nonya, I know you've done all you can.
Now let me try the Colonel.’
She wasn't fazed by this.
‘Oh, of course, Adolph.
But I don't think you can change his mind very easily.
He is very obstinate.’
‘I'll do my best,’ I said, and then I made her bite her lip in vexation for I said with a smile, ‘And I'll tell him you're all in favour, if I may.’
‘Oh, yes, of course, Adolph.’
It took some balls to beard the Colonel in his lair.
I spent three days plucking up the courage.
He raised his eyebrows but he didn't actually skewer my hand to his desk with his favourite kris.
He shook his head.
‘No.’
I tried to go on.
‘No,’ was the answer again.
I was on the point of surrendering when I thought that it would be more dangerous to resume the subject on another occasion; I also didn't trust my nerve.
I might not ask again until it was too late; my native caution would betray me just as effectively as Arsenio and Osvaldo's natural daring had subverted their judge-ment.
The Colonel waited for me, really with amazing politeness.
Whether he thought it would be more unnerving than a show of rage or whether he imagined he owed me civil consideration, I was uncertain.
I guess mild irritation would have been his best bet as tactics for A. Ng: sufficient to intimidate me, but with the prospect of worse to come.
‘Colonel,’ I said, ‘I know that if it was within your power and it was up to you, that you would free me.’
He nodded, the merest inclination of the head, to say, well, he didn't necessarily commit himself to agreeing but that he wasn't ruling it out as a might-have-been either.
At this stage I don't think he saw what I was leading up to.
I said, ‘I know things are difficult.
There are people who make things difficult.’
Colonel Goreng said, ‘There are people who make things difficult.’
This was good — this was the closest we'd come to meaningful exchange.
It was a little like talking to a wooden puppet.
A devil puppet.
However, I was going to try to pull the right strings.
I said, ‘These people can sometimes be taken care of.’
I paused meaningfully.
I wondered if he was too obtuse to pick up what I was driving at; he was a simple soldier, after all, serving his country to the best of his ability, etc., etc.
‘Yes?’
No.
I needn't have worried.
Seemed that malais had a sixth  sense, a special antenna for propositions of this kind; it was absorbed in the mother's milk.
‘These people can, hah, be induced to step aside.’
His antennae were quivering now.
‘How do you mean?’
That was an invitation.
I said, ‘With these people anything is possible with money.’
He shrugged.
‘You have to have the money.’
I said, ‘Well, that would be my problem.’
We said nothing more after that.
Things had gone far enough for then.
During the next few days I went about my duties with propriety and correctness.
Mrs Goreng had been befriended by the French lady down the hill, who was an amateur painter; so I was no longer required continually.
I didn't mention my interview with the Colonel.
What was possible with him was not proper with her.
I knew it was for me to approach the Colonel again, rather than vice versa.
So when he brushed me aside brusquely the next time, I knew everything was OK.
Politeness and kindness would have constituted a refusal.
I let a fortnight elapse.
This time he didn't send me away, but he went on annotating a report on his desk, without looking up.
I said, ‘There is money abroad, which would be enough to satisfy these people.
But I would need your help.’
‘What money?’ he asked, still waiting.
‘It is money which belonged to my father.
It is in an American bank,’ I told him truthfully.
‘Yes.
How much?’
I had decided to be vague.
‘I am not sure.
But enough for this kind of person.
A few thousand dollars.
Do you think you could speak to them on my behalf?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Colonel, I do not like to remind you of this, but I saved your son's life.
Please take the money and speak to these people, as a favour to me.’
God, the sonorous hypocrisy of it.
He knew I knew he knew I knew.
For nearly a minute he said nothing and I had the sense to keep quiet, too, looking down at the top of his head.
He said, ‘I could pass the money to them.
But then they may take it and do nothing.’
I said, ‘That is why you must do it for me, Colonel.’
He nodded and he looked at me for the first time.
I said, ‘Thank you, Colonel.’
He said, ‘I do it for my wife and for my son.
I don't do it for you.’
But he let me kiss his hand.
He entered into the spirit of the farce.
I won't go into the reneguing, the disappointments, the false optimism, the anti-climaxes.
I won't go into the third-person mind-games and transferences.
The only easy part was the telegraphic transfer of the funds into the Colonel's Singapore bank account.
Four months later I was in New York.
THIRTY
Cedar Avenue Don Mills Ontario
Dear Adolph,
It was really a pleasant surprise to have your letter.
My mother forwarded it me the day she received it.
Of course I remember you.
In fact, I have often wondered what became of you.
I did recall you were from Danu, so when I first read about the troubles there I became somewhat anxious on your behalf.
At the time (I know it was seven years ago because that's when I left for Edmonton where I met Michael) I would always make sure I read the foreign page to see what was happening in Danu.
The articles were quite big at first, then got smaller until they were maybe only one or two paragraphs long, then they stopped at all .
It must have been scary for you.
You said you got caught up in the fighting, my husband Michael said he'd love to hear more about that.
I always remember your joke at the North and South Club when you told the Jamaican guy those things that he got mad at you that you didn't have a black belt but you had  a yellow streak at Origami!
Seriously though, it must have been a bad time.
You must be glad the terrorists have gone away, even if it was at a terrible cost to your country.
When I first met him Michael already belonged to the Unification Church and I do as well now, so we are aware of the threat from Communism in all its forms.
We have two children, Emerald and Brandon, Emerald is four and Brandon will be two in November.
On account of my grandfather leaving me this house we moved here from Edmonton.
Michael is a sculptor and a poet, as well as a feminist.
When I met him he was co-manager of a jazz cafe in Edmonton.
No, I do not see any of the people we knew back in school.
We all seemed to split up and go our separate ways afterwards.
I did hear Ras Mohammed, the Ethiopian who kept to himself pretty much, got to be a big General but maybe you didn't know him.
I think I did get a letter from you in Danu when you got back first all those years ago, I remember I gave the stamps to my nephew.
I am sorry if I did not reply.
Well, Adolph, it certainly was a real pleasure to hear from you after all these years.
They seem a very long time ago now.
Write when you have a chance and I will too, if you pass through Toronto look us up.
You are in my prayers and thoughts,
Your friend,
Ann (Laval)
No, I never wrote again, and nor did she.
I sent the letter across the Atlantic from the metropolitan country.
I'd hoped to go to Australia, a mere couple of hours by jet, but the Colonel was too clever to allow that.
Away to Europe I went, out of controversy's way.
If I had wanted I could have shouted there, too, but the noise would have got kind of muffled.
You shout loudest into the Anglophone.
I had no relatives left behind for them to blackmail me into silence-that had been the biggest obstacle.
Without the Colonel I might never have got through; they preferred you to leave someone dear behind.
Then, if you began to sing, they'd tell you your mother, your brother, your children even, would catch a cold on your behalf.
All I gave was my solemn word.
They thought it meant nothing; but I have tried to keep my promise.
That way, they might be readier to let someone through again.
The Home Country could not detain me long.
It held no allure for me.
On my first evening, my body still believing it was morning, I wandered up the maze of cobbled alleyways to the city's most venerable quarter.
This was the old world, and you could keep it.
I thought Macao had greater sophistication — certainly the casino hotels offered a more ambitious modern architecture than anything I could see in this furred heart of a moribund empire.
This wasn't where it happened; this was a backwater, too.
I read reports of food shortages in the countryside, though there was no clue as to this in the windows of the truly excellent restaurants.
It was a pity I detested both sea-food and olive oil.
The lights of the city twinkled below me.
That, anyhow, was different from Danu.
I could see the black of the river estuary and the car lights, all red in one direction, all white in another, sliding over the big bridge that was the most impressive thing in the city.
It dwarfed, for instance, the monument on the river bank to the Renaissance explorers and circumnavigators who'd set the tiny country on the path to greatness.
I imagined they must have been bold generals like Arsenio and Osvaldo, pathfinders like X. Ray, stalwarts like the Corporal, boys as eager and facile as my woodchucks.
For them, the time and the place had been right.
The Vascos and Fernandos had been no greater than Osvaldo.
From a cafe a guitarist broke into one of the wild, melancholy laments that were the typical music of the country.
Too much.
I laughed.
Going down the hill, I heard furtive steps on the stone stairs behind.
I could make out four men.
I didn't have to think — I was leaping downhill like a goddamned goat before I'd summed up the situation: which was they intended to rob me.
Being the casual criminals they were, they didn't persist long in the chase.
I am accustomed, I thought with scorn, to a greater degree of perseverance from my pursuers.
I mixed among the crowds strolling the avenues.
Safety in numbers was an illusion.
I spotted a gang of bag-snatchers, sizing up a tourist.
Why couldn't everyone else?
I had no pity for these complacent victims.
The good thing about the Home Country was its passport.
Poor and shrunken though it was, no longer a power with an empire, half-way to being a third-world nation itself in material terms, the place was still an Atlantic civilisation.
It was a passport of Europe.
And soon, so the official who interviewed me said, it would be a passport of the full community; it would be a key that could unlock the gates of Paris, Rome, of London, even.
It would become a magic talisman.
His eyes gleamed; he smiled as he recited what it would do one day.
And I smiled in appreciation.
But in the meantime I had no interest in remaining, not in what I found an ossuary of the spirit.
Yes, I'd come back.
But now I wanted to be somewhere that had a future and no past to carry.
Not too much of one anyhow.
I didn't care if it was raw, if the pangs of birth were ugly; I wanted to be somewhere I wouldn't be defined by what I'd been, where I could fashion a new notion of myself and impose it on others as the truth.
I decided to go to Brazil.
Don't think it bizarre.
I was not alone in thinking it a splendid plan.
The case-officer assigned to deal with me thought it a gift from the gods — I could see that, though he did his best not to show it.
He'd speedily seen I wasn't the typical Danuese.
I had no religion for a start, though I had developed respect for the Church through knowing Monsignor.
I'd kept my involvement with FAKOUM and FAKINTIL and in particular my personal association with Osvaldo and Martinho to myself, but he smelled a rat.
I had no intention of giving trouble or offence to anyone, not me, but the case-officer discerned in me the potential for terrible trouble.
‘A very sensible idea, Senhor Ng,’ he said, and if he could have applauded he would.
‘You'll be out of my hair there,’ was what he didn't say.
He did say, ‘You can make a whole new life there.
We will do all we can to help.’
And he did, he was as good as his word.
I never had problems with Brazil all the time I was there.
You could say it was a big, peacetime Danu.
My Portuguese, of course, was as excellent as my English (no, I lie; it was nearly as good as my perfect, my Balliol English).
The metropolitan accent conferred a touch of distinction, which was not unpleasant to me.
Chinese I knew there would be, that petty diaspora of restaurateurs and storekeepers.
But I had other, nobler plans for myself.
I knew for a start that there were more than a million Japanese there.
I was to be interviewed in New York, en route to Rio, by an agent who specialised in placing people like me.
I was warned before I left not to do anything silly, like becoming an illegal immigrant, a runaway.
Momentarily, I was offended.
That was something quite below my dignity.
I wished he could have seen that.
It would not have been the act of the person I had chosen to become.
As things turned out, I had a week to cool my heels in New York.
The agent had unforeseen business to detain him.
I hoped the u s authorities were giving him a hard time.
During this time I browsed the book-stores, and resisted the temptation to steal two or three interesting volumes, among them De Gaulle's foreign policy monograph.
I was surprised to be able to stand and read as long as I liked without feeling a hand on my shoulder.
I'd forgotten the indulgences of that world.
I strolled down towards Greenwich Village, sat in the dismal gray square outside the university.
I looked at the faces; the man on the bench next to me was talking to himself.
His eyes looked insane.
I knew this had been a place of elegance, had been sanctified in literature, but it was not that kind of place to me.
On my fourth day I went to visit the United Nations.
It had started to snow, the first I'd seen since leaving Toronto.
The building looked as impressive in actuality as it did in magazines, though the Hudson somewhat less so than the river I'd just left.
I was unable to spot the malai flag anywhere, which cheered me perversely.
I was wearing a blue woollen sailor's hat as disguise.
I had the feeling that this was the kind of place no one would want me going to, although it was a perfectly innocent visit of curiosity.
I'd changed subway trains unnecessarily three times in order to check no one leapt out with me as the doors slid shut.
No one had.
I guess I was afflicted with delusions of grandeur.
I removed my flake-laden pom-pom inside, dashed it on my knee, and stayed bare-headed a while, so that I wouldn't appear like a nut bent on an assassination mission.
I joined a tour.
As it was finishing I saw a man who was familiar.
I looked longer than was wise or discreet.
Our eyes met.
It was definitely Joaquim Lobato, the ex-FAKOUM Minister of the Exterior.
He had been abroad on his support-gathering tour at the time of the malai  invasion.
I had thought him the luckiest man on the FAKOUM Central Committee.
He was certainly one of the only three still living.
But he didn't think so.
He accounted himself the unluckiest man alive.
He almost wished he'd shared the fate of his friends.
So he told me in the diner to which we resorted for coffee and blueberry pie.
Over the plastic-topped table with its mustards, ketchups, and sugar-shaker we exchanged stories.
I told him mine first.
It was a comprehensive and truthful account, save for my name.
He had already heard Osvaldo was dead — the malais had wasted no time in letting that he known — but the circumstances had been different.
They'd said he'd been caught in a heliborne ambush and killed in hand to hand combat by a malai captain.
I disabused him of that notion.
Then I heard how he lived hand to mouth in the Bronx, lobbying whom he could at the talking-shop.
There was a resolution he tried to get passed every year, condemning the invasion and calling for a withdrawal.
He lobbied as hard as he could — he seemed tireless and undaunted even to me — but it was an uphill struggle.
So far he'd got sympathetic countries to ‘deplore’ the malai act of aggression, which was not the same thing as condemning it, he said.
Small verbal distinctions mattered in this world.
That was the high- or low-point of his annual calendar.
He did his best to see that his phone wasn't disconnected at that time — he lived, as I say, from day to day.
The waitress came round and blackmailed us into buying another cup of coffee.
I let the Minister know I'd pay.
‘It's funny sitting here,’ I said, ‘talking about Osvaldo, so remote from Danu.’
‘Remote?’ he cried.
People turned to look at us.
I gestured to him.
I wanted to go to Brazil, even if he didn't.
He lowered his voice.
‘This isn't remote,’ his voice shook.
‘This is where it's determined; this is where it began; this is where it will end.’
I looked at him; I thought it was forgivable, egocentric but forgivable.
Then he changed my understanding for ever.
He laughed bitterly and he said, ‘Do you know what it was all for?
Do you?
I mean, do you really?’
I waited.
He said, ‘There's a deep-water channel off Danu.
I don't suppose you ever thought about it, did you?’
‘I knew the sea was deep there.
It changes colour to deep blue.’
‘Exactly, it changes colour.
Well, they didn't want it turning red.
That channel is one of only three in the whole archipelago that will allow a nuclear submarine safe passage.
Only three in two thousand miles.
Otherwise, if they take the long route, it adds ten days going from Guam in the Pacific to Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean.
Is that a nice little geography lesson?’
He smiled; there was rage and misery in that smile.
And I understood at once the implications of what he'd been saying.
That was why it had all happened.
‘So we are as vital as Panama to the U S?’
‘No.
But still very important to their global projection.
They didn't want a new left-wing government sitting on the canal-bank.
Oh, there was a reason for it.
It wasn't just mad malai Colonels looking for action.
Do you know the American President and his adviser were in the malai capital at the time?’
I shook my head.
‘They left the day before the invasion.
Nice timing, don't you think?’
The waitress hovered meaningfully by us.
After a minute, she wrote out the check and placed it on the table.
Joaquim Lobato said angrily, ‘I did not ask for that.’
She ignored him.
He said, ‘I'm talking to you.’
He was almost shouting.
I wondered if confrontations like this gave him strength and relief; anything that would help.
I didn't think he was so lucky now.
We sat there, defying her.
Lobato gave me his telephone number.
That was when he told me it was often disconnected.
‘You'd think they'd keep it open so they could go on bugging me,’ he said.
I could see a somewhat bitter sense of humour was what kept him going.
I told him I would contact him in a few days, but I never did.
We shook hands in the snow.
Then for some reason we embraced.
I looked back at the corner and he waved.
I don't think he thought I was a malai informer.
That night I took a stroll around the expensive quarter.
I played with the notion of bombing it.
I'd have done it with minimalist technology; say, beans swelling in water and lifting a diaphragm and bare wire to a contact for the time-fuse.
That would be the check I'd present them.
But such spite was not Osvaldo's legacy.
He'd been a dinosaur in a world of pettiness.
I felt ashamed of myself.
The Brazilian agent saw me the next morning.
He asked me if I had any special skills.
‘I have experience in the hotel industry,’ I told him.
‘Also the construction industry.’
‘That's an interesting combination,’ he said.
‘You could build it and then manage it.’
As he was the one with the power I smiled.
‘What was your expertise in the building business — quantity surveying or cost control?’
‘Neither,’ I said, ‘blasting.’
‘Well, let's go for hotel.
The construction is mostly in the interior, and I don't think you would like that, malaria and Indians.
What name would you like to use?’
This was something I hadn't thought of.
I was gratified.
‘Call me…call me, Mr Kawasaki,’ I said, and, like my old generator, my heart skipped a bound.
That was neither an end, nor a beginning.
If I thought I could unmake my old self so easily I was a fool.
I could not terminate Adolph Ng so conveniently.
I was trying to accomplish within my own small person what the malais hadn't been able to do to a nation.
An identity and a history cannot be obliterated with a switch of a name or the stroke of a pen.
I arrived in the vastness of a new country as what I thought a tabula rasa but there was writing underneath, the coded determinants of what I was and always would be inscribed in (what shall we say?) acetic acid or lemon juice which gradually browned and showed in the revealing action of sunlight.
For the first days, weeks even, I carried on in a light-headed and even giddy way.
The scenery — nothing remarkable — the very banalities of the vacation industry — sea, city blocks, beach, bronzed androgynous bodies, was nevertheless sufficiently different not to trigger associations of the past.
I didn't have a solid grasp of myself — I depended on other people and surroundings to cue me.
So I wandered bizarrely, often with that feeling of standing outside myself as a separate and dispassionate watcher, that I had experienced the day the malais had invaded Danu but this time  without the terror.
I'd repeat my name — and as I got really far from shore I'd say ‘Ng’ or ‘Adolph’— to try to bring me back inside myself.
But it didn't work.
I realised who I was O K — I just couldn't live inside the envelope.
One is given to understand that it is a perfectly common psychological state which has afflicted nearly everyone at some time.
But the surroundings grew familiar, a routine established itself.
I made acquaintances, I met partners — that special freemasonry of glances — and gradually I saw my features reflected in the iridescent circumstances of Rio.
It was a countenance I'd seen before; only the mirror's frame was more ornate.
I learned to accept it.
I was wearier, I was more tolerant, that was the only difference and that change only enabled me the better to accept what I'd always been.
The invisible writing, the lineaments of me, which had been there beneath the surface all the time, became manifest.
I accepted myself again.
I even wrote to Lobato, before tearing the letter up.
Well, it was a conclusion, not the start of anything new.
And if I couldn't make away with myself, how could the malais make away with a whole nation?
Before the invasion there were seven hundred thousand Danuese.
Now there are less than half a million.
If that isn't genocide I don't know what is.
But I know something else — you can't kill everyone.
It isn't over.
They might have caught up with X. Ray by now; Martinho might have done away with himself.
Yet I still believe what I said to Martinho, as he cocked his blind head towards me before talking of the hand of God: there's always someone else who'll step forward.
Even a tiny society like ours had the capacity to throw up any number of superior people.
There's no such thing as a hero — only ordinary people asked extraordinary things in terrible circumstances-and delivering.
The Danuese might have thought they'd lost their leaders, that there was no one else, and that's the moment a frizzy-haired messiah will choose to come upon the scene.
X. Ray's unshowy steadiness was right for the low time in which he newly found himself — he could put the fire out.
Even if X. Ray was only the Baptist to some little woodchuck's saviour, I do know that nothing died with Osvaldo except his own faults.
(I think of him in some tropical Valhalla, rejoined with Arsenio.
They are not swilling  horns of ale but chewing betel.)
The malais might have put the torch to the field, they might think they've exterminated all the creatures in it, but there'll always be one woodchuck left.
There always is.