

CHAPTER THREE
The Rowse essay having been completed, I dispatched it to Fabers and received Eliot's comment in a letter dated 19 April.
He wrote:
Of course I saw that, in his appraisal of the situation, he was right.
Publication of the essay, presumably in The Criterion, would understandably have hurt Rowse's feelings; it might, at the same time, have shown me up as an impertinent upstart.
I presume that Eliot, perhaps overestimating my powers, had thought that I could somehow write a piece which would have avoided causing offence.
Also, I may have given him the impression, with the urgency of youth possessed of strong convictions, that I wanted at all costs to have something published on this subject.
True, I was not Rowse's student: but I had met him chiefly through Eliot's introduction, and he had been civil enough, and even, despite marked differences of viewpoint, encouraging.
I did not believe that he was likely to be one of my examiners in Finals, and this turned out to be true.
As irony would have it, however, an examiner that I did have passed on to Rowse the information that, in the paper on Political Institutions, in which I did badly, I had vigorously attacked Rowse's pamphlet on ‘The Question of the House of Lords’.
Rowse began his pamphlet, if I remember rightly, with the words: ‘What is there to do with the House of Lords except to abolish it?’ whereas I had followed J. S. Mill in regarding its most salutary function as that of ‘a check on precipitancy’.
But, in those days, to defend the House of Lords was to be dubbed a shameful reactionary.
For me, it was sufficient satisfaction that Eliot had approved my essay; that he considered it the best thing I had done; and that I had been one of the few to express opinions which had his total concurrence.
From a letter to my mother dated 2 May, which has escaped  destruction, it is clear that I had just written to Eliot explaining that I realized the undesirability of publication, unless indeed Rowse himself were prepared to give it his endorsement.
I mentioned this in view of the fact that Eliot had wanted Rowse to read the original essay, and I was anxious to see whether he still recommended this.
Rowse was at that time in London, or I might (I said) have asked him to tea and taken some soundings.
In the end, perhaps because I was embarking on other work, the matter was quietly dropped.
On the whole, I was glad.
I did later show Rowse an essay of mine, but this was not a personal onslaught.
He clearly disapproved of it and that was that.
Thereafter I never attacked Rowse's political views in print, and, when I came to know him better, I no longer felt I had reason to do so.
I trust that he will not mind my reproducing a letter from a mutual friend containing personal criticism.
In this I do not think that Eliot exaggerated.
If he exaggerated at all, it was in supposing that anything I might say mattered all that much.
As to the projected translation mentioned in the last paragraph, it referred to Sorel's Illusions du Progrès.
This was a book I had thought far superior to the Reflexions sur la Violence.
Looking back on it today, however, I perceive how dated it is; but, in the 1930s it might just have excited interest, simply as illustrating one direction in which a Marxian might, in his disillusionment, turn.
(Sorel, beginning as a revolutionary syndicalist, gravitated towards the Action Francaise movement, which was the reason why I thought the book might interest Eliot.)
I heard no more on the subject; and if this meant that I had failed to persuade Eliot to devote precious time to reading the book, I was more relieved than otherwise.
We, on the other hand, were at that stage of life when we felt we could find time for anything that took our fancy.
There was a great deal of extra- or para-curricular activity.
Burke, I remember, helped to establish an Education Society: Harold Mason and I and a girl called Alethea wanted to publish a kind of politico-literary manifesto.
This would be a counterblast to the growing propaganda of the Left, not only in Oxford but outside — in fact, I suggested that it should be called Counterblast, with Wyndham Lewis's ‘puce monster’, Blast, in mind — but we were as anxious to dissociate ourselves from the Right.
A feminist magazine called Lysistrata was also one of our targets.
The idea was to bring in some big names: two we had in mind were Eliot and Leavis.
I had by this time met the latter.
Having appeared to  saddle Eliot with reading Sorel's book, I was reluctant to impose further tasks on him.
An essay of his I had read at school entitled ‘Religion without Humanism’, from a symposium published under the title of Humanism and America (1930), edited by Norman Foerster, had excited scant interest on this side of the Atlantic.
It occurred to me that its republication in our Symposium might both appeal to him and attract public attention: for I considered it an authoritative statement of the value of Humanism (the title was a little misleading) in its relation to religion.
Moreover, it was written in Eliot's early style: pleasing, pungent and persuasive.
Accordingly, I wrote to Eliot asking whether he would agree to lend us his assistance and his authority in this way.
As he told me he did not possess the book and had lost sight of the paper, I hurried to London, located it at the National Central Library, as it then was, copied out the essay in longhand (being fed with sheet after sheet of paper by the rather puzzled girl at the reception-desk), and called with it at Faber's.
As he was a very busy man, I was grateful that Eliot should have been prepared to see me without any notice at all.
True, he had become used to being interrupted — there were, in the category of interrupters, young feckless poets who thought nothing of calling and expecting to be subsidised without there being any thought of reimbursement.
Dylan Thomas was one such suppliant.
I know, because Eliot told me: he also disclosed, what he usually kept to himself, that after the poet had drunk himself to death, and hearing that his widow was in difficulties, he had provided liberal help, though whether she was aware of the fact I do not know.
Another interrupter, especially at this time, was of course Vivien herself, who, despite the legal separation, would continue to pester him, causing great embarrassment to Miss Swan and to his secretary.
The one most called upon to handle the situation was Brigid O'Donovan, and she seems to have managed very well.
Yet, when I saw him on this occasion, he seemed more than usually calm and quiet, which, given that the most painful of interrupters might arrive at any hour, showed that when, in the very essay I was delivering to him, he had talked about the necessity for the ‘discipline and training of the emotions’, he meant what he said and practised it.
It was this habit of self-mastery which made one expect him always to maintain a standard of behaviour which other people felt themselves excused from emulating.
For the trouble with the great and the good is that we expect them to be on duty the whole time.
Indeed, quite early on, I tried to work out in my mind what it was that made his personality (though he did not like the word) so compelling; and I came to the conclusion that it was because he did not let me down in my own estimation of him.
When we are first trying to establish our values and standards in life, there are certain people, or it may be institutions, upon which we decide we have at all costs to rely.
This means that they must on no account fail us, just as, to take a different level, the woman whose beauty we find captivating must be seen to maintain her attractions: so much so that we ‘will’ her to display a beauty that she does not always possess, or perhaps has never possessed.
It was the steady reliability, the unfailing support, which I knew I could count on, which distinguished Eliot from so many others.
I did not have to pretend that he was a great man: by his acts, his understanding, and his solicitude, and by the example he set and maintained of standards higher than those of his fellows, he showed himself to be one.
He was in any case visibly touched that I should have gone to the lengths of copying the essay; but in those days no other method of putting him in possession of it was available.
Of its contents he retained only the haziest notion; and he explained that he would have been reluctant to contribute to such a volume — his Second Thoughts on Humanism, published a year earlier, had consisted of a devastating criticism of the editor — save that it represented a tribute to Irving Babbitt, whom he had always revered as one of his masters and about whom he felt that his early criticism had been misunderstood, not least by Babbitt himself.
In any case, he felt he ought to stop making too many major pronouncements of this kind.
I noticed that he pronounced the name B'bbitt.
He moved round the room — in so far as it was possible in such cramped quarters — glad to he relieved momentarily of desk work but perhaps by way of indicating that the interview must be conducted as if we were both on the move; and this meant that certain remarks were addressed to the window or the mantelpiece.
In fact, he liked standing, especially when telephoning, which, as he disliked that form of communication, may have rendered it less irksome.
But then, having exhausted his recollections of the circumstances of his writing the paper, he switched to more personal matters and enquired carefully how I was getting on in a way that made me reel that my mission had been worthwhile and that I had by no means wasted his morning.
Meanwhile, having appealed to Leavis, we received from him almost by return a literary essay, and we set to work to write our own pieces.
To our gratification, Blackwells, whom we had approached, expressed interest in the project, something we had not dared to expect.
Nevertheless, we soon found that producing a publication of the required length, and assembling a representative group of writers, was no easy task.
To find enough opponents of the left who were not too far committed in the other direction proved more difficult than we had imagined.
Also, we were in much too much of a hurry.
Even now, I remain uncertain who was supposed to be doing what.
Our spirits were already beginning to flag when I received a letter from Eliot dated 2 June:
Naturally I was disappointed that the most notable name of which we could boast had to be excluded: and although I knew that he disliked re-reading his prose works, I was as sorry that he felt the essay to be below standard as I was to regret his later repudiation of After Strange Gods.
I still think his essay, far from being ‘a rather feeble piece of writing’, to be a powerful piece of advocacy; and it contained some remarks about culture and religious observance for which in penetration and acuteness I can recall no exact parallel.
I fear that he greatly over-estimated our combined literary and administrative abilities.
I wrote a little later to say that, while his repudiation of the essay was in no way responsible for the decision, we had deferred our project.
I expressed the hope that one day he would include the piece in a volume or volumes of collected essays: a collection I still feel is very much needed.
He was quick to respond.
On 13 June, he wrote:
When I look back, I am amazed that Eliot should have even contemplated going to such trouble on our behalf.
It is now clear — and, in view of the final lines of his letter of 2 June, it was sufficiently plain by then — that he was writing under great pressure: which up to his last years was the condition in which he produced most of his work, including some of his best.
Although writing under pressure is how many authors are best able to function, Eliot set himself so high a standard that his achievement, given its quantity, was the more remarkable.
There were moments when he took on too much; and although I pursued the matter of our volume only because he had invited me to do so, I soon realized that I was asking more than I should have done, especially as I was uncertain at any moment whether my collaborators saw eye to eye with me about the scope of our project.
We still cherished the idea of putting together a ‘counterblast’; but I perceived in due course that we had begun to differ regarding the objective to be demolished.
Still bearing in mind the essay in the humanist volume, I wrote to Eliot during the summer suggesting as a theme for his consideration one based on the statement: ‘The problem of nationalism and the problem of disassociated personalities may turn out to be the same’.
This seemed to me to be one of the most perceptive remarks in the essay, about which some elaboration on his part would be of considerable interest.
As I kept little of my side of any correspondence in those days, I am not sure whether I explained more clearly what we were trying to do, as he had requested.
All I know is that by the time we had entered into residence again that autumn, we found we had made so little progress, and had remained so vague about our aims that, one evening, Harold Mason and I, who had seen more of each other than we did anyone else in the group, resolved to abandon the project altogether; and I therefore wrote to Eliot, from whom I had not heard further, telling him that our plan had made so little headway that I felt it my duty to tell him not to trouble himself any more.
At the same time, I renewed the invitation on behalf of the Phoenix Society, as there was a consensus that this should be revived.
He replied on 2 November:
I could see that, had he embarked upon the paper, it would have left me conscience-stricken in my turn.
That anything he undertook or contemplated would be a thorough piece of work, I knew; but I do not suppose I appreciated how much preparation he would have considered necessary, including intensive readings.
I imagined he could just sit down, perhaps at the typewriter to which he had recourse even for poetry, and produce the requisite text.
It was true of Eliot, as it was true of Dr Johnson, that he needed to read himself into a writing disposition; and that is perhaps why some of his best essays were produced under the stimulus of a particular kind — a review-book or some text which would ‘tie him down’.
He used some such expression in the text of an unpublished essay that I later found at Harvard.
An essay or a lecture on some general theme did not always have the required effect, as some of the otherwise magisterial addresses delivered when he was a  world-figure tend to show.
That same November, I escaped from Oxford life by securing permission — I do not know whether such authorization is needed these days — to go to a performance in London by the Group Theatre in Great Newport Street, under Rupert Doone, of Sweeney Agonistes.
I could wish, incidentally, that Eliot had retained the original title of Wanna Go Home, Baby? which always seemed to me exactly right.
The Group Theatre, as it name implied, was considered to be slightly advanced or progressive.
The ladies wore their underwear, which, far from revealing anything, seemed rather like a ribbed pink carapace, but did in some measure convey the sordidness of their profession.
I thought it was a good performance.
What I did not know was that Vivien Eliot was in the audience.
At least I did not recognize her; but then she was such a shrinking, washed-out-creature — when later I had lunch with one of Eliot's former doctors he described her as ‘an ugly little thing’, which was rather unkind and hardly accurate — that she could easily have escaped notice.
Discontent with our literary projects seem to have provoked in me discontent of another, more general, kind: for I found my philosophical tutelage increasingly unsatisfactory.
I was seized one day with the desire to go to the United States for a period of study.
A scholarship to Harvard under the name of a Henry Fellowship, had been advertised on the plastered notice-board at the College entrance.
(As this sort of restlessness has seized me all my life, I need not elaborate.)
It impelled me to request Eliot, for the first time of more times than I care to remember-as it was a chore which I have been obliged to shoulder often enough myself-to act as a referee.
Although he willingly complied, it was not without misgivings.
On 14 December, he wrote to me:
Although I duly applied for the Fellowship, I was unsuccessful, no doubt to my lasting benefit, as similar failures have served to prove.
And again I saw that in his caveat Eliot was right.
What heartened as well as chastened me about the letter was his wish to see more of my writing.
I had hinted to him that I had been engaged on a paper to be called ‘Enslavement by Capital’, a title adapted from one employed by Ezra Pound in a Criterion article called more characteristically, ‘Murder by Capital’.
It was about the difficulties experienced by the writer, especially the major writer, in prevailing economic conditions, and I took as examples Eliot, Pound and Herbert Read.
The choice of the latter led Leavis, to whom I sent the paper later, to expostulate, but at that time I thought that Read was heading for an eminence which, at least as a creative writer, he never attained.
This I posted to Eliot.
I also sent him an article entitled ‘Interpretation by Economics’.
Meanwhile, I had intervened in a wrangle which had been going on in the pages of Time and Tide over some articles Eliot had written.
This was in a series called ‘Notes on the Way’(January/February 1935).
They had provoked Rebecca West to make more than one violent intervention.
Her letters were of mounting stridency and, as I thought, extremely unfair.
Bridling, I wrote a long riposte, which was printed in the issue for 2 February 1935.
In the same issue, Rebecca West's last salvo appeared after a final one from Eliot.
Reading my letter fifty-one years later, I am struck by its vigour, but I deplore a certain over-writing and perhaps a ‘one-must-not attack Mr Eliot’ tone.
I have no wish to reproduce it here.
Eliot's own letter contained, besides some telling points, an amusing conclusion in which he invited Miss West, in order to ‘talk these matters over quietly’ to ‘come up and see me some time’.
This phrase, the force of which may be lost on the present generation, had been made familiar by another Miss West, the buxom and sultry film-star; the similarity of nomenclature was a coincidence of which Eliot took full advantage.
That the grave and devout poet should use these words, and even be aware of them, was a source of much mirth.
In my letter to Eliot, enclosing my own article, I had expressed the hope that, in contrast to Rowse, who told me that he considered my letter ‘ineffective’, might approve of it.
In his reply of 21 February 1935, he added a footnote in his own hand which put the matter aptly; but about my second article he had his doubts.
As Eliot was very sparing of exclamation marks, and must rarely have employed two in juxtaposition, it was clear to me that, with the particular reservation he made, he was far from thinking my letter ineffective.
I recall that I had written another broadside in reply to an article in The Student Vanguard by Rayner Heppenstall, then a communist, called ‘T. S. Eliot: sign of the times’.
He had attacked Eliot for worshipping culture, which I considered about as false an imputation as could be imagined.
I also wrote to Waldo Frank, who, in an article to which Harold Mason drew my attention, had attacked Eliot.
Although this might suggest otherwise, I was all the time working hard for Schools, as I knew that Eliot, now my mentor in most things, would have strongly urged me to do.
Indeed, he might have been perturbed to think that I was diverting so much energy towards his defence; but, so far as I know, he was ignorant of these interventions of mine, as I never showed him the letters or alluded to them.
His reaction to my essay, on the other hand, brought me up with a jolt; and although what I had written is of no interest — I seem to have lost the manuscript, so that is the end of the matter — I carne to value his negative appraisals.
I knew that they were sincere and above all that they were meant to be helpful.
When Eliot had spoken well of me in the reply to John Garrett, to which I have referred, the latter was slightly miffed, I could tell; for although he showed it me with some pride as being a favourable reply to his request, he countered the praise it contained by saying that Eliot was being far too kind to an absolute novice.
He was indeed kind, exceptionally so; but he never indulged in insincerity for the sake of pleasing, and he could be downright enough when he deemed it necessary.
That is why I willingly sent him anything I thought might be of sufficient merit to justify him, as a publisher, pronouncing upon it.
In the whole course of our friendship, what I never ventured to do was to send him any poetry.
At that time I was turning it out with some facility, and I had had two poems published in The Isis in my first year.
But the bulk of it, now that I have re-read it in connection with this memoir, I have quietly made away with.
In fact, the next paper I sent him was called, if I remember rightly, ‘The Poet — the Public — the Faith’, and I had dispatched it to a review called The Green Quarterly, the only recollection of which I have is that it was quarterly and that it was green.
I had come upon it in thumbing through The Writers and Artists Yearbook; it seems to have been an Anglo-Catholic journal.
I suppose that Kenneth Ingram, the editor, had not quite made up his mind about what I had written, which is the reason why I had forwarded it to Eliot.
On 27 August 1935, he wrote to me at my Purley address about it as follows:
If the invitation to the Phoenix Club came to nothing, as it did, an invitation from the English Club, in which I enjoyed no official status, though I was a member, bore fruit.
I forget how we learnt that he was coming under its auspices, but I do remember that our wish — that is to say, the wish of myself and Michael Cullis, by then an established friend — to entertain him during the visit, produced a minor clash with the English Club secretariat.
We did not want to be the cause of friction; but as we were unable to ascertain what the Club had in mind by way of arrangements, we proposed tea or dinner, or, if he were not being entertained in the evening, both.
Eliot's letter of 22 October confirmed that he still had not received details from the Club; but he understandably felt that while he could accept our invitation to tea, he ought to reserve his position about dinner.
So we agreed about tea, and invited Father D'Arcy to join us.
On 22 October 1935 Eliot wrote:
What happened however was that Eliot caught a cold, and on the 2 November we received a telegram from him:
We naturally renewed our invitation as soon as we learnt of the new arrangements proposed by the English Club, and he wrote to me on 25 November 1935 on Criterion writing paper:
For some reason the ‘Poet-Public-Faith’ article did not get used; but meanwhile Collingwood, whose acquaintance I had made, had received the advancement he amply deserved, and I wanted to write in The Criterion about his first lecture as Professor.
The short notice I did write was my first appearance in that journal, and I recall that Rowse did not much like it; but then he did not like Collingwood either.
Meanwhile, I was looking forward to Eliot's Oxford visit.
Having met him at the station on 3 December, a Tuesday, we walked back to the Old parsonage, in St Giles's (now a hotel), where Michael Cullis had pleasant lodgings.
My place was not suitable, as I was living rather far out beyond Magdalen in more cramped conditions.
Wearing a large Stetson sort of hat and a thick brown overcoat, Eliot progressed fairly slowly, wielding a rather formidable sword-stick.
We happened to pass a woman pushing a pram, who for some reason produced a torch, no doubt in order to locate something, and directed it straight at the baby's face.
This seemed to disturb Eliot, as anything afflicting the eye did — for he had a dread of blindness — and he murmured his concern that the woman had shone the light ‘in the child's eye’.
For some reason the subject of Marianne Moore came up, and he expressed disappointment that the edition of her poems which Faber's had recently published had sold less well than expected.
I was to see her years later, and talk much of Eliot, they were fellow-citizens of St Louis, Missouri, and almost of the same age.
Not long after we had reached the Old parsonage and climbed the stairs to Michael's rooms, Father D'Arcy arrived.
We noticed with what great deference he treated Eliot, though they were obviously on close and confidential terms.
As for Eliot himself, he seemed to make himself absolutely at home, as he usually did in a small gathering, and he swung his leg over the arm of the comfortable chair, where it reposed throughout the visit.
Father D'Arcy sat on his right.
I remember thinking at the time that the two men were father-figures  in more than one sense, and that it might as well have been Father Eliot as Father D'Arcy.
It was D'Arcy who raised the subject of The Criterion, because he had heard that it was in difficulties.
I weighed in by saying that for some reason it no longer appeared in the Radcliffe Camera, as I gathered the library had ceased to subscribe to it.
This caused Eliot some surprise.
He said that the magazine was in good health and that they had not even had to obtain a ‘medical opinion’ on the subject (it was of course supported partly by a subsidy from Lady Rothermere), but that he would look into the Radcliffe Camera question.
We went on to talk about the articles in Time and Tide that had so provoked Rebecca West, and Father D'Arcy observed how, in dealing with ‘difficult’ correspondents, it was important to strike the right note in replying.
‘Never write an angry letter!’ he exclaimed decisively and by way of offering advice to us all.
He had no doubt come to this decision as a result of bitter experience; for he went on to remark how difficult it was to keep one's equanimity when people deliberately distorted one's views — about Catholic teaching, for example.
Eliot concurred; but he still felt that sometimes it was necessary to write a fairly sharp rejoinder.
I called to mind his letters in Time and Tide (January/February 1935) about A. A. Milne's views on war and peace.
This included one of the most severe letters I had seen from his pen.
For on the whole he kept to D'Arcy's rule.
He had just published in the New English Weekly (28 November) a poem called ‘Lines for an Old Man’(to which he added a couplet when it was included in Collected Poems).
In order to test my reaction, and before I had received my copy, Michael had typed it out and sent it to me, almost as if it might be one of his own efforts, and I had reacted with some reserve.
It did not seem to me, in that incomplete version, quite to come off, and I still do not regard it among the successful poems.
We questioned Eliot about it.
First, what was the exact meaning of the title?
Was it ‘Lines in the mouth of an old man’?
‘Yes’.
Secondly, what did ‘writhing in the essential blood mean?’
What Eliot said in reply to that question has survived in two versions.
Michael recalls him as saying that the notion was suggested by a detective story by R. Austin Freeman, which concerned a negro knocking his brow against a bar, so that the blood issuing forth was ‘essential’.
Michael: ‘A Homeric epithet, in other words’.
Eliot (with some deliberation and slowly crumbling his cake): ‘Yes, you could say that.’
My recollection was that the detective story was one of E. Phillips  Oppenheim's, and that it concerned a horrific murder whereby the victim was, so to speak, liquefied and poured down the sink, so that the ‘essence’ of him was thus disposed of.
I still feel that this story if I have retold it right, would have appealed to Eliot more than the tamer one about the negro.
In any case, I believe Eliot admired the thrillers of the prolific E. Phillips Oppenheim, who was published in the yellow-backed series to which he more than once referred as a possible source of inspiration.
It is true that a form of haematuria is called ‘essential’, but I cannot believe Eliot was referring to that, though I would not put it past him.
Our last question concerned ‘inaccessible by the young’; And Eliot replied that, according to the OED, ‘by’ was a permissible use with ‘inaccessible’as well as‘to’, and in his opinion its presence in the last line sounded better.
Not long before there had been a lively correspondence in The Times about cheese, and somewhat to the surprise of certain devotees, Eliot had intervened in it.
He had asked to be ‘put in the way’ of a certain variety, and it was Father D'Arcy who enquired whether his request had met with success.
This set Eliot on to a technical disquisition which I at least was unable to follow; but it included the fact that, in order to preserve a certain particularly rare cheese or at least to promote its further maturity, the owners had ‘buried it’.
The solemn and deep tones in which these words were delivered have remained fixed in my memory.
As with so many of Eliot's apparently portentous remarks, I fancy that they were uttered partly in a quizzical manner, and that the mock solemnity was intended to convey the idea of a conspiratorial ritual.
Any conversation at that period was bound to touch on the state of the world, and the question of social reform at home; and the allusion to the New English Weekly, which to some extent we regarded as ‘our’ paper, led to some talk of similar minority reviews, including G.K.'s Weekly.
Father D'Arcy said that he did not think Distributism was the happiest of terms for a politico-economic movement; but he vouched for Chesterton's total sincerity in propounding it, and he hinted that the review was a regular drain on his pocket.
Somehow we then got on to the theme of French poetry, and Eliot expressed surprise at one of Herbert Read's recent pronouncements on Laforgue and another nineteenth-century poet I cannot recall and about whom at the time I knew too little to be able to arrive at an opinion.
Even at Oxford, I doubted whether there were many people who could adjudicate on a matter of this kind.
Yet again, looking at this urbane relaxed figure seated opposite me and comparing him with the romantic figures of  Spender and others or with the scruffy Auden, I found it difficult to believe that he was a poet and not rather some worldly and successful company director.
I sometimes thought that he would enjoy being mistaken for the one rather than the other, because he disliked the idea of poetry as a ‘profession’: an attitude which some lesser figures found puzzling.
His association with the New English Weekly was of great value, and lent considerable prestige, to that minority journal, because some of those connected with it were decidedly eccentric, unpractical and in need of guidance.
Eliot, who was tolerant of eccentrics as long as he was not expected to join their ranks, sometimes deplored the degree of ascetic zeal that was expected of the supporters.
He referred to a dinner given in honour of A. R. Orage, the retiring editor whom Philip Mairet was to replace, which was of inordinate length and at which there were interminable speeches, and where — this was represented as the ultimate horror, uttered in the tones of a cri de coeur—‘you couldn't even get a drink!’
D'Arcy, who did not despise the good life, seemed to find this display of hedonism a little extreme.
At another NEW party, there had been present one of the journal's current gurus, Midrinovic, probably taken up first by Orage, who collected such people (at one time he was a disciple of Gurdjieff).
Eliot was plain-spoken about this man.
He said he was one of the most unpleasant people he had ever met.
Apparently, the guru had played little part in the proceedings, confining himself to putting records on the gramophone; and this, for Eliot, seemed to render him the more sinister.
The subject of modern poetry coming up, which it might have been expected to do, D'Arcy put forward the view that the best of the younger poets was Louis MacNeice, because he had had a classical education.
Eliot weighed in by saying that he had great hopes of a young man —‘rather a spotty youth’— called Rayner Heppenstall.
This heartened D'Arcy, because he had just converted this former communist to Catholicism.
(He left the Roman Church not long after, like D'Arcy's Jesuit protégé Henry John, son of Augustus, and wrote a somewhat  snarky account of D'Arcy's efforts at proselytizing.)
Eliot added that he had written a rather interesting poem about, here he turned to D'Arcy and asked: ‘Who was the saint that had arrows stuck all over him?’
‘St Sebastian’, D'Arcy put in promptly.
‘Ah yes: and the poem’, resumed Eliot, ‘continued four or five good lines in succession, which is pretty rare these days’.
This was a momentary memory-lapse, as Eliot himself had written a poem on the saint, entitled ‘The Love Song of St Sebastian’, the text of which was in the notebook given to John Quinn and now in the Berg Collection, New York.
He then reminisced about a house-party at which someone had suggested that Mr Eliot (who did not go to many such parties) should be invited to read some of his poems.
‘I'm afraid we haven't got any of Mr Eliot's poems’, the host answered ruefully.
Eliot relayed this in such a manner as to imply grave delinquency on the host's part, and made the anecdote sound very funny.
Indeed, he had a remarkable gift for extracting from even the most commonplace remarks or situations some latent humour, which otherwise might never have been suspected.
Even the written word, by conjuring up the Eliot tone of voice, could express this kind of humorous gravity, for example, his remark in the ‘Dialogue on Dramatic Poetry’ that ‘we cannot spend all our time reading large philosophical works’.
(I have often tried to analyse what makes this statement so amusing, and I have come to the conclusion that it is due to the words ‘all’ and ‘large’, so that the idea becomes a preposterous one.)
Much of his conversation, uttered in the flat voice which set off the originality of the content, conveyed in this way infinite nuances of banter and irony.
We had referred to the rather disturbing politics of The Times, which under Geoffrey Dawson favoured appeasement of the dictators.
Eliot remarked that as far as he was concerned he took that paper chiefly for the crossword and the company reports.
Later, as I know, he took great interest in the law reports, and he always read the letters.
The party broke up when Father D'Arcy, whose life was organized round the liturgy, rose saying that he had to attend an obligatory office at Campion Hall.
Eliot asked to be shown the lavatory.
Michael, indicating the stairs and implying that he had to go straight on, then directed him to the left, upon which he said quietly, if a trifle reproachfully: ‘You said straight on’.
As he was moving down, he whipped out an orange stick and began hastily manicuring his nails.
This scrupulous attention to neatness, linked with the possession of the necessary equipment, was typical, and explained in part the number of pockets in his suits of which he was to boast.
While he was in the lavatory, Michael tells me that, observing the large hat reposing by the overcoat, I reverently picked it up and placed it on my head.
While most of the events of the  afternoon have remained firmly in my memory, I had totally forgotten this piece of mischief.
I delivered Eliot to Magdalen, and was one of the first to arrive for the English Club meeting, accompanied by a Somerville girl to whom I had become attached.
Although not so thronged as any assembly addressed by Eliot would later have been, the room was full.
He was due to read his own poems, but he prefaced the performance with remarking how extraordinary he found it that students obliged to attend lectures should want to turn up for more such talk after hours.
He also made some modest remark about his achievement, such as it was, and hazarded the opinion that he might best be remembered by his devotion to cheese.
This did not evoke much response from the audience, because The Times was not widely read by university students.
They either assumed that what appeared in such a paper was nonsense or establishment propaganda, or they read such papers as the Manchester Guardian, as it was then called.
These preparatory remarks were rather hesitant and repetitive; I did not feel that extempore public speaking came easily to him; but his readings were good, because they totally lacked affectation.
Perhaps the most successful rendering was that of the fifth poem of ‘Landscapes’, entitled ‘Cape Ann’, which he read with great gusto and of which the last line ‘The palaver is finished’ produced a ripple of pleasure.
So did his explanatory remark that he had written it ‘to show that I know something about birds’.
He also made a comment on one of his early poems that it belonged to his ‘Imagist period’, adding almost sotto voce and in a typical Eliot way —‘if there was an Imagist period’.
He concluded by referring to some work he had been doing on Tennyson.
This was the Preface to a selection of the poems, which Leavis was to handle roughly, as he felt that Eliot had no business to be praising Tennyson, any more than later he had any business to be endorsing Kipling.
When the votes of thanks and other formalities were over, I was able to have a brief word with him as he emerged into the vestibule.
I said I wanted him to meet my Somerville friend, who, with a fellow-student, was by pre-arrangement sitting on an inner windowsill, from which with an air of spontaneity I was able to summon them down.
I can see them perched up there now, swinging their legs.
In particular I recall how the fellow-student, in that breathless voice of teenage girls, strangled in this case with awe, asked him whether he knew some Italian poet whose name I could  not catch.
Eliot could not it first hear it either and bending down with a friendly expression, asked her to repeat the name.
He then answered her gently, saying that he did not know that particular poet but that he knew so-and-so and so-and-so from Italy.
And he concluded with a half-smile that put the girl in a condition of partial ecstasy.
If she should by chance ever read these words, I think she would confirm not merely that this was how he spoke but that I have not misrepresented her reactions.
Having delivered Eliot to those who were looking after him for the night, we walked back to our colleges discussing the evening, with the ardour of youth which included that most interesting of contests, the comparison of recollections.
This produced the usual tangle of discrepancy.
Soon after this I embarked on another essay, under what stimulus I do not now remember; but I had formed the habit, not of revising or tinkering with an unsatisfactory piece, but of writing something else instead.
This was a politico-literary piece, and it brought the following response, dated 5 may 1936.
I replied at once to say that I should be in London shortly and suggested a meeting on Thursday, 14 May.
This elicited a reply from his secretary, Brigid O'Donovan, on 12 May, confirming this date.
Years later this lady of character was to write a rather moving piece entitled ‘The Love Song of T. S. Eliot’ secretary (Confrontation, Long Island University, Winter 1975); and from what Eliot said once, though half-jocularly, when he and his wife and I were having a meal together, there was more than one secretary who could have composed such a Love Song, or at least who had the necessarily incentive or excuse, I vaguely recall the lady as of ample build and very cheerful, so she was able to put good face on her sad plight.
As tea had been decided upon, I arrived as planned at 3.30 p.m.
This was to involve a procedure familiar to many who arrived in the afternoon at Russell Square.
Seated at his desk in the corner by the window, Eliot would switch his chair round, and the guest would be settled down opposite.
The tea was brought in usually by what seemed a Faber handyman, with whom Eliot would often exchange some kind of badinage.
It was a simple refreshment (‘jam is too much trouble’, to quote Stephen Spender's account), and one remembered things like the steady pouring from the teapot, held slightly aloft and repeatedly ritualistically, and no doubt with intent, half-way through the conversation.
On this occasion, we got straight down to business.
I think I must have expressed dissatisfaction with the ‘Poetry and Propaganda’ article, because, like others that I had submitted to him up to that point, it was never to appear.
In those days there seemed so many vistas ahead that I did not mind when I began to go public: it was sufficiently gratifying to feel that Eliot wanted to print some of my work in his good time and in mine.
I had already made my debut in Scrutiny, however, and he may have felt that this made it appropriate that I should have something equivalent in The Criterion.
These were after all the two leading literary journals.
He expressed interest in the article for Leavis, which had been called ‘Scrutiny of Modern Greats’, and he questioned me closely about the general intellectual mood at Oxford.
It was clear to me that his own personal preoccupations, such as had been conveyed to me by Father D'Arcy and hinted at by others, had cut him off from the workings of certain institutions — his unawareness of Collingwood's preferment was a case in point — and again he wanted to be informed what the young were thinking.
He was particularly interested in the condition of British philosophy.
There had been a moment in his career, as he declared in the interesting preface he wrote to Josef Pieper's Leisure the Basis of Culture and as Brand Blanshard has retailed in the Eliot Anniversary Issue of The Southern Review (1985),(‘Eliot at Oxford’), when, after a good deal of philosophical study, lie had decided to renounce the subject as such.
With one of those insights which showed a mind much subtler than that of many of his contemporaries, he had drawn an analogy between logical positivism and surrealism; but he told me on this occasion that he had once asked A.J. Ayer, as he then was, what political beliefs were compatible with logical positivism: to which the reply had been, not altogether to his surprise, that they  would be decidedly left-wing.
From some remarks in Sir Alfred Ayer's autobiography (Part of my Life Vol. 1, 1978), it seems that the two met infrequently and perhaps did not altogether get on.
Naturally, Eliot was pleased about my enthusiasm for Collingwood, for whom he had considerable regard; but although he told me he liked the Essay on Philosophical Method, which had appeared in 1933 and concerning which I had attended Collingwood's lecture-course in my first year, I could see that he was more interested in such works as A. E. Taylor's Faith of a Moralist, or more directly theological works, such as those of Jacques Maritain.
He spoke about the need for an ‘exact’ theology, and Maritain, with his handbooks on logic, gave the impression of exactitude which most English theologians, brought up in the Hegelian tradition, failed to do.
At the same time, although he much liked Maritain as a person (as who could not?), he felt that the French post-Bergsonian intellectual approach, even if called ‘Neo-scholastique’, differed markedly from that of St Thomas himself: it was the difference between a hovering darting kestrel and a ‘dumb ox’ pawing the ground.
Another function in London which I was able to attend was a lecture by Eliot at that same Group Theatre at which I had seen Sweeney Agonistes.
He had not long declared that poetry was a ‘mug's game’; and Rupert Doone, not the most accomplished of public speakers, got rather tied up by trying to say that Eliot was not himself a mug and yet somehow implying that, for saying such a thing he must be.
Eliot produced a single page of notes from his pocket which he placed before him on the small table and brooded over for a while; but when he started, he managed to pack in, during 45 minutes or so, a great deal of sound sense on the subject of drama and especially on the relation of drama to religion.
He had a habit of beginning each section with some arresting phrase such as‘Savages and churchmen…’, which made the audience sit up.
By stating that he rarely went to the theatre, and needed to be forcibly taken there if he went at all, he managed to lay bare the inadequacies of modern drama and defined the conditions of a new sort of drama altogether.
One point he made which I have rarely seen put forward so well: that the audience cannot be expected to follow any profound drama at all levels at once, and that there may be certain aspects which remain beyond the audience's comprehension altogether.
Every play should leave a question-mark.
And like the performance of the liturgy, the audience may not actually hear everything that is being declaimed.
He gave in that connection some instances from The Rock, which he described not so much as a play as a revue, a word he pronounced in the French manner.
Then, after a longer pause than usual, he affirmed: ‘And that is as far as my thought has reached’.
It lent to his words an air of impressive finality, as if he had been thinking out each point for the first time and had come to a halt.
I had only a brief opportunity of shaking his hand at the end, as I was obliged to rush back to Oxford before I was ‘gated’.
Routine played an important part in Eliot's life.
Without it, I doubt if he could have undertaken such work is he did.
There was a moment, particularly at tea, when I would sense that our conversation was, so far as he was concerned, due to come to an end.
I would therefore display a becoming restiveness, or look round for the usual dispatch-case, so that when he started slowly rising to his feet, which he did as if by some inner mechanism, I could, like an adjoining lift, follow him slightly behindhand.
There was only one occasion when, either preoccupied or through sheer inattentiveness, I found him rising before I had made preparations to follow.
I remember feeling a good deal embarrassed, which he imperturbably pretended not to notice, thereby perhaps further teaching me a lesson in Eliot-etiquette, though he was the last person deliberately to make anyone feel uneasy.
Before I left, I expressed the hope that he could pay another visit to Oxford, though this time a purely private one, and I see that I wrote to him repeating this towards the end of term — the final term — because on 17 June he replied to my home address:
Back home, I wrote to him on 4 July, enclosing a shortish essay which the comparative leisure afforded by leaving Oxford had made possible.
This produced a reply which I am sure was wholly deserved (though I cannot remember the essay), as were his comments on an earlier submission.
As will be seen, I had not quite expelled from my  system the preoccupation with Rowse's views; and while one barrier to their expression had been removed, the other — that the book was no longer the target it had once been — had just been erected.
But true to his plan not to do anything to interrupt, or to deflect me from, my studies, while I was up at Oxford, he took the first opportunity, now that I had gone down, to enlist my services with The Criterion.
On 14 July, he wrote:
The statement ‘I notice that you have nothing to review for the next number’ could only have been written by him.
I had noticed it too, and I was all the more pleased with the prospect of doing something in what was coming to be my other sphere of interest, namely, literature and especially poetry.
Moreover, a change from philosophy was in many ways to be desired, as it so often is.
I had  found myself reacting more and more against the linguistic/logical positivist approach; and, shortly after its appearance in 1936, I had written a sustained diatribe against A. J. Ayer's Language, Truth and Logic (1936).
This appeared in Scrutiny, and attracted some notice, not least from Ayer himself, with whom I was later to form a warm friendship.
But I looked to a philosophical point of view more comprehensive even than that of the early Collingwood, and I thought I had found the germ of it in the lectures he delivered in my last year on ‘Nature and Mind’.
This I still consider the most brilliant course of lectures I have ever heard anywhere, and I have heard a great many.
(The lectures were posthumously published in 1945 under the title of The Idea of Nature.)
I turn aside to record this judgment, because it is relevant to a later stage of this memoir.
Another reason why I needed a change, or something else by way of reaction, was an increasing interest in current politics.
I had been given a very short time to assimilate the books of poetry and to write the review: a time-limit that would have been almost impossible for me to meet today, so much more sluggish has my mind become; but I felt that if Eliot thought I could do the job, it was doubtless within my capacity.
The typescript was delivered on time, perhaps a little early.
Indeed, I much enjoyed the work; and, in view of my interest in aesthetics (stimulated by a study of a man almost considered unmentionable in these days, Benedetto Croce), I relished the opportunity of discussing the nature of poetry.
Eliot printed the review in the issue of The Criterion for 1936.
It was not as good as I should have wished, partly because I was in a hurry, but also partly because I had not yet learnt — if I was ever to master — the technique of literary criticism.
In fact, George Every, then a lay brother at Kelham, with whom I had started a correspondence, told me later that Eliot, while praising some individual points, had said that the general impression it gave was of material being put through a machine and coming out the other side more or less as it was before.
The simile was so striking and no doubt so apt, and one that was so delightfully Eliotish, that I could not take offence, though a critical word from that quarter could deal a heavy blow to one's morale.
Apart from this stricture, I think I overestimated Dorothy Wellesley and perhaps underrated Marianne Moore.
Years later, when I met, through Eliot's sister-in-law, that charming, modest, retiring lady in Brooklyn, I was relieved to find that she had liked what I had written about her.
1 The author as a schoolboy.
2 A passport photograph of T. S. Eliot in 1932.
3 T. S. Eliot in his office at Faber & Faber in the early years.
4 Extract from the author's early essay on ‘The Younger Generation and Politics’, submitted to Faber & Faber when at school, inscribed with T.S.
Eliot's notes.
5 T.S.
Eliot in his office at Faber & Faber.
His room was always crowded with books.
6 T.S.
Eliot's visiting card with the address at Harvard given to the author at their second meeting, 1931.
7 T.S.
Eliot in the grounds at Kelham, headquarters of the Society of Sacred Mission, taken in the mid-1930s.
8 The chapel at Kelham.
T.S.
Eliot was a frequent visitor to the monastery.
9 T. S. Eliot's visiting card accompanying flowers sent to the author in Guy's Hospital.
10 Drawing of T.S.
Eliot by the author based on a photograph in The Green Quarterly , and from observation, 1937.
11 A wartime airgraph to the author from T.S.
Eliot.
12 Photograph of the author, taken in Paris, 1947.
13 T.S.
Eliot being wheeled into the French Hospital, Shaftesbury Avenue, after being taken ill on an Atlantic crossing.
The photograph appeared in the Evening Standard , 12 June, 1956.
14 Drawing of T.S.
Eliot asleep, Cambridge, Mass., by his sister-in-law, Theresa Eliot.
15 T.S.
Eliot in relaxed mood in his office at Faber & Faber.
16 T.S.
Eliot and his wife photographed in the early morning, following a celebration of the opening of The Elder Statesman , 26 September, 1958.
17 T.S.
Eliot's congratulatory letter to the author, 17 June, 1959.
18 The T.S.
Eliot memorial tablet in the south transept of St Stephen's, Gloucester Road.
CHAPTER FOUR
The year 1936 was an eventful one.
The threat of unemployment, even for apparently ‘qualified’ people, was such that I had to cast round desperately for a job.
Teaching was the only practical possibility though one of the few other options was acting as an agent for Tootals ties.
Finally, I secured a post as an assistant master at Sloane School, Chelsea, the headmaster of which, Guy Boas, himself a writer, was the son of the Shakespeare scholar who had taken the chair at Eliot's King's College lecture.
As Eliot had allowed me to give his name as a reference, my appointment, in the face of a number of other young men hungry for employment and no doubt better qualified (for I had neither teaching experience nor teaching qualifications), may well have owed much to him.
As to the teaching profession, he said that he could have wished me to have obtained a less demanding post, if I wanted to write, because his experience at Highgate School had led him to believe that teaching, if conscientiously undertaken, was one of the most exhausting of occupations; and, though I do not regret the experience, I was to discover that regarding its rigours he was right.
At the beginning of the year George V died and Edward VIII acceded to the throne.
By the end of the year he had abdicated.
In my small way, because I felt that the whole business had been handled most unsatisfactorily by Baldwin and exploited by others, including the Archbishop of Canterbury, I plunged into the resulting controversy.
It seemed to me that the matrimonial question could have been dealt with more sympathetically and with greater understanding, as perhaps Winston Churchill could have handled it.
(In fact, his conduct in the crisis nearly ruined  his career.)
So I wrote a strong article on the subject in the New English Weekly.
This was critical of a piece written by Maurice Reckitt.
Philip Mairet, the editor, who was sympathetic to my views, tried to persuade Eliot to contribute his, and he eventually agreed to do so.
The developments that occurred: the extraordinary behaviour of certain sections of the press; and the later career of the Duke of Windsor, provoked in me both short-term and long-term disillusionment; but I do not intend to go into any further detail here, though I cannot repudiate what I said.
My growing interest in politics, however, was reflected in Eliot's letter to me of 4 January 1937:
He had already sent me the Strachey book, The Theory and Practice of Marxism, and Spender's, the original title of which was The Approach to Communism, seemed to me to go with it very well.
Again, I am amazed that I accomplished the job so quickly seeing that most of the work was done at weekends.
I am no less interested to observe that, for Eliot, who always seemed unhurried, ‘there is plenty of time’ could mean a period of not much more than three weeks for reading (the Strachey book being pretty long), writing typing and dispatching: which, given the fact that Spender's book had not arrived, that I was teaching all day and conducting some evening classes, I still consider a tight fit.
As his next letter, dated 11 January showed, the Spender book could not have reached me before 12 January at the earliest, and I wanted to keep to the length of an article.
By the middle of January 1937, he had spoken to Mairet, and he gave the impression that anything he might write about the crisis in the New English Weekly would be done with some reluctance, not least because he was extremely busy.
The church and state broadcasts to which he referred in his next letter were noteworthy as containing one of his own, of which I thought highly.
On 15 January 1937 he had written:
As for his suggestion that I should comment or write on the series, I did not follow this up.
Save for his own contribution  and not out of slavish concurrence with his views, I found the talks even duller to read than to hear.
Meanwhile, to my surprise and gratification — given his heavy schedule — he wrote an article for the New English Weekly (25 February 1937) entitled ‘Mr Reckitt, Mr Tomlin and the Crisis’.
This began with some flattering words about us both, and implied that he had for long been unable to make up his mind about the abdication.
Indeed he had changed it several times a day while the crucial events were occurring.
But the points he made were chiefly concerned with moral questions affecting the status of divorce, on which he had strong views: whereas I had been occupied more with the Baldwin government and its apparent wish to stifle certain political views, especially concerning unemployment, to which the King had given expression.
These had boiled down to the supposed constitutionally irregular remark that ‘something must be done’.
I also found certain sections of the press grossly biased; and when a representative of the Daily Express called at the New English Weekly office and asked for a copy of the relevant issue, I thought I might be involved in a libel action.
Today, when even Catholic priests are prepared to advocate radical departures from conventional morality, Eliot's views may appear nostalgically old-fashioned.
But that did not perturb me.
What caused me concern was, as I say, the slightly uncomfortable feeling that Eliot had been bounced into writing an article which he did not particularly relish doing and to which he would in any case have wished to devote much more reflection.
Philip Mairet had written to me on 14 February 1937 saying that Eliot had ‘promised’ an article.
I therefore wrote to express the hope that I had not appeared to expect him to intervene; that I did not necessarily disagree with what he said; and that my underlying feeling was that the Baldwin government, though apparently trying to get rid of a bad king, might damage the monarchy at a time when a great international crisis seemed to be upon us.
In this I was happily to be proved wrong, but who could have known that at the time?
(For those interested in the whole question, I consider John Grigg's account of the Duke of Windsor in the DNB to be the fairest assessment I know.)
To this letter I received a reply dated I March which contained some of the most interesting remarks he ever communicated to me, and which is of permanent value in reflecting his opinions on much wider issues:
It was a relief to read those lines, especially the third paragraph.
They are worth a great deal even today, because of the familiar insinuations that Eliot was as much a political reactionary as a religious bigot.
He was neither.
He once called liberalism a form of bigotry, but he did not particularly mind being called a bigot himself.
Whenever he spoke of these matters it was with a flexibility and charity such as those holding views less firm did not always display.
With regard to the Church, however, one wonders how far today such flexibility would have been exercised.
His enquiry about my whereabouts was due to our having moved house.
Merstham was in a slightly more rural area of Surrey, and one upon which we had always looked with favour.
This meant a slightly longer, but more pleasant, train journey to London; and it presented no problems about staying up in the evening, whereas with my school duties lunch was out of the question.
I wrote to tell him this, and also referring to another book he had sent me, and I received a reply dated 19 March 1937:
The attendance at St Stephen's did not happen for reasons which he would explain, and I was sorry to have missed it.
It would have thrown light on Eliot's attitude to the liturgy and to the drama, which in his view were indissolubly linked, though he realized the temptation to enjoy the emotions of the Mass for their own sake; a point he had made in his ‘Dialogue on Poetic Drama’.
One of the merits of Father Cheetham as Vicar — a man who played an important role in Eliot's life — was that he was, if the expression is not irreverent, a fine ecclesiastical showman.
I was not to attend St Stephen's until years later, when I lived in the parish; but meanwhile I had attended Tenebrae more than once, and had indeed found it beautiful and moving, with the abrupt strepitacula somehow reinforcing the effect.
In this instance, there had been a mix-up, and for once Eliot's memory had played him tricks.
In a letter which has disappeared, he said that he could not manage 24 March after all, and he explained why in a letter dated that same day.
The visit to Scotland, which reinforced both his affection for the beauty of that country and his interest in her history (for he was always attached to small countries or communities which had clung  to their traditions) had produced the poem ‘Rannoch, by Glencoe’, published in the New English Weekly, 17 October 1935.
In the next letter he wrote me, dated 7 May, he announced that he was to have a holiday; and this I knew to be much overdue.
The New English Weekly article was a follow-up to one I wrote about the abdication crisis.
It would probably read very stale now, if I could bring myself to look at it.
I did not wonder that it failed to ‘shake’ Eliot.
All I can say is that this excursion into public affairs further encouraged me in a project I had already formed: namely to write a book on political theory, to be entitled Liberal and Servile Society.
I intended the word liberal to mean ‘free’, not as identifying me with the almost defunct Liberal Party of that epoch.
As this turns up later in the memoir, I need only report that, out of dissatisfaction, I scrapped the manuscript more than once, and therefore I did not show it to Eliot just then.
I forget how it was that I told Maurice  Reckitt about it before Eliot, who usually received prior intelligence about my activities in this sphere.
The Marxist book I reviewed with several others in The Criterion for October 1937.
On 25 May I dined with Eliot at the Oxford and Cambridge Club.
On meeting him again, I at once noticed that he was looking unusually well and bronzed.
He told me he had been in Austria and he mentioned how ‘handsome’ he had found the people.
Altogether he struck me as being in better spirits than usual; and I learnt later, though not from him and I cannot vouch for its veracity, that he had had himself psychoanalysed.
I doubt whether this implied anything lurid; it may have been just a consultation.
Years earlier he had resided briefly at a clinic with Vivien, where Robert Sencourt claimed to have first met them both: and earlier still he had spoken of a mental condition of ‘long-standing’.
Concerning this there has been much speculation.
I believe that it was, or had some connection with, a species of agoraphobia, which in his case manifested itself as an acute fear of heights.
He told me about this condition quite openly, including the impulse to throw himself over cliffs etc.
At the Canterbury Eliot Symposium in 1983, Tom Faber mentioned the attacks of vertigo Eliot suffered while on holiday in Wales.
What the psychiatrists or psychoanalysts make of this condition I do not know.
If in order to get to the root of it Eliot consulted a Viennese expert, the result was not evidently a cure, because I believe he suffered from it all his life: but the consultation, if that was what it was, may have benefited him by disclosure —‘the luxury of an intimate disclosure to a stranger’.
Seated opposite each other, we naturally began by discussing the ‘crisis’.
Next to that of Suez in 1956, it had divided more families than any I can remember.
He began by saying: ‘Well, we both agree it's a bad business’— an indication that the subject was still alive months after the accession of a new king.
I found him sympathetic, though still in principle opposed to the line I had taken.
Indeed he agreed that a great deal of hypocrisy had been involved in what Macaulay had called one of the ‘fits of morality’ to which the British nation was periodically subject.
I also think he had been slightly influenced by Father D'Arcy, with whom lie had apparently been in recent touch.
The Catholic intelligentsia had been highly critical of the way the government had conducted itself: Blackfriars, the Oxford Dominican journal, had taken a line which I found especially sympathetic; and D'Arcy, to whom I had sent my  article, wrote to me expressing approval of my stand.
He was a staunch monarchist, and possibly even more of a king's man that Eliot.
Our conversation moved cautiously round the subject of corruption in public life, and I quoted Burke, whose Thoughts on the Present Discontents I had been studying, to the effect that wisdom consisted in part in deciding how much evil to tolerate.
I suppose I was defending a monarchy that had in the past seen some unsuitable sovereigns, while he somewhat deftly applied the same argument to unsatisfactory prime ministers.
Looking back, I find one point interesting: the chief actors in the drama, Baldwin and the Duke of Windsor, were both to fall in public esteem, and the reputation of neither seems likely to recover.
Although Eliot expressed some liking for Edward VIII as a man, he felt he lacked character.
He also referred to some presumed sexual oddity, which had made the unfortunate Prince lean more heavily on the one woman, out of a number, who seemed able to cope with it.
That Eliot tended to be curious in such matters, others have noted, and they have sometimes inferred some oddity in his own make-up.
I rather felt it testified to the contrary.
At any rate, in those days such matters were rarely discussed in detail, let alone in a London Club, and we did not pursue the subject.
We moved to a discussion of events at home.
From 10 to 23 of the month there had been a bus-strike, which had naturally caused a great deal of inconvenience.
The busmen's case had been that their strict schedules made the satisfactory operation of physical functions difficult.
At that time, strikes were regarded by most members of the middle class as conspiracies against the established order, as sometimes they may have been; but this particular stoppage, concerning itself chiefly with man's natural being and constitution, seemed to Eliot to be quite different from the normal down-tools affair.
‘I'm all for the busmen’, he remarked decisively.
And he meant it.
He was a very radical conservative, more genuinely radical than many or the rabble-rousers who had monopolized the term, and even than the members of the intelligentsia who claimed to have the ‘workers’ interests at heart.
When I told my friends Bill Page and Bill Adams, both of whom were bus inspectors and the first of whom had been at Whitgift with me, they were astounded.
They had assumed without question that Eliot, the royalist and high churchman, would have sided automatically with the establishment or what was then called the ruling class.
Except to say that it was scrupulously chosen, as was usual with Eliot, I forget what we ate on the occasion: we had so much to talk about.
What I do recall is that we drank beer which Eliot, like George Saintsbury, regarded as having certain virtues, especially at lunch-time, which wine did not possess.
It also enabled him to wrap his hand round the glass, even if it had a handle, in a manner peculiarly his own.
When we adjourned to the lounge, he glanced down at a newspaper that had been cast aside, commenting in a murmur: ‘the usual half-finished crossword!’
No doubt the sight afforded him quiet amusement, because he was a crossword expert himself, being renowned for finishing The Times daily puzzle in record time.
But I think it also reflected his sense of the inherent fragmentary nature of life.
Once settled in an armchair, he took out a shortish but fairly carbonized pipe and began smoking.
Noticing that I was not provided for, he slapped his right-side coat pocket and, diving in, produced an opened packet of Gauloise Bleu, from which loose container he took out a cigarette.
Then, as now, the smell of Gauloises would immediately evoke Paris, and to one accustomed, as I then was, to Players or Craven A, a French cigarette was still a novelty.
But what struck me then was the idea of his habitually alternating with pipe and cigarette-smoking.
Over the years this must have harmed his chest, as it had already badly discoloured his teeth.
Yet I could see, sitting next to him, that it brought him contentment which at other levels he lacked.
He also enjoyed luxuriating a little after a meal, and at such moments he seemed all the more benign and at peace even with himself.
Having by then disposed of public affairs, he asked me about my work at the LCC school.
As stated, he understood only too well the problems and burdens of schoolmastering.
He reiterated one of the problems that dogged him throughout life, which was fatigue; for although he had on the whole a ‘tough’ constitution — at least he liked to think so — and tremendous will-power, he had driven himself very hard over the past twenty years.
This and his personal worries, which must have seemed without issue, were perhaps responsible for a certain reliance, though by no means dependence, on alcohol.
True I never saw him the worse for drink, but often the better.
He was perhaps one of those people, myself included, who, to quote a character in a Compton Mackenzie novel, were born two whiskies below par.
Except in a reference to the composition of Sweeney  Agonistes, he wrote little about the place of alcohol, or any other narcotic, in literary creation.
But he mentioned in an essay the degree to which certain forms of anaemia were conducive to such creation; and, in our conversation that day, he described how, when he was working on The Waste Land in Switzerland in 1921 (‘by the waters of Leman’), he felt at one moment that his brain was going to burst.
That is perhaps the reason for his saying, in an interview late in life, that at that moment, he ‘did not know what he was writing’.
Indeed, the poem has all the inevitability of subconscious control.
He more than once declared that, compared with schoolmastering, work at the bank was almost a rest cure.
But it had its problems, even so.
One of them was his habitual slowness, especially in handling and totting up cash; for, before he took up duties in the foreign exchange department of Lloyds in the semi-basement room at the branch at 20 King William Street (no wonder that the eyes and back, at the end of the day, turned ‘upward’ from the desk), he worked for a period behind the counter.
He seems to have pleased certain customers; he was once, as he told me, presented over the grille with some game, which, before accepting, he was naturally obliged to take to the manager's office.
The sight of the slim, prim, young American moving towards the managerial door carrying a brace of partridges, or whatever it was, must have been diverting.
I think he enjoyed the bank, not merely because it was a change from teaching, but because the City exerted so great a fascination over him.
With the river, the hemmed-in churches, and certain pubs, it provided much of the raw material of The Waste Land.
Moreover, as he made clear, he found the measured pace and rhythm of the work especially congenial, coinciding as it did with a period of remarkable creative gestation.
He was always against the Poet's Pub idea.
To him, the poetry of taverns resided in their authentic atmosphere, not one rendered bogus by the intrusion of ‘art’.
Like all office work, as I myself knew only too well, the bank was not invariably plain-sailing.
A letter I came across in the Houghton Library at Harvard bemoans to his father an incident in which, for some reason, he had offended a women clerk to whom he had consigned some typing.
The incident, which has parallels in most people' experience, irked him evidently a good deal; for he could not leave the subject alone.
I must have said something about being in reasonably, good health despite a rather dismal daily round of commuting to Charing Cross and a crawl by bus up the King's Road to the appropriately named  World's End pub, but that I was more tormented at that time with a clash of affections with two young ladies.
For the purpose of this memoir, the details are irrelevant, and my experience was commonplace to that time of life; but I needed to talk to someone.
What struck me was the way in which he seemed to have little difficulty not merely in coming down to my level but in entering into my feelings, as if I were telling him about the most natural matter in the world.
Later, I reflected that to be in receipt of confidences of this kind, if my own experience was anything to go by, could be insufferably taxing to the patience.
If this were so in the present case, he concealed the fact with remarkable aplomb; but my impression was that he rather welcomed this degree of personal contact, as if it provided some sort of relief from the heavy intellectual conversation repeatedly forced upon him.
If ‘we hear the key turn each in his prison’, it may be a satisfaction to find occasionally that entry rather than closure is being sought; for while he had a great many acquaintances and, as his fame increased, hundreds who wanted to meet him if only in order to say they had done so, he lacked relationships which were simple, straightforward, and stable.
At any rate, whenever I abandoned the usual literary-cum-public-affairs talk, I would observe him, as in this instance, perceptibly to relax.
In fact, I felt he was more than ready to discuss male-female relations.
Looking back he said he realised how clumsily he had behaved in certain situations, and indeed what an ‘unpleasant’ person (that was the adjective he used) he knew he had sometimes been.
Whether this referred to the monocle-and-green-face-powder period (though the latter can, I believe, be explained by a skin rash), I have no idea.
A possible clue to this unusual verbal spate of self-revelation, which caused me some surprise, was, as we now know, that he was at that time engaged in writing The Family Reunion.
Writing the play brought back a whole period of his early life: not merely the marriage to Vivien but the friendship with Emily Hale.
That companion of his undergraduate years, who obviously hoped that one day she would replace Vivien, was visiting England during the school vacation.
Her visit, which had been repeated since 1935, was, I learnt later, not an unmixed pleasure for him.
Nevertheless, in speaking of the different ‘rhythms’ of which any relationship needed to take account, he showed a pretty shrewd understanding of the female character; an understanding which has sometimes been denied.
He brought our conversation to an end by alluding once more to the past; and in comparing the difference between his present achievements and the tribulations that had led up to it (though he did not put it quite like that), he appeared to coin on the Spot an Epigram which, so far as I know, he never committed to print but of which there are echoes in The Family Reunion.
‘Success’, he propounded, ‘is what a man does with his failure’.
He then gave me a slight shock by lapsing into a brief sort of reverie, and saying that if one had ever felt like ‘murdering someone’, one could never do anything about it.
Something had been registered in the past and in one's own being and that was that.
I recalled the lines from Sweeney Agonistes: This was to be echoed later by Harry's impression in The Family Reunion of having killed his wife.
In view of the evasive comments he later made on this latter episode (Canon Demant tells of his being pressed by some German students and saying that he was the last person to be able to answer them), I believe that he had experienced a moment of horrifying self-revelation ‘of all that he had done and been’ and thought, which had opened up a wound that could not heal.
This, it seems to me, and not some homosexual fantasy, was what The Waste Land, with its afflicted Fisher King, was basically about.
I could not help feeling that this particular meeting of ours proved a milestone, at least for me; and thereafter I found it easier to get through to him, as in after years I sometimes needed to do, on that wavelength.
In view of the remarks about the hypersensitivity of a man ‘who could be extremely shy and nervous in the company of other people’(to quote Ackroyd's paraphrase of his own words to Djuna Barnes in 1951), I should like to record that, save in respect of sensitivity, I never found him like that.
It was a privilege for me to be invited to one of the Criterion Evenings which were held at irregular intervals at 24 Russell Square.
This was what today would be described as a prestigious event.
I recall that on this occasion there were present — besides Geoffrey Faber and other members of his staff — Dylan Thomas, William Empson, A. L. Rowse, Charles Madge, Babette Deutsch (who had just published a book called This Modern Poetry), and some Faber and Criterion authors.
Eliot, the most commanding figure there, dominated the assembly in the quietest way possible.
He never seemed to raise his voice, whereas Empson, who rapidly got tight, would end every other sentence with a ‘whoop’, accompanied by a lunge endangering the wine glasses of anyone who happened to be near.
Dylan Thomas arrived drunk and, as I gathered, was particularly foul-mouthed.
In contrast to the parties given in his honour, from which Eliot would contrive to slip away after a token attendance, these functions, never too large, were the kind he most enjoyed.
He could preside without being too much the centre of attention.
He once told me that he found a company of not more than eleven people the most congenial.
And although his name will always be associated with a Cocktail Party he found such uproarious assemblies, at which no one could have a satisfactory conversation, increasingly insupportable.
The Criterion Evenings, at which there was food as well as drink in quantity, used to continue until fairly late.
Towards the end of the soirée, Eliot stood for a while by himself in a seemingly abstracted state, and, looking at him across the room, I could not decide whether he was looking in my direction or not.
I felt he had been struck by some arresting thought.
On departure, many of the younger guests, deeming themselves insufficiently primed, were about to ‘go on’ somewhere, and in the end I found myself alone on the pavement with Eliot.
It was a clear but rather chilly night.
As usual, I felt that, on taking leave, I ought to proceed in a direction opposite to that which he was taking, because there was a mystery as to where Eliot lived, and I did not want to appear inquisitive.
He glanced up at the sky and remarked: ‘There's nowhere to go at this time of night’, at which I said that I would be going home, and moved off to the right.
This proved the correct thing to do, as he turned to the left at a brisk pace.
Later I heard from more than one person how, landed with him outside Faber's, they had been conscious that he was waiting from them to take their leave first, as he was reluctant to provide any clue as to the whereabouts of his home.
About this time Wyndham Lewis expressed the wish to paint the Somerville friend of mine, and the ‘Portrait of Miss Close’ appears in Walter Michel's compendium (No. 5).
As a result of the controversy over the rejection by the Royal Academy of his portrait of T. S. Eliot, Lewis had resumed the kind of fame he had attained before the First World War.
During the sittings, he was always in good spirits; and as long as you did not try to glimpse what he was putting up on the canvas, he would dilate on any subject that took his fancy.
He  spoke often of Eliot, trying from time to time to poke gentle fun at him.
As Lewis was very fond of champagne, he had offered Eliot some during a sitting in the spring of 1937.
Eliot had apparently declined it on the plea that it was Lent.
He murmured that he would have some whisky instead.
This had greatly tickled Lewis.
The truth was, I suppose, that by renouncing champagne, of which he was as fond as Lewis, Eliot felt that he was exercising a measure of self-denial.
Lewis several times commented on Eliot's capacity for alcohol, which, as I have mentioned, seemed never visibly to affect him.
In fact, Lewis was in no position to reproach his friend on that score, because he would drink far too heavily himself, which in his case was against doctor's orders.
Eliot was worried that I should have money troubles with Lewis, and in this he was right.
But Miss Close's father was a man of substance, and he finally bought the picture for a rather large sum.
It was in the late summer of 1937 that I took the train to Newark, in Nottinghamshire, and paid a visit to Kelham, centre of the Community of the Resurrection.
I had been invited there by George Every, and he chose a time when Eliot would be coming up too.
It was the first occasion, but by no means the last, on which I stayed in a monastery.
As a particularly honoured guest, Eliot sat at High Table, whereas others like myself were placed among the students or ‘novices’, and I preferred it that way.
Eliot had arranged with me beforehand that we should have a private meeting, and meanwhile I sank myself into the communal life of the place.
The weather was perfect: the memory of such a ‘distant summer’ endows it with possibly exaggerated serenity.
Apart from offices, we spent most of the time outside.
In those days before Vatican II and Honest to God, there were few —; and those scarcely noticeable — upheavals in theology or morals; and behaviour tolerated today not merely in students but in their religious instructors (see Some Day I'll Find You by Harry Williams), would have been unthinkable then.
If anything, there was a kind of competitive emulation of piety.
When the young men, released from silence, were not talking about ‘shows’ in London — which, as their only excursion into permissiveness held out vistas of slightly forbidden enjoyments — they commented with a kind of awe on the ardour of devotion which Eliot was Seen to display at Mass.
It is true that Eliot went through all the ritual gestures with almost perfect precision; and his impeccably-dressed figure stood out among the  rather battered brethren stationed in front of us.
I noticed as he moved forwards, that he swung his head slightly from side to side.
But I always felt that, despite his liking for ritual and pageantry, his religious life was something very personal — indeed, intensely so.
To quote his own words,
One felt that he regarded this task, the task of gaining ‘spiritual freedom’, as the supreme, and never quite realizable, end of the religious life, with which no form of humanism could compete.
And this was necessarily an inward thing, not a matter of hieratic gestures.
But the ritual was nevertheless a way of protecting the devotional intimacy, whereas the non-liturgical denominations exposed it in a way he would have found offensive.
Of the devotional intimacy, I suspect that few people, including even some priest confessors, were afforded any glimpse.
My private meeting with Eliot was in the afternoon.
I was to go up to his room and tap on the door.
This I did, and, on hearing a rather sleepy ‘Come in’, entered.
Eliot was stretched the length of his iron bedstead.
Theresa Eliot's sketch of him (see plate 14) recalls what he looked like.
On the bedside table, he was in the act of placing a Bible, so that he may have dropped off into a doze while reading it.
Sitting up, he was overcome with one of those slow yawns that seem like a prolonged agony, which he stopped with his hand, murmuring, when sufficient oxygen had been inhaled, that he was not yet properly awake.
In view of the warm weather, he suggested that we should take a walk, for which purpose he would change into lighter things.
In a moment, he was off the bed, whipping off his belt and slipping down his trousers.
Although I remember him stepping out of them and the sight of his white pants, I felt it was not seemly to observe too closely: otherwise I should have been able to verify the assertion that his underclothes were American but the rest very English.
With the prudishness of the day, I glanced aside until he had pulled on a pair of greyers.
The whole operation was performed with such  straightforward openness that I believe, had he observed my slight embarrassment — which stemmed chiefly from the unexpectedness of the action — he would have been a trifle put out.
He then ripped off his tie.
At any rate, I can say that I am one of the few people who saw T. S. Eliot with his trousers down.
He was a great strider.
There was no greater contrast than between his slowness of speech and quickness of pace.
We walked for quite a long time and covered a good deal of ground.
Now that he was thoroughly awake, he seemed particularly buoyant in spirits, which at that time was rare.
We began by talking politics, which he enjoyed doing with someone not out to convert him to socialism — then, as now, the established faith of most intellectuals — and, referring to A. L. Rowse's fervent attempts, the first of many, to persuade him to join the Labour Party, he flung wide his arms and said: ‘I refuse to be tied down to allegiances of this kind.’
To him, Labour was not merely a political party; subscription to it entailed embracing the faith, the doctrine of socialism, an that was to embrace an.
ersatz religion.
One (genuine) religion was enough.
As we approached the river, the Trent, which had a bathing-place in the grounds, he mentioned that he had already had a dip and recommended it.
The river was running fast and I learnt later that bathing could be perilous.
That he was a good and strong swimmer I assumed, because his American youth had familiarized him with the sea and coastal sailing; but, owing to his agoraphobia, I cannot exactly imagine him enjoying a high dive.
Eventually we made our way back to the terrace and sat down on a bank.
We began talking in a general way about modern theologians.
All of us young people, even unbelievers, had been taking an interest in Thomism.
This was largely as a result of Eliot's own initiative; and what we knew of it was derived from the works of Jacques Maritain, which were largely the source, I suspect, of Eliot's own knowledge.
He commented then, what he was to say in print later, that while he found Maritain a most charming man, his philosophical work, though claiming to reflect at every point Thomist orthodoxy, was in spirit quite unlike that of St Thomas: by which I presume he meant that Maritain had converted Thomas Aquinas into a French intellectual.
The formidable names of Sertillanges, Garrigue-Lagrange, and Cajetan were like archetypal figures.
He then went on to say that, despite this qualification, he still greatly respected Maritain, but that another theologian with whom, after an initial enthusiasm, he had become somewhat disillusioned was Berdyaev.
I could well understand why; a ‘Christian theosophist’ or ‘believing free-thinker’was not quite Eliot's cup of tea.
I imagine that Eliot's early admiration, if that was not too strong a word, was due to Berdyaev's excellent little book on the Russian Revolution; a movement of which four years' personal experience was enough to dispel early hopes.
I remember that we got round to talking about historical hindsight, or the kind of attitude to which André Maurois (to whom I was to introduce Eliot years later) referred when he imagined a man saying ‘Gentlemen, we are about to enter upon the Middle Ages’.
It was amazing how much Eliot knew about history, as I, who had just completed a History degree, my second qualification, had reason to know.
But just as Eliot remarked that Shakespeare acquired from Plutarch more essential knowledge than most men could from the whole British Museum, so he himself seemed to have acquired from books like F. S. Oliver's Endless Adventure an extraordinary grasp of historical movements and tendencies, for example the seventeenth century ‘disassociation of sensibility’ was a piece of historical perception which no pure historian would have been able to originate.
In this conversation he cited the case of Montaigne: here was a man who seemed to understand the kind of world he was living in.
At that time I knew very little about Montaigne: but Eliot had come to him through Shakespeare and the influences upon Shakespeare (who must have read the Apologie de Raymond Sebond); and, as he said in his essay on Pascal, Montaigne's outlook is the only credible alternative to that of belief.
It was an enormous subject upon which we had embarked, and I felt that, as a minor guest of the monastery, I must not monopolize the time of the guest whom everyone wanted to meet.
No doubt perceiving my uncertainty (for he had an extraordinary intuitive grasp of people's moods), he said: ‘Perhaps we each ought to talk to someone else.’
We got up and found ourselves roped in to join a group of Fathers dressed in light gear, as it was a hot day.
I found that they were engaged in retailing rather heavy jokes; and there came a point when Eliot, feeling perhaps that he ought to contribute, embarked upon a rather long story about George V. It ran somewhat as follows.
Wearing one of his more elaborate uniforms complete with medals, the monarch had been using a soda siphon, which, because of some defect, had backfired and showered him with mineral water.
Extremely annoyed, he had been obliged  to change his uniform, substitute another set of medals, and order that Schweppes (as I believe it was) should be informed of the royal displeasure.
That is why, according to Eliot, soda siphons from that firm — I have never checked this — bear on their labels some phrase to the effect that they had been thoroughly and exhaustively tested.
After this narration, delivered at a slow pace, there was just the slightest pause in case the denouement, instead of being reached, was still to come.
Then there followed polite, slightly hesitant, expressions of mirth.
I believe that that was the only occasion, in both public and private, that I saw Eliot not to his best advantage.
However I had perceived that he had been caught in that familiar predicament of being obliged to continue to the end of a story which half-way through he repented of having begun.
Otherwise he could be very funny, if always in a quiet way.
It was after this that Brother George (Every) and in his own way Father Gabriel (Herbert), whose book Faber's had published, told me that, on arrival at Kelham (as everybody called the monastic headquarters), Eliot had been extremely, if not painfully, shy: so much so that the Fathers had not known how to deal with him.
This applied in particular to the Prior, Father Stephen Bedale, a man of huge stature and extrovert character, and the kind of man who, had he been a layman, might have given the poet a hearty slap on the back in the belief that this would make him feel at home.
Of course it would have made him feel anything but that.
The truth is, I believe, that, while Eliot might have been fond of clubs, he was not, in the conventional sense, a clubbable man.
He was not gregarious.
The kind of company he would most have liked would have been that of a family, his own.
It is likely, as I have said in another place, that he preferred in general the company of women to men.
In my view the idea of his being monkish, or that he could have for a moment dreamt of entering a monastery, is not to be entertained, despite the claim of the Reverend William Levy in his Memoir.
At Kelham he seemed to enjoy the company of the lay brothers and the students more than that of the fathers, though I fancy he enjoyed the company of the more lively minded among them, such as Father Gabriel, a shrewd and lively thinker.
After the first day, his manner had thawed, and, no doubt refreshed by his dip in the river, he was in good enough spirits when I had my talk with him.
My last recollection of him at Kelham was when he gave a reading of his poetry.
Brother George told me that he  had persuaded Eliot to include the passage in The Waste Land about the seduction of the ‘bored and tired’ typist by the small house-agent's clerk, because he (George) thought that the young men ought to know a little more about the facts of life.
How much enlightenment they obtained I do not know, but the details about ‘exploring hands’ were, in those days in contrast to the present, unusual.
When Eliot had finished an extract, he would pause for a second or two, and then, as if to break the spell, switch his head quickly to the right.
Then he would announce the next passage, ending with one from what he called, in a tone lower than usual, ‘Murder’.
I heard him giving many readings, and now of course they are on record; but I think he was at his best — with every word clearly articulated — among a small group such as that at Kelham.
I think also that he liked Kelham — provided it were a short visit, for he was by nature and inclination a townsman — because he felt that such establishments were of great value in carrying on, in addition to theological instruction, the classical tradition.
He would have been saddened by the closure of Kelham and by the decline in numbers at similar Anglican institutions.
A successor to Thoughts after Lambeth would have borne a more sombre message.
Later on, I ventured to express the hope that one day he would perhaps visit my family in Merstham.
I was pleased that he at once took to the idea.
Naturally, I wanted to see him and to introduce him to my family; but I also felt that he needed to get out of London from time to time, because he seemed to be assuming an increasing load of public work, as well as public lectures and broadcasts.
On 17 August he wrote to me suggesting dates.
It appears that all this time I too was working flat out, because, in addition to a heavy load of teaching, I was writing articles right  and left, as well as tinkering with the political book.
I thought of seeking a more congenial job, and, with Eliot as a referee, applied for a post at Winchester.
I was unsuccessful, but in due course my brother was to join the staff and the family connection extended with my sister's residence there.
There were also the personal matters, which, as every young person knows, consume an unconscionable amount of time.
In those days before the National Health Service, one did not run off to the doctor except in real emergencies; but, at this juncture, my mother, noticing that I showed unusual signs of debility, urged me to seek medical advice.
The counsel given was probably the best in the circumstances, which was that I should go abroad for a break.
A group of friends was going to St Servan near St Malo and they asked me to join them.
I must have recognized that I needed a change; for no reason short of extreme exhaustion would have induced me to alter my plans with Eliot.
Replying to my explanatory letter, he wrote on 15 September 1937, with typical solicitude:
He had wanted to publish a full-length article from me in The Criterion; and in expressing the hope that this sort of work would be ‘a help’, he was, with his knowledge of the therapeutic value of work, perfectly right.
I regret only that the article entitled ‘Philosophy and Politics’ and published in The Criterion for January 1938, is not better.
It formed one more effort, renewed over the next decade, to produce a book which in the end turned into another book altogether, and which Eliot published.
As to the visit to Merstham, I had hoped that if he were to come all that way, he ought to see something of the country, as it was then still of an unspoilt rural character and in autumn especially beautiful.
He was so tied to London, and had been especially so during his increasingly unhappy marriage, that his knowledge of the country, even the Home Counties, was patchy.
This ignorance could be exaggerated, of course; there were several anecdotes in circulation to suggest as much.
For instance, before the war, it was reported that he was heard to say over the telephone, in reply to an invitation from a leading London hostess, ‘I should especially like to come, as I have not been to Hampstead since 1916’.
But, as with most of the Eliot jokes (of which there were an increasing number and an accumulating apocrypha), the humour in the retailing depended to a large extent on reproducing the low-pitched Eliot drawl, a last relic no doubt of his southern accent.
In this way, he made the commonplace appear of great import.
He could also reduce the solemn to the apparently trivial (‘nothing in this life is wholly serious’), lending often to his ordinary conversation, as to his poetry, that element of surprise which Elgar Allan Poe held to be an essential ingredient of art itself.
Given his many commitments and the preparations for the new play, his second, The Family Reunion, on which he probably worked harder than on any other — it was understandable that he could not consider sparing more than an evening away.
In his letter of 30 December, he wrote to me about fixing a day and about the timing of the production of the play.
The reference to the ‘friend’ had to do with my association with the Speech Institute, where I was giving a course of lectures on what the Directress, Miss Marjorie Gullan, liked to call ‘Modernist Poetry’(for it was still considered that ‘poetry’ended with the Georgians, whom we had all studied at school, and that Pound and Eliot were advanced experimenters).
The Speech Institute group was similar and perhaps a rival to the band directed by Miss Elsie Fogarty, who had done the choruses in Murder in the Cathedral, and I believe that one of them had asked me what were the chances of taking part in its successor.
As the two plays could not have been more different, there were very few.
On 30 December he wrote:
In fact, the country visit had to be postponed for some time, because, although he had promised himself some months' freedom  from engagements, he found himself, as usual, saddled with responsibilities.
I had a number of telephone conversations with him, and an interim letter dated 7 January in which he suggested, or asked me to suggest several possible dates.
Finally, it was towards the end of January 1938 that the visit took place.
I called for him at Faber's —; which meant waiting downstairs either du côté de chez Swan or in the small waiting-room crowded with Faber books ready for dispatch —; and we caught a train to Merstham from Victoria.
On the way to the station we heard a kerbstone musician playing the concertina, and Eliot, struck by the tune, asked me if I knew what it was.
I happened to know —‘Is it true what they say about Dixie?’.
It seemed to fascinate him, as the South in general did.
Trains were so frequent on this line that there was no need to aim for a particular one.
We travelled first class, still something of a treat, and had the carriage to ourselves.
Although very much a townsman, Eliot was, like G. K. Chesterton, a great advocate of country life, and he shared the attitude of many townsmen that most other people ought to live in the country.
Indeed, in one of the Criterion Commentaries he maintained that a rural existence was ‘the best life’ for most people — a view which ‘most people’have not shared.
Yet as the view became increasingly rural past East Croydon Station, he grew more elated.
Now London suburbia has almost merged with the encroachments of Brighton.
On the journey, between lapses into contented silence, we spoke a good deal about The Criterion, the prospects of which were now less rosy.
He referred, perhaps a little ironically, to the respect in which it was held, and he remarked how each issue was spoken of as containing besides a noteworthy article or two, ‘the usual brilliant batch of reviews’.
That was intended to be a pat on the back — as one of several others — for me.
We somehow got on to the subject of detective stories, for it had been with some surprise that I learnt at the Old Parsonage meeting that at one time he had read them with avidity.
The 1930s were the era of the detective story, and it had reached its maximum popularity with Edgar Wallace.
At Oxford and Cambridge, dons were reputed to spend much of their time reading a slightly higher ‘body in the library’ sort of book.
At a lower level, there were not any libraries for bodies to be found in.
Eliot seemed to have sampled the genre at every level; he mentioned in one of his essays that even poetic inspiration might come from reading a ‘yellow back’ novel (a series published by Hodder & Stoughton).
But he agreed that the genre was degenerating.
That was why he relied chiefly on Simenon, an author for whom he preserved a high opinion all his life.
Sordid occasionally, yes; but the man had ‘pity’— that was what Eliot most valued in him.
Needless to say, whenever he could, he read the books in the original French.
Merstham was then very much of a village, an appendage of the Colman Estate.
It was almost a model village, with its Quality Street, where a future head of the Secret Service lived for many years.
It has now greatly changed.
On leaving the little station there was always a sense of freshness and freedom.
My brother, then on the staff at Eton, met us in the car.
The house, Wychwood, from which I like to think that Eliot derived the name in The Family Reunion, was easily within walking distance; but we felt some responsibility for getting the great man from London without subjecting him to too much fatigue; and if my brother reached home by a circuitous route, it was partly in order to show off the beauty of the place.
In contrast to Wyndham Lewis, who when I invited him home expressed apprehension that he might have to meet my family (a prospect which seemed slightly to unnerve him), Eliot showed no such anxiety about my people.
I had told him that I had a brother and sister and that my mother was a widow.
Consequently, when I introduced him, he seemed completely at his ease with us all, and most appreciative of the meal we gave him.
He was, as usual, quietly spoken, but not, like Herbert Read, inclined to whisper, as if to lend his utterances an added confidentiality.
On the contrary, he spoke very clearly.
And he gave the impression, by bowing his head and turning rather gravely towards his interlocutor, that he was ready to treat every communication with the utmost seriousness, and would be reluctant to miss a syllable.
He thought hard before he spoke, and the parchment brow would slightly corrugate while he deliberated his answer.
Neither my sister nor I can remember exactly what we had for dinner, but we chose not merely a good cheese but a claret of which we hoped he would approve.
What we as a family were unanimous about was that he adopted no pose of being the distinguished writer, and even gave the impression that he much preferred not to be treated as such.
The occasion was one which he seemed to wish to enjoy, and to make his enjoyment evident.
Nevertheless, as my sister records: ‘I recall vividly sitting next to him at table and the feeling of awe at actually passing things to my hero as he had  then become.’
He was so naturally modest (some have described his so-called humility —‘the most difficult of Christian virtues’, as he put it — as an irritating pose) that had he been aware of this silent hero-worship, he would no doubt have felt uneasy.
Among snatches of conversation, both of us remember his referring to the underground as being rather like hell.
Indeed, some of his most effective imagery in The Four Quartets was based on the underground, which he patronized for reasons of speed, economy, and no doubt of experiencing the frisson of imagining himself consigned to perdition.
Then, to quote my sister again, ‘I took my little black kitten in my arms up to the poet to introduce it, and tall Mr Eliot bending forward to look at it remarked ‘That's a nice little catlet’’.
Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats having become well known, I think we had called our specimen Leviticus.
After dinner we listened to some music on records, which included Mozart's ‘Oboe Quartet’; and when we asked him if he would like to hear some more, he replied quietly that he was ‘insatiable’.
So far as I am aware, Eliot was not a concert-goer, but chamber music in the home — which in his case meant somebody else's home — and above all the last Quartets of Beethoven, were to him a source of more than aesthetic pleasure.
Before he had fully conceived the idea of The Four Quartets, he had remarked that what drew him to Beethoven was that in these last works the composer did what he himself had sought to do in poetry — and may have actually done in ‘forty or fifty lines’— namely to ‘get beyond’ that art.
My family then left me alone with Eliot.
We sat together on the settee oblique to the fireplace, and talked about work, which meant writing.
I said that literary work often left me with a depressed feeling.
This remark, slightly sententious in a young man and in one whose production was pretty slender, was proffered in the belief that Eliot would immediately endorse it.
But, as it happened, he didn't.
I cannot quite recall what he said; it may be that he said nothing, which, rather than utter anything trite, he sometimes preferred to do.
But I realized afterwards that, for him, writing, though no doubt excruciatingly difficult, was the form of therapy most satisfactory to one who was subject to doubts, misgivings and self-inquisition.
For all he said about poetry being a ‘mug's game’, he must have felt an interior exultation at knowing that he possessed outstanding gifts.
For, as Leavis remarked, a great writer knows he is great and cares  little what others think: whereas a minor writer, one might add, cares very much indeed.
We saw Eliot off that evening, not too late, because we knew he was an early riser who went to morning Mass.
He had said goodbye quietly, making a lasting impression on my mother.
Quiet men with graceful manners were the ideal of her generation, and he seemed to embody it.
We very much wanted him to come down to Merstham again when the weather was better, so that we could drive him round the country.
Among other things, I was anxious to show him Chaldon Church, with its medieval wall painting of the Last Judgment.
References to another visit recur in later letters, but events precluded it.
Meanwhile, he was anxious for me to contribute further to The Criterion, and he remained hopeful that I would write something more substantial.
This was reflected in a letter dated 7 March 1938:
The book on Cornish Crosses was the work of my archaeologist uncle, T. F. G. Dexter, completed by his brother, and seen through  the press by his widow.
I had suggested that Longman's should send it to The Criterion, but obviously I was not the right person to review it.
I need not go into detail about my long connection with Cornwall and my interest in Celtic history, which had this family origin.
Since Eliot's family was of West Country provenance, he retained all the more interest in that region and in minority cultures, as I have mentioned.
The two leftish books to which he referred were duly reviewed, and I admit to have rather enjoyed undertaking the ‘thorough cutting up’ which he declared the Levy book to deserve (it did).
Eliot's enquiry about my work recurred in a letter dated 17 June 1938, sent to Wychwood, Merstham:
I had been forming some plans, which included writing a book on modern philosophy.
It was not that I had abandoned the political book: it was that the mounting gravity of current events had turned my interests from theory to practice.
The two countries on which I had set my eyes were France and Italy.
I had visited Paris once or twice, but now I was fortunate enough to secure a grant from the LCC — £15, but princely for those days — which permitted me to spend a week or two there for the  purpose of study, my subject being modern French philosophy.
On 19 July 1938 Eliot wrote me:
It was duly arranged that we should meet after work, and it was then that I gave him further details about my ‘sponsored’ trip to Paris and about my much more ambitious idea of a trip to Libya.
He had been keenly interested in the first: about the second he was much intrigued.
What particularly touched me was that, practical as always and among the most financially-shrewd of men he said that perhaps he could be of material help over the longer tour.
That is to say, he was prepared to commission an article for The Criterion and to pay for it in advance.
This was one of the kindest of his gestures.
Although the cost of living was very much less than it is now, schoolteachers' salaries were modest.
Our conversation concentrated on the international situation.
It was gratifying to me that he approved the political and economic articles I was writing for the New English Weekly.
Events were moving rapidly: in March, Hitler had annexed Austria.
The Sudeten Germans had begun their contrived agitation in April.
A meeting between Hitler and Mussolini in May was especially ominous.
No less ominous was the visit to Prague by Walter Runciman, one of Chamberlain's appeasing colleagues, who, to the consternation of many, reported in favour of acquiescing in Hitler's ruthless demands on the Czechoslovak government.
Although the idea of a general war was still ‘unthinkable’, the upsurge of Nazi power was in the forefront of everyone's minds.
Eliot reiterated his view that, as between a Communist world and a world dominated by the Nazis (which would mean a world dominated by Germany in the West and Japan in the East), the latter would be the more horrible immediately to contemplate.
In this judgment he never varied.
Accusations that he was a ‘fascist’(revived or fuelled in the play Tom and Viv by Michael Hastings) are little short of preposterous.
What particularly shocked him, from then until the outbreak of war, was the repeated humiliations heaped on  Czechoslovakia , especially at the Munich conference in September.
For although Britain, France, Germany and Italy had guaranteed the frontiers of that country (minus the Sudetenland) at that same conference, the Czech Republic was fragmented a few weeks later, and by the following March Germany had completed her design by totally absorbing an independent state.
Eliot felt that at Munich there had been a betrayal which seemed to demand an act of almost personal contrition.
It was in this mood that he decided to bring The Criterion to an end.
The last number, in which there was no room for my long article (which in any case formed part of a backlog) appeared in January 1939.
No journal comparable to it in scope and direction has appeared since.
CHAPTER FIVE
Of his contemporaries Eliot was one of the few who not merely looked to a culturally united Europe but knew personally many of the writers and intellectual leaders on the Continent.
That was why when I told him about my LCC-subsidized visit to Paris, he insisted that I should pay calls on friends of his like Paul Valéry, Jacques Maritain and Charles du Bos; and he set about providing me with letters of introduction.
Wyndham Lewis kindly provided me with a similar introduction to James Joyce.
Never did I embark on a foreign visit with more keenness; for I felt that time was short, and that such an opportunity might never recur.
To take the trip to Meudon and to visit Jacques and Raissa Maritain, and also her sister — a visit which turned into two visits — was most rewarding.
This was not least because of the respect and affection in which, as I found, Eliot was so clearly held as both a writer and a man.
Details must await another memoir.
This respect for Eliot and the desire to do something of which he would approve, was further manifested in the Maritains' wish that I should visit Bergson.
Alas, he was lying ill and semi-paralysed and not expected to recover, though that great man, whose reputation today has regrettably fallen, survived to die a more noble death in the Occupied Paris of 1941.
Charles du Bos, the literary critic, another figure who is scarcely known to the younger generation even in his own country, was equally devoted to Eliot.
He would have given me an introduction to Paul Valéry as well, except that he was out of Paris.
No less devoted was Joyce, who was anxious to talk about Eliot as about the Enemy.
Despite the fact that I succumbed to a mild form of food-poisoning through eating  at the cheapest restaurants — a meal could he obtained for ten (old) francs or less, but less meant the more chance of prostration — I have never known Paris so surpassingly beautiful as that year.
Through my mind there reverberated the words from Portrait of a Lady, ‘Memories of my dead life, and Paris in the Spring’, the meaning of which every lover of Paris can echo, even if he had no dead life in either George Moore's or Eliot's sense, or even if his most memorable visit to Paris took place, as mine did, at another season.
It was for a number of reasons, apart from a wish to escape from teaching, that I set out some weeks later for Libya, then a country almost entirely unknown.
I had sought to interest some of the more enterprising newspapers, especially as I hoped to be able, if possible, to push on to Abyssinia; but, in the end, I went in independence, as I have undertaken most excursions, both terrestrial and mental.
What I had in mind all along, however, and possibly Eliot did too, was the eventual production of a book.
This was to be not just a travel book but one which should be of use if, as seemed increasingly likely, we should be involved in hostilities with Italy: a circumstance which I nevertheless felt could, with diplomatic skill, be avoided.
The mention that I was journeying via Marseilles prompted him to warn me, somewhat to my surprise, not to let the street-girls of the special quarter (since abolished) commandeer my hat — a favourite play of theirs to  inveigle one inside — which suggested that he had experienced such an approach.
When I returned from Libya via Egypt, just after the Munich crisis I at once got in touch with Eliot, and put my proposal before him.
It seemed to me that, in this way and with some fresh views to submit, and possessed with a totally new interest in the Orient, I might contribute something, however modest, to the Italian ‘problem’.
It was impossible to imagine a people —; I do not say a government — with less relish for war, if my contacts with the Italian colonists and equally with the Italian army were any guide.
Eliot saw the point, and asked me to sit down forthwith and draft a synopsis.
From then on I did a great deal of telephoning to him; but, as usual, he preferred contact de vive voix.
On 10 October, having arranged a meeting, he wrote to me about the earlier essay for which he had already arranged generous advanced payment:
Having compared notes with some others, I have the impression that this was a rather typical letter to receive from Faber & Faber at that time.
Eliot was the most orderly of men, and Anne Bradby (who became Mrs Ridler shortly after) was, I am sure, a methodical young lady; but typescripts did get lost or mislaid, though other people suffered more than I did.
What I liked about this letter was the phrase ‘if you tell me that I have it’.
This conveyed almost the speaking tone of the writer, as he might glance up impishly from one of his colloquies with the carpet.
Whether or not he had sent the article back (if it had been rejected) did not in the least matter.
It was sufficiently damned to rule out any offer of reprieve elsewhere.
We duly met, and I was as before, astonished to find how much interest he could take, by clearing his mind of more pressing matters, in a subject not obviously familiar to him.
But, as he pointed out in The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism (1933) with reference to abstract philosophizing, his mind was a ‘heavy’ one.
He had that sense of fact which he considered to be more useful ‘than nine-tenths of the most pretentious critical journalism’.
Within a short while he was on to the subject of Libya's exports.
When I told him that one of the most important was esparto grass, his grave face lit up, because Faber's, it appeared, purchased consignments of it to meet their paper needs.
He was no less curious about the life of the newly-arrived colonists; for this Italian experiment, though short-lived, had few precedents.
Whole communities were being, so to speak, lifted out of the mother country and planted down in villages already prepared for them, even down to food in the larder.
As some of his remarks in the Criterion commentaries made clear, he was not hostile to the idea of Empire, ‘whatever the Daily Express may say’; and if this should rouse the indignation of anti-imperialists, it should be realized that I am talking about a bygone era, since which the  world-scene has been transformed, and the term colonialism is now employed usually in the service of invective.
He urged on me the need to embark on a full-sized book, and to send him a synopsis as soon as possible.
We had a few concluding words about the literary scene in London, which he thought to have reached a pretty low ebb.
For me, and to some extent for him, the liveliest literary intellectual circle, though small enough, was still that associated with the New English Weekly.
Eliot, who lent the circle considerable prestige, found himself in congenial assorted, and in some cases strange, company.
He commented on ‘the excitable XY’, a female author who later achieved considerable fame.
In fact, he was often quite outspoken about people, though usually with reference to their harmless foibles.
I never heard so much as a malicious word or imputation.
Some of the NEW group had opinions which were slightly dotty, though on the whole, in comparison with today's weirdies, they were a conventional lot.
If, on the other hand, he felt that someone was a really harmful influence, he did not hesitate to say so.
If he had no wrath, he had a kind of steely ire.
I did my best to produce an attractive synopsis, embellishing it with some of the sketches I had made on the spot.
In those days I had been doing a good deal of drawing; and, having come under Wyndham Lewis's influence, I took my Vorticist efforts round to the Master, and, to my surprise, I found that he thought quite well of them.
I also bound up with my brochure, a number of photographs; for I had taken two cameras abroad.
Obviously I should have provided more text than I did, but I suppose I was in rather a hurry.
I delivered the stitched brochure (which it had become) to Eliot, and he went through it, sitting with it on his knees and brooding over each page.
At the end, he looked up and said: ‘This looks very promising.’
On 26 October, having submitted it to his colleagues, he wrote to me:
Not only did I draw a blank about the pictures, but political events were moving so fast that the book I had begun to write had ceased, after the completion of the amount of text Faber's required, to be the one that needed to he written.
I therefore decided to abandon what I had planned, because I felt that Faber's too, despite their initial keenness, would now want another sort of book, if they wanted one at all.
I did submit what I had written, and, not altogether to my surprise, I received not long after a letter from Eliot beginning ‘I am sorry to tell you….
This rejection at least served the purpose of bringing me face to face with the uncomfortable fact that I was now without a job and almost without an occupation.
In those days, it never occurred to me but to employ my time as best I could, without any thought of ‘going on the dole’, which was for the underprivileged.
So I set to work learning Italian intensively, because I continued to feel, and increasingly felt, that anything that could help to keep Italy out of any war that might take place, ought to be done.
I therefore managed to get myself accredited as a journalist to cover the visit to Rome by Neville Chamberlain and Lord Halifax in early January 1939 for talks with Mussolini.
On my return, in order to earn a living, I engaged in intensive writing, including a detailed report to the War Office covering Libya as well.
Then, quite out of the blue, there had come the offer of a job at Marlborough; for although I had resolved to abandon teaching, I had found, like so many others, that  of all the means of earning one's bread, freelance authorship was among the most precarious.
I told Eliot of my new post, but when I next heard from him, in a letter dated 31 January 1939, the day after my twenty-sixth birthday, it was with a slight hint of reproach.
When I look back on the long friendship, I realize that I need not have had certain misgivings about troubling Eliot or taking up his time — misgivings due to temperamental diffidence rather than to genuine modesty, I am afraid — because he was both generous of his time and solicitous about the welfare of those in whom lie  took an interest.
But once or twice in a while I would despair of producing the kind of thing that seemed likely to win approval from one whose standards were so high — impossibly high I felt so far as emulation on my part was concerned — and therefore I had moods in which I would feel unworthy of his attention.
Naturally, once the first paragraph of his letter met my eyes, I sat down with reassurance to say how sorry I was not to have written earlier and to have delayed giving him an account of the Italian visit.
By this time I was settled in one of the staff residences in Marlborough (Hillside) to begin what proved to be one of the happiest interludes of my life.
In alluding to Ronald Duncan and The Criterion, he was referring to a proposal by Duncan — with whom I had been in correspondence, though I did not meet him until after the war — that I should write for The Townsman (a magazine which he edited from an ancient mill situated in a valley on the Devon/Cornish border, where I was later to live and write about), an article analysing the reasons why The Criterion, after flourishing for seventeen years, had so suddenly come to an end.
The request that I should receive a consignment of most, if not all, of the issues was obviously impossible to meet; and although I should much like to have had the ‘run’ of Eliot's bookcase for an afternoon, I felt I could not seek permission, so soon after my arrival at the school, to go to London for that purpose, so I told Eliot that half a dozen well-spaced numbers would suffice for me.
Meanwhile, the Consul-General at Florence, Mr Wakefield-Harrey, whom I had first met in Tripoli, stayed with in Florence and met once more in Rome for the Chamberlain-Mussolini talks, had sent me a long Miltonic poem (for these slightly underemployed officials in remote places often took to authorship as an alternative to the bottle) about which he begged me to seek Eliot's opinion.
I felt I had to comply, out of gratitude to one who, with his wife, had been most hospitable; and, no doubt detecting merits which were not there, I forwarded it to Eliot.
At this distance in time, I cannot pretend that I had my doubts about its merits: what I did dwell on was a certain psychological subtlety in retailing the author's love-life, though in terms which today would he considered ludicrously niminy-piminy.
Back came a snorter the like of which I was never again to receive from Eliot, though I am sure it was thoroughly well-deserved.
Although I realized  that my faulty literary judgment was the occasion for his reaction — for he must have been well-accustomed to reading manuscripts of surpassing dullness — because when lie wrote to Wakefield-Harrey it was in firm but polite terms, which, since they were from Eliot, were to him the next best thing to commendation.
To me, he wrote on 10 February as follows, the invective being tempered by the desire expressed at the beginning that we should have in due course a prolonged tête-à-tête:
When I had sufficiently recovered from this onslaught, two points remained fixed in my mind.
The first was the industry which Eliot was prepared to devote to such poor material, even to the extent of giving this particular piece three readings: whereas most publishers or critics might not have had the patience to complete one.
The second was his insistence, not so common in his day, that any poetry worthy of serious attention had to display high technical competence.
Indeed, some of his contemporaries were highly critical of his preoccupation with the technical side of verse; even friends like Herbert Read placed emphasis on the Wordsworthian ‘spontaneous overflowing of powerful feelings’.
But  to Eliot the power lay in the letter rather than in the spirit — hence his famous remark that ‘the spirit killeth while the letter giveth life’— and all his memorable lines of verse exemplified that.
But I think there was a third reason why Eliot took exception to this particular effusion.
This was the nature of the content.
A long and laborious analysis of affaires de coeur, though not of the explicitness we should expect today, was not to his taste.
When reviewing some essays by A. R. Orage, he singled out the one, ‘On Love’, as being a piece with which he was ‘not qualified’ to deal.
There was a note of irony in that reservation.
To him, The Waste Land was primarily the desert of extinct emotion, which symbolized his own failure.
He could be warmly understanding and sympathetic, as I knew, when dealing with a friend's problems; but, for that very reason, a catalogue in mediocre verse of a stranger's supposed education sentimentale was something he found thoroughly distasteful.
The repeated readings must have been in the nature of a penance, which, because of his awareness of his own prejudices, was deliberately self-imposed.
I duly completed the essay on the rise and fall of The Criterion, and I sent Eliot the relevant copy of The Townsman.
Looking at it today, I consider it neither profound nor convincing.
I tried to argue that the Criterion had neglected to pay enough attention to certain lines of contemporary thought, above all that represented by Collingwood.
Just Collingwood: for he had no disciples.
I see now the inadequacy of this explanation; but, apart from the fact that at that age one's loyalties are defended with more than usual zeal, my conviction, in the Oxford of that time, was that Collingwood was the only alternative to linguistic philosophy.
The latter was to become the orthodoxy of the next few decades, whereas Collingwood died in 1943 virtually in the shadows, for more reasons than one.
But, in any case, I should have realized that a review of high seriousness like The Criterion, the circulation of which never reached 1,000 copies and I suspect hardly more than 500, was supported by an intellectual minority whose allegiance did not wane on account of the neglect of a man of whom many may not have heard.
(After the war, when Collingwood was discovered by the younger generation, and found to be highly readable and stimulating, the situation was totally different, and the aging linguistic philosophers were obliged to start reading him in self-defence.)
As a letter to me at Merstham dated I May 1939 indicated, Eliot was polite about the article in question:
That was the last, as I thought, of my Criterion obituary; but because of some slightly disparaging remarks I made in it of Montgomery Belgion, a Criterion contributor, I incurred the bitter enmity of that enigmatic figure, which exploded years later when he reviewed my book on Simone Weil.
But Eliot, of whom he made some absurd insinuations, imputing plagiarism, told me later on that he found Belgion an exceedingly tiresome man to deal with.
Nor was he the only one to do so.
Over the next few days I was in touch by letter and by phone with Eliot, and finally it was arranged, in a note dated 9 May, that I should lunch with him on Thursday 19 May, which, as he carefully specified, was Ascension Day.
As usual, we met at the Oxford and Cambridge.
We had much to talk about.
The international situation was growing increasingly gloomy.
The day before, Norway had declined Germany's offer of a non-aggression pact, which no doubt weakened her position some months later, though even had she signed one, it would probably have made little difference.
Eliot, as was to be expected, was particularly interested in the kind of propaganda we were putting out to Germany and Italy: for the propaganda war had already begun and was intensifying.
He raised a point, which had never occurred to me, like not a few of his aperçus, that, in the case of radio broadcasts, it was a mistake invariably to employ German refugees or perfect German speakers to warn the German public of the evils of Nazism.
Far more effective, he considered (and there was no  anti-Semitism involved, though inevitably most of the recent refugees were Jews), would be to put on the air people who, while speaking intelligible German, would be identified as representative British people.
When William Joyce (‘Lord Haw-Haw’) began his revulsion felt by the British public, if the reaction was not mirthful, was due to the fact that he was, in a sense, a stranger to them by reason of his apostasy and unnatural situation and therefore he carried far less conviction than a less articulate but sincere German would have done.
Propaganda could be effective — this was what Eliot was getting at — only by ceasing to be mere propaganda.
I see that an article I wrote at the time entitled ‘What should we say to Germany?’ reflected this point of view, though with less explicitness.
Altogether Eliot, who later offered his services to the Ministry of Information, which was founded on 5 September, two days after the outbreak of war, believed that a great deal could meanwhile be done by way of the spoken and written word.
He hoped that I could undertake something in that line, especially in relation to Italy: for I had been giving him my impressions of the visit to Rome, which included encountering at close quarters, Mussolini, Count Ciano, and Edda his wife, and the by comparison rather puny Neville Chamberlain.
I told him again how I had been reinforced in my belief that, whereas Germany seemed intent on war, Italy, while verbally identifying herself with the Axis, would clutch at any straw to evade participation, and that our policy should be to keep her out of it with every means in our power.
I could see that he was sceptical of our diplomatic capacity to do so; and when, later, Chamberlain despatched a female relation to ‘negotiate’ with Mussolini, it became clear that his misgivings were justified.
In fact, Hitler and Mussolini signed a ten-year Pact on 22 May 1939.
At that lunch in the Oxford and Cambridge he was in the sombre mood that had descended on him with the signing of the Munich Agreement.
Never one to believe in quick or facile solutions, he cared very much about the national welfare; and as he was one of the few British writers whose word carried any weight with the authorities — in contrast to such authors as Priestley who carried more weight with the public through his remarkable war-time broadcasts — he gave the impression of a certain helplessness in face of government policy which appeared to lack resolution.
As Peter Ackroyd has pointed out in his biography, Eliot was apprehensive about the approach of war: which was not the same as  being faint-hearted.
He was of course not the only one: the idea of a nation roused to righteous anger and determined to crush Nazism in the most resolute manner, applied — and then chiefly because of the fire and resolution of one man, Churchill — not to that period but to a year later.
Eliot did not doubt the resilience or resolve of the British people; but he remarked to me that he could not see a man like Neville Chamberlain coping with a major conflict.
He classed Chamberlain the ‘Conservative’ with Baldwin as a representative of that mercantile tradition, descending from Adam Smith, Ricardo, Cobden and Bright and from which the Fabians were themselves derived, as being the official receivers of the capitalist system.
He therefore considered them of a tradition quite different from that form of conservatism — so admirably defined by Russell Kirk in his study Eliot and his Age (1971, 1984)— which, as Eliot said to me more than once, was the best and perhaps the only defence against the extremes of Communism and Fascism.
There was, however, another reason for Eliot's mood of dejection.
The Family Reunion, about which he had spoken in his letter of 30 December had opened in March and lasted only five weeks.
He felt that the play upon which he had bestowed such care had been a failure.
When I told him about Marlborough, he cheered up a little.
In view of his experience at Highgate School, he had always been interested in the life and tribulations of schools teachers; and in any case he held strong views about education, about which he lacked an opportunity to state his ideas at length until he gave some lectures in Chicago in 1950.
As I had been enjoying Marlborough, which in atmosphere, personnel, and not least location, was in total contrast to the Sloane School, Chelsea, I no doubt gave him a slightly rose-tinted account of the life there.
I did tell him, however, that the older boys — and I was form-master of the modern sixth — were keenly interested in what was going on in modern literature, but that they seemed to some extent cushioned against modern life in their ignorance, which was almost total, of such currents of thought as Marxism.
Eliot picked on this.
He was quick to point out that when they went up to Oxford — as most of my pupils would he likely to do — the impact of Marx, the one reputation which most politically-conscious dons revered, was likely to sweep them off their feet.
(I have since called to mind G. K. Chesterton's remark in Heretics that ideas are dangerous and most dangerous to the man of  no ideas: ‘the man of no ideas will find the first idea fly to his head like wine to the head of a teetotaller.’)
Of modern poets, I had of course spoken to the boys — and to the masters for that matter, for most had ventured no further than Hardy and Houseman, like the Brasenose dons — of Eliot, Pound and the later Yeats; and I discovered that they lapped this up as if slaking a mental thirst.
In fact, I perceived once again, as I have repeatedly done since, that young people — and this applies to girls just as much as to boys — need, almost to the point of desperation, writers, inevitably older, who speak to their generation and in their language, or at least in language which, once they hear it, they perceive to be theirs.
This proved true above all at the time of which I write, or up to that time, because adolescence is as much a mental as a biological experience, and the arts meant much at that epoch, the last before the advent of Pop Culture, which has since taken over the adolescent mind rendering present that ‘future’ which Eliot dreaded.
Eliot once said that all poets would like their work to be said or sung by the common people (which was realized in his case by Cats).
He also said that he would prefer an audience that could neither read nor write.
I noticed that he never put on an air of diffidence when, as here, his own work was being cited.
In fact, contrary to what has sometimes been said about his modesty, he enjoyed talking about his work, even when it was no more than work in progress.
The thought of the Marlborough boys ‘discovering’ him gave him obvious pleasure; and whether or not he believed that the curriculum should include modern literature (as Auden was later to say that it should not), he certainly believed, with his own youthful experience in mind, that the young should be enabled to explore new fields in the arts for themselves.
Where otherwise was the public for new art to come from?
It was when we had settled down to talk in comfortable armchairs that I told him that the man for whom I had substituted at Marlborough, in the hope of replacing him altogether, now planned to return, so that once more I should be out of a job.
It happened, however, that while I was at the College I had been approached by the Bristol University Board of Extra-Mural Studies, where a post was for the moment vacant organizing adult education work chiefly in Wiltshire.
I would be employed also by the WEA and as a Trade Union lecturer (which, as far as I know, I still am).
As the work was being reorganized to promote the war effort, I was to be  given a National Service driving licence and other facilities —; Conscription having been introduced on 27 April, this seemed the ideal transitional job to undertake pending the call-up.
I therefore asked Eliot if I might quote his name as a reference.
As good-luck would have it, he was in a stronger position than usual, because, as he mentioned with one of his quick smiles, the University of Bristol was about to give him an honorary degree, one of the fourteen that he was to accumulate.
The formalities took some weeks, but by the end of July 1939, I learnt that I had got the job.
On 31 July, Eliot wrote to Merstham:
Ever since the happy visit of the year before, I had been trying to persuade him to pay a second and, if possible, longer visit.
Apart from the worry over The Family Reunion, I perceived that lie was under considerable strain.
This manifested itself partly in his waxy parchment-like complexion and a habit of sitting in an increasingly hunched posture.
He was, I recognized, one of those people — Dickens was another, and Eliot was very much a Dickensian — who needed the stimulus of London streets for the maintenance of his mental vitality.
He also needed the London underground, for which he had a love/dread relationship, and the London theatre, not of the new kind, but, when available, of the old music hall tradition and, when in season, the pantomime.
He told me that he made a point of seeing one pantomime a year.
But I felt strongly that, like Dickens again, though not to the same extent, he needed occasionally to get out into the open: which is why he made his way down to Cornwall once or twice to see Ronald Duncan.
Just at this time he was thinking about and drafting his meditation about home, namely the West Country, in the poem which became East Coker.
But the outbreak of war on 3  September 1939 made a second Merstham visit impossible, though I always regretted that it could not he managed.
The assignment in Wiltshire proved for me an extremely full and busy one.
Never before had I covered a number of villages and country towns, with the added novelty of intensive driving in the blackout, with dimmed lights in anti-camouflage of white striping.
Until I moved in to the Rectory at Seend, I lived briefly at the Bell Inn, St Edith's Marsh, Bromham, near Devizes.
I must have delivered hundreds of lectures, pep-talks, addresses, speeches, and organized many others.
As was found throughout the war, there was an increased interest in private reading (partly due to blackout conditions), and, as I found early on, an increasing public for current affairs as well as for music and poetry.
I was much encouraged to find that the most unlikely audiences appreciated modern poetry, and Eliot's perhaps most, though that was perhaps due to my own advocacy.
With service audiences — Wiltshire was dotted with army camps — I had less success.
Yet although my addresses were chiefly in the nature of pep-talks, I usually contrived to work in what today would be called ‘culture’, and sometimes the pub scene in The Waste Land or parts of Portrait of a Lady would go down with a wow.
In the many visits I paid in the course of promoting these activities I again found the kind of awareness of what was new in literature in places I had least expected; and when in the autumn of that year The Idea of a Christian Society was published, it was much more successful than Eliot hoped.
The rectories and vicarages I visited played a more important part in the rural community than they have done since or are likely ever to do again.
It was significant that, when the war took a grave turn the following year, it was to every Anglican incumbent in the land (and no doubt to many others, though I can speak only for the parish clergy) that Duff Cooper, the Home Secretary, sent letters expressing apprehension of the state of public morale and urging the incumbents to do their utmost to help raise it.
It was obvious to me my projected work on Italy would have to be either abandoned or drastically modified.
A travel book would not be enough: anything I wrote on that country would need to be designed to assist, in however small a way, the war effort, even though Italy was still uninvolved.
I thought that the best thing that I could do, anticipating the worst, would be to start on one entitled Italy's Betrayal.
Although Eliot considered this idea a good one, especially in view of the articles I had been writing for the  New English Weekly (for example, ‘Italy must Choose; and ‘An Open Letter to Ansaldo’, which Mairet had forwarded to the spokesman in question and also to the Vatican), he felt that such a book issued in time of war, would need official backing.
He therefore recommended me to get in touch with the Ministry of Information.
That institution, peopled by a number of well-known figures, but from which a number of others had been turned away — so much so that one of them, C. E. M. Joad, wrote that ‘the corridors of the Ministry were hissing with the sound of deflated reputations’—; proved extremely difficult to approach, still more to negotiate with and most of all to extract money from.
But it enabled me to see how tough a negotiator Eliot himself could be.
I had lunch with Eliot just after Christmas 1939.
By then he had been encouraged by the success of The Idea of a Christian Society (1940) though it is sobering to reflect that the sales, so he told me, were not much more than 6,000 copies.
Although the ‘phoney war’ was still continuing, the outlook was sombre: bacon, butter and sugar rationing was introduced that month, and people were not yet adjusted to the blackout.
But I found Eliot quieter and calmer than I had done recently, when he had begun to sign letters ‘in haste’.
This may well have been due to the satisfaction he had been deriving from the composition of East Coker, though he made no mention to me of the new poem.
Probably creative work was all the real satisfaction he obtained in those stressful years.
As in the past, he was anxious to know what my new job was like, and it was reassuring for me to learn that he thought that such work was very much needed.
He was also sure that I ought to mug up as much as I could about Italy.
He mentioned his own abortive approach to the Ministry of Information.
Wartime controls, though necessary, might, he thought, give rise to a whole new set of abuses, because it was always his view that the more you imposed restrictions, the more people would think up ingenious ways of eluding them.
As an example of corruption, I cited the case of a châtelaine in my part of the world who had applied for, and received, a number of supplementary petrol coupons (which were by no means easy to obtain) for attending a committee-meeting held in her own drawing-room.
To which he uttered the classic comment, in the more than usually low drawl he employed for such deliverances: ‘There's always bound…to be a certain amount of iniquity…in these matters’.
‘Iniquity’ was Eliot all over: the slight archaism, the slight hyperbole, exactly fitted.
As I had come to know a number of rectors and vicars in the course of my journeys, for reasons which I have mentioned, Eliot questioned me about what he felt might he a mounting danger, namely that the Church might seek to increase by chauvinism what it appeared to be losing in spirituality: and indeed the vicar of my own village had been upbraided by a group of parishioners for not preaching sermons directly furthering the war effort, which Eliot said was tantamount to making him into an unpaid official of the MOI.
I also spoke of my difficulty in giving talks to the armed forces; for nothing remotely intellectual was acceptable, and the only use which I felt I could be was in taking along a few maps and indicating the whereabouts of places increasingly mentioned on the wireless or the press (though they read only the ‘picture’ papers).
It is difficult for the present generation of comparable age to realize what a change, in this respect, has been brought about by television.
Eliot was at this time increasingly preoccupied with the question of ‘public knowledge’.
As he had stressed in The Rock this was not in the sense of information, but rather in the sense of consciousness of values; and he deplored a situation where the term society implied simply a group of ‘well connected’ and affluent people, which had almost no relation to that other group or society which maintained moral and intellectual standards, which for him was the church.
Of the composition of the ‘bench of bishops’(again the exact expression) he shook his head a little sadly, though he knew some of them well: I felt he was not so enthusiastic about William Temple, now Archbishop of Canterbury, as many of his fellow-writers were, however, grudgingly.
The latter seemed to hold the view that, if there had to be an Archbishop of Canterbury at all, it were best that he should be a socialist.
Indeed, most of the intelligentsia assumed outright that the post-war society would be a socialist society, and that one of the chief justifications for fighting the war was that socialism should be its outcome.
It was on this occasion that I drew Eliot's attention to the remarkable tribute to the English church contained in Thomas Hardy's Preface to the volume Late Lyrics and Earlier.
When I had first read The Idea of a Christian Society, I was at once struck by the compatibility of some of Hardy's remarks on the role and function of the Anglican Church with Eliot's own views.
No doubt because of his strictures on Hardy in After Strange Gods, and because he found Hardy's view of life personally antipathetic — and when Eliot disliked a writer, as  he disliked Aldous Huxley (i.e. the work, not the man), and as he disliked Addison, and above all Goethe, his antipathy was intense and difficult to budge — he reacted in rather a lukewarm manner.
Indeed, I saw that he was not convinced.
Possibly this was because he distrusted the enthusiasm, sometimes pushed to excessive lengths, which some agnostics felt for the church (for example their defence of Cranmer's Prayer Book), and Hardy's enthusiasm amounted almost to love.
It was almost, I ventured to suggest as if the agnostic were declaring ‘Lord, I want to believe, but please cosset my unbelief, because the resulting tension is so delicious’.
The real point of this story is that, so far as I know, Eliot never read the Hardy Preface, because when I referred to it again about twenty-five years later, he gave the impression of not knowing about it.
It was for that reason that I never showed him my poem ‘To Thomas Hardy in 1940’.
He brought this part of our conversation to an end with some remarks about the kind of world that might exist after the war.
That this Second World War would not last so long as the First, and even that it might not be a war on such a world-scale, were legitimate presumptions at the time, and Eliot was firmly of the opinion that we should be thinking then and there of the world which would finally emerge.
In fact, the struggle was longer, on a greater scale, and with an outcome very different from that anticipated; so that, as far as Eliot was concerned, the task, as his Notes towards the Definition of Culture (1948) made clear, was not merely that of rescuing the Christian religion but of salvaging culture itself.
CHAPTER SIX
In February 1940 at the Labour Exchange at Devizes, I duly registered for military service.
It was then a question of waiting to be called up and none of us had any idea how long this would be.
Meanwhile, I had formed one of a group of Local Defence Volunteers, an emergency organization set up in May 1940, later to be transformed into the Home Guard.
With no uniform but an armband and all but no weapons, we kept watch in rotation through the warm nights of that early summer, with German planes passing overhead and all of a sudden the ground shuddering from bombs dropped on Southampton or Bristol.
One night I was joined by a visitor to Seend, anxious to be of help, Colonel Faithorne, who was some relation of the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and who showed intellectual interests, including a knowledge of Eliot, which I was not to meet again in a soldier until I made the acquaintance in 1974 of my late father-in-law.
The intensification of the war increased when on 10 June 1940, Mussolini, making one of his last balcony performances, declared war, so that my newly-projected book on Italy seemed of immediate relevance, though whether I should complete it was another matter.
I was thereafter in frequent communication with Eliot about the synopsis and concerning my negotiations with the Ministry.
One of the officials with whom I had dealings was John Hampden, who years later was to become a colleague; but although he did his best to be co-operative, it was the men who held the purse-strings that counted, and, going between the MOI and Faber's, I could not extract from officialdom any commitment and Eliot naturally  needed certain specific undertakings regarding finance before Faber's could think of commissioning a book, which also needed the Ministry's  imprimatur.
For the first time, but by no means the last, I became involved in that Kafkaesque bureaucratic fog which, more than any aspect of public life, serves to drain one of psychic energy.
I was at that time calling on and off at Faber's, sometimes seeing Eliot and sometimes missing him.
A typical letter was that which he wrote on 8 July 1940:
This letter induced me to pay him an urgent visit, as I was doubtful of getting anything out of the Ministry so soon as that, if at all.
Eliot's comment was: ‘They should do business.’
He was right.
What he suggested was that I should then and there telephone my contact with the object of tying him down.
Accordingly he vacated his desk and, inviting me to occupy it, he shifted the guest chair towards the door and there seated himself.
As I was obtaining the number, I remember squinting at the view of Russell Square to my left.
At the same time I thought how few people, apart from Eliot, could have sat and telephoned from that desk: meanwhile, reflecting that it were more proper to appear to be contemplating the exterior than to be glancing at Eliot's papers scattered in front of me.
My conversation with the Ministry seemed to take ages, and, as I had already anticipated, it proved abortive.
But I was far from being depressed.
Although he seemed to be oblivious of what had happened, because he was concentrating on some letter or other, Eliot looked up resignedly and with a smile of one all too accustomed to the lack of business acumen in other people; but I could see that he was also relieved to find me not too cast down.
Fifteen years were  to pass before I had a book published by Faber's, but by then I had been launched by other publishing houses.
Since the fall of France in May, the possibility of invasion increased.
Such a thing not having happened for many centuries, the idea, even though the smell of cordite had spread across the Channel and could be picked up in the Charing Cross Road, seemed difficult to envisage.
My brother had enlisted in the Grenadier Guards, and was at Camberley, but my mother and sister were still in Merstham; and it seemed to me that, in the event of a German landing, for which Churchill had alerted the public, a place as safe as any would be my Wiltshire village of Seend, where there was a delightful little Guest House, kept by a Mrs Earle.
Here I would provisionally assemble the family.
I had a Morris 10 which went like a bird, and I thereupon conceived the wild idea of rescuing Eliot from London if the danger should seem acute — and assuming that I were still available — and settling him, however temporarily, in the village.
Admittedly at this distance the idea appears fanciful and even ludicrous; and no doubt if an enemy landing or landings had taken place, the roads out of London would have been jammed.
On the other hand, my journeys in Wiltshire had made me a familiar figure to the police, and I consulted them about evacuating from London a distinguished man, of whose name, I need hardly say, they had never heard.
That there would be evacuations, they thought very likely and if I could leave Wiltshire and get back again, there would be no problem.
I duly put this plan to Eliot, who, to my mild surprise, did not seem to regard it as so fanciful an idea as I had anticipated.
I had chosen the right moment, because I found him, not so much irresolute as musing on the possibility of being wiped out by ‘a stray bomb’.
He also expressed regret that, so far as taking up arms was concerned, he was ‘no good’ as a shot.
He even seemed slightly grateful that I had raised the matter.
Nor did he dismiss it outright, though he said that my first duty should be to my family, with which of course I concurred.
From his manner and general reaction, however, I realized how lonely a figure he was.
Years later, his sister-in-law Theresa told me that her husband, Henry Ware Eliot, had written to some department of the British government, presumably the Home Office, requesting them to give Eliot some sort of protection at this critical moment.
There had been no reply.
I suppose it is not impossible that, if I had needed to make application to the authorities to undertake a dash to and from London for the purpose I had in  mind, the brother-in-law's request might by some happy chance have ‘married up’ with my own application.
It is an interesting thought.
Whether Henry Eliot's letter is still on some Home Office file or other among the seventeen miles of paper which Toynbee (if I remember right) calculated to comprise the total government documentation of the war, I do not know; but some research worker may conceivably yet come upon it, and it would be interesting to learn whether it contained any apt comments.
Possibly it was dismissed as the work of an eccentric; and just as Henry Eliot received no reply, I have no doubt that Eliot himself remained in ignorance of its existence, unless Theresa later mentioned it to him.
He would certainly not have approved of being singled out for special treatment.
That was my last meeting with Eliot until the end of hostilities.
I remember his tall spare figure, filling the door of his office.
He looked slightly abstracted; and I noticed for the first time that his habit of addressing remarks with head bowed — often appearing to contemplate the floor or the ‘figure in the carpet’— had begun to bring about that slight spinal curvature which became accentuated later in life though not without adding to his dignity of bearing.
At such a time, with his formal dress, he looked like a diplomat of the old school.
While waiting for the call-up, various opportunities or openings of an official nature came my way, and I was summoned for interview, usually at extremely short notice, in connection with some of them.
In more than one case, I never heard another word.
This applied to a possible opening which Eliot mentioned in a letter of 2 April 1940.
He had gone to great trouble to ascertain ways in which my knowledge of Italy and especially Libya might be put to use: As I was once again unemployed and earning no money, I needed to obtain some work.
The New English Weekly could not afford to  pay contributors.
A post in Italy, the nature of which I never fully learnt, save that it would be of sufficient importance to take me out of uniform if I were in it, fell through with Italy's declaration of war.
This was a disappointment, since I had been striving even more to acquire expertise in Italian affairs, and I was doing some propaganda work for the BBC, some of which was ‘beamed’ to the Arab population of Libya.
Then a communication reached me from a newly-formed organization called the British Council, which rio one, including some of its officials, seemed to know much about.
The general aim was to counter Axis influences and propaganda.
The Chairman, however, was Lord Lloyd, a fiery patriot and Anglo-Catholic, with whom Eliot was quite well acquainted.
With his usual pertinacity, he pursued this new line, and on 8 April 1940, he wrote to me:
I was at length summoned for interview, during which I was told that the War Office wished to fill a post of Instructor-cum-British Adviser at the Staff College and Royal Military College, Baghdad, Iraq, and that in order to reassure the Iraqi High Command that they were not sending a British ‘plant’(for relations between the two countries were strained), they asked the British Council to fill it.
Lord Lloyd interviewed me, and explained that I was to report to the Military Attaché at the Baghdad Embassy, though I was to be attached to the British Institute.
My task was to identify myself as much as possible with the personnel of the College and their activities  in order to mitigate their hostility and pro-Axis leanings.
One of the qualifications, according to Lord Lloyd, was polo, but he considered that this was not essential, but that my Cert A, my apparent taste for adventure, and, I suspect, Eliot's backing, were enough to justify his appointing me.
A few weeks later I was on a troopship, the converted Andes, with 3,000 men, bound for the Middle East via the Cape.
At Glasgow on 8 August 1940, I wrote last-minute notes to friends for the recent weeks had been hectic, but the one intended for Eliot never arrived.
Communications were no doubt temporarily dislocated: our jam-packed train had been halted during the night owing to an air raid in the region.
My mother fortunately wrote to Eliot on 20 August 1940, and he answered:
In embarking on this section of my reminiscences, I need to stress once more that I am not writing my own memoirs.
On the other hand, I have needed from time to time to provide a certain amount of background, because the progress of a friendship cannot be traced otherwise than by describing attendant circumstances.
For us two the war meant, as for so many others, a break in physical  contact: but if, as Simone Weil said, ‘every separation is a link’, such a break is not a breaking off, but a period in which, at least in my case, that ties of friendship continued in another form.
If you held the kind of philosophy that I do, you would realize that, in friendship, presence and absence, propinquity and distance, do not make quite the difference that they do in mere acquaintanceship.
There is a crucial and fundamental difference, not always appreciated, between acquaintances and friends.
Acquaintanceship imposes its own discipline and obligation.
If I am in the habit of greeting my neighbour or a regular passer-by in the morning, I must not omit to do so, or I shall cause immediate pain and offence.
A similar lapse in the case of friendship, provided it were inadvertent, would be better and more charitably understood.
Therefore, while absence may spell the end of acquaintanceship, it will not in itself destroy friendship; and while Dr Johnson was right to say that we should keep our friendships in good repair, the perpetual shoring up of friendship might suggest that it were less enduring than we had supposed.
I am not implying that there is communication between friends on a supernormal, still less a supernatural, plane, though I would not exclude it: there is just enough evidence for telepathy to explain certain experiences that most of us have had, or are convinced that we have had, once or twice.
I am thinking of a feeling of confidence which has been built up and which it would take some drastic change to break down.
For my part, there can hardly have been a day when I did not think of Eliot, when his growing prestige was not a source of immense satisfaction and pride to me, and when personal news about him, however brief, was more than welcome at such distance than propinquity without meeting would have been.
The course of my life during the period from the end of 1940 until the autumn of 1945 is one of which I intend to write an account; but this is not the place for it.
Here I need mention only that my work at the Staff College and the Royal Military College in Baghdad put me under suspicion of espionage, and that had the pro-Nazi rebellion of Raschid Ali of May 1941 (during which I was given protection in the American Embassy) been successful, I should have fared badly, as it was surmised much later that I was on the rebels' hit list.
The new order after the collapse of the rebellion brought Iraq, if somewhat reluctantly, into the war on the Allied side.
For some months I worked in the Information Department of the British Embassy, where I was  engaged in propaganda, which included writing leaders for the Iraq Times.
With Iraq in the war, it was most desirable to endeavour to bring in Turkey too, and I was therefore transferred there by the British Council in the autumn of 1941.
An enormous effort, directed by Michael Grant, who had been taken out of the army for that purpose, was being sustained.
From that time dated my devotion to Turkey and the Turkish people.
Unfortunately, many of my letters home miscarried, because, Turkey being neutral until towards the end of the war, the post went through enemy-occupied Europe: I do not know what the Nazi censors made of some of my missives.
To ensure passage by way of Egypt it was necessary to mark the envelope ‘Misir yolu’.
Only one letter from Eliot survived the war, written on 24 February 1943.
My sister, however, kindly kept him informed of my whereabouts, and he replied in two letters, the first of which was dated 30 November 1940: The second was dated 27 May 1942:
Meanwhile, during journeys to Palestine and to Egypt, I picked up copies of The Dry Salvages and Little Gidding.
There was also no lack of contacts, who, starved of literature, were exhilarated to be able to talk about Eliot: a Captain Richardson, whom I met in Eritrea, engaged  to a charming Italian, proved one of those contacts whom the war brought together and separated, reminding me in some ways of the young Eliot and Jean Verdenal.
If he survived the war and should ever read these words, I hope he may resume contact after nearly fifty years.
The same applied to a Polish officer, one of the most cultivated men I have ever met, whom I encountered in Khartoum.
Nor must I omit a dozen or so Turkish friends, whose friendship I was able to resume years later, above all Aziz and Ulviye Isvar and my closest Turkish friend — indeed one of my closest friends — Naci Ortaç, whose wife was the daughter of a Grand Vizier.
Alas, he died in 1987.
Then there was the politician Bulent Ecerit, who had translated Eliot.
Otherwise, the war meant much loneliness, which was assuaged in my case by writing, reading, learning languages, and studying such countries of the Middle East as I was able to visit.
But one was never off duty.
A further family link with Eliot was momentarily established in 1941 by the fact that my sister attended a poetry reading by him under the auspices of the English Association.
He read — and this helps to fix the date — the beginning of what he announced to be ‘a new poem’.
This was Little Gidding, and, as she wrote, ‘I shall never forget the experience of hearing the words new-minted as it were from the poet's own lips’.
Afterwards, she ventured to go up to him and say that she was my sister: to which he replied kindly —; ‘I can see that you are’.
Of the letters I wrote to Eliot and kept copies I reproduce one, which might perhaps have some more permanent interest than the ephemera.
I believe that my account of events is a good deal nearer the truth than some that have since been published: but then I was perhaps in a better position than some other observers to know what was going on.
of the time in Trebizond itself, I managed to fit in a trip to Rizé, where the countryside resembles that of Switzerland, and also, by great good luck, to Hopa, which is not far away from the Russian frontier.
I say ‘by great good luck’, because the Turkish authorities do not like foreigners wandering about in the neighbourhood of frontiers, particularly the Russian frontier.
I was fortunate enough to obtain permission to go, but I had waited until arriving at Rizé before applying for it.
When I returned to Trebizond, I was told that the authorities at Rizé were exceeding their rights in allowing me to proceed.
This was no doubt very wicked of them, but I bear them no animosity at all: I had done what I wanted to do, which was to obtain a glimpse of the Caucasus from the most  easternly town of any size in Turkey.
This concern over the movements of foreigners is far from being an isolated example of its kind.
As the danger to Turkey recedes, the number of restrictions seem to multiply: the country's nerves grow daily more touchy.
There are several possible explanations for this increasing nervousness.
My own view is that the Turks do not interpret the course of the war in the same sense that we do.
To them, the danger is not so much receding as increasing: but that is because their definition of what constitutes danger is very different from ours.
The danger which they believe to be increasing is precisely the danger of the war ending too soon.
For the Turks have always hoped that the war would be prolonged until both sides were too exhausted to remain a menace to anybody.
Decisive victory for either side: that is what Turkish policy, in so far as it has any power, has been striving to prevent.
And if anything, they regard the coming victory of the United Nations with more apprehension at the moment than they did the possibility of a German victory two or three years ago: the reason being that, in achieving decisive victory, the United Nations will leave Europe with no nation sufficiently strong to shield Turkey against possible Russian demands in the post-war period.
I date the present coldness of Turkey towards us from the expulsion of the Axis from North Africa.
That victory of ours was the first to which they gave less than their usual measure of approval.
The truth is that, while they want us to win, they do not want Germany to lose.
Coupled with her hope that the war may end in a stalemate goes the hope that she may never be obliged to become a belligerent nation.
Turkey does not want to fight (her people  are at the moment almost frantically pacifist): and, if she can help it, she does not intend to fight.
The Cairo Conference was a near thing for her.
Her obligations stared her in the face, but she did not flinch!
And on the return of the President from that journey, the whole country gave a sigh of profound, if somewhat complacent, relief.
This was followed by an interview between the President and Von Papen: and I cannot help thinking that, during their conversation together, the former must have assured the latter that, so long as she could hold out against Allied demands, Turkey would abstain from hostile action towards Germany.
She has had to give in over the question of chrome: and the Foreign Minister, who never struck me as being too friendly towards us, failed to get away (as he apparently hoped) with letting armed German ships through the Straits.
But, more recently, the opening of the Second Front, together with its initial success, has sent a faint thrill of alarm through the country: and the latest utterance of Cordell Hull, which carne over the wireless yesterday, is not going to cheer things up, nor is it likely to be the last exhortation of its kind.
To say that this sums up Turkey's attitude as a whole would nevertheless be untrue.
Combined with their reluctance to enter the war, the Turks entertain great hopes of their army, upon which a major portion of the budget is spent: and they cannot fail to recognise something ludicrous in an attitude which, at one moment, abhors the idea of fighting and at another lauds it as the noblest activity of man.
Consequently, I think we may legitimately expect to see an attempt, though not before the Nazis are observed to be definitely on the point of throwing in their hand, to undertake some minor military venture independent, if at all possible, of the general strategy of the Allies.
It will probably be directed against Bulgaria, but there is also the possibility of an attack upon the Dodecanese, if such an expedition could be undertaken with the small fleet that Turkey possesses.
And it may be that the warning of Cordell Hull was designed, among other things, to make it clear that, should Turkey finally decide to become a belligerent, she must do so in conformity with plans already agreed upon by the Allies themselves.
I intended this to be a letter, but I see that it has turned into a political commentary.
Having caught the fever of the country, which induces inflammation of the political speculative faculties, I am inclined to imagine that everyone else is so addicted.
But I fancy that England is content to get on with the war, and that things take a more practical turn at home.
I occasionally receive a copy of the NEW, most numbers of which evidently get lost on the way.
In this matter, I seem to miss those issues to which you contribute articles: I have not seen one for many months now.
For the last year, I have had little time for writing, though I get something down on paper when I can.
Something may emerge from it later.
In a few weeks time, I hope to get a short spell of leave, and I mean to devote it exclusively to literary work.
The major difficulty is to find somewhere in the Middle Last in which seclusion and moderate comfort can be combined.
Last year I set out on the same quest, but met with little success.
My wanderings took me first to Beyrout, which I found much too crowded and hilarious.
After that, I went on to Cairo, where the heat was insupportable.
Finally, resolved to find at least a change of heat, I went on to Khartoum, which had the merit at least of being dry in contrast to the swelter up north.
But this did not satisfy me either, so I ended up in Eritrea, having passed through Keren, Agordat, and Asmara.
And by that time I was due to return to my work in Turkey.
I must not make the same mistake this time.
I have my eye at the moment on the little-visited town of Amman, capital of Transjordan, which I am told is charming.
I have also been recommended Zanzibar, but that is going to cost a great deal of money, and likewise the journey there and back will occupy much valuable time.
The trouble with having lived in the Middle East for a year or two is that, wherever one goes, one is bound to run into acquaintances; and that means drinks at the nearest bar, and more acquaintances, and finally the complete derangement of one's intended programme, and great loss of time.
In spite of much travelling and various kinds of work, I have been able to get through some interesting books.
One that I enjoyed very much recently was H. J. Massingham's autobiography ‘Remembrance’, which, if you have not read, I am sure you would like.
I have also just finished ‘The Well of Loneliness’, which I had not read previously.
I presume that it was banned because, instead of treating its subject frivolously, it treated it seriously, even solemnly.
Solemnity is perhaps its greatest defect.
‘Nightwood’ is, I think, a better book.
With the surrender of Germany and Turkey's entry into the war, it was felt that one phase of our work was done, and that at last we could go home.
In my case, ‘we’ was the right word, because in 1944 I had married.
Once back in London, one of the first people I wanted to meet was Eliot.
I wrote to him and he asked me to ring him, so that a date for a meeting could be arranged.
On the telephone, I was greeted with a very friendly and hearty ‘Well…well…well!’ and we chatted for a few minutes as if there had been no break in our contact.
I found always this to be the case: resumption of acquaintance was so natural that small talk, as mere material for continuity or improvization, was unnecessary.
When I paid my visit, I was surprised to see how comparatively well he looked.
He had scarcely changed.
Nor had his manner.
We resumed conversation almost as if we had never left off.
On this occasion he occupied a chair at right angles to his desk, and he leaned much further back than had been his custom, stretching out his legs; and, being denied by this posture the opportunity of studying the floor while collecting his thoughts, he addressed the bulk of his remarks first to his feet.
I sat on his left, and had the impression of looking slightly down at him.
At that time, Russell Square was showing its scars.
From the window I could see that the block on the far side to the right had had most of its front ripped off, and Eliot commented how odd and rather disturbing it was to see a bath on an upper storey sticking out into the void, as in a surrealist picture.
He also spoke of lying awake and listening for the flying bombs, and noting the difference in volume between one explosion and another, and then, on hearing one more definite in sound, concluding that, as in the old artillery box-barrage, they had at last‘got the range’.
About his work at Faber's, he remarked — and it is now a somewhat nostalgic thought — that books were being bought as never before; the trouble was that the impressive or ‘excess’ profits were heavily taxed.
These commercial matters were as much as ever in his mind.
In contrast to some other material, my essay ‘The Claims of Basic English’, to which I had referred in my letter of 18 July 1944, had reached him; and I was much cheered by the fact that he expressed unqualified approval for it.
He said he would be prepared to place it for me, and he was as good as his word.
It appeared in January 1946 in the Dublin Review — which was a most lively periodical, and of which, now that it is no more, there is no equivalent.
The essay has since been listed in several bibliographies, and has exerted an influence which, when I composed it as a kind of riposte to the British Council's purchase of the copyright of that crack-brained idea from its originator, C. K. Ogden, I could not have foreseen.
But I owe its initial success to Eliot.
While we talked, I had an opportunity of glancing round the familiar room, which was even more cluttered than usual.
I noticed in particular a large placard placed on the floor in a corner, which I assumed to have been presented to him by Montgomery Belgion, who had been a prisoner of war in Germany.
It recommended fellow-prisoners to occupy their time to the best advantage, such as attending a talk on ‘The Poetry of T. S. Eliot’, and there was a sketch of a man studiously reading a book with this title.
Before I left, I told Eliot that I was still toying with the idea of writing the book on politics, which had increasingly been absorbing me, and I described to him something of what it had been like to live under a benevolent dictatorship.
We also discussed the next great problem in international affairs, that posed by the Soviet Union, that victorious and self-confident power, with which our politicians, and above all Ernest Bevin, were already grappling.
I found him reflecting on this problem with his usual shrewdness.
Although he did not underestimate the dangers of insurgent Communism, and considered it pathetic that the Soviet leaders should have as their strict aim the overtaking of the Capitalist states, he still felt that something might come out of Russia from which all might benefit.
By that it was clear that he was referring to some sort of spiritual renaissance, and he succeeded, as so often, in implicitly prophesying the emergence of men like Solzhenitsyn.
His preoccupation with Russia was to show itself shortly after with the publication of The Dark Side of the Moon, to which he wrote a most interesting Preface.
Although I have said that Eliot had not greatly physically changed, he felt the deprivations of the war as acutely as anyone else.
One of the satisfactions, at the secular level, of which he keenly felt the lack was in the gastronomic sphere.
He could not endure substitutes.
Saccharine, for instance, or the ersatz in general , he abominated.
I once shocked him by admitting that I sometimes took it in my tea.
Except for the occasional food-parcel from the United States, he would never have sought to diverge from the rationing system, which, like many other controls, were maintained long after the war ended.
Prices were controlled too, so meals in restaurants, even though dull, were not expensive.
For reasons which I could never grasp, some restaurants seemed in a position to provide much greater variety than others, and my wife and I found one such place in the Hanover Square area, where I worked.
As I wanted Eliot to meet us together, I invited him to lunch at this crowded chatter-filled establishment on 22 October 1945.
We called for him in a taxi at Faber's, Margaret waiting inside the vehicle.
In those days stationary taxis still throbbed a little, like the ones he had compared in The Waste Land to the waiting human engine at the day's end.
Apart from that, what remains vividly in my memory is the sudden look of extreme melancholy which possessed his face as he was about to climb in.
Some memory must have stabbed him at that moment.
Otherwise he remained throughout the meal in the best possible spirits; and Margaret, who had not perhaps quite reconciled herself to my admiration for him, surrendered to his spell.
As to Eliot, he was interested in her Scottishness, because although his knowledge of that country was limited, he had been captivated by its beauty, and, as I have said, he had a particular penchant for small countries, and even for regional ‘nationalisms,.
We ventured to ask him what he was writing, and he replied that the trouble with being a publisher was that one was so absorbed in other people's books as to have insufficient time and energy to devote to one's own.
He deplored the paper shortage and the fact that books needed to be produced on such poor material.
The edition of the Selected Essays, which I had picked up in Cairo during the war after my copy had been pinched by someone in the Foreign Service (whose identity is known to me), had a  pleasant silk binding, but the paper was of the colour and of the dryness of a tobacco plant.
Another topic on which we touched, because it was one of our preoccupations, was London and the most desirable districts in which to live.
After some search, we had been fortunate in finding accommodation, admittedly very cramped, in a mews flat in Kensington Court.
The address was, and I think still is, Kensington Court Garage, because the stables had been converted to the needs of the automobile age; and we were perched up in the gallery.
Years later Eliot and his second wife were to live a stone's-throw away.
He himself had not long left his rooms in Courtfield Gardens, chez the Vicar, Father Eric Cheetham, and settled with John Hayward in Carlyle Mansions, Chelsea.
One of the attractions of that district, he remarked, was the proximity of the Thames, particularly so for him, for whom rivers had a particular fascination.
What he most liked, so he explained, was the feeling that from that proximate stretch, you felt that you could set sail, if the impulse took you, to any part of the world.
This was the kind of observation which he was inclined to drop with apparent casualness but which stuck in the mind.
Indeed, that was why so many of his remarks have echoed in my mind over the years, because experience has merely served to confirm their aptness.
Of the lunch itself I can remember very little.
Being still in the period of Stafford Crippsian austerity, I know it was rather plain and dull.
I do recall him saying, not in that connection (which his good manners would have forbidden) but with reference to the system of rationing in general, that it made one obsessively conscious of the working of one's digestive organs.
He was often down to earth in that way.
As to the restaurant itself, I recall that we had to shuffle and wriggle our way out between the crowded tables, and that the noise had been a little taxing on the nerves.
Not that he showed it.
Nor do I for a moment suppose that anyone there recognized him, nor was he the sort of author who basked in that kind of admiration.
Not long after that meeting I was faced with a problem over my official duties and I urgently sought his advice.
To whom else, indeed, would I have turned?
Accordingly, he asked me to lunch, and we went to the Russell Hotel, which was conveniently near his office.
I must have poured out my troubles at such length, and he must have put to me a sufficient number of searching questions, that, before we had drawn breath, the afternoon was already far advanced.
I remember that  we sat opposite each other— the arrangement I most preferred — so that I could observe evéry modification of his countenance; and I have to say that never in all our acquaintance had I witnessed such patience and sheer kindness.
This was further demonstrated by the fact that, when I murmured some apologies that I must leave, he insisted on my staying for some tea.
True, this was a meal of which he was very fond; but on the other hand he usually did the bulk of his office work in the afternoon, and I was conscious of having been instrumental in seriously holding this up.
All the same, once he appeared to be actually enjoying this extension of our meeting, I felt as reassured as I was grateful.
This was all the more so, since part of the problem with which I was faced was due, as I recognized, to lack of forethought on my side, though it had been complicated by a stroke of ill-luck.
Eliot did not beat about the bush.
He agreed that a regrettable lack of foresight was at the root of it, but he felt that there were extenuating circumstances, and he seemed resolved to do something about it, in so far as he could.
I noted then, what I had noted earlier, that, at such a juncture, he seemed to sink his own personal problems and interests in concentrating on the troubles of the other person.
That is why I cannot agree with Stephen Spender's remark, quoted by Ackroyd, that he seemed ‘blinded to the existence of people outside himself’.
To my mind, he was the very reverse of blind.
though he took every precaution, as I felt, to render his own self invisible.
Hugh Kenner's title ‘The Invisible Poet’ was much more to the point.
As I have written elsewhere, ‘for one who was in perpetual self-inquisition he was remarkably outward-looking, and always showed interest in other people's activities’.
If people felt occasionally frustrated in their relationship with Eliot — as Herbert Read told me he did — it was because they could not get behind ‘the mask’.
But then what is this habit of trying to penetrate to people's inner life?
In judging other people, we have to rely on intuition and empathy.
The souls mis a nu, like the persons who ‘tell ill’ in our popular newspapers and magazines, usually show by the exposure that they have very little to convey.
Eliot has said it himself in After Strange Gods: it is during those ‘bewildering minutes’ that ‘we are all very much the same’.
The upshot of this long sessions was that Eliot asked me to send him all the relevant documents, which I did in a letter of 20 May.
It arrived just before he was leaving for the United States (another  example of his self-forgetfulness, as he had not mentioned this to me), and he was not due to return until the end of July.
He wrote a longish letter on 23 May ending with the words:
Again, I was touched by his solicitude.
A busy man who was prepared for ‘another talk’ after the prolonged exchange of a few days earlier, was not quite the self-absorbed, withdrawn person he has sometimes been portrayed.
The crisis passed, somewhat to my surprise, and I would not dismiss the possibility that Eliot, acting so as to ensure that the information should not be disclosed to me, had something to do with it.
And within a few days of his return from the United States, he wrote to me on 4 August to the Kensington Mews flat:
It was a remark of this kind that I found particularly heartening.
In so unequal a friendship — unequal not merely in respect of age but in the extent to which the giving was preponderantly on his side — I would repeatedly wonder whether I had presumed too much.
At a time when he had so many claims on his time, what with his normal work, committees, visitors from overseas, particularly from the United States, a growing acquaintanceship and a formidable correspondence, the assurance that he was ‘here again and available’ was of great moral support to me, especially as I was still uncertain about the future, and as the news, as his letter hinted, was by no means all good.
Indeed, the next months were taxing in a different way, culminating in my appointment to a post in Bahrein for which I had little enough relish.
We wanted very much to ask Eliot round before departure, especially as we had now moved to a bigger flat.
I was in touch several times by telephone, and I remember noticing for the first time a slight labouring for breath on his part, which was to become increasingly marked.
On 15 November, he wrote to me at 41A Roland Gardens: The Tuesday was duly fixed up, and we prepared as good a meal as the rationing system, still in operation, made possible.
The time appointed, 7.30 p.m., came and went.
As we were installed in a sort of penthouse flat, with no lift: and as occasionally a guest had found the front-door bell erratic in its functioning, I hurried down to see what, if anything, had been happening.
As I opened the door, a familiar tall figure, swinging a stick, strode past.
When I detained him by a greeting, he looked up a little puzzled, saying that he thought that we lived in Cornwall Gardens.
What would have happened had I not arrived at the door at precisely that juncture, I cannot imagine.
He had a long, brown, American-style overcoat, a woollen scarf against the cold, the usual hat, and the sword-stick, perhaps an imitation, which was no doubt a present.
(He was in receipt of numerous walking-sticks and umbrellas, some huge, as admirers translated their support in this literal way.
When a French journalist wrote of him carrying un grand parapluie, Eliot crossed out ‘grand’ and put ‘immense’.)
He quietly made himself at home, and launched upon the usual enquiries about my work and my writing.
Nelson's had just issued a short book of mine on Turkey, and he scrutinized it with care, holding it high up and bending back the spine as if to test its durability.
When I was out of the room, he told Margaret that he wanted to see me write weightier books than that.
We talked about the Dublin Review, where my Basic English article had been published, and referred to a characteristically splenetic article by Montgomery  Belgion which had also appeared in that journal.
Belgion, a man who seemed to be equipped with a steam-boiler instead of a body, had criticized a remark of Eliot's in After Strange Gods, namely that in order to study with thoroughness Hindu and Buddhist thought and the Sanskrit and Pali languages in which they were expounded, he would have been obliged to turn himself into an oriental.
For some reason, Belgion had resented this observation, not because he thought it untrue but because he claimed to have said it first.
Eliot mentioned that he had written to Belgion, gently protesting against the intemperate way in which this comment had been conveyed.
He also remarked that Belgion was something of a mystery man, about whom very little seemed to be known — even whence he acquired his undoubtedly vast store of knowledge.
(He did not remark, but I did later, that if anyone truly deserved the title of ‘egg-head’, it was Belgion, with his huge bald, smooth, oval-shaped head.)
After these preliminaries, including some observations about Kensington, conducted before a rather feeble gas-fire, we moved to the low-ceilinged dining-room.
Again, I cannot remember what we had to eat, though we had tried to obtain a suitable cheese; but it was during the meal that Eliot uttered one of the most Eliotic of his remarks.
There was a particular dish, in those days something of a delicacy, which needed cutting into sections before serving, and the question was how this was to be done.
Eliot pronounced the verdict with great and grave deliberation.
‘Each one’, he said by way of final adjudication, ‘will perform that operation for himself.’
Although we did not attend it, we had visited St Stephen's, Gloucester Road, together, no doubt out of forgivable curiosity, though Eliot might not have thought excusable any curiosity he had been the means of exciting in that sphere.
But he seemed disposed on this occasion to discuss St Stephen's, because its problems had lately been much on his mind.
The details have escaped me, but he and Sir Andrew Clarke, as churchwardens (their memorial tablets are near to each other in the south transept) had been obliged to take legal action over the advowson — the word which, because of its precision of meaning and its sound, I could see he enjoyed introducing; but they had evidently covered themselves in so doing, because, the Anglican Church being established, their office carried official responsibilities.
Although Eliot was privately a most generous man — to an extent that many people, especially the young, may not always have been aware — he exercised a public prudence that  sometimes faintly amused his associates.
This was no doubt in part due to his Puritan ancestry.
I remember that when he got up at the end of the meal, his head nearly touched the ceiling, and, as usual, the rising to his feet was undertaken by means of the silent swivel-mechanism.
As we had referred to Turkey and the fact that Margaret and I had met there, and as we knew he took great interest in genuine peasant culture, we showed him some Turkish embroidery and in particular two typical Turkish saddle-bags, which we had transformed into cushions.
He was much struck by the latter, turning them over and myopically examining their patterns.
‘That's what I call civilization,’ he said decisively and gave one of them a smart pat.
The present generation should be informed that in those days we tended to talk about ‘civilization’ rather than‘culture’.
Civilization, or ‘civilization as we know it’ was what people had fought for.
Culture, which later became current with the rise of social anthropology, tended to be associated with what the Germans had believed they had fought for.
During the next few years, the subject was increasingly to preoccupy him, and when his thoughts finally appeared in print, they were concerned with ‘culture’: the word civilization does not feature at all.
We sat for a while in the sitting-room over coffee.
The fact that we had met Michael and Janet Roberts came up, and he was moved to explain that, with his growing acquaintanceship with the children of his friends — to several of whom he had become godfather — he had felt the need to adopt some sobriquet less solemn than Uncle.
That is why he had suggested that he should be known as Possum.
It was already his nickname with fellow-writers such as Ezra Pound; and, in adopting it for use by the youngest generation, he may have again wished to convey, though with slightly less emphasis, the elusive character of that animal, with its instinct for feigning and dissembling.
I saw him to the door and watched him pace away along the streets he knew better than most others in London.
Some, like Clarence Gate Gardens, had sad associations for him.
The name remained in the telephone-book as his address long after he had left.
Some, like Bina Gardens, where he had spent pleasant evenings with Frank Morley and Geoffrey Faber in the 1930s at John Hayward's flat, resulted in the Noctes Binanianae, a little private anthology which I came upon later in the Houghton Library at Harvard.
There is a book to be written, and almost certainly will be written, on T. S. Eliot's Kensington, as a companion volume to Patricia Hutchings' Ezra Pound's Kensington.
And three days before these lines were written, English Heritage set the seal on Eliot's Kensington associations by putting a plaque on the block where he spent his last and happiest years.
During the next few weeks my fortunes took a more propitious turn.
The posting to Bahrein was cancelled, and I was to stay on in London, at least for the moment.
One day, in an elated mood, we thought we would give Eliot a surprise.
Just before Christmas, we visited Carlyle Mansions, climbed to the third floor and, ringing the bell, delivered to the housekeeper a rather nice, mature Camembert.
Whereas today such a cheese is accessible enough and almost commonplace, in 1946 this was far from being so.
Such cheese was, in rationing terminology, on points, and the chances of getting a really good one were fairly rare.
Anything of quality was exciting in those days, for the usual run of food was of a dullness today hardly comprehensible.
The housekeeper, French by origin and known as Madame, was one of those fair Nordic or Norman types whose hair and complexion were of a uniformity to suggest that she had been dipped in custard.
She took the packet with some fussy excitement, and she was clearly a little relieved when we made it clear that we had no intention of staying or seeking entrance.
We also had to make it plain that the present was for Mr Eliot, though we knew perfectly well that he would share it with John Hayward.
Just as we were engaged in these sotto voce instructions, Eliot himself was perceived to walk across a passage at the far end of the flat.
This was in the neighbourhood of his humble quarters.
On realizing that there was someone at the door, he quickened his pace, so that our view of him was a fugitive one.
We were able to see, however, that he was formally dressed in a three-piece dark suit.
As we were paying our visit at the end of the morning, he may have been dressed ready for the office.
This visit to the flat, the only one I paid, produced a letter which was, as I know, typed with his own hand.
It was headed with the address, but not the name, of Faber's, for he had been anxious, especially when he lodged with Father Cheetham, that his private address should not be known.
I was glad that we had not troubled him personally, though we confessed that we should like to have set foot in the flat.
He wrote:
It was a delightful letter; and the reference to being ‘fed’ by us and to the heresy of refrigerating a mature Camembert were typical of him.
Again, I was moved that he should have perceived how miserable an exile to the Persian Gulf would have been.
The fact that he had been ‘much distressed’ by that prospect proved his genuine regard, which I knew was not contrived.
Despite chest trouble and the serious illness of his mother, he was, as the letter provided a small piece of evidence, much happier about his own work.
The Family Reunion, which we went to see and much enjoyed, had that autumn been put on again, and its success greatly heartened him.
We had also been in touch with him indirectly through learning early in the year that he and John Hayward were needing a housekeeper.
Through family connections, Margaret knew a handsome Greek lady, who seemed suitable.
She had not merely been a housekeeper but her qualities of efficiency, cheerfulness and gastronomic expertise seemed to fit her for the task of looking after this unusual pair.
I was several times on the phone to John Hayward, who supervised such domestic matters, and I was struck by his almost fierce, perhaps too possessive, loyalty to Eliot.
He made frank, often ribald remarks  about other people, especially fellow-writers and intellectuals, and he was scathing about the award by Oxford of an honorary doctorate to a minor littérateur, E. V. Lucas, instead of to Eliot, and I don't wonder.
Given his distressing complaint (muscular dystrophy), he possessed, apart from a commanding voice, an ebullience which, as I can now see, suited Eliot, though I believe there were moments when the two temperaments were at odds.
Moreover there was gossip about the two which disgusted me.
Once only was I able to talk to Hayward de vive voix, and that was at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, when I referred again to the housekeeper problem; but in the end, for reasons that I do not know, our Greek candidate, who might have been an admirable choice, was not summoned for interview.
The French housekeeper, who triumphed, stayed at Carlyle Mansions for more than ten years.
She must have come to know her employers better than many others, and certainly in a quite different and unusual way.
Like Miss Swan at Faber's, she had a particular regard for Eliot.
This was also the case with the housekeeper, Elizabeth Hinson, who had looked after the Vicarage and who died in a nursing home about a year before these lines were written.
A friend of mine, who ministered to her late in life, gained the impression, from one or two things she let drop, that, contrary to what has been stated, Eliot did indeed go to Northumberland House, the nursing home where Vivien was looked after.
When I was told this, I recalled hearing it said, back in the 1930s, that these visits had been observed by a young writer or two who, out of rather callous curiosity, would follow Eliot at a discreet distance, and observe him to turn round, as he approached the door, in order to see whether anybody had been spying on him.
But this story is definitely false; and it illustrates how myths can grow up, especially concerning the great.
I deeply regret that I was unable to have a word with the housekeeper when she was more collected in mind.
So far as I know, she never gave a coherent account to anybody of her recollections, and there is no reason why she should have done; but just as any scrap of information about Shakespeare — from anybody, a servant, amanuensis, ostler, for instance— would be of the greatest interest, so a testimony from one so close as Miss Hinson would have been worth having.
Mere tittle-tattle dredged up for purely prurient interest is another matter.
In the case of John Hayward, there is plenty of  that.
When I wrote the entry on Hayward for the DNB, I found this made my task difficult.
The operation to which Eliot had referred in his thank-you letter of 22 December was one for hernia, a trouble with which he had been afflicted from birth (in fact he had a double hernia), and for which he was obliged to wear a truss.
An operation which he could describe as due to take place some weeks ahead was the second to correct the condition.
Had the hernia been strangulated, action would have had to be taken at the first sign of trouble.
In fact, intervention of another kind took place on 27 January 1947, with the sudden death of Vivien Eliot.
There was every reason, apart from the unexpectedness of the news, why this should have given Eliot the greatest distress.
From what I knew of John Hayward, I think that Ackroyd is right in his surmise that at this personal crisis he was able to help Eliot more effectively than some more ‘tender’ spirits might have done.
Although the operation was deferred until July, Eliot spent a period in hospital on account of an attack of his chest complaint, which may have owed its onset on this occasion to the emotional blow that he had received.
Ronald Duncan, whom I came to know about this time (our first meeting took place when I made a bicycle tour of Cornwall in the summer of 1947), spoke of having received a telegram from Eliot cancelling an engagement and saying that he had to ‘bury a woman’.
He repeated this in his second autobiographical volume How to make Enemies.
Ackroyd quotes him; but apart from the fact that Eliot, especially in his distressed state, was unlikely to have used those words of Vivien, there is no record of his having sent such a telegram.
The correspondence shows that the lunch-date was eighteen months after Vivien's death, and makes it clear that he had to attend the funeral of Mrs Mirrlees, a great friend at whose house at Shamley Green, Surrey, he had spent some of the war.
I was at this time that I renewed my acquaintance with Herbert Read, whom I had met first at Oxford in the company of Nevill Coghill.
He had known Eliot since the First World War, and at that time and until the poet's death in 1965, he was seeing him frequently.
He always spoke of him in the most affectionate terms.
As a director of Routledge, he took an interest in what I was writing, and in 1946 he commissioned the first book I was to produce on philosophy, The Approach to Metaphysics.
I duly sent a copy to Eliot; and although lie showed interest, I think it possible that he never read it through, as the following letter shows.
Not that he need have done.
As he had said  in a lecture delivered in Dublin in 1936, ‘I have myself no capacity whatever for abstract thought or indeed for any sort of thinking’(the Southern Review, October 1985).
And although I believe he was referring to a certain kind of abstract thinking — the kind that reduced the English Hegelian tradition to a lyrical hymn to the Absolute, and of which his own thesis on Bradley of 1916 came very near to imitating (which is why he declared, on its publication in 1963, that he did not pretend to understand it), he possessed an outstanding capacity for reasoned argument.
This was nevertheless dependent upon his having something concrete to argue about.
Although he published much of Herbert Read, he told me that he could not cope with Read's numerous books on Art.
This was no doubt because Read had a way of writing about Abstract Art in his own highly abstract manner, so that abstraction was further compounded.
Read had not been particularly interested in my political book (which I had submitted to him in fulfilment of the option clause in my contract with Routledge, so I got together some more representative pieces and sent them to Eliot, no least because he had published my article on ‘Philosophy and Politics’ in The Criterion, and because I had again spoken about my plans at our first meeting after the war.
On 24 February 1947, he wrote me an interim letter in which he said he thought I had tended to ‘overwhelm the reader by a tendency to say too much at once’, and that the material might need some reorganization.
On 21 March, he wrote that he had ‘thought a good deal’ about the book — which, bearing in mind the Spanish use the word ‘servile’in contrast to ‘liberal’, I had called Liberal and Servile Society — but that his Board had agreed that in its present form, which was in any case fragmentary, it was insufficiently co-ordinated.
He would either need to spend ‘a couple of hours’ analysing where it was deficient or, preferably, he hoped that we might meet to discuss it over a meal.
He concluded: ‘Could you dine with me on Thursday, April 10th?’
So we did, at the Athenaeum, in the days when that club, like most others in London, was rather livelier in the evenings than, for social reasons, it is now.
As my son had been born on 5 March of that year, we talked at first about children, and he observed somewhat wistfully that the experience of having children must, despite all its responsibilities, be a unique sort of pleasure.
It was obvious that he would love to have had a family, and this has been amply confirmed by his second  wife.
To have asked him to be a godfather had crossed my mind; but I knew that he already held this office in plurality.
It was in the Drawing-Room upstairs that we discussed the book in detail.
He pointed out that although my title was an attractive one — since there was such a thing as a ‘servile’ society, namely a totalitarian one — the reader would assume that I was using the word liberal in the modern sense, which was certainly not my intention, He then went meticulously through my argument, and it almost pained me that he should take so much trouble over a work which I cannot think it deserved.
At one point, when some pages Spilled out on the floor, he remarked, as if it were an integral part of his commentary, that ‘some people’ did not realize the importance of properly securing a typescript.
His quiet reproaches, as I had felt on more than one occasion, were all the more devastating.
As I had made some pretty critical remarks about the Soviet Union, at a time the war-time alliance still commanded admiration, especially among the young, he pointed out that if printed, these views would be taken by the Kremlin to be officially inspired.
By way of illustration, he cited the case of his Preface to The Dark Side of the Moon, which, according to what he had been told by a Foreign Office official, would certainly be so taken; but I felt that there would be infinitely more likelihood of the remarks of T. S. Eliot being heeded than those of E. W. F. Tomlin.
He was known and respected in the Soviet Union, if only through the writings on British society by Prince Mirsky and through an anthology published in Leningrad in 1937.
He concluded his examination by turning to me suddenly and saying: ‘I feel you are going to write this book one day.’
This put heart into me, because in all the years that followed I came increasingly to believe that the genuine radicals were neither the ‘philosophical radicals’(much as I admired J. S. Mill, and have even found good in Bentham) nor the Fabian radicals, the socialists or social democrats, but the kind of conservative radicals of whom Cobbett was perhaps the earliest example.
But, as fate would have it, my work has lain for years in a field where I was obliged strictly to keep my political convictions to myself.
So the book, or one of the books, which Eliot wanted me to write has not yet seen the light of day.