

Editorial
Crowded streets.
Noisy streets.
Each of us jostle for space in our dream cities of the late 20th century.
But, if the crowd is the panoramic view, we all believe, deep down, that we stand out from it.
That we are individuals.
We are searching for anonymity and essence.
The face has always had a dialectical relationship to art and, today perhaps, this is stronger than ever as we view the face — in portraiture — with a scepticism characteristic of our age and as we witness the convergence of popular culture and fine art in so many spheres.
It is said that Joshua Reynolds, one of the Grand Old Men of English art, was instrumental in defining the successful modern portrait.
It is not said, however, that at around the same time in Georgian England a woman, Angelica Kauffman, had arrived on the London art scene and was proving remarkably successful as a portrait painter.
Griselda Pollock, in her provocative article in this issue of Woman's Art Magazine , goes much further than simply retrieving one Old Mistress.
Power, celebrity, status and beauty: the portrait reveals all or nothing.
Obsessed as we are by discovering the truth, we still believe the face — and the successful portrait — to be an honest, unveiled depiction of the subject.
Yet art has always had a troubled relationship with the portrait.
Rejecting the inherent conservatism of the traditional portrait, many artists have today tried to extend the definition of portraiture to embrace a level of experimentation sought necessary in their search for the true identity.
The face of defiance, the face of seduction, the posed face, the glamorous face, the troubled face…
In this issue we take a look at the face from different angles.
Through photographic images we see a few of the attempts by contemporary artists to find the real face.
Marcia Pointon's fascinating essay on the contemporary portrait leads us to question the central relationship between artist, sitter and spectator.
Whilst Julia Browne's interviews with animal portrait artists, none of whom have felt the effects of the recession in the art world, gives us any insight into a very different world, a world which rarely attracts any notice from the serious art press.
We man not want pictures of birds of prey or even cows any more, but these artists will vouch for the steady demand for dogs, cats and horses.
Psychoanalytic theory has probably been the single most important theoretical influence on the discipline of Art History over the past decade.
With debates about feminism and culture it had been seen by many as the key to understanding our current dilemmas.
Against this background, Nicola Diamond introduces the ideas of Jacques Lacan, one theorist who believes the project to discover the real face will always remain a fantasy.
Sally Townsend    
Cover: Susan Herbert ‘after Vincent van Gogh, Selfportrait’ 1889
Views expressed in Woman's Art Magazine are those of the contributors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Editor nor of the Women Artists Slide Library.
We welcome your letters for publication.
We will institute a Letters Page when appropriate.
Feature
Rewriting the Story of Art
Griselda Pollock on painting, femininity and success in 18th century London: the case of Angelica Kauffman
I recently did a quick survey of museum bookshops in London.
The plan was to see if feminism had really had any impact on what was available by way of art books to the art-loving public.
Would there now, after more than 20 years of feminist scholarship in art history, be more books on women artists nestling amongst the row upon row of glossy monographs and weighty catalogues dedicated to the Old Masters?
My survey produced a resounding ‘no’ to this question.
At the National Gallery's new sumptuous shop in the Sainsbury Wing I recorded three books on Gwen John (and none on Augustus, her brother), two on Artemisia Gentileschi (one being the very scholarly and feminist monograph by Mary D Garrard, published by Princeton University Press, now in paperback), one book on Rosalba Carriera, and most surprisingly given the feminist industry around this artist, only one on Mary Cassatt.
There were none on Suzanne Valadon or Rachel Ruysch or any one else who was female.
There were no books at all about the work of any artist who was not white.
Yet there 18 on Cezanne, and another 18 on Degas, 15 for Manet and so on back through ages.
Angelica Kauffman ‘Duchess of Richmond’
Does this matter?
We could argue that retrieving the Old Mistresses is not as important as supporting women involved today in the making of a living culture.
But I would suggest that part of sustaining the conditions for women working today and ensuring both a livelihood and acknowledgement through publication, or preservation in museums and galleries, is a radical rewriting of the existing stories of art.
The historical legacy of women's artistic practices must be acknowledged and researched not only for the sake of justice.
It is necessary for contemporary women artists so that they can understand the history and the specificity of their positioning as artists who are women, with specific social and cultural locations in terms of class, race and sexuality, as opposed to the stereotypical displacement as ‘women artists’.
It is also important to create what I call a maternal genealogy to add to the paternal lineage which the current histories of art canonise — the succession of geniuses passing on the Olympic torch down the ages, man to man.
Women artists need to have both ‘parents’ as part of the resources and references from which they make their art today, and to understand the nature of the position from which they work and intervene to reshape — to expand — contemporary culture.
At the Brighton Museum and Art Gallery there is a show which marks a milestone in this struggle.
It is dedicated to an 18th century Swiss artist who lived and worked in England between 1766–81, Angelica Kauffman (1741–1807) /It is really shocking how rare such exhibitions are, especially in Britain.
Angelica Kauffman was born in Switzerland.
Accompanied by her father, himself a minor painter,(her mother having died when she was 16), she travelled extensively in Italy studying and painting commissions in Florence, in Rome, in Naples and in Venice, where she met Bridget, Lady Wentworth, an English woman who invited her to visit England.
In 1766 she arrived in London to become one of the leading figures in the art world of London, not only proving remarkably successful as a portrait painter, but winning high esteem in the most prestigious form of painting — history painting, namely large-scale compositions based on historical and mythological subjects which provided a lesson in heroism, tragedy or morality.
She was a founder member, the only woman from another Swiss woman artist, Mary Moser, of the Royal Academy which was established in 1768 in order to advance the professional careers and inspire the ambition of British artists to emulate the Italian artists of the Renaissance in the  recreation of the Grand Style.
In addition to becoming one of the leading but still very few practitioners of neo-classical history painting, Angelica Kauffman participated in the movement to decorate with specially painted panels the newly built, Robert Adam-designed country houses of those growing rich on the exploitation of agriculture at home and slavery abroad.
Her popularity and success — within the limits of an expanding middle class — was in part due to the numerous engravings she herself made, or that were made after her paintings with their moving subject matter drawn from Roman sources and from the history and literature of medieval and Renaissance Europe.
Angelica Kauffman ‘The Return of Telemachus’
Like Gwen John, or Artemisia Gentileschi, Angelica Kauffman was never entirely obliterated from art history.
There is quite an extensive bibliography on this artist,(that is relative to the virtual absence of any monographs on most women artists of the past) including a number of appreciative biographies — starting with one published in 1810, then another 1892 and the still definitive volume published in 1924.
Interest was refuelled in the 1980s by feminism, and the exhibition is accompanied by a substantial book of essays, edited and headed by a leading Angelica Kauffman scholar, Wendy Wassyng Roworth.
But there have been many more relevant developments in feminist literary and historical studies which are engaged in reconsidering the importance of the 18th century for the emergence of modern western culture, its class system, its gender relations and its racism.
In the revolutionary moment in which republicanism and social rights were actively proclaimed, the concept of man, rational, specifically male and white emerged in opposition to the correspondingly redefined ideas about woman, nature and Europe's cultural others.
So there is a tension.
On the one hand, this new book offers an up to date, scholarly and well illustrated study of the artist Angelica Kauffman in England, her history paintings, her portraits, her engraved work.
This is of interest for art historians who like to know lots of details of when and by whom a painting was commissioned and painted, how much it cost, who was buying this kind of work, where was it being exhibited.
Such is the bread and butter of art history, the framework of precise historical knowledge without which interpretation cannot be securely founded.
The trouble is this foundation is often all you get.
So, on the other hand, feminists want another kind of knowledge — based on believing that it is not enough to establish that Angelica Kauffman was productive and well respected in both difficult and popular forms of art.
We want to know what her paintings are about — how images of Penelope, Cornelia Mother of the Gracchi, Cleopatra, Andromache and many others were being used to explore the possibility of representing women's intellect, courage, political judgement as well as their passions, pride or grief in that contradictory and fluid moment of western European history.
Although upper or middle class women in the 18th century managed to negotiate ways in which to participate in the intellectual culture of their day — this is the age of the so-called blue stockings, fashionable women who banned gambling at their parties and invited clever people to come and converse wittily with each other— this period also witnessed the emergence of a sexually discriminating language, which defined women as the gentle and sentimental sex, and proposed a passive ideal of femininity closely tied to nature and biologically determined nurturing role in which intelligence and imagination were to be banished if not carefully hidden — masked.
Recently a German feminist art historian, Angela Rosenthal,(who also writes on portraiture in the book) has suggested that Angelica Kaufman's paintings have to be read as a carefully constructed game of masking she claims that she is making , through her use of certain key subjects, for women's artistic and intellectual intelligence.
She argues the case through a reading of a history painting ‘Zeuxis Choosing his Models for the Painting of Helen of Troy’ of the late 1770s in which one of the female figures stands behind the classical Greek artist and herself reaches for the chalk to start on the blank canvas beside her, and through a self portrait ‘Angelica Kauffman Hesitating between the Arts of Music and Painting’(1794).
Angelica Kauffman might be compared with Mozart — an infant prodigy overendowed with artistic gifts — but while music could have been a profession for a man, it would have turned Angelica Kauffman into a performer.
Painting represented the choice of an arduous intellectual profession and Angelica Kauffman boldly inserts her self as the intellectual artist making a moral choice by using as the model for her self portrayal one of the key themes used to demonstrate masculine dedication and virtue, ‘Hercules Choosing between Virtue and Vice’.
These two types of feminist writing, one in, and the other beginning to go beyond, art history, work together in creating the proper conditions for knowledge about this European woman's work.
Yet they also point to the conflict between feminism inside art history, which often seems little more than a maker of changing the gender of the artist as hero, and feminism as a more complex, multi-focused, or interdisciplinary project which utterly transforms the objects art history usually studies by refusing to treat them as simply ‘works of art’ created by ‘artists’.
Instead they become complex historical texts, whose meanings require theorised as well as historical ‘reading’ in order to grasp the dynamic of art as a practice — shaped by, but also acting, upon the institutions, economies, sign systems, ideologies within which the works are produced.
Rediscovering and making heroes of overlooked Old Mistresses doesn't challenge the exclusivity of art history, the way it masquerades as a specialism — so it talks only about form and sources, influences and patrons — while collaborating with the class of owners and dealers in art as rich people's commodities because it never talks about social conditions of race, class, gender or sexuality.
Angelica Kauffman's history is bound up with the elite classes whose rituals of social dominance included visiting her in her fashionable  studio in Golden Square, Soho, or commissioning a portrait or a decorative ensemble from this latest London novelty (who was, of course, a really fine artist and being fashionable then was not a pejorative condition when fashionability was synonymous with being part of ‘society’).
It was a way of life based on constant leisure made possible by the constant labour of other classes and enslaved peoples.
It was a way of life devoted to cultured consumption, culture as the means of conspicuous consumption and consumption as the use of culture to secure class status.
As feminists, we need to have a way of looking at this work which makes us think about whose shattered lives and suffering produced the money used to pay her for her paintings — namely the poor rural workers of Britain and Ireland and the enslaved African peoples working in the West Indies and the American colonies.
This material foundation for 18th century culture is marked as a marginal yet important presence in the  country-house portrait itself, in for instance Angelica Kauffman's ‘Henry Loftus.
Early of Ely and Family’(1771) in which the richly clad Earl, the Countess and their two musical daughters sway  elegantly in front of an idealised Greek temple set in their newly designed gardens while a small African boy dressed in a combination of Turkish and Indian costume holds up the Earl's diadem, curiously peering round the Countess to look up at his owner.
Yet we also need to see that for middle class European women, struggling to use a momentary opening in the cultural framework of pre-Revolutionary Europe to claim some access to the intellectual professions, these unsavoury conditions were the very means of their access to both art and social acknowledgement.
Like her French contemporaries Elizabeth Vigee-Lebrun or Adelaide Labille-Guiard, Angelica  Kauffman was caught up in the contradictory politics of class and gender through the elite patronage without which she could not work.
Angelica Kauffman ‘Self-Portrait Hesitating Between Art and Music’ 1791
These contradictions will be marked in the work produced under these conditions in ways that we are only just beginning to be able to imagine.
In 1764 Angelica Kauffman met the German art lover Joachim Winkelmann, She painted his portrait, showing him casually dressed, holding a quill, seated over an open writing book.
Winkelmann was just about to publish the first book to use the word art history in its title, This book on the history of Classical Art is seen as a milestone in the history of art history.
Winkelmann created a vision of Greek art as the cradle and the childhood of European civilisation.
He was both a symptom of, and a resource for, the revival of Classical Art in the 18th century.
He adored the smooth-limbed whiteness of the idealised youths of ancient Greek art and it said that Angelica Kauffman's painted figures followed this view of, and taste in, Greek masculinity in opposition to a more robust, tense, athletic and Roman image of the male body which prevailed in later French versions of neoclassicism.
Thus the ‘effeminacy’ attributed to her work, is not the sigh of her own gender, but of a cultural and sexual taste.
Winkelmann, and thus Kauffman, were part of the ‘invention’ of the Greeks as the ancestors of western art, an invention which Martin Bernal has shown took place in the 18th century by displacing the existing stories of art — that Greek culture grew out of the Egyptian, African and Semitic cultures of the Mediterranean world — and producing what he calls the ‘Aryan’and highly racist version of that history which denied the impact of Africa and the Semitic (Phoenicians in particular) peoples in order to redefine the Greeks as symbols of a specifically white and anti-semitic Europe.
Greek images were also used by physiognomists and ethnologists  when they began to create racist classification systems which placed the Greek profile as the highest development of humanity, above Jewish people with African peoples lower down the scale, represented so as to approximate their profiles with those of primates and apes at the bottom.
Yet, against this sense of her work being inevitably implicated in the strategies of European supremacy in the age of slavery and early colonialism, we cannot fail to find her representations of white women's moral character, emotional profundity and historical agency, compelling.
Why did Angelica Kauffman return so often to the image of Penelope, wife of Ulysses mother of Telemachus, who was abandoned by her husband when he went off to fight the Trojan Wars, and had to fend off a pack of vulture-like suitors who wanted to take over Ulysses' estate, wealth and derelict wife.
There are at least five paintings dealing with episodes in Penelope's story.
She had to keep inventing ruses to protect herself against this resident ratpack, one of which was perpetual creativity through weaving a tapestry which she never finished.
Through the work of contemporary feminist artists, theorists and psychoanalysts like Laura Mulvey or Nini Herman, we are recognising the possibilities of re-reading these old Greek myths, like that of Pandora and her ‘box/vase’(the question of curiosity and sexuality), Demeter and Persephone (the problem of mother and daughter separation).
Instead of only seeing Angelica Kauffman's history paintings as part of a neoclassical revival and a feature of 18th century history painting, might a psychoanalytical-cum-anthropological approach allow us to see a pattern of latent meanings, around themes of abandonment, grief, mourning or see her dramatisation of women's complex relations to emotional and civic loyalties?
There is no doubt that Angelica Kauffman's work offers a large and varied body of materials for feminist cultural and historical study.
Hers is a dense and complex archive which can only become vivid for us today if she, like all women, are seen as historical, therefore positioned, as social, therefore contradictory.
Women, then as now, were caught in conflicting webs of identifications which fracture society because of the existence of power, and oppression.
In looking at her tender and respectful image of a woman friend, forced to write to support herself and her widowed mother ‘Portrait of Cornelia Knight’(1793) we see something more direct, less cluttered, and less rhetorical than the ‘Portrait of Mary, 3rd Duchess of Richmond in a Turkish Dress’(1775).
How do we explain this difference?
Is it a matter of class between a ‘gentlewoman’ and a duchess, a friend and a patron, ie, the point where social class and personal relations do and don't intersect.
Or could it also be to do with conflicting concepts of femininity, both competing in the specific historical arena of élite European culture?
For the portrait of her novelist friend is just as much posed according to established iconographic formulae, those for representing ‘meditation’ which is related to ‘invention’the intellectual component of the art making process.
Cornelia Knight has been lifted out of the category of femininity in which woman is famed for her ‘beauty’, itself an effect of class (food, clothes, health) and an attempt is being made, using the most canonised resources of western art to imag(in)e for us a combination of femininity and intellectuality.
Does this project require more personality, more solidity, a different manner of painting, that is so different from the harmoniously fluid and elegant figures who populate her mythological scenes of women's sacrifice, distress or devotion?
Is this why her self-portraits form such a compelling and challenging series of images?
By resisting narcissism they force into the cultural imaginary a way of being a clever, gifted and ambitious professional woman ?
Such an exhibition, and its permanent record in the lavishly illustrated new book edited by Wendy Roworth, should alert us to the rich possibilities offered by serious reassessment of the work of such a varied, complex and intellectual artist as Angelica Kauffman.
At the same time it should make us aware of the enormity of the task that still lies before us in developing an adequate analysis of the art made by artists for whom ‘being a woman’ was not a given, but something to be explored through a historically shaped and socially conditioned artistic.
Griselda Pollock is Professor of the Social and Critical Histories of Art at the University of Leeds.
She coedited with Richard Kendall Dealing with Degas (Pandora); her new book Avant Garde Gambits: Gender and the Colour of Art History will be published by Thames & Hudson in February
Angelica Kauffman ‘Self-Portrait Listening to the Inspiration of Poetry’
A Child In Time
The childhood world is a violent one.
One that is often unrealistically pictured by adults as Alison Yarrington reports
We have all experienced childhood, it therefore seems familiar, but do we necessarily understand this most transient of states or those images which attempt to capture its fragmentary differences?
The famous opening lines of The Go Between express this adult sense of a lost identity: ‘The past is a different country: they do things differently there’.
Innocence and Experience: Images of Childhood in British Art from 1600 to the Present , selected by Sarah Holdsworth and Joan Crossley, takes a subject which has immediate appeal.
It attempts, by tackling childhood thematically, across time, to stimulate new responses through sometimes startling juxtapositions of images.
The 68 works on exhibit (the majority of which are two-dimensional) are divided into interlinking sections: ‘The Family’ where the child is seen as an integral part of a socio-economic unit; ‘A Sense of Identity’where questions of power, gender, sexuality and difference are explored; ‘Work and Play’and finally, ‘The End of Innocence’.
In this way four centuries of British art are considered, not with the intention of providing any comprehensive historical overview, although the last essay in the catalogue by Christine Hardyment; attempts to provide a much needed historical perspective.
The organisation of the exhibition, however, immediately poses questions, answers to which run the risk of over simplification simply because of the enormous time-span involved.
The material evidence of childhood is wafer-thin: most histories of childhood are the product of adult (re) constructions whether written or pictured.
Whilst improvements in the material well-being of children during the period under consideration is measurable in the decrease in child mortality rates, and advances in education provision and medical care (in other words the material evidence of the control and monitoring of children by the state), the historical changes which occur in the emotional/psychological category, ‘the child’, are largely unknowable.
What is clear in this exhibition are the changing attitudes towards and perceptions of childhood by adults who control and order where they can seem to have an aim of accurate recall.
The exhibition contains childhood, it controls it, makes it a consumable item.
What is missing is the sense of the reality of childhood as it is directly experienced by children.
The children here are mute: they are signs of an adult world of understanding and codification.
Perhaps what is needed is their inclusion, as Patricia Holland suggests in her book ‘What is a Child?
Popular Images of Childhood:’.
If children had greater access to a public voice, if they were able to contribute to the social meanings with which we make sense of our world, the result would not be a more ‘childish’ set of images.
Rather, we would be forced to adjust our concept of childhood, and our notion of what it means to be an adult would necessarily become more flexible’.
These representations of childhood in the exhibition are sites of potential control and anxiety.
Anxiety is particularly pronounced in the images of our own century, the anxiety of the observer of and for the child, the anxiety of the child itself.
The initial vulnerability of the new born is expressed in Denis Creffield's Anxious Baby (1983) and here the parallels with those popular images of childhood which constantly interpenetrate and interrupt our day-to-day routine are obvious.
Take for example the photo of the new born child taken from Leboyer's Birth Without Violence (1977) which is reproduced and investigated in Holland's book.
Just as we attempt to exert control over our children, physically and mentally from birth through to adolescence, so we  suppress and as William Blake would have affirmed) repress their spontaneity and imagination.
In the section, ‘The Family’, the relationship of the parent/child is explored in a variety of ways.
It is appropriate that the worship of the eternal-maternal should be the subject of one of the opening images of the exhibition.
Helen Chadwick's ‘One Flesh ’(1985 takes the form and scale of the christian altarpiece but here the image of the Madonna is fused with the material fact of birth, the placenta and umbilical cord; and the lactating breasts, those most locatable symbols of nurture are exposed above the female child.
The blood-red surround to the child again emphasises the raw reality of childbirth and is placed against the blue which we traditionally associate with the Madonna.
The tangibility of the image is further enhanced by the knowledge that the work is made out of photocopies, shadows of the real.
This iconic image of motherhood subverts the earlier sterilised images of the Victorian bourgeois Madonna as exemplified by Mulready's ‘The Lesson’(1859).
Eileen Cooper ‘The New Baby’ 1988 Courtesy: Benjamin Rhodes Gallery)
The other juxtapositions in the ‘Family’ section are ones which raise (albeit somewhat crudely) questions relating to ‘innocence and experience’as manifested across the divisions of gender, class and time.
Thus, William Hoare's ‘Christopher Anstey with his daughter Mary’(c1779) is set against John Henshall's ‘Faither an' Mither an' A’(1908).
Both represent the ‘fathering’ roles.
Anstey is the father of a pink cheeked vision of health and material well-being who tries to distract him from his writing by showing him her doll, a fashionably attired figure which intervenes in the space between them.
The informality of the pose and the allusion to their relationship is one which the demands of fashionable 18th century portraiture determined.
However the narrative of Henshall's work appeals to sentiment, the flushed face of the child here denotes ill-health as does her inert pose over the knee of her grandfather, whose exhausted face and poverty-stricken surroundings indicate that there is no help in the  short or the long term.
In this way it is in direct contrast to the earlier work and highlights the difficulty of such juxtapositions for the viewer faced with a difference of genre and historical location.
Similar class differences are stressed in other juxtapositions where family relationships are the subject.
Quiller Orchardson's ‘The Idol’(186870) represents the child as the object of worship for the newly widowed mother, where familial ties are indicated by gaze rather than touch.
The status of mother and child is indicated by the wealth of space within which they are placed and the expensive quality of the ornament and decoration of the interior.
The contrast with Dame Laura Knight's ‘Dressing the Child’(c1906) is striking.
Here the difference is the stress upon the mother's role as provider for her children: Orchardson's work suggests the mother has little physical involvement with the child's everyday material needs whereas, in Knight's work, the close physical contact between mother and children and their dress denotes harsh necessity rather than worship — there is not time to ‘fondly gaze’.
It is an image not of the ‘feminine’ sphere of middle class domestic virtue, but of the ever-present outer world of work for the working class child and the mother.
Very few of the works on display provide us with the child's perspective on the word, a notable exception being Sonia Boyce's arresting ‘Big Woman's Talk’(1984) where the sense of scale is ordered in a way that the child's view is paramount.
The figure of the child surrounded by the warmth and comfort of the lap of the ‘big woman’ is a memory of things past and provides a rich contrast to the earliest works in the exhibition.
The formality and control of familial relationships is stressed in a work by Cornelius Johnson.
‘The Capel Family’(c2640), where the children are ranged along the foreground of the picture-space, segregated according to gender.
The girls are placed to their mother's left against the background of the enclosed garden, the boys to their father's right.
The clarity of the image and the seriousness of the children's gaze is one which attracts other children.
In the gallery I observed a group of six and seven year old children allowed to ‘look’ at the pictures, gravitate towards this before all others in the room.
Despite the formality and constraint there is no sense of threat here, unlike Paula Rego's ‘The Family’ against which the Capel Family may be viewed across the exhibition space.
Rego's work inverts the sense of patriarchal order displayed in the 17th century family portrait.
Here childhood is redolent with sexual power, ‘turning the tables’ on the usually dominant figure of the father.
The inclusion of the toy theatre is a reference to childhood memory, but it is one which lacks the comfort of Boyce's flowered lap.
The penetration of the fox by the stork in relief on the furniture emphasises the role reversal of the dominance of the prey over the hunter and the sexual dominance of the wife/daughter over the husband/father.
The rigidity of what was expected from children in terms of compliance to religious and moral ideologies could have no more perfect expression than in the two small late 18th century carved wooden figures of the Blue Coat Schoolboy and Schoolgirl which until recently were to be found in All Saints Church, Maidstone.
For a child who was reliant upon charity it was difficult to escape the determining rules which governed the public understanding of ‘training up the child to be the man (for woman)’.
Whilst humility, piety and obedience were the key words in the education for the deserving poor, the children of dynastic families were equally controlled as their representations suggest.
The small painting of ‘Child with a Rattle’(1611) attributed to Paul Van Somer is an icon of the child as power and property, as the garments he wears control and contain his figure.
Here the child is truly ‘father of the man’.
Rivetingly, at the exhibition a three dimensional version of this work made by a child was placed beneath the portrait, a delicious counterpoint to the highly wrought and sophisticated 17th century portrait.
Some  of the most revealing works in the exhibition are those which are representations of single figures found in the section, ‘A Sense of Identity’.
Here art orders our vision, deliberately interventionist in that it presents those uncertainties and anxieties of childhood where difference makes life a misery whilst providing poignant images for the artist.
In this context Joan Eardley's ‘Phillip the Fat Boy’ and ‘Girl with a Squint’have particular resonance.
When Pat Samson, the model for ‘Girl with a Squint’ had her squint corrected, the artist is reported as having ‘joked’: ‘Oh hell, he won't be much use to me now’.
The uncertainty of the fat child or the onset of puberty which can make swimming baths one of the first circles of hell for the adolescent, so vividly evoked by Kathryn Ensall's ‘Girls in Line at the Swimming Baths’(1988), or the terrifying prospect of the first day at school captured by Shanti Panchal are all expressions of modern sensibility and above all, of childhood and adolescent anxiety, constructed out of an acute embarrassment with themselves and their situation.
The sense of threat, of the unknown presented by childhood, childhood as the kernel of adult life and activity, is often the subject of the works elected by Holdsworth and Crossley.
Rego's work threatens because it challenges the cosy myths of childhood, Christopher Steven's ‘Giant’(1988) exemplifies the ways in which the threat of ‘The boy is the father of the man’ emerges.
One of the most recent works on show is Peter Howson's ‘Blind Leading the Blind (1)’(1991), a modern version of Breugel which produces an image of equal power in its sense of menace and threat to that of Rego's ‘Family’.
The nightmare quality of the action is located, as the catalogue entry states, in the disruption of ‘our preconception of the mother as nurturer and protector’.
Is it the fact that the mother is blundering towards the unknown, with her children that causes unease, or is it the de-feminised figure of the woman herself?
But, finally, it is the last section of the exhibition which raises most questions and provides some of the most poignant images.
The end of innocence can be the abrupt finality of death and the most moving representation of childhood in the exhibition is the small sketch made by Allen Ramsay of his baby son (1743), a memento mori of great emotional power without a hint of mawkishness.
The other ‘end’ comes when experience  supersedes innocence with the emergence of sexuality.
Gerald Brockhurst's ‘Adolescence’(1932) represents that awareness by the woman of her body and sexual identity whilst Eileen Cooper's ‘Play Dead’(1991) represents her own awareness of the developing sexuality of her son.
The  home-erotic private representation of love among the schoolboys by Simeon Solomon (1865) contrasts with the public recognition of male sexuality in Gilbert and George's ‘Berryboy’(1984).
The exhibition deals with particularities, specific instances where the image of childhood is controlled and conveyed through ‘art’— a powerful and absorbing spectacle for which the exhibition organisers should be congratulated.
What it excludes are mass produced images, popular images of childhood, equally subversive or ideologically determined which punctuate our daily lives.
As I write this article, film of starving children in Somalia is the most recent image of childhood to be presented to my eyes.
This is not ‘art’ and because of that not protected by its essential artifice.
The nightmare of childhood lived daily by orphan children in Romania is another example of a state of dreadful innocence abused by adults which is too painful to comprehend and yet which has become part of the domain of childhood as understood in Britain, just as images of the abuse of children by adults are also part of our daily reference to the violent world of childhood.
These are part of the construct of contemporary childhood which we cannot exclude and must not ignore.
Innocence and Experience is at the Ferens Art Gallery, Hull until 10 Jan 1993; Castle Museum, Nottingham 16 Jan-28 Feb; Kelvingrove Art Gallery, Glasgow 6 Mar-25 April.
The accompanying catalogue Innocence and Experience: Images of Children in British Art From 1600 to the Present Sarah Holdsworth, Joan Crossley (eds) Manchester City Art Galleries, 1992.
What is a Child?
Popular Images of Childhood Virago, 1992 £12.99
Alison Yarrington is Senior Lecturer in History of Art at the University of Leicester
Face Values
The photographic face confronts us continually
Liz Wells introduces the many and varied images
Mask, curated by Valerie Brown for Impressions Gallery in York is a computer-developed identikit, a somewhat tongue-in-cheek representation of the average European who, we are told, is androgynous, 31.5 years old, of mixed ethnic origin with no distinguishing marks!
The image itself is, of course, dull.
It is available in kit form; but if you get one for Christmas the joke is probably at your expense.
An average European?
WE thrive on our sense of individuality; faces fascinate because of their diversity.
On the face of it, photography would seem a fairly straightforward means of portraiture.
We tend to take pictures of people for granted regardless of the purpose and circumstances of the making, and context in which we encounter the image.
We see images of faces everywhere: in galleries, pubs, outside theatres, on postage stamps and money, in our family albums.
Photographs appear realistic; the camera records that which is in front of it.
But, as numerous critics have pointed out, that a sitter is, or was once, present in front of the camera, tells us little about the shooting situation, the relationship between sitter and photographer, the equipment and techniques used.
Furthermore, our response to the image is coloured by what we know of the person depicted, whether they are relatives, friends, public personalities, or totally unknown.
Top: The Average European
Right: Margaret Benyon Facial Codes, 1985 Four 8″ × 10″ reflection holograms, painted xerox border
Below: Joan Solomon
Myself in the Picture, 1986
Thus the diversity lies not only in the differences between people, the sitters, but also in different ways of photographing and in the varying contexts within which we encounter the image.
The following examples illustrate some categories and differences: portraits of named, known people; the anonymous profile; contemporary surrealist imagery; self-portrait as photo-therapy.
With the cold winter evenings ahead why not try out some of these differing styles as alternative self-portraits instead of trying on the Euromask?
Liz Wells is a writer and lecturer at the University of the West of England, Bristol
Angela Coombes from a ‘Bald’ series, 1990
Below: Jane Brown ‘Three Redgraves’, showing at the Zelda Cheatle Gallery, London 26 Jan26 Feb
Heads You Win
Marcia Pointon on Frank Auerbach and the question of portraiture
For most reviewers of Auerbach's work shown in London in 1987 there was no doubt that the series of depictions of heads that dominated the show were portraits.
John Russel Taylor refers to Auerbach's work as ‘confined to landscape and portrait an expressionist approach’.
William Packer states: ‘In this instance the paintings and drawings from the figure are all portraits — heads and shoulders only of a handful of his familiar models long fixed within his closest acquaintance’.
He goes on to describe Auerbach's intention to achieve a ‘figurative equivalence’.
Frank Auerbach ‘Head of JYM’ oil on canvas, 19856 (Courtesy: Marlborough Fine Art)
Terms like ‘expressionistic approach’ and ‘figurative equivalence’signal the critic's preoccupation with the issue of likeness for, it would be assumed, if we are to accept these works as portraits there must be some point at which the notion of the subject-sitter intrudes upon the paint-as-surface which is such a prominent aspect of the experience of looking at Auerbach's work.
Packers anxious reassurance that they are all portraits (relieving us of the potentially dangerous task of distinguishing those that are not) requires him to identify and locate a sitter or sitters.
The evident difficulty of writing about an artist who has transformed the traditional process of mapping a terrain of physiognomical likeness onto the production of a surface that suggests a process of physical disintegration rendered in assertively material terms is resolved by Packer in an oblique but entirely conventional manner.
The artist as subject is involved as authority for the authenticity of the subject as sitter and hence also for the legitimacy of the object as portrait.
The artist's ‘intimacy’ with a ‘handful’(the possessive act of holding in one's palm) of ‘familiar’sitters, fixed and therefore by implication immoveable both in the sense that they pose like good models and in the sense that they do not leave, travel or change and therefore have no narratives of their own.
This last privilege is one presumably allowed the artist but not the model.
Indeed the very ability of the artist to develop must, in this account, by implication depend upon the fixity of the model.
All this may seem over-interpretation of an insignificant piece of journalism.
But Packer's difficulties are worth recognising because not only do they reveal something of the cultural context within which Auerbach's work signifies, they also typify — albeit unconsciously — the burden of historiography and the demands of convention in writing about anything that purports to be a portrait.
Artist's intention is one of the criteria for the portrait posited by historians and theorists.
Here we have a living artist so surely, it seems, this can be settled once and for all.
But the case of Auerbach merely serves to illustrate how ill-founded the criterion is.
Refusing all but the most exceptional interview, Auerbach himself insists on the autonomy of the work.
In 1987 he exhibited a sequence of paintings and drawings with structural elements in common(heads and shoulders as Packer defines them) but with considerable internal variations.
The fact that they resemble one another does not prove that they have a common referent, however.
The labels offered only numbers and the accompanying catalogue merely repeats the citation ‘Head of JMW’, ‘Head of Julia II’ and so on.
The cryptic initials traditionally cast a veil of secrecy over the sitter's identity and their gender, masking the subject through a process of partial revelation, that requires the intervention of a reader with privileged knowledge to complete the act of portraiture.
Whether in an Elizabethan miniature or a Roman bust, the inclusion of initials establishes a tension between the conceptual and the formal aspects of the image.
And it makes no difference in terms of consumption that here they appear in the catalogue rather than inscribed on the surface of the image since the contemporary catalogue has claims to offer a unifying experience for the viewer.
Here the image that offers to convey something about  somebody also strives to protect itself and its subject from that process of narrative unfolding by which portraiture always seems to be accompanied.
The strategy, in evidence in the display of Auerbach's work, effectively refuses the notion, which in Britain has had particularly powerful influence as a result of the writings of Carlyle in the last century, underpins the labelling of portraits in exhibitions (such as The Swagger Portrait , Tate Gallery 1992) and in institutions like the National Portrait Gallery.
Auerbach's work not only discourages the enumeration of biographical detail, the reading of signs of dress, the interpretation of expression in relation to known biographical data of the portrait subject.
It positively prohibits it.
The heads identified as JYM thus exercise a form of control over the process of viewing and apprehension which is normally denied to portraiture.
Simultaneously, the enigmatic ‘naming’ of the heads invites us to apprehend them as in some sense likenesses of an individual.
If artist's intention and the identification of a particular sitter — the most common criteria in portrait analysis — are not very helpful in approaching Auerbach's work, are other established procedures more productive?
There are three points at which we might invoke questions relevant to portraiture as a genre by way of establishing parameters for a discussion of Auerbach's JYM series.
The first is the question of format, the ‘head and shoulders’ motif identified by Packer; the second is the question of a sequence or series and how it functions; the third is the question of the portrait as the site of an irresolvable struggle to reconcile permanent feature with arrested motion.
Richard Brilliant has suggested that the bust involves a high degree of representative abstraction since the only the head and shoulders and upper part of the body are made to stand for the whole.
He describes (without offering evidence) the bust as a ‘compressed substitute for the complete human form’.
In Roman art or in an 18th century Temple of Worthies (such as the one at Stowe) the rules of rhetoric might be invoked to argue that the bust functions as synecdoche, the head standing in for the whole physical and active domain of the body.
It might also be argued that it functions as metonymy, in which some element closely associated with the prime function of the whole comes to stand in for it.
By this account, the human subject's defining attribute being the brain, the portrait bust would signify the whole person.
But with Auerbach the premise of the bust as substitution for the complete human form seems untenable.
Indeed, the assertive exploration of head construction and the realisation of head in space as three-dimensional object denies the viewer the possibility of making the part into a whole through an act of imaginative restitution.
Frank Auerbach ‘Head of JYM II’ oil on canvas, 1985 (Courtesy: Marlborough Fine Art)
The complexity of handling of the heads is reinforced by the boldly simplified, virtually hieroglyphic, handling of dress and other impermanent features.
Whilst some of the series include enough body to qualify as half-length, this separation severs any implied connection between head and body.
Thus the cut of a lapel, appearing as a bold and larger-than-life motif takes on an intensified presence, becoming a cypher for the stylistic shifts of fashion that imperceptibly determine our appearance and our reading of the appearance of others rather than(as Brilliant's premise would indicate) a sign for the corporeal presence of the body which is not seen.
The ambiguity about the definitions of hat/head/hair also serve to reify the human head, detached from its body as a carrier of cultural impedimenta comparable to the de-portraitised head as a carrier of different kinds  of spectacles in the advertisement for Dollond and Aitchison, the opticians.
Moreover, these abstractions serve also to blur the distinctive formations of body, hair and dress through which portraits are customarily gendered.
 Dollond and Aitchison, opticians advertisement on London Tube, 1987
The question of sequence revolves around the relationship between the different canvases ‘Head of JYM’ as hung by Auerbach at Marlborough Fine Art.
The constant is the head, variously rendered but always recognisably the same basic structure.
Around this point of stasis, the world of chairbacks and shifting verticals revolves, creating a disturbing inversion of normality in which the ‘live’ head is the still point and the customarily inanimate is what shifts and alters.
The traditional relationship between sitter and ‘background’ are explored through paint surfaces and spillage across imposed internal boundaries.
The narrative sequence stresses the solid sameness of the human features in a paradoxically evolving and constantly changing relationship with the spectator.
The sitter is both always the same and always different under this regime; we are accustomed to sequences of portraits of the same subject (the Queen for example, or Rembrandt's self-portraits) but with Auerbach's sequence is disconcerting because, as a series, it arouses expectations of progress (by ageing) or difference (by character or role) which are not fulfilled.
The fundamental elements of facial encoding — eye, nose, mouth formations — remain more or less stable in this series.
The variables are supplied in format (between upright, square and horizontal), in colour range and in paint structure and treatment of surface.
The result is an assertion of the permanence of the human features in a world of constantly changing visual experience.
The portrait as genre here serves its traditional function in a postmodern world of fragmentation and exerts control on the narratives of subjectivity (sitter/artist/spectator) by its articulation of notions of continuity within syntactical disruption.
The destruction of the human face is a highly emotive topic for reasons that are theological as well as psychological.
At the same time as Auerbach was painting his heads of JYM the English National Opera Company was mounting a production of Bizet's Carmen designed by Maria Bjornson.
The action took place before a huge blown-up head and shoulders image of Carmen.
The curtain went up on the second act to reveal the face from this image lying on the ground where it was walked over and trampled on by the cast.
To invoke this example is not to suggest any direct connection between the English National Opera and the work of Auerbach.
It is rather to point up the intense cultural sensitivity to the face as a motif in western representation.
It is, moreover, to draw attention to the way in which depictions that purport to portray individuals and which become associated with disintegration unleash narratives of global fragmentation.
The elements of control that operate through constant reiteration of the bust motif in Auerbach can be seen, therefore, to hold in check the emotive questions of disintegrating human features in ways that are part of a wider cultural context.
Indeed, the very oscillation between disintegrating surfaces and the wholeness of bust imagery might be taken as paradigmatic of a postmodern anxiety about the relations between individuals and the collective and between the particular and the global.
The way in which the head and shoulders of JYM occupies the space and relates to the rectilinear frame varies from canvas to canvas.
But the bust format ensures a rudimentary form without gestural and signifying elements or excrescences.
As Gombrich points out: ‘the experience of the underlying constancies in a person's face which is so strong as to survive all the transformations of mood and age and even to leap across generations, conflicts with the strange fact that such recognition can be inhibited with comparative ease by what may be called the mask’.
‘The issue of perception can be addressed most fruitfully in Auerbach's work by taking precisely this oscillation between the mask and the face and examining it in terms of pose (the key indicator for the relation with the viewer) and in terms of paint’.
The pose chosen — with head tilted back and neck exposed — is vulnerable and defiant simultaneously.
The neck is the focus of special attention, at times competing with the head with which its relationship is never securely fixed, always open to negotiation.
The neck itself is subject to a form of clinical exposure, its bone structure shifting and projecting.
Moreover, the possibility of a conversation is denied with a model who presents an uplifted chin and who looks over the artist's and viewer's heads.
Such treatment of the ‘model’ further reinforces the dominance of object over likeness.
The tensions and contradictions inherent in the conceptual approach to ‘head’ in Auerbach are reiterated in, and reinforced by, a series of polarisations and contrasts in handling: the paint is liquid and shiny or it is dull and matt.
The important question of the containment of head and shoulders within the frame is dealt with variously.
In some of the series it is compressed by the top margin of the frame but pours out of the bottom in great rivers of paint.
In others the palette knife has been used along the top edge to establish a horizontal band with a raised edge that casts a shadow and produces a distinct demarcation two inches from the top.
A similar boundary is constructed in the lower right where paint is scraped away in a band to reveal the surface of the canvas itself.
This act of exposure is typical of a manner of painting that demands engagement by the viewer on the level of empathy.
It is as though the physical structure of the head and neck are being at one and the same time constructed and medically dissected as well as reproduced in terms of illusion.
Thus the eye moves between these contrasts: thick paint and thin, shiny pigment and dull, serpentine runs of paint and straight lines.
The ‘physiological’ aspects of the work (which functions both by analogy and by connotation) can be seen particularly in number 11 of the series where the paint area in the centre of the throat is scraped away to reveal a box-shaped cavity marked with iridescent crimson.
This intrusion or invasion into the thick impasto of the declamatory surface is peculiarly poignant and suggestive.
Auerbach unites the portrait as depiction of object with the portrait as site of subjectivities.
The evasiveness over identity and gender, the fragmentation and violence of fracture and the obsessive realignments and repetitions, deflect the narratisation that those  subjectivities (the artist's, the sitter's and the viewer's) produce.
The series serves relentlessly to interrogate the concept of the portrait in its classic form as the portrait bust.
Frank Auerbach ‘Head of Julia II’ oil on canvas, 1985 (Courtesy: Marlborough Fine Art)
Marcia Pointon is Pilkington Professor of the History of Art at the University of Manchester.
Her most recent book Hanging the Head, Portraiture and Social Formation in 18th Century England is published this month by Yale University Press
A Stroke In The Right Direction
Women are making a name for themselves in animal portraiture today.
Julia Browne traces the 19th century background and talks to three artists making a living out of animals
At the beginning of the 19th century, two basic styles of animal portraiture are evident in artistic practice.
One is graphic, emphasising technique and a concern with knowledge and ‘truth’.
The other displays painterly ‘high art’ tendencies such as a desire for sensual enjoyment through the visual and a positive weighting of compositional ‘idea’over the notion of documentation.
At times the boundaries between these modes of address are exclusive, yet more often than not they shift to accommodate varying needs.
Amongst other aspects, the 19th century in Britain is marked by a mania for classification accompanied by the supporting practice of illustration.
Artist Thomas Bewick (17531828) wrote and illustrated A History of Quadrupeds (1790).
The text and supporting graphics of animals in this book were designed to educate, though the ordering was chosen by Bewick so it was not without bias.
Bewick later published his version of Aesop's Fables (1818).
The fables moved away from pseudo-scientific intent to edification in the realm of morals.
Though a form of categorisation was still being executed in the form of a separate story for each moral, the new abstract subject involved use of invention and illustrated animals through their engagement with fable became anthropomorphically represented.
Bewick's engraving and printing of the ‘Fables’ ensured a mass audience already visually primed to animal illustration in graphic style not only through classificatory catalogues but also through the more inventive mediums of children's literature illustrations and satirical cartoons in 19th century media publications.
James Ward RA ‘Portrait of a Prize White Ox’(Courtesy: Sothebys)
The painter James Ward RA (17691859), who trained at John Brooke's School of Anatomy in London, gained in his early career a reputation for rendering animal anatomy exactly.
Therefore it is understandable that he won a commission at the turn of the century from a recently formed Board of Agriculture for 200 portraits of representative breeds.
His paintings were to be engraved and printed in catalogues for agriculturists seeking improved breeds.
This project had an unexpected spin-off effect for Ward's market in that wealthy agriculturalists became private patrons.
Sir John Sinclair, President of the Board of Agriculture, had Ward paint his ‘Alderney’ at his estate on the Isle of Thanet.
In this manner, representations painted in simple style which were meant to be graphically reproduced in a catalogue for a mass audience, shifted into the form of a more elaborately produced and unique art object intended for private tastes.
Due in part to a newly intense relationship between agriculture and commerce, the cow along with other animals became, through portraiture, a permanent resident inside wealthy country estate homes.
Ward's own sphere as an animal painter gravitated towards the Royal Academy's particular dialogues as he painted more elaborate compositions, some of these in quotation of Rembrandt.
Another artist specialising in representations of cattle and sheep which addressed the needs of high art, was the painter Thomas Sidney Cooper RA (1802!
()’). Cooper painted these images in the landscape around his home area of Canterbury and they were always intended for an urban albeit regional art market.
Cooper kept constant his production of cows and sheep in pasture during the length of his very lengthy career and, in spite of such a very narrow register for the subject of his painting, his works were steadily collected over the years.
It is difficult to explain why they would have maintained such popularity — for it is said that Cooper produced a painting a day — over shifts in market and social circumstances.
All that can be surmised of the apparently endless demand for Cooper's paintings beyond an obvious urban desire for a monolithic, idyllically produced rural peace, is that his reception gives evidence of a constant market, particularly an urban market, for well produced animal painting.
Alterations in class composition around this time may have to some extent re-ordered the direction of artistic patronage.
It is known that wealthy industrialists joining the upper class by virtue of a newly acquired spending power, sought to buy into the status of the latter by becoming landowners and patrons of art.
This burgeoning set of collectors emerging from a lower class and without the cultural or educational background of the gentry were reluctant to relinquish the familiarity of their own country and language by travelling abroad to purchase foreign art works.
These limitations, coupled with a fear of European dealers as fraudulent, led  the new patrons to demand paintings of familiar subjects by British artists.
Animal paintings by artists such as Ward and Cooper contained appropriate nationalist resonances coupled with the new upward directed social significations of agricultural practice desired by these purchasers.
Additionally, this new public was indeed already enculturated with animal illustrations through graphic reproduction in popular sources.
Animal portraits at this time can therefore be appreciated as not only accessing many artistic currencies but also as moving between the needs of several classes located in both rural and urban populations.
As such, the artists producing animal portraits in the 19th century enjoyed both a wide and a positively receptive market for their works.
Tessa Campbell Fraser ‘Janus, Drum Horse of the Blues and Royals’
In the 1990's, the animal painters interviewed here comment that as far as they are concerned, there is no sign of an economic recession.
This is spoken at a time when the media are documenting despair amongst Cork Street galleries and recognition by major collectors such as the Saatchi family that the bottom has fallen out of the market for modern art.
In pondering the success of animal portraiture today, it can be noted that, as in the 19th century, animal representation continues to be a viable figuration across artistic currencies, mediums and audiences.
For example, the three animal portrait artists interviewed here are successfully engaged with a differentiated public and certainly voice separate considerations regarding their production.
Nonetheless, the context suggested for animal portraiture's audience and survival in the 19th century cannot be taken on board completely today since ‘history’ has changed.
Yet it can be suggested that some of the reasons formerly connected with its success such as interest in the countryside's potential for social signification, in breeding and lineage, and animals and the country as ordered symbols of harmony (or power relationships) have acquired even more mythic proportion and, hence, viability.
Today, divorce rates have never been higher, women have joined the priesthood in the Church of England, and the recession continues daily.
Animal images, other considerations aside, may be seen to fill comfortably and unproblematically desires for order, peace, permanence and tradition in a decade where social and economic trends across the classes signify disturbances of all kinds.
Dogs
Delia Marr is a self-taught artist who paints portraits of dogs largely on commission.
Explaining her painting strategy in producing within a closely defined genre, Delia says ‘I don't do ‘Spaniels’ as a type.
I look for what each dog is, its own character, its own personality apart from its overall breed’.
For Delia, each new portrait is invested with the task of finding an appropriate vocabulary for its particular rendering.
She does this in almost literal fashion as she watches for repeated mannerisms typical of that animal.
In a large unlined notebook she writes ‘scripts’ about how she might describe its behaviour in terms that would at times suit a human being.
It is here that an individual anthropomorphic interpretation of each animal enters the process and overlays generalised documentation.
Eventually, Delia has a photographer provide pictures for her use after dog returns home.
Delia keeps backgrounds to a simple wash, foregrounding the animal.
The only elaboration is a stipple effect produced with a sponge.
Painted in colour that is surprisingly thick and bright for water paints, the portraits become referential to so-called high art in oil.
Delia enjoys looking at portraits including dogs by Velasquez and Gainsborough.
She in turn feels she has painted best when ‘the’ dog appears as though it has turned its head to the viewer and is gazing back’.
Having painted dogs for four years now, Delia says ‘it  suits my life at present’ but she also remarks that ‘change is good.
When it's time, then I'll think about change’.
Cats
Susan Herbert's work comes from a person who ‘loved to draw all her life’.
With little formal training, she has now produced several illustrated books of animal portraits.
Her medium is gouache and watercolour which lends itself well to graphic reproduction.
Aligning itself with popular art, her previous production includes a cartoon strip expliqué of Wagner's Ring cycle with rodent protagonists.
Susan exhibits the originals of her published illustrations at galleries, but through her publisher Thames and Hudson extends her book market into cards, calendars, and other mementoes, all very well received by the general public.
Susan's animal figures are composed in conjunction with quotations from canonical paintings.
Formed from this association, her subsequent discourse invents anthropomorphically and causes her production to be invested with fantasy and wit.
Susan is herself a mixture of seriousness and humour.
She says she would make these images whether she was selling them or not, but she also notes that in painting them she has ‘such enormous fun’.
In Impressionist Cats (1992), her favourite artist to render is Van Gogh because she finds his style ‘so  recognisable and easy to imitate’.
For the purpose of her own artistic practice, she has other heroes than the icons of high art and these are found amongst illustrators such as Arthur Rackham, Edmund Dulac, Beatrix Potter, and William Heath Robinson.
Horses
Tessa Campbell Fraser, trained at the Chelsea School of Art, works in her studio on commissioned animal portraits.
The animal she is most interested in representing is the horse because of‘its sculptural qualities.
The horse is a vehicle for the rehearsal of painterly problems and their technical solution’.
Towards this end, she says, an understanding of anatomy ‘is of vital importance’.
Beyond this, she stresses, that the key to rendering with sensitivity happens on a daily basis of observation of the subject.
Tessa has worked in oils for approximately three years now.
Her more elaborate portraits are in oil, as her most outstanding recent commission, a portrait of the Queen with her dogs at Sandringham.
She describes its production, saying ‘I saw the Queen at Sandringham with her dogs, which were painted as much as possible from life.
I made wax maquettes of the figures and organised their grouping through re-arranging the maquettes.
I lit the models and drew from them until I was happy with the composition.
For the background landscape, I spent a lot of time sketching at Sandringham and altered some aspects to make the composition more pleasing.
When the last painting stage arrived, I continued to work from life as much as possible, taking the canvas out into the garden’.
Since the Queen's portrait, completed over five months.
Tessa continues to grow as an artist.
Studying Corot, Skepings, Munnings and Crawhill, she experiments with new works.
Setting the tone for future production she says ‘I don't like compromises’.
Julia Browne is a postgraduate art historian working on animal painting in the 19th century at Manchester University
Left: Delia Marr Photo: Pauline Barrie
Below: Susan Herbert ‘After Berthe Morisot, The Cradle, 1872’
Who Is The Fairest Of Them All?
We all like to think we stand out from the crowd and, in the past, the face has been seen as the key to unlocking our identity.
But, for Jacques Lacan and other psychoanalytic theorists, the project to discover the real face remains a fantasy.
Nicola Diamond introduces the argument
It is the face which is seen to be the most personally revealing part of the body.
The image of the face is deployed as a way of showing the specific identity of the person.
As with the passport photograph that is used to verify the identity of the subject and which functions like the signature in official documents, this function of the face can be detected in traditional portraiture where the face on the canvas is there to represent the true likeness of the model.
The familiarity of features captured by the picture, creating the effect of instant recognition.
From this perspective the image of the face captures the identity of the subject.
Such a view is called into question by Jacques Lacan's understanding of the subject's relation to the mirror image.
He describes how the infant at birth has no means of linking features or bodily parts together in the form of an identity.
On the contrary, features and limbs are perceived in isolation without relation, as fragments rather than as part of a totality.
There is no experience of ‘parts’ belonging to one's ‘own’body.
Lacan argues that, firstly, the human infant is born pre-mature, neurologically deficient and lacking in motor sensory coordination and, secondly, that the subject's experience of itself is not auto-generated but derived from others.
We appear first and foremost for others.
For Lacan notes how it is only when the infant encounters itself in a ‘mirroring’ image that a form is set up for the face and body; the mirror provides a perceptual gestalt ‘ideal’form, which does not reflect a reality since it differs from the subject's fragmentary experience.
The mirror image is a metaphor for the way the image of the subject is derived from outside; other's ‘mirror’ the subject and construe an image.
Lacan shows how the recognition of ourselves in the image of the face is based on a misrecognition, since we perceive the face as our own when in fact it is produced in the image outside ourselves.
The tables have turned, rather than the face having a fixed identity outside the image, it is in fact the image which originally gives us a face, to be perceived.
From the first, our face is a  simulacrum , captured in and by the image.
When Lacan speaks of the Other, he does not only mean the world of concrete others, but indicates an outside symbolic field of language which we are inserted into.
A field where the sign no longer refers back to real objects or persons but instead constructs what is to be perceived within the system of signification.
Lacan has had a tendency to privilege the linguistic signs but other psychoanalysts such as Jean Laplanche argue that visual and other sensory forms of communication can function as part of a language system.
So it is not only living beings that initially ‘mirror’ the face and construe it as image, for the ‘other’now extends to an entire symbolic cultural field where in particular the language of the visual image constructs faces that we then identify with and attempt to emulate.
Lacan also refers to the subject's appeal to the Other, which is when the subject demands a guarantee of absolute recognition from another, that goes beyond what the other human being can offer as a response.
For such an appeal cannot be assuaged, since it would have to be an all seeing Other who could provide such certitude.
This is strictly a fictitious place that no-one can actually occupy (only god!).
The ‘gaze’ for Lacan relates to this fictitious place that can never be taken up by any human being.
Whereas one human being can direct ‘a look’ towards another human being, ‘the gaze’cannot be assumed by anyone.
It instead designates the imagined field from where we can never be fully seen.
‘It is not a seen gaze, but a gaze imagined by me in the field of the other’(Lacan 1981).
It is the way the subject is exposed to an anonymous gaze that always remains open, which puts any sense of personal identity into question.
To discover that real face that is our own amongst the images, the image of a face that will give us a face once and for all time, remains a fantasy rather than a realisable project.
For the face as  simulacrum can only refer us to yet another image, there being no true face behind the mask.
The face as image is always precarious, for it is always exposed to possible re-framing and re-definition by other images.
When Roland Barthes writes of Garbo's face, a paradox is placed in its image, since the very essence of Garbo's face (that this face is Garbo's and no other) is posed in its absolute mask-like quality, by the face in its impersonality, in its very indifference.
The anonymity being simultaneously the essential Garbo.
Barthes describes how the make-up has the ‘snow thickness of a mask; it is not a painted face, but one set in plaster, protected by the surface of the colour not by its lineaments’(Barthes, 1973); ‘and the eyes simply black in the strange soft flesh but not in the least expressive’(ibid).
Or take Marilyn Monroe's face, with the peroxide hair, so created by a construction of a look, that she can be readily replicated by lookalikes, something that Madonna expressed the changing face with her insistent dramatic re-fashioning of image.
We could say that the postmodern expression of the woman's face is one that acknowledges itself as  simulacrum and displays this without modesty.
Nicola Diamond is a lecturer.
Her specialist area of interest is psychoanalysis, the body and its representation.
Exhibitions
The Medium is the Message
Sacha Craddock visits Liliane Lijn and Judith Cowan in their studio: two artists of different generations preparing for exhibitions
Liliane Lijn ‘Atom Body Was Light’, 1963 Letraset and paint on woodcone turntable, motor
Judith Cowan ‘Filling in the words with holes’ castiron, cibachrome photograph, stone
Liliane Lijn's first Poem Machines were made in Paris in 1962 and exhibited the next year at the beatnik headquarters of La Librairie Anglaise.
It was a very different time.
The early sixties demanded something else from its art.
Instead of the rather fearful, literal adherence to object that underlies attitudes to sculpture today there was still then an optimism and faith in the unknown.
It hadn't been discovered yet.
Science fiction offered theoretical adventure and telling parallels; travel in space was seen as a possible metaphor for earth preoccupations.
Ideas about representing the structure of energy and movement were sought through experimentation with new materials and light.
Lijn's desire to merge or melt the difference between the visual and aural senses came at a time when many artists were wishing to anticipate a more holistic view of art.
The early Machines, revived, rediscovered and about to be displayed by the book section of the Victoria and Albert Museum, are simple.
Each is driven by an electric fan belt.
The drums spin either backwards or forwards, evenly, over and over again, till the Letraset words print upon them dissolve into lines of blur.
Cones, like regular lumps on a potters wheel, whirl around and around.
Single words, sentences and poems written by the artist and others lose individual and particular identity and become a general humming presence.
These objects encourage only a fleeting understanding of language; coming and going like swerving planets that spin in and out of our consciousness.
Sentences like ‘get rid of government’, vibrate now, free flow city’, merge to deny each particular one a separate hearing, seeing or reading.
At this stage Lijn's use of machinery is unembellished and matter of fact.
Soon the words come off the subjects, the cone becomes a ‘Kone’ with its mass sliced through with layers of transparent plastic to make a more categorisable kinetic work.
Lijn admits that in order to say something different she has tended to change her medium; blown glass, synchronised systems, advanced fibre technology, printing, writing, sound, and smoothly finished sprayed steel.
But for 40 years her use of electricity to make objects move, speak, walk, spin, shine, click, rotate and perform has given all of these objects a special autonomy.
In the second half of the 1980s Lijn created a series of giant goddess figures.
It may seem strange that while the word, letter and sign replaces the figure in contemporary artistic language, she should respond with such deliberate female theatricals.
Work for an era that needed it spelt out; perhaps Lijn's recorded voice expresses from the head while a red laser beam cuts sharply through smoke that generates from the base of a black lacquered body.
Such an immaculately synchronised performance between two figures seeks totally to control and condition our attention.
It is almost as if Lijn feels the need to replace a vacuum of powerful female imagery with real figures.
Technological competence turns the potentially hideous, if stationary, into something that is smooth and effective when alive.
For some time Judith Cowan's was synonymous  with a certain type of imagery and object making characteristic of the 1980s' little monkey hands would peep over elliptical edges and scooped out boat shapes would merge with curiously-conceived animals made out of fired papier mâché.
Although her much earlier work of semi-architectural constructions on a theatrical scale hinted at a different sort of audience participation, away from that of the story telling object, it has taken till now for her to challenge the viewer in an open way.
Her new work seems to double backwards, past that decade of serious object making, to something out of reach, and uncontrolled.
The use of installation denies the individual sculptural attention on which her pieces used to depend.
But, more importantly, the inclusion of photography in her work introduces the formal pleasures of the outside world.
Instead of just cooking up three dimensions with all of the responsibility that modelling and casting can involve, she ‘plunders’ the freshness of a medium she doesn't fully understand to bring spatial illusion into her own sculptural space.
The camera comes between her and the audience and allows her not to tell the whole story.
Our imagination knows, for instance, that there is no definite outline or edge to the enlarged colour photographs of different types of water that lie flat on the floor framed by redundant handrails in elaborately worked metal.
The effect of this installation is intended to be vertiginous.
The horizon is denied.
Whilst a mirror can allow a clear view of a painted ceiling, it can nonetheless be disorientating and disquieting.
For the last 30 years or more Lilian Lijn has exercised a rare freedom in her choice of medium and materials.
At any given time she has been appropriately fearless and self-contained in the message she has applied.
Perhaps now, in the same way, Judith Cowan's new range or work can also be effective in a climate which desperately seeks more than just a checklist of intention.
Sacha Craddock is an artist and a critic
A Muse on Myth
Johanna Dahn on Alexis Hunter
Back in the 1970s Alexis Hunter was notable as an overtly feminist artist who produced a series of ‘photographic narrative sequences’ designed to challenge the construction of gender roles.
At that stage, despite a fine art training, she had abandoned painting, considering it to be overloaded with (patriarchal) meaning.
The 1980s saw her return to more traditional media, and her recent exhibition contained paintings, drawings and prints.
The majority of the work shown was very recent, but several of the pieces date back as much as 10 years revealing her fascination with the themes from classical mythology over a long period.
The latest works are done in a seductive range of colours, inspired, appropriately enough, by a recent visit to Greece.
Hunter's intention, as always, is subversive.
She perceives the symbolism underlying stories from a mythology which can be regarded as patriarchal propaganda and she deconstructs established meanings to effect a shift in emphasis.
In Greek mythology, Danae was a young woman locked up by her father to thwart would-be suitors, only to be impregnated by the God Zeus entering her prison in the form of a shower of gold.
In ‘Danae's Secret’(oil on canvas, 1992) Hunter shows her pleasing herself while diverting the gold into a chest.
Hunter's ‘Daphne’(oil on canvas, 1992) sports an extraordinary head of branches complete with nesting bird.
Narcissus was a young man who spurned the nymph Echo and became enamoured of his own reflection.
The gods turned him into the flower that bears his name.
He is generally featured peering languidly into a pool, however divests the situation of its seriousness by considering his metamorphosis.
The result is excruciating: in one drawing ‘Narcissus I-IV’(watercolour and ink on paper, 1992) vegetation is protruding from the backside of the hapless youth.
At the opening of the exhibition I overhead one declaring that she would never have ‘Muse of War’(oil on canvas, 199091) in her house, it was far too frightening.
But, this was not an exhibition infused with obvious polemic.
There was much that was more likely to inspire a smile than to send us rushing from the gallery complaining about the injustices of patriarchy, which is probably the best way to subvert the system.
The so-serious world of mythological meanings, source of all those so-important history paintings in the past, has been invaded by an artist with an anarchic sense of humour.
Johanna Dahn is a postgraduate student
Alexis Hunter ‘Acteon’, 1992, Aquatint etching
Risky Business
Althea Greenan samples recent photographic shows in London
Displaying art in a bar or cafe is a tricky business considering the potential hazards involved with combining food, drink, smoke and precious works of art.
Though I have never heard of any one collaboration between restaurateur and artist proving more lucrative than the next, there does not seem to be any shortage of artists who will in effect take on certain risks in order to get their work out on the town.
Neither are the risks merely physical when she encourages a direct association between looking at her art and consuming food and drink, but the vast array of psychological dynamics which can motivate purchases as humble as a cup of  coffee guarantees that the decision to choose one bar over another is often less casual than browsing through galleries.
From the point of view of the ‘host’ or ‘hostess’the most immediate benefit of showing art would be to enhance a pleasant ambience, but the more ambitious would also be seeking to attract a certain clientele by offering more than the comfort of food.
This is despite the fact that art-on-the-walls offers a type of passive entertainment compared with ‘live’ acts, so that for the most part‘having a look’happens during an awkward gap in the conversation or when you're standing around waiting for your change.
Indeed, for the individual who has arrived to keep a rendezvous with the pictures alone, there is the feeling of being conspicuously different, especially if you lose your social poise and start glaring fiercely at works which are almost always above someone's head.
Catherine Yass ‘Portrait: Laure Genillard Gallery’,(‘Gallerist’), 1992 Cibachrome display print, light box
Yet, in a somewhat art-y place like Freud's which recently displayed the photographic work of Jane Ralley, the solitary wild-eyed scribbler was not too out of place; but then, judging by the subject of half of the photographs in the show, the owner could count on this crowd to retain its sophisticated bonhomie in the face of far more deliberate provocation.
Thus it was that the idea of pictures as mere contributions to the decor was happily turned on its head the minute this visitor entered the darkened room and was greeted by a series of large colour photos of what could be described as ‘Still-life with Penis’.
Judging by the sense of humour evident in the other series lining the opposite wall where male models/friends are portrayed sporting dresses, I wouldn't have thought the artist would object to that label too strongly.
Not that the work of Ralley seeks to trivialise her subject-matter.
As with most work which boldly  centres on the male sexual organ, these photographs seek to reveal the normally hidden and often denied vulnerability of the male physique.
Having photographed these averagely attractive, effectively anonymous members nestled amongst feathers, emerging from a bunch of Iris buds, tucked up with a wad of £10 notes, or wrapped up in black fishnet material, the stage is ostensibly set for the viewer to compare these peculiar juxtapositions with those more commonly seen in the media where the female body is used instead.
But as the artist herself states, these images do not try to appeal to our erotic awareness, and that is perhaps why the intended commentary on the display of the female sex is not so obvious.
So much of the power of the ‘male gaze’ depends on the impulse towards self-gratification that not to draw on the erotic is to limit the effect of the image.
Once clear of the shock of seeing the penis photographed at such close range, these images do more to suggest intimacy and collaboration between model and artist than exploitation.
this also held true for the series of men who swopped their everyday gear to sit and drink and smoke and be photographed in a dress.
As an exercise in questioning ‘traditional’ ideas regarding masculinity and femininity this work contends with basics such as there is more to femininity than putting on a skirt!
While this idea probably proves more challenging to the men participating than to the average feminist, this also indicates the experimental intention of the photographer who is seeking to provoke discussion rather than provide trenchant commentary.
In order to see another show of photographs, this time by Sophie Molins, I went to the Metro Cinema where the work was well displayed in a spot-lit corridor.
Having arrived in the dead quiet of the afternoon, I had the place to myself which was fortunate since all 30 prints were of a scale that demanded close contemplation.
Obvious care was taken to make these small black and white photographs stand up to such scrutiny as they were immaculately printed on fibre-based paper and mounted on expensive conservation board, also protecting the investment of the potential buyer.
It was a difficult show to view nonetheless as the visual scale of some of the subjects portrayed was not always comfortably accommodated within this size (3″ ×5″).
Although Molins' aim is to capture the ‘small — and often unacknowledged — details of life’, her eye ranges from broad vistas noting the peculiar effect of a lamp-post  Lurching up into the sky or of a statue gesticulating from the top of a building, to close-up studies of various corners of interiors.
In her effort to record the delight she derives from such details, evidently travelling as far afield as the US and Turkey, her outdoor work recalls both the practice of Marjorie Content's work of 1928 in picking out the pattern of urban activity and its settings, and Lee Friedlander when focusing on the witty suggestibility of statues and lamp-posts, while her interiors remind me of the work of Margaret Watkins of 1919.
Photograph by Sophi Molins
But there is a sense in much of the images that, notwithstanding the smallness of the final print the intimacy of impact which she wishes to share has escaped the frame of the viewfinder.
In contrast to the use of photography to record set-ups such as Ralley's (who is also a video/film-maker), Molins is a photographer who uses the camera like a hunter ever on the alert to capture those ‘details’ which decisively echo something of her own thoughts and emotions.
But it is not every image that succeeds in suggesting something of the thrill of the hunt as well as curiosity.
One of the images that does is the one taken in Thailand of three fish-tails swung as if from gallows silhouetted against the sky.
It is perhaps because the element of the surreal which is more strongly emphasised here, conveys a livelier sense of discovery.
Photograph by Sophie Molins
The work of photographer Catherine Yass, was to be found in, of all places, a gallery, and, ironically, of the artist reviewed her, she is probably the most experienced in exhibiting in and accommodating the ‘public place’.
The physical nature of her work needs only dimmed lighting and a place to sit to enable the full impression to take hold.
The show was small, consisting of four cibachrome portraits presented on lightboxes: ‘Collector’, ‘Gallerist’, ‘Curator’ and ‘Self-Portrait’, but by no means insubstantial.
Though each portrait was essentially a straightforward head-shot, we are given far more to muse over than a strange face.
There is, for a start, the instant intrigue sparked off by our clue as to what these people ‘do’.
I am always surprised by the fact that this device of photographing someone as a representative of a profession rather than as an individual.
But of course it is the individual who attracts the photographer in the first place (and in this instance we know the reverse to be true), and Yass is obviously keen to sharpen our awareness of the personal face-to-face aspect of these relationships.
Each of these faces absorbs us within their sphere of reflection where, although the formality of their titles and their professional roles in the artist's life is relaxed, they continue to respond to the person who was in our vantage point at the time, the photographer.
Watchful, though not wary, their guard may be down, but  no-one is taking advantage of anyone else here.
And to reiterate the essentially active role of the artist in the whole process, Yass' shadowy figure appears within the somewhat heightened colours of each portrait's background, arm raised and hand poised on the shutter-release, a pose that recalls all those mirrored images of artists at their easel.
Vermeer sprang to mind as there is also something about the intense luminosity of the effect of the light-boxes that reminded me of that unique concentration of light in paintings executed with the aid of camera obscuras(ancestor of the camera).
In contrast, the photograph the artist took of herself is more like a still from a film where paradoxically the subject appears to be caught off-guard, indeed caught in the act.
However, it is a less expressive image, as it is a less expressive moment, for while he is so wrapped up in the action of taking the shot she cannot reveal much more than that furtive concentration that takes over any face in the act of intensive looking.
Althea Greenan is an artist and writer
No Rest for the Viewer
Penny Dunford on Annette Chevallier's urban abstraction
The Shipley Gallery in Gateshead has a reputation for being both accessible to its local community as well as to those involved in the worlds of art and design.
Its permanent collection of fine Victorian paintings often sits cheek by jowl with a varied selection of current art and craft practices some of which also provide opportunities for visitors to participate in.
Annette Chevallier's recent show of paintings occupied one of the rooms in the gallery spilling out into a corner of the Victorian paintings, while opposite was a touring exhibition of European ceramics.
Chevallier's paintings are uncompromisingly abstract.
Yet this is not the cold, off-putting abstraction which arouses incomprehension in the ordinary spectator.
The vivacity and brilliant colours of the mobile forms draw the spectator into the work, also tempting her to identify the shapes with external references.
Chevallier describes her painting process as improvising on the existing forms and colours which present themselves.
The musical analogy is one to which she herself alludes: her interest in jazz is displayed in the constant movement of forms which allow the viewer's eye no rest and in her references to urban popular culture, particularly in the ‘Coney Island’ series.
The eight large oil paintings (typically around 62″ × 77″) and four smaller works on paper fall into several groups.
The group of works in which large, often black, forms predominate are perhaps less successful.
These paintings follow from a period of two years in which Chevallier examined the potentialities of the colour red.
They indicate more clearly the underlying structure to her work and demonstrate how deceptive the apparent spontaneity can be.
‘Last Waltz’, in which an anthropomorphic black form occupies the centre foreground, is less rhythmical than others such as‘Night Riot’.
Here the paintings of Futurists such as Boccioni's ‘Riot’ in the gallery and Russolo's ‘Revolt’are recalled both by the subject and the organisation of forms which implies a melée but which is itself carefully constructed.
The notion of violence within an urban context is reinforced by some of the titles although these paintings were completed before the riots on the Meadowell estate, near Chevallier's studio, erupted.
Certainly the titles encourage the spectator to identify some forms as almost figurative.
A second group of works contain a wider range of colours and tones.
Several, including ‘After the Storm’, make direct references to landscape.
There is a clear sense of recession, with paler tones dominating at the top of the canvas and appearing further away than the more densely coloured foreground.
Some of the outlines are no longer completely filled with colour.
The emphasis on primary colours has given way to a more acidic range while the outlines of the coloured forms swirl, undulate and bubble energetically.
In ‘Grey Shadows’ the areas of grey are sufficiently solid to balance with the strong blues and yellows, but the sense of landscape remains.
The grey forms allow themselves to be read as clouds, through which stronger light is managing to penetrate.
The last group of paintings, as yet incomplete, returns to the urban theme.
In 1990 Chevallier won a Northern Arts travel award which enabled her to spend six weeks in New York.
Much of her time was spent on Coney Island, now a run-down and garish resort.
There she discovered a derelict funfair and it is from these experiences that the group of the most brightly coloured paintings, originates.
The circular motif in pure colour predominates in several, recalling Sonia Delaunay's use of circular forms of bright colours to deal with a number of similar themes, including the ‘Bal Bullier’ and the ‘Market at Minho’around the years 19135.
Both artists succeed in conveying the sense of liveliness and movement found in popular forms of entertainment.
Chevallier, though, is an artist working after Abstract Expressionism so accidental drips and runs of paint are integral to her work and the forms appear, albeit deceptively, to be less controlled.
The writer Cynthia Fuller produced poems to accompany the paintings and the gallery organised lectures and accompanied tours around the exhibition.
These associated activities, together with the relative accessibility of this type of abstract work, can only help to break down some of the problems which non-figurative art poses for many spectators.
Penny Dunford is head of History of Art and Design at the University of Sunderland
Annette Chevallier in her studio Photo: Keith Pattison
NEWS FROM THE WOMEN ARTISTS SLIDE LIBRARY
Pauline Barrie
As we move into 1993 The Women Artists Slide Library will be presenting a profile on its work and development over the last 10 years at the Centre 181 Gallery, King Street, in Hammersmith, London.
In Profile will present a selection of original works from the International Women's Art Diary together with a continuous slide programme showing a brief history of WASL's work and a full programme of lunchtime talks by some of our members.
In Profile is intended as a final presentation this year to celebrate 10 years of survival.
If you are already a member or subscriber come along and support us.
If you are a practising artist who wants to know more, then come and join us from 522 January, Mondays to Fridays, 10am-5pm.
There are many opportunities which arise for women artists who are members of WASL.
By lodging your slides and information with us, you enable all sorts of people to view them.
Members also get early warnings about conferences, opportunities or publications like Networking Internationally .
In 1993 we aim to develop additional benefits.
Recently, all our members were mailed with information about a forthcoming women in arts symposium called ‘Notions of Equality’.
This will be taking place in Birmingham between 57 March 1993.
Organised by the Women in Arts project at the Arts Council, this symposium will bring together women in the arts, to reclaim the past, identify the present and plan the future.
WASL will be present at the conference whose aims are to respect difference, challenge complacency, create networks, share information, recognise achievement, encourage development and inspire confidence.
For further information and a booking form please contact Alex Ankrah at the Arts Council.
The Women's Caucus in the Arts meets again from 15 February 1993 in Seattle, Washington.
Their national conference is called ‘Beyond the Boundaries’.
Again, WASL will be there and Women's Art Magazine will carry a report in the next issue.
The Women Artists Slide Library is presently applying for funds to continue to develop the library, run a fuller service for its members and users and to continue with this work for the next year.
We aim to continue to expand the magazine, provide more opportunities to our members, continue to give exposure to the work of women artists and to lobby at every opportunity to enable equality to exist within all the professional levels of the art world today.
Most importantly, WASL will be fundraising for a new home which will provide the organisation with more shelf and storage space, exhibition area, meeting rooms and more basic facilities.
1993 should prove to be another successful year for the Women Artists Slide Library.
At the library we rely heavily on volunteers to help us meet the demands of the public and members alike.
I would like to thank the following for their help at WASL over the last few months:.
Paula Rego ‘The Ferry Girl VII’, 1992 watercolour and ink on paper, Photo: Prudence Cuming Associates
MEMBERS FOCUS
A new exhibition has recently opened at London's Marlborough Gallery (until 31 Jan) showing Paula Rego's continued interest in nursery stories.
She tackles Peter Pan in a small suite of 12″ etchings and aquatints, turning her restless eye and surreal imaginings to the stories of Peter Pan, Wendy and the Lost Boys.
Stories within stories: Captain Hook, sometimes a gentle old man, philosophically  staring into space, then transformed into a sword wielding pirate out to trap Wendy and take revenge on Peter.
But the works on paper are scattered with other goings-on — like contemporary creations of Hieronymus Bosch — we see mermaids cruelly trying to drown Wendy; ghosts, demons and men with hollow eyes pursuing the children.
It's a fearful world where even the goodies have a strangeness about them, as they too are caught up in a world of little people, strange animals and flying objects.
The other stories, watercolour and inks on paper, present the story of the Ferry Girl.
Some of the figure drawing in these works is quite beautiful and there is a simple freshness in Rego's use of watercolour and line.
In each work she presents us with an unexpected anxiety, the memory before a human crisis.
It is this expectation which gives the work its edge and you will see a side of Peter Pan and the Ferry Girl which perhaps only exists in our darker moments.
Working at The Women Artists Slide Library means that you are constantly bombarded with information and images produced by women artists today.
Its a privileged position which gives you a real understanding of the intensity and diversity of the work of women artists today.
But often you notice that one woman has been working extremely hard with some degree of success in showing the results of her hard labour.
Nancy Honey is most certainly one of these women.
Since 1990 she has really began to surface with work which is not for the faint hearted.
Her photographs can be described as provocative, confrontational and full of issues concerning the constructed images of sexuality and gender.
She takes a hard look at the way women present their bodies, their image and how this is dominated by notions of contemporary beauty.
Nancy Honey ‘Daisy (12) and Sarah (14) Bathing the Dog’, 1991
Woman to Woman was produced as both an exhibition and a book, it has already toured to a number of venue throughout the UK and is still available for hire through The Royal Photographic Society in Bath.
In 1991/2 Nancy Honey also became the Fellow in Photography at The National Museum of Photography, Film and Television and Bradford and likely Community College.
This gave her an opportunity to work in Bradford and she extended her interest and investigations into the period of time between 11 and 14, when a child becomes a woman.
She has taken the issues raised in Woman to Woman and produced Entering the Masquerade .
This most recent work presents the viewer with images of young girls (some of Honey's own daughter, Daisy) who willingly take on images from the media as their own role models.
‘At 11 years, most girls are still children, by 14, they are women.
This brief three-year span can affect the rest of a woman's life.
It is when she determines her self-image’.
The recent series of photographs begin to visually examine the media's perfect woman, devoid of body hair, perfectly tanned, weighed in and passively poised.
Images which are used by most young women as their role models and from looking at how the media presents women influences directly their own expectations of themselves.
Her photographs capture the girls viewing each other and already checking their own image.
This process of self-observation has already matured from the assimilation of media images, which are often more strongly inforced than the female role-models in everyday life.
Honey's work also presents difficulties for the viewer: on the surface it could be seen as a further exploitation of the female either as a child or a woman, but this would not do this work justice.
By looking at these developing years and investigating the transformations which take place you are entering new territories which begin to examine in earnest the role of the media and the effects stereotyping which influences us all.
Entering the Masquerade is on view until 7 February.
Books
Frida Kahlo: The Camera Seduced
Elena Poniatowska and Carla Stellweg (eds)
Chatto and Windus, 1992
Elizabeth Wilson
I had always resisted Frida Kahlo and especially the feminist appropriation  of her life and her art.
She was one of the women we women were supposed to admire, she was supposed to speak for us and to bear testimony to our pain.
Illogically, when I learned that Madonna collects Kahlo's paintings, the pop star rose in my estimation, but the painter didn't.
To me it made her seem somehow obvious.
Unfairly, I felt that Madonna's appreciation vulgarised the painter.
I mention these ignorant reactions only because this book of photographs, bracketed by two brief essays, has caused me to succumb to Frida Kahlo's strange gaze as her actual paintings, exhibited at the Whitechapel Art Gallery some years ago, never did.
The camera has been seduced by the unflinching stare and Mona Lisa smile of a woman whose striking Mexican looks have caused her to become an icon for artists, radicals, women.
The defiance of her look is almost threatening.
It is the defiance of a woman determined to control her image in the face of severe physical suffering.
As a child she had suffered from a mild case of polio, which left one leg slightly shorter than the other.
At the age of 18 her body was crushed in a streetcar accident; her spine, leg and foot were badly broken and an iron rail pierced her body.
Thereafter she was seldom without pain, and underwent 32 operations during her lifetime.
She wore a corset to support her broken body, and she lived to be only 47.
Her painting conveys the mental and emotional transformation the accident brought about.
As she wrote to her boyfriend: ‘What secret are you looking for?…
I already know it all, without reading or writing.
A little while ago, not much more than a few days ago, I was a child who went about in a world of colours, of hard and tangible forms.
Everything was mysterious and something was hidden, guessing what it was a game to me.
If you knew how terrible it is to know suddenly…
Now I live in a painful planet, transparent as ice; but it is as if I had learned everything in seconds…
I became old in instants and everything today is bland and lucid.
I know that nothing lies behind’.
Her self-presentation seems always carefully calculated.
On her first visit out of Mexico, to San Francisco, she wore full traditional Mexican costume.
People turned to stare at her in the street.
At other times she wore drag, or mixed Mexican adornments — flowers, jewellery, braided hair — with fashionable western dress.
It is as if she has to create an impervious beauty, a mask to conceal the painfully damaged body beneath the clothes, just as her lips are always closed in these photographs to conceal her decayed teeth.
There is a desperation about her insistence on outward perfection.
It is frightening, a triumph of the will over material circumstances.
It suggests to me a little remarked aspect of dress and fashion: the ability of well chosen, beautiful garments to stand in for the body.
Frida Kahlo utilises to the full the fantasy potential of dress, which can improve on the body.
We use it to project to the world our fantasies about ourselves as more beautiful, more imposing, more powerful than we inwardly feel.
In these photographs Frida Kahlo appears as the healthy creature, free of pain, that, tragically, she never was.
In an act of self love (in the best sense) she insisted on her wholeness and her perfection.
In her paintings it was otherwise.
In them, her tortured body is revealed, and always she exaggerates the dark hair on her lip and between her eyebrows, marking herself as flawed.
Her ill health did not prevent her from painting, from being politically active in the communist movement nor from leading a rich life.
Although Diego Rivera, the Mexican communist mural painter, was her great love, she had an affair with Leon Trotsky; shortly after his arrival in Mexico, and she loved other men and women too.
But although she became pregnant several times, she miscarried on each occasion.
Her body betrayed her once more.
Her whole adult life was a triumph of determination over a body that could have condemned her to permanent invalidism.
What shines out of these photographs is her bravery.
It is a beautiful celebration of what she was.
Elizabeth Wilson is Professor of Social Sciences at the University of North London and the author of The Sphinx in the City and Adorned in Dreams
Imogen Cunningham Frida Kahlo, 1930 from Frida Kahlo: The Camera Seduced
The Expanding Discourse: Feminism and Art History
Norma Broude and Mary D Garrard (eds)
Icon/HarperCollins, 1992
Katy Deepwell
A decade ago, Norma Broude and Mary Garrad published Feminism and Art History: Questioning the Litany (Icon, 1982), one of the first anthologies of feminist art history in America.
The Expanding Discourse maps the progress and diversity of feminist art history debates through 29 essays written in the 1980s.
In the introduction they outline how the encounter with postmodern theory has literally expanded and diversified the discourses of feminist art historians producing what they define as ‘neo-Marxist’, ‘constructivist’ and ‘poststructuralist’accounts in addition to their own ‘liberal feminist’project.
While they still maintain feminist art history should raise ‘fundamental questions for art history as a humanist discipline’, they do not believe feminist art history should be confined to the documentation of women artists (as a form of additive history).
Nor does their selection preclude the work of male writers eg, Craig Owens, whose classic essay ‘The Discourse of Others: Feminists and Postmodernism’ is included.
The editors argue there are three dominant tropes in feminist art history in the last decade: the female body and the male gaze; femininity as a social construct; and feminist critiques of essentialism, postmodernism, and the woman artist.
Under the first category come some trenchant analyses of images of women in ‘great’ male artists' work, including ‘Invention of Primitivist Modernism’and constructions of a ‘Tahitian Body’(Peter Brooks).
Mary Ann Caws' illuminating essay on the depiction of women in Surrealist art, ‘Ladies Shot and Painted’, is also included.
Yael Even examines the images of women's subjugation on the ‘Loggia dei Lanze’ sculpture court in Florence.
While Carol Duncan's ‘MoMa's Hot Mamas’ explores how the modern (male) artist's heroic struggle over the body of woman structures the visitor's experience at New York's Museum of Modern Art.
Femininity as a social construct is explored through an analysis of largely 19th century themes — another feature of feminist art history in the 1980s.
These include Griselda Pollock's essay which redefines ‘Modernity and the Spaces of Femininity’ through an analysis of male/female Impressionists' works and Tamar Garb's; analysis of a critical category ‘L'Art Feminin’used to pigeonhole women's work.
Linda Nochlin argues that Berthe Morisot's ‘Wet Nurse’ renegotiates the construction of work and leisure in Impressionist painting, while James Saslow's discusses the construction of a lesbian body in Rosa Bonheur's ‘The Horse Fair’.
Anne Higonnet's essay on 19th century women's ‘Secluded Vision’, by contrast with these analyses of women's professional practice, explores images of feminine experience in women's albums and ‘amateur’ paintings.
Outside the research on the 19th century is Margaret Miles' study of the ‘Virgin's One Bare Breast’ which analyses nudity, gender and religion in Tuscan Early Renaissance culture and Natalie Kampen's ‘The Muted Other: Gender and Morality in Augustan Rome and 18th Century Europe’.
Helen Langa explores the work of women artists in America's New Deal arts projects of the 1930's.
Langa contrasts the rhetoric of an ‘egalitarian vision’ with the gendered experience of identity/difference across a male/public female/private political division.
The volume also includes some valuable studies of individual women artists which discuss the negotiation of feminine/feminist identities and experiences: Frida Kahlo (Janice Helland); Lee Krasner as ‘LK’(Anne M Wagner); and Georgia O'Keefe (Barbara Buhler Lynes).
Explorations of contemporary feminist artists include Judy Chicago's ‘Dinner Party’ and two essays on Faith Ringgold, on her observations of America in the 1960s (Lowery Sims) the other, on Afrocentrism in Ringgold's work.
In line with poststructuralist debates about identity and subjectivity, femininity is not assumed but explored as contradictory, strategic and fragmentary.
‘Along with the dominance of a masculine value system in art and art history has often come a blindness to female existence, even when the reality of women's roles is well documented by the art of a given place or period’.
(Broude and Garrad, 1982).
Anyone involved with the teaching of art history today will understand the importance of Broude and Garrad's suggestion that feminist art history will continue to serve ‘a corrective need’ in the next decade, until the ‘values, categories and conceptual structures of our field’are profoundly rearranged.
Katy Deepwell is chair of the Executive Committee of the Women Artists Slide Library.
She lectures at Goldsmiths College