

I just want to WIN
PETER REID DOESN'T CARE WHAT IT IS, BUT…
No trophy since 1976 is a rubbish record
SHAUN CUSTIS
PETER REID lays it frankly on the line: ‘It's about time Manchester City won something.’
Bulldog Peter isn't fussy what it is — but City's player-boss knows the natives are getting restless.
City haven't won a trophy since 1976 when goals from Peter Barnes and Denis Tueart took them to League Cup victory over Newcastle.
It's also 14 seasons since they played in Europe.
They came close to ending the European famine last season only to falter at the end.
Now, in his second full term in charge, Reid wants an improvement — and that means some silverware on the table.
‘Not winning something since the mid-Seventies is a rubbish record for a club this size,’ he blasts.
Reid may be a rookie boss but he's grown up quickly.
He isn't afraid to do things his way.
When the fans were screaming for him to play Clive Allen, Reid kept him on the bench.
Even when Allen came on and scored it didn't make any difference.
Reid continued to leave him out and eventually sold him to Chelsea.
Allen was bemused but Reid said simply: ‘He didn't fit into my team pattern.
I believe I'm doing what's right for this club.
If people disagree, fine, but in the end it's me who'll get the sack if things go wrong.’
Reid has always been like a terrier chasing a bone on the pitch — opponents never get a moment's peace.
And he's the same off it.
When he decides he wants a player, he won't let go.
Neither is he afraid to spend a fortune to back his judgement.
He was determined to get Keith Curle from Wimbledon and he eventually did — for 2.5million.
Many eyebrows were raised.
Was Curle really worth that or was this the City of old paying over the odds?
Reid insists: ‘That was the market price.
I wanted Keith and we couldn't get him for anything less.’
Now Reid has done it again, paying Wimbledon another 2.5million — this time for a left-back, Terry Phelan.
That's 5million for two defenders and two more crowd favourites shown the door — Steve Redmond and Neil Pointon. push Pointon, in fact, was one of the stars of the City side last season but that didn't bother Reid.
He knows what he wants and is determined to build a club which can produce sustained success year in, year out.
He's made a good start, now comes the big push.
A trophy for a cabinet with a very rusty lock would get things going nicely.
16-year hitch
IT was February 28 1976 that City fans last had something to smile about when they lifted the League Cup by beating Newcastle 2–1 at Wembley with goals from Peter Barnes and Denis Tueart.
Joining in the celebrations were:(back row) Tommy Booth, Joe Royle, Peter Barnes, sub Ken Clements, Joe Corrigan, a City trainer and manager Tony Book;(front row) Gerard Keegan, Willie Donachie, Asa Hartford, Denis Tueart, skipper Mike Doyle and Dave Watson.
TOP OF THE KOPS!
Old King Goal Rush guns for hat-trick of records
STEVE ROYCE
IAN RUSH is bang on target for another historic hat-trick — of records!
On Wednesday, his four-goal blast against Apollon Limassol took him past Roger Hunt's club record of 17 European goals.
And his hat-trick for Wales earlier this month against the Faroe Islands puts him on 23 goals for his country — equalling the Welsh record held jointly by Trevor Ford and Ivor Allchurch.
And now Rush — on 284 goals for Liverpool — is after Hunt's club record of 285 strikes.
And he could break that record when he makes his 500th appearance for the Anfield giants against Chesterfield in the Coca-Cola League Cup this week.
STRIKE
Considering Rush had meningitis at the age of six, spent three weeks in an oxygen tent and alarmingly lost weight through illness, he's not done badly.
In recent years, the obituaries have been pencilled in as Liverpool have brought in younger strike partners.
But Rush, 31 next month, has seen them all off — and simply gone on and on.
When Kenny Dalglish stepped up to management, in came Peter Beardsley.
John Aldridge was around during Rush's exile in Italy — but didn't stay too long when the great man came back.
Then it was Dean Saunders, only for the pairing to be broken up with his Wales partner's recent move to Villa.
As a kid, Rush's first love was Everton — yet when he paid to watch his first League game it was, fittingly, Spurs v Liverpool at White Hart Lane.
Ironically, he was linked recently with a move to Everton.
But all the speculation ended when he re-signed at Anfield for three more years — effectively until the end of his top-class career.
In his early Liverpool days, worried Rush thought about moving on.
It's history now that the great Bob Paisley told him to be more ruthless for goals — and ten years on, he's enjoying scoring more than ever.
Now Anfield record-holder Hunt, adored on the Kop, is sure Rush will eventually overhaul him.
He says: ‘Rush is the best in the modern game.
There was more attacking when I played and more chances.
I reckon he'd have scored more goals then than he has now.
‘It's all the more credit to him that he's got his goals in this era.’
Come the turn of the year, Rush will be chasing yet another landmark — Denis Law's record of 41 FA Cup goals.
So far, he's on 36 for Liverpool and three for Chester in his early days.
He is heading for 350 League appearances with Liverpool (183 goals) and 50 FA Cup games.
And the Chesterfield game will be his 61st in League Cup competition.
Injuries permitting, he should finish this season approaching 600 career games — with a tally of goals putting him among the 300-plus elite.
MASSIVE
Tributes abound.
One of the most graphic came from experienced Paul Futcher after a Rush treble against Barnsley.
Futcher said: ‘Short of getting a double-barrelled gun and blowing off his head, I don't think he can be stopped.’
And perhaps the supreme accolade came from another 300-goal man, his ex-partner and boss Dalglish.
Said Kenny: ‘Rush's contribution to the club has been massive.
‘He's one of the best finishers I've seen — if not THE best.’
HAT'S AMAZING!
Deeside Primary School: 72 goals in 33 games.
First hat-trick: Wales Schools v Ireland.
League hat-tricks: Against Notts County (2), Everton (four goals), Coventry (2, once four goals), Luton (five goals), Villa and Leicester.
FA Cup hat-tricks: Against Barnsley and Swansea.
European hat-tricks: Against Benfica, against Apollon Limassol.
League Cup hat-tricks:.
Against Crewe.
Screen Sport Cup: Against Everton.
Italian hat-trick: Against Pescara.
Derby Record: 23 goals eclipsed Dixie Dean's old record in Merseyside games.
I BELONG TO SHEFFIELD
Londoner Bassett won't be tempted back down south
STEVE BATES
DAVE BASSETT was born just a Wimbledon-style boot from Wembley Stadium.
But these days not even a king's ransom would tempt ‘Arry to ditch Yorkshire and return to the bright lights of London.
After five years as Sheffield United boss, he cemented his love of Bramall Lane and his adopted county by signing a new three-year contract this summer.
By the end of that he'll have been Blades boss for nearly nine years!
And that's not bad for a Londoner that die-hard Tykes believed wouldn't stay five minutes when he came north after a disastrous spell at Watford.
‘To be honest, at first I didn't have a clue how long I'd stay,’ says Bassett, ‘so I can understand why some locals didn't think I'd last more than a season or so.
‘They saw this brash bloke coming to Yorkshire and probably wondered what was happening.
‘That said, it's been an exciting five years for me and the club.
I've broadened my football knowledge and it's been a vital part of my education in the game.
Support
‘As for London, I've no great yearning to go back there.
There's a job to be done here and I intend to do it.
The club have shown faith in me and that kind of backing deserves loyalty from me.’
Bassett brought alive a club who had spent 14 years since the mid-70s commuting between the Second and Third Divisions.
In successive seasons, he took United from the Third to the Second and into the First Division.
He's done it on a shoestring budget to boot and, inevitably, such achievement hasn't gone unnoticed in other Premier League boardrooms.
Bassett adds: ‘There have been opportunities over the past couple of years where clubs have shown an interest in me.
‘But all I needed to do was look at the support I got from the club and the fans when we were at the bottom last season.
It was fantastic and you have to repay that sort of loyalty.’
As during his six years at Wimbledon, Bassett has achieved success with a rarity in soccer — a smile.
The humour is still razor-sharp.
That's why he's a massive hit with fans who would normally barrack a boss when the team is struggling.
The recent pre-season Christmas party was typical Bassett.
But he had the last laugh — the Blades dumped Manchester United 2–1 on the opening day!
Despite all his time at United he's still remembered for unleashing Wimbledon on League football.
‘I'll always be associated with creating the Wimbledon monster,’ laughs Bassett.
‘But that doesn't worry me.
‘I'm proud of what I achieved at Plough Lane, even if other people aren't.
To take a team from the Fourth to the First in six years isn't bad going whatever style of football you play.’
Bassett's more than pleased with his years at Bramall Lane, too.
‘The current side is the best team I've had in my five years here.
‘We've still a way to go but I look for improvement all the time and our start this season has shown just that.’
FANS-TASTIC…
These United fans deserve my loyalty, says Bassett
GLORY DAYS…
Dave with the FA Cup won at Wimbledon
JACKA- NORY
Football's a game for a laugh when wacky Charlton's about
He wasn't a 9–5 man — Jack liked his fishing and grouse shooting!
‘Team talks were often hilarious’
JACK CHARLTON must be one of Yorkshire's most favourite — and funniest — adopted sons.
The former England centre half turned out a record 629 league games for Don Revie's brilliant Leeds side — and now masterminds the campaigns of the Republic of Ireland.
But it's big Jack's capacity for making folk laugh — often quite unintentionally — that makes him the great character he is.
Tales of Jack forgetting players' names abound.
Shortly after taking the Irish job, he was heard talking about ‘John McGrath’, the former Newcastle and Southampton defender, who now manages Halifax.
HILARIOUS
But Jack, of course, was referring to his star defender PAUL McGrath!
When Charlton took on his last club job at Newcastle, midfielder John Trewick asked about one-twos, which had been encouraged by former boss Arthur Cox.
‘The only one-twos I want to see now,’ growled Jack — now famed for the long-ball game with Ireland —‘are one-twos with God!’
One player who knows the funny side of Charlton is David Mills, Britain's first 500,000 footballer, who had stints with Big Jack at Middlesbrough and Sheffield Wednesday.
‘Team talks were often hilarious,’ recalls Mills.
‘I recall one breakdown on Wolves.
The report obviously mentioned Mike Bailey and Steve Daley.
But Jack managed to have Bailey taking a corner — and then Bailey heading the flag-kick into the net.
We were creased up.’
Charlton arrived at Middlesbrough after leaving Leeds in 1973.
‘He was a very good manager,’ Mills says.
‘His tactical awareness was second to none — but he didn't want to know some of the more boring aspects of management.
‘Even in the early days, he wasn't a 9-to-5 man.
He liked his shooting and fishing right from the start.’
SURPRISES
In fact, Jack fancied his country sports so much he'd occasionally order Boro apprentices to help ‘beat’ the Yorkshire moors for game birds — where he'd be waiting with a loaded gun!
‘One day, I got roped in,’ recalls Mills.
‘I was a senior player but that made no difference.
I was injured and therefore no use to Jack — except to act as a beater!
‘He had all the kids fan out.
I was huddled under a bush and it started to snow — I could have got frostbite but that didn't bother the gaffer.
‘And to think I was eventually sold for half-a-million!’
Mills and Charlton later linked up at Hillsborough and Mills admits: ‘He had mellowed.
He was more approachable in those days — but life could still have surprises.
DREADED
‘When I joined Wednesday, I was staying with Jack until I sorted out a place of my own.
One day, I did extra training and arrived back at his home at about 4.30pm.
There was a note telling me both Jack and Pat, his wife, were out and could I feed his hens.
‘I had to negotiate the sheep enclosure at Jack's place to reach the hen-house.
The sheep were very curious and made a bee-line for me but I managed to push my way through to the birds.
‘After I'd fed the hens, I couldn't get out — the sheep had penned me in.
‘By this time it was 5.30pm in midwinter and snowing again.
‘I only got away by throwing hen feed at the sheep to distract them.’
Charlton's ‘careful’ approach to life also tickles Mills.
He remembers a training session in Hyde Park when Boro were in London for an away match.
Jack calmly walked up to a stranger on a bench and asked: ‘Can I borrow a fag?’
Mills says: ‘He got away with it, of course.
Jack was like that.
‘But his care with cash was translated into management.
He almost regarded the club money as his own and wouldn't spend freely.
‘If he'd spent to improve an already good Boro team, he'd have probably won honours.
‘We already had the likes of Graeme Souness, David Armstrong, Bobby Murdoch, John Hickton and Willie Maddren!
‘The same thing happened later at Newcastle.
He wanted Eric Gates, of Ipswich and England, but wouldn't come up with the wages.
‘In stepped Newcastle's dreaded rivals Sunderland, and Lawrie McMenemy stumped up the cash.
HASSLE
‘Gates signed at Roker and Newcastle's fans gave Jack some stick for that.
I think that's what turned him off club management — he knew what his interests were and decided he could walk away from the hassle.
‘But I got on well with him.
He'd stand by you if you did what he wanted — even if you failed.
I was never dropped by him at Boro or Wednesday.
‘Now, as Irish manager, he never has to discuss a contract, never has to sign a player.
It's perfect.
He just has to get them to play.’
Charlton is a tough negotiator — and one day left Mills speechless.
‘I recall going to see him one morning in the mid-70s after a newspaper suggested Liverpool were ready to pay Boro 200,000 for me.
I was young — and that was big money at the time.
‘Jack greeted me with ‘Whaddya want?’ and I told him I was interested in the story.
Did Liverpool want me?
Jack said: ‘They've made an offer of 200,000 but it's not enough.
I've turned it down.’
‘I hadn't cost Middlesbrough a penny so I said: ‘OK.
But you're stopping me joining England's most successful side.
How about paying me what you think a 200,000 footballer is worth?’
‘Jack just looked at me and said: ‘You can **** off!’
He left me sat there and strode out of the office.
‘I thought…it doesn't look like you'll be moving to Liverpool, Millsy.
‘And I didn't get a pay rise, either!’
MAC WHO?
Big Jack got the name of his Republic of Ireland ace Paul McGrath mixed up
BROUGH JUSTICE: When Jack Charlton was boss of Middlesbrough he had star players of the quality of Graeme Souness, left, and David Mills, right.
‘If he'd spent to improve an already good team, he'd have probably won honours,’ says Mills
MAKE-OR-BREAK CHUMS
TWO former Barnsley team-mates kicked off the new season with mixed emotions — wondering just what lies in store for them.
John Beresford is a 700,000 Kevin Keegan recruit to Newcastle from Portsmouth, while Steve Agnew is trying to rebuild his career at moneybags Blackburn after a crushing injury.
Sheffield-born left-back Beresford came close to becoming a Liverpool player during the close season — until the Anfield side pulled out.
He also looked likely to join Sheffield Wednesday at one stage but in the end had to settle for First Division Newcastle.
Agnew made his mark in midfield at Barnsley where his ability to produce a telling pass brought him to the notice of Blackburn, who shelled out 750,000 for the Shipley-born player.
Almost before he got used to wearing the famous blue and white, Agnew suffered an injury which put him on crutches and out of action for virtually a season.
Rivals Now he faces a make-or-break season with the Ewood Park club, which has shown that when it comes to cash it has no serious rivals.
Agnew knows that he has to prove to manager Kenny Dalglish not only that he can make a comeback but also that he can do his stuff at the highest level.
If he fails he's likely to become expendable and could even wind up back at Barnsley, a forgotten man.
Beresford, too, aims to prove a point by letting Liverpool and Wednesday see just what they missed — by helping Newcastle into the Premier league.
POINT TO PROVE…
Beresford
Big Kev guns for the top
HE'S the tallest player in League football at 6ft 7in, he weighs in at 16 ½st and wears size 13 boots.
And his club is adamant it will take more than 1m to prise him away.
Which makes the 60,000 Stockport County paid Derby County for Kevin Francis look a snip.
Stockport and Francis, who struck 26 goals last season, missed out in the play-offs last summer.
But while County are tipped to go up this time, Francis could be stepping on to a bigger stage before next spring.
Cambridge United sent out videos of Dion Dublin — and, suddenly, the big clubs showed interest, with Manchester United pipping Chelsea, Aston Villa and Everton as they gambled 1m on the big fellow.
Stockport probably won't need to worry about videos — the inquiries started last season.
And the big clubs are keeping a close watch on how Francis, who is still only 24, performs over the next few weeks.
County put one across Chester in the Coca-Cola Cup and Francis put opposing keeper Billy Stewart — 6ft 2in and 13 ½ st — in hospital after they collided going for a 50–50 ball.
Stewart was concussed, had some teeth damaged and his jaw badly bruised.
Chester boss Harry McNally cleared Francis, saying: ‘It was a pure accident’.
He tips the giant striker to make it to the top.
‘I first watched him playing for Derby reserves and he looked ungainly.
Now he's filled out and got a lot stronger,’ says McNally.
‘He's ideally suited to the long-ball game — he wins 99 per cent of balls in the air — and while he wouldn't be a classical player, he would be an effective one, like John Fashanu and Dion Dublin.
‘I reckon he could play in the Premier League and I've no hesitation in saying that.’
WE were the first to tip you off about Ryan Giggs, who has become a household name at Manchester United…now we're telling you to watch out for another youngster.
And if he makes it, Crewe Alexandra will have done it again!
They took David Platt, Geoff Thomas and Rob Jones and turned them into star material and now they've got a first-year apprentice called Francis Tierney.
He plays on the right wing and has pace as well as skill.
Crewe won't be rushing him but we're told that Liverpool are so impressed they've asked for first option on him.
BARGAIN STOCK…
Kevin Francis
DAVID PLATT
A BLOODY MARVEL
Moran's never been scared to stick his head in when the boots fly
STEVE BATES
BLACKBURN'S Kevin Moran has been through the lot in nearly 20 years as a top class defender.
World Cups, European Championships and Wembley Cup Finals — you name it, Moran's seen front line action in them all.
A man who's never been afraid to stick his head in among the flying boots, Moran's medical records are thicker — and gorier — than a short horror novel.
So when Manchester United boss Alex Ferguson hastily gave him a free transfer to Spain's Sporting Gijon more than three years ago, you'd have bet that the battered Irishman would have slipped quietly out of the limelight.
After all, if you leave a place like Old Trafford, surely the only way is down?
But Moran — along with ex-United men David Platt and Peter Beardsley — would disagree.
He has added another successful chapter to his career as part of Blackburn's 10m transformation from cloth cap country cousins to big time tycoons of British football.
And Moran didn't cost them a single penny!
Former Rovers boss Don Mackay took him on a free transfer from Gijon to Ewood Park two seasons ago.
And despite Kenny Dalglish's spending spree, Moran, 36, is still going strong at the sharp end of the Premier League.
Dalglish managing Moran is a turn up to start with.
The pair crossed swords in the eighties during their heyday with rivals Liverpool and United.
AMAZED
On one occasion at Anfield, Dalglish had his cheekbone fractured in a clash with Moran — but at least the Rovers boss knows Moran is granite hard!
Team mate and defensive partner Colin Hendry is amazed by Moran's change of fortunes too.
‘It's extraordinary to think Kevin left United a few seasons ago on a free — and now he's playing so well for us.
‘He just makes a mockery of those who write players off at 32 or say the Premier League is for young athletes.
‘I never think about Kev's age and most of the time with his vast experience he's one step ahead of the strikers we face.
‘I enjoy every minute alongside him because he gives so much.
You always know you'll get nothing short of 110 per cent and he's still got a great appetite for playing at the top level.
‘When he came to Rovers he probably thought he'd be lucky to get a year's contract.
But since then he's won a Second Division promotion medal and is near the top of the Premier League.
‘The rumours flew about Craig Short of Notts County joining us for over 2m but you have to live with that kind of rumour these days at Rovers.
‘To buy a player of Kevin's experience would cost a fortune but we got him for free.
‘And that must make him one of the best bargains around.’
Moran's commitment was legendary in over a decade at Old Trafford and nothing has changed.
Says Hendry: ‘Kevin is a physical player because that's part of his make up.
The way he goes crunching into tackles makes me so glad I play with him and not against him.
‘He gets stuck in — and that's probably why he's picked up so many knocks down the years.
‘Sometimes you only have to look at his head — and he starts bleeding!’
EMOTION
Moran, the first player to be sent off in an FA Cup Final when he fouled Peter Reid in the 1985 FA Cup Final between United and Everton, has tasted every emotion that football can offer.
But even he wouldn't have dared to dream up this kind of swansong to his long football life.
He might have been discarded at international level by Ireland boss Jack Charlton.
But with Blackburn flying high, there might just be one big surprise left for Moran in the twilight of his career.
.
RARITY…
For once Kevin has to take it lying down.
The usual reason…blood
.
ONE FOR THE ALBUM…
Kevin without the blood.
Or is it.
Look above that right eye 
UNBOWED…
Blood on them there brows.
But it wouldn't be Kevin without the gore would it?
.
RARITY…
For once Kevin has to take it lying down.
The usual reason…blood
.
ONE FOR THE ALBUM…
Kevin without the blood.
Or is it.
Look above that right eye
800,000!
ALAN SHEARER'S success at Blackburn Rovers is reflected in the massive signing-on fee he picked up in the record move.
The word is that Shearer (below) bought for more than 3 million in the deal that sent David Speedie to Southampton, picked up 800,000!
And that is also reflected in the fee collected by Rovers other big summer buy, Stuart Ripley, a 1.3 million arrival from Middlesbrough.
Ripley, we hear, got 200,000-plus.
All in all, it's easy to see why a small-town club called the Rovers made the fancy dans in the big cities.
BIRTHDAY SWEET 16
Trainer Dave Chapman plans a victory party for his jockey granddaughter
IN MY OWN BACKYARD
LARRY LYNX
STILLINGTON trainer David Chapman has a very special 16th birthday present in store for his granddaughter Ruth — a winning ride at Redcar.
Ruth Clark is lined up as jockey for State Governor in the amateur race at Redcar on September 25 — the day she turns 16.
For Ruth it will be a dream come true as she becomes the youngest female licensed amateur rider in history.
For David, who trains at Mowbray House, it will fulfil a last burning ambition.
‘I'd love to win the amateurs’ race there with Ruth riding,’he says.
‘We have applied for her licence and if all goes to plan she will be riding State Governor.
‘That girl's as keen as mustard.
She cycles four miles every morning to ride out with us and she always arrives before anybody else.’
Racing is a family business.
Ruth's mother runs a saddlery and her father is a farrier.
State Governor is owned by her great-uncle John Chapman.
Ruth, studying for GCSEs next summer, says: ‘I've never done anything apart from horses and riding.
But I've always known I could never be a professional jockey because I couldn't make the weight.
With a saddle I tip nine stone.
‘Hopefully I'll be able to carry on as an amateur and help mum in the shop.’
Ruth is embarking on a fitness campaign to improve her breathing and the strength in her legs.
State Governor also has to get fit — he burst a vein when he ran at Ripon on Bank Holiday Monday.
Ruth says: ‘I'm not nervous at the moment, but I will be on the day.
I've just got to stay on and get round the course.’
HEALING
It should be a day to remember for Chapman, who has been in the business for 30 years.
He has healing hands — rejects and cripples from larger stables have been transformed by his skill into winning racers.
The likes of Soba, Chaplins Club and Glencroft have sprinted to stardom under the gentle care of David and his wife Marian.
It all began 40 years ago when David was 18 and his father started him off farming at Mowbray House.
‘I was mad keen on horses then,’ recalls David.
‘But father told me that my first priority was to get the farm paid for.
By the the time I was 28 I had achieved dad's wish and then I was dabbling with point-to-pointers.
‘I started training modest horses and in those days you could make it pay by running them in selling races.’
He took out a full licence in 1967, gradually making a name for himself.
His biggest moment came ten years ago when his marvellous mare Sobarattled up 11 wins, including the valuable Stewards' Cup at Goodwood.
It was a real rags-to-riches story.
His sister, Muriel, bred Soba from a dam who cost only 360 guineas as a yearling.
‘She was really something.
The old girl is alive and well with my sister at Wetherby, but she proved barren this year.
‘A few of her offspring have won, and at present I have her son Comiskey Park in training.
He's taking his time finding form, but he'll be all right.’
Soba finished her brilliant career with a second in the Group One Prix de l'Abbaye at Longchamp in 1983.
The stable had lost its star, but there was another in the wings in the shape of Chaplins Club.
After 22 unsuccessful runs with different trainers, owner Peter Savill sent Chaplins Club to Chapman — and two races later he trotted up at Beverley in 1985.
Shrewdly placed that year, ‘Charlie’ became the first horse this century to win nine handicaps in a season.
And this year, at the age of 12, Charlie scored at Redcar — his 24th victory.
Chaplins Club was retired after that memorable success.
CHAMPION
But with winnings of 145,000 he will always be remembered as a true punters' champion.
Others have followed in his footsteps.
Charlie's stablemate Glencroft, a mere lad of eight seasons, is still going strong.
Chapman predicts: ‘He'll pick up a little prize before the end of the year.
‘He's not quite 100 per cent at the moment, but he's coming along.’
Glencroft — who has chalked up 17 victories — brought Chapman his happiest racing moment.
Says David: ‘That was at York four years ago when he was won his ninth race of the season.
Chaplins Club, who had already won nine that season, was second.’
But 1992 has not been one of his better years with only ten winners so far.
Chapman explains: ‘A virus has laid some of my horses low.
I have 22 in the yard, but not all are fit.
‘But Old Sully's Choice, who is 11, is gradually picking up again and he will win by the end of the year.’
Tigani, who had two trainers before moving to Mowbray House, is another to look out for.
Chapman says: ‘He's useful and coming along nicely.
‘He ran well from a bad draw when beaten about four lengths at Redcar recently and I am hoping to run him in the Portland Handicap at Doncaster.’
He runs a happy stables at Mowbray House — and is well aware of the debt he owes to his wife and his team.
‘Steve Wood is our stable jockey and he is first class,’ he says.
‘Unlike some he is prepared to work hard and is not in it just for the glory.
‘Our stable won the overall prize for the best turned out horses last year, beating Martin Pipe's lot.
‘In fact our girl Tracey Wood won the country's number one prize for stable grooms, while Christine Frampton was third.’
But the prize Chapman wants most of all is at Redcar on September 25 when he hopes State Governor will carry its keen young jockey to a birthday victory.
THAT'S MY GIRL…
Dave Chapman and Ruth plan a very special 16th birthday celebration with State Governor
MAKING HAY WHILE THE SUN SHINES…
Early bird Ruth arrives on her bike and pitches in with the adult workers at her grandfather's stables every morning before she sets off for school Pictures: STUART FOSTER
ELL OF A FIND!
Jase the Pace is the new Hanley
Robbo makes you rise in your seat, just like Ellery
JOHN ROBINSON
THEY call him the ‘second Ellery Hanley’— and the comparisons don't bother Jason Robinson.
Wigan fans are still talking about the dazzling try which marked the 18-year-old's home debut two weeks ago.
Five Hull defenders were left trailing by the youngster's electrifying pace and change of direction as he scorched his way to the line.
That dramatic touchdown announced Robinson's arrival as a force to be reckoned with.
And no-one was more delighted than the man who brought him to Central Park — scout Eric Hawley.
‘Even Ellery himself could not have scored the try better,’ he insisted.
Yorkshireman Hawley should know about that.
For it was he who helped to find superstar Hanley for Bradford Northern — a signing acknowledged as one of the most significant in Rugby League history.
Robinson has also been compared with another former Wigan idol, Henderson Gill.
But Hawley says: ‘Jason is more like Hanley in his general play — even though he is much smaller and basically a scrum-half.
POTENTIAL
‘In fact, Jason reminds people of Ellery so much that in some parts of Yorkshire they refer to him as Black Pearl II.
‘He makes you rise in your seat when he gets the ball — just as Ellery does.
‘And I'm sure he is going all the way to the top, just like Ellery.
He has great try-scoring potential and his defence is unbelievable.’
Robinson, who was discovered playing for amateurs Hunslet Parkside, has already paid a price for his dedication to the game.
He is out of work after losing his engineering job because of taking time off for rugby.
Now he travels from his Leeds home every day to train and play for Wigan.
‘Rugby League is my career now,’ says Jason.
‘I'm on a four-year contract and enjoying every minute.
The lads have been great in helping me to settle in.
LUCKY
‘Playing in the first team has been a big step up after the Academy and the reserves.
It's faster and more physical — but easier in a way because I have so many top players around me.
‘I've been lucky in that I've always had pace, but the regular training and coaching I've had at Wigan has made me stronger and faster.’
Robinson, nicknamed ‘Billy Whizz’ for his speed around the park, has been utilised on the wing and at hooker for spells in his opening games.
But it is at scrum-half or stand-off that he eventually aims to establish himself.
When Jason first queried his switch to hooker in the victory at Sheffield, coach John Monie winked and told him: ‘Just look at your winning pay packet on Thursday.’
Robinson has one fault to be ironed out.
He is so intent on scoring that he is often unaware of the need to pass to supporting players in a better position.
Hawley says: ‘That's because when he was at Hunslet Parkside he used to score four or five tries a match and was so quick off the mark that none of his team-mates could keep up with him.’
He adds: ‘Monie has realised that Jason is a player who thrives on a roving commission.
Basics
‘He is a smashing, modest lad who has not shown his full repertoire yet.
He is a good technical kicker and can also drop goals.
‘But he is not rushing himself.
He is getting the basics right.
He relishes tackling and few get past him.
‘Yet nothing goes to his head — and he just doesn't seem to have any nerves.’
RED-HOT ROBBO!
WHIZZ KID…
Wigan's exciting 18-year-old Jason Robinson is set for the top.
He scored a dazzling try on his home debut against Hull recently
THE MASTER…
Rugby League legend Ellery Hanley
HITTING THE RACISTS FOR SIX
Tendulkar broke the taboo at Yorkshire
Imran and others had to face the taunts of the bigots…times are changing
ANDY JALIL
THE signing of India's boy wonder, Sachin Tendulkar, failed to smash the accusations of racial discrimination surrounding Yorkshire Cricket.
Even the recent recruitment of West Indies’ skipper Richie Richardson in Tendulkar's place hasn't silenced the controversy.
But now Asians connected with the county have leapt to its defence.
Solly Adam, who first alerted Yorkshire that Tendulkar was keen to play in England, is convinced that prejudice is dead and buried.
He said: ‘They have made it a priority to discover a Yorkshire-born non-white player to play for them.
‘Last year the Yorkshire committee paid for an extensive coaching programme for six weeks to help youngsters in the area who were predominantly of Pakistani and Indian background.
‘I informed everyone in local league cricket, including 21 clubs of Asian boys, but only three turned up for the first week.
So how can people say there is a bias against coloured players?
‘If one of our boys was good enough to play and was not getting a chance with Yorkshire, then surely another county would have taken him.
We would then have an argument against Yorkshire.
But even that has never happened.’
Tendulkar's arrival broke the club's ancient taboo against foreigners.
He is not being retained next season only because of his cricket commitments at home in India — but Richardson is a formidable replacement.
In the past, the club always stipulated that no one born outside the county could play for Yorkshire.
It was argued that the rule of having only Yorkshire-born players was the perfect way of keeping out the non-whites.
The signing of Tendulkar was described as a whitewash merely to cover racial bias.
But Solly Adam and Mohammad Tanvir, who have strong links with local league cricket, are convinced the battle against racism is being won -although few Asian youngsters are breaking through.
‘Our boys enjoy playing cricket among themselves,’ said Tanvir, who runs the well-organised Quaid-e-Azam League, which was established in 1980.
‘They show little interest in playing integrated cricket for teams in other leagues outside their own tournaments.
‘But if they are happy with their cricket and don't want to go further, then it's up to them.’
Adam mentioned Tendulkar to Brian Close, the chairman of Yorkshire's cricket committee, when a deal to sign Australian fast bowler Craig McDermott fell through.
Adam admits: ‘Brian Close made some uncomplimentary remarks on television about Asian players, but they were made in the heat of the moment.
‘He later apologised, of course, but if you know him well, you know that he is very fair.’
Yorkshire have now taken on two Pakistani lads for coaching, all-rounder Adil Ditta and Ismail Dawood, a promising batsman and wicket-keeper.
Bill Boag, trustee of the Yorkshire County Cricket Youth Trust, concedes that there are still some racists in the crowd —‘You'll always get them, but it's far less now,’ he says.
Imran Khan and several West Indian players, such as Viv Richards and Malcom Marshall, have suffered at the hands of Yorkshire crowds.
Boag says: ‘Things are changing now.
The coloured lads, most of whom are Muslims of Pakistani origin, are accepted as part of the local scene.
‘Boys of all races are being encouraged.
Sir Lawrence Byford, the president of Yorkshire CCC, is personally advocating their inclusion in the coaching.
‘Chris Hassell, the secretary, has been a great help.
He was anxious to have a match at Park Avenue, Bradford, to cement relations.
‘The coloured lads tend to be insular.
‘They have confined their activities to their own leagues mainly, but they are starting to mix more now.
‘There is so much talent, but it's restricted as they are playing among themselves.
‘I think it will gradually come into the mainstream of Yorkshire cricket.’
By tearing down the barriers at Yorkshire, Tendulkar has left a legacy of hope.
‘Although his run scoring was not prolific, by his standards, he has done everything we could have asked of him,’ said former master batsman Geoff Boycott.
‘No other batsman in the world has such crowd-pulling charisma.’
The club's chief executive Chris Hassell was also full of praise.
‘He has gone down a treat with the members, who have a lot of affection for him,’ he said.
Hassell, who joined the club only a few months before Tendulkar, added: ‘When I arrived, membership had been falling for about seven years and we were ringing up companies to try to talk them into sponsorship.
Now, even in recession, they are approaching us and since Sachin we have added 1,500 new members.’
Richard Blakey, who will be touring India with the England team this winter, says: ‘It's been a joy to bat alongside him.
He has so much ability.
There's no doubt he relieved the pressure on me and the rest of the dressing-room and enabled me to enjoy my game to the full.’
There are reports of early political undercurrents in India, which will no doubt gather momentum nearer the time, against the tour to Sri Lanka next year.
A widespread opposition to the tour is expected because the late Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Ghandi's assassination was carried out by a Sri Lankan Tamil.
That will be ironic, as Yorkshire have not retained Tendulkar only because of India's planned tour.
SHIRE GRIT!
YORKSHIRE cricket is blazing the international trail after always accepting only home-grown talent in the past Aussie paceman Craig McDermott (above left) was the first overseas star expected to join the county, but the move fell through and Tendulkar came over from India instead.
Now Tendulkar has been replaced by West Indies’ skipper Richie Richardson (above)
CHEERS!
Yorkshire took Sachin Tendulkar to its heart as the young star of India struck a mighty blow against racism in cricket
Indian dope trick
Selectors dropped a clanger say Test stars
England are barmy not to take Gower
ANDY JALIL
INDIA'S cricketers were given a huge confidence-booster this week…by the England selectors!
The Indian hierarchy could hardly believe their luck when they heard details of the party to tour the sub-continent this winter.
NO Ian Salisbury.
NO Jack Russell.
And, most amazingly, NO David Gower.
Dilip Doshi, the former Indian Test player, is astonished that classy Gower will not be going —‘It's the most glaring omission considering his record against India,’ he said.
And Asif Iqbal, who played extensive first-class cricket in his home country, India, before crossing the border and becoming a Pakistan Test star, was also stunned by the omission of Gower.
‘Unless it was for reasons other than cricket, one cannot see an England team without his presence,’ he said.
‘How can you leave out Gower by saying he is old at 35 and yet include John Embury, who is 40?’
Doshi, who was a fine left-arm orthodox bowler, feels particularly sorry for Salisbury, the most promising young spinner in England.
He said: ‘Salisbury should have gone.
It would have developed him — he is such a good prospect.
You could see it in the way he performed against Pakistan.’
FLAT
Sussex leg-spinner Salisbury certainly impressed in his debut Test at Lord's, even if he struggled a little on Old Trafford's flat track in the next Test.
But he made up for it there by scoring a half century.
At Lord's, he had match figures of five for 122.
He took the wickets of Pakistan captain Javed Miandad and Wasim Akram in the first innings and followed up with three for 49 in the second, including Pakistan's two top batsmen, Aamir Sohail and Salim Malik.
Salisbury, named Young Cricketer of the Year last week, had also been successful against the tourists earlier in the summer when bowling for Sussex.
Doshi added: ‘You could see the confidence in him in his first Test match.
He is the sort of young player who should be encouraged’ He believes Salisbury could have struck up a deadly partnership with Phil Tufnell.
Doshi said: ‘There is no doubt Tufnell is a high class bowler.
‘But it's going to be a different game — bowling on those wickets will teach him a lot.
‘I think he will trouble the Indian batsmen even though they are good players of spin bowling.’
Doshi, whose 33 tests brought him 114 wickets, including five-wicket hauls in an innings on six occasions, said: ‘The great thing about Tufnell is that he is willing to experiment.
He is not afraid to give the ball air and has variation.
‘It's going to be a good contest between him and the Indian batsmen.’
CHANCE
The omission of Mark Ramprakash also surprised Doshi, who said: ‘He has mainly played in difficult series in England, against West Indies and Pakistan — the two best bowling sides in the world.
‘He hasn't had a chance against lesser bowling.
‘That would give him more confidence and he would be able to establish himself in the side.’
Former Pakistan captain Asif believes England could struggle to bowl India out twice in a match —‘They need the right bowlers on those Indian tracks, because they don't get much assistance from the surface.
‘I cannot see any logic in taking a bowler like Paul Jarvis.
He has not performed even at county level or in tests when he played before.
This is the strangest selection.
‘You should select a squad with the needs of a particular tour in mind.
If England were looking to the future then some of the players should have been selected years ago.
‘This is where Pakistan are scoring points and their youth policy has paid off.’
Both Doshi and Asif felt that the selection showed an emphasis on one-day matches.
‘They should select a side for the Tests and then pick for one-day games,’ Doshi said.
‘I don't think Dermot Reeve is a Test player.
The bits-and-pieces players are not going to do any good.
‘Dropping Russell is unfortunate.
It will affect Alec Stewart's batting eventually if he keeps wicket regularly and has to concentrate on it.’
Asif Iqbal added: ‘You need a specialist for that position.
At the moment, England have batsmen who can keep wicket.’
ASIF…
‘England could struggle to bowl out India twice in a match’
JOKER…but there will be no clowning glory for Gower he's been snubbed by the England selectors for the winter tour of the sub-continent
GOLDEN OLDIE…
Doshi feels spin wizard Ian Salisbury should have been selected to go to India with England
STAR TURN…but Salisbury is left out
Eubank fails to deliver
FRANKIE TAYLOR
CHRIS EUBANK kept his WBO super-middleweight title by outpointing New Jersey postman Tony Thornton in Glasgow last night — but Eubank's biggest cheer from the Scottish fans came for his gimmicky leap into the ring before the fight started.
That feat accomplished Eubank provided the few thrills against Thornton's dogged, but unconvincing, attacks.
Thornton did not have the strength in his punches to trouble Eubank early in the fight or enough snap to worry him later on.
Eubank took a comfortable unanimous decision — although I had him winning by only one round and plenty of ringsiders thought he hadn't made it.
Only in the first two minutes of the third round did we see Eubank looking anything like his best performances against Michael Watson and Nigel Benn.
Then he attacked with venom and had Thornton looking troubled for the only time in the fight.
Indeed there were several rounds when Eubank not only back-pedalled to escape Eubank's plodding attack he actually turned and ran unashamedly to avoid toe-to-toe confrontation.
Thornton, 32, was constantly frustrated by Eubank's weird and unorthodox antics but he had nothing exceptional to throw into the pot.
Eubank was warned several times by South African referee Stan Christodoulou, for low blows and once for blatantly shouldering Thornton away.
Eubank is now lined up to fight Paraguay's Juan Carlos Gimmez on November 28in Manchester.
No doubt fans will flock to that one as well in the hope of seeing who can force Eubank to produce his best.
La dolce vita for Walker
That's the sweet life to you and me, folks!
Brian Glanville
‘BEST decision I've ever made in my life,’ said Des Walker, gazing down from the terrace of his Genoese apartment at sunlit rocks and ocean.
‘You look out and you see the sea, the sun.
The people are friendly.
You can't ask for much more.
‘And I've got the challenge of playing with the best players in the best stadiums.’
He's so happy, England centre-back Walker would like to stay in Italy for the rest of his footballing life.
He lives with Sally, his blonde girlfriend from Nottingham, just down the coast from Sampdoria's training ground, which is high up in Bogliasco.
In a couple of months, they will be moving to larger premises, which Walker had just found when I visited him.
Meanwhile, things couldn't be better.
He's the first to admit, however, that there are ‘a few things to be ironed out’ in a Sampdoria defence still in a slight state of culture shock.
They've just turned to the zone game after generations of the sweeper system.
Today comes the great test, perhaps a little earlier in the season than Sampdoria would have liked it, against AC Milan.
This comes when they will be without their main man, Roberto Mancini, suspended after being sent off in Udine last Sunday.
Milan, one point ahead of Sampdoria at the top of the table, also have teething problems, trying to rotate half a dozen foreigners when they can only use three!
Ruud Gullit is now often banished to the stand, and the 10 million Jean-Pierre Papin is struggling to find form.
But culture shock is the last thing Walker has experienced.
He's been gloriously happy from the moment he set foot in Genoa to a generous welcome from his new colleagues.
How well a foreigner gets on in Italian football, he thinks, depends on his own attitude.
If it's positive, then they'll help you.
‘They show you such hospitality,’ he says.
‘Then, if they see you don't try, they chuck it back in your face.
The first month, they take you out, they show you everything.
They get offended if you say no-no-no.’
Curiously, his closest friend seems to be the deep left winger, Ivano Bonetti, who played with Ian Rush at Juventus.
Bonetti doesn't resent the fact that in his first training game, Walker inadvert-ently knocked out two of his teeth.
The Italian fell on his leg after a tackle — with horror, Walker saw one tooth embedded in his knee!
Bonetti has his own boat, and has taken Walker all the way to Sardinia.
‘One day, Ivano said, ‘I'm not going to ask you what you're doing in the afternoons.
I want you to ask me what I'm doing in the afternoons.
The players like you.
If you're bored, you can always come out with me.
Now you're in’.’
Walker is settling down steadily in the centre of defence beside the powerful, abrasive Pietro Vierchowod, the Italian international of Soviet descent.
Sven Goran Eriksson, the Swedish coach, now with his third Italian club, has imposed, says Walker, ‘a completely new style’ on Sampdoria.
‘It's the same system I've played virtually all of my career.
It's probably easier for me than the other three, but then they are such good players.’
Easier, he says, for a zonal defender like himself to switch to a marking game than for an Italian marker to change to zonal defence, ‘because a zoner is all positional play.’
Pace and the ability to read the game are, as Walker says, his chief talents.
He thinks about football rigorously, and stresses how much more difficult it is to play against an Italian attack.
In Italy there is usually just one striker up whereas English teams have two.
The Italians keep a second striker lurking behind the first.
‘They work hard, they move off the ball a lot, they move around.
There's a lot more movement.
They never stand still and let you mark them,’ he says.
‘And what must help the players is that, all week, you do nothing but improve your technical skills and team pattern.
In England, you're playing in two games a week.
‘Sometimes I think English football suffers from that.
You don't get time to improve.
It's a pressure cooker.
Here, I think the speed of thought and the movement is so much better.’
Genoa, the city, obviously suits him well.
He says the fans are rather less impassioned than elsewhere in Italy, although I had to tell him that once, when Trevor Francis missed a penalty for Sampdoria, his car was bombarded and his son, Matthew, was struck by a stone.
But Walker isn't worried by the challenges facing him.
He confirms: ‘I'd like to stay here till I retire.’
DES WALKER…has settled well and says he would like to spend the rest of his footballing life in Italy
THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE
TV Walker kicks off in soccer war
BRIAN GLANVILLE
THIS afternoon Channel 4 begins its barrage in the TV soccer war.
While BSkyB beams Manchester United and Leeds to its restricted audience, all TV fans can switch to Des Walker making his Sampdoria debut in the Italian championship against Paul Gascoigne's new team, Lazio.
If Channel 4 get it right, they could strike a mortal blow at BSkyB and their drawn out screenings of the Premier League.
Sky fell fast asleep when the bidding came up for Italian football — that's ironic, since they had shown it so compulsively themselves.
And if Channel 4, who have resurrected Kenneth Wolstenholme as their presenter, can match such excellence, BSkyB may tremble.
Walker should come through it well enough.
His speed should complement the rugged, abrasive qualities of his fellow centre back, the veteran Italian international Pietro Vierchowod.
Even better for Walker, Sampdoria's new manager, Sven-Goran Eriksson, has changed the team's traditional sweeper defence to one of four in line.
Not that this defence is likely to have an easy afternoon.
Lazio — who won't risk Gascoigne in this match — have two excellent strikers in the German international, Riedle, so strong in the air, and Signori, the young Italian cap.
RENEW
The black Dutchman, Winter, who's had to put up with much racial abuse, continues in the space reserved for Gazza.
His most recent form is disappointing.
Sampdoria showed in the Makita Tournament at Leeds that they may not greatly miss Gianluca Vialli, sold to Juventus.
The gifted Roberto Mancini, once seen as his twin, is flourishing without him.
Those who watched the games at Leeds will renew acquaintance with the brilliant, bald Lombardi, on the right wing, Bertarelli, the new young striker and the international keeper Pagliuca.
But all is not well at Lazio — quite apart from Gascoigne's absence.
Lazio's manager, Dino Zoff, says that Gascoigne is all he needs to have a team capable of challenging for the title.
But he is fuming over the interference in his work of the chief executive, Lionello Celon.
‘With Celon, we cannot possibly have football conversations.
No, I can't talk about football with Celon.’
David Platt will probably be in the Juventus side today at Cagliari, but he's scarcely been reassured by the recent utterances of Gianni Agnelli, grand patron of the club.
Agnelli has praised Andy Moeller, Platt's German rival for a place in midfield, and lamented the absence there of such an all-rounder as Marco Tardelli, scorer of a memorable goal in the 1982 World Cup Final.
Rightly or wrongly, Platt has been moved to reply.
Not always the best policy where Agnelli is concerned.
He says he respects Agnelli's opinions, and doesn't regard them as critical of himself.
He's convinced Juventus have a team capable of winning the title, but feels there's a tendency in Turin to regret past players.
He doesn't, he says, dispute Tardelli's qualities but in football, one must be realistic.
Tardelli isn't there any longer, one player can't make a team, and besides, Tardelli played in a great one.
In an away match such as Juventus face in Cagliari, Platt might be more useful than Moeller, in a Juve midfield ominously lacking tackling power.
Milan, inevitably, are strong favourites to retain the title they won last season, especially after signing new stars Papin and Lentini.
Dejan Savicevic, their Yugoslav midfielder, is understandably distressed at being forced to watch from the stand.
His form in the Italian Cup has been exceptional.
But senior members of the team, such as the skipper Franco Baresi and Marco Van Basten, don't want him.
Baresi says Milan can't change tactics to accommodate one who ‘is neither striker nor midfielder.’
Gullit seems likely to stay on the sidelines.
Milan, lacking his fellow Dutchman Rijkaard in central midfield, weren't so impressive last Sunday when they beat Parma 2–1 at San Siro in the Super Cup.
Their city rivals, Inter, begin away to promoted Udinese, whose aim will be avoiding relegation.
Inter's new foreigners, Sammer of Germany, Pancev, the Yugoslav striker, and Shalimov, the Russian midfielder, in his second Italian season, have been bedding down better of late.
Overall, it's hard to see anyone pushing Milan all the way, though Sampdoria and Juventus have the best chance.
If only Juventus had a Tardelli!
DES WALKER…playing in a flat back four
HOTLINE
BILL BRADSHAW/STEVE BATES/ SHAUN CUSTIS/JOHN DILLON
WOLVES fancy Blackpool forward David Eyres and they could also get a call from Chelsea, who may fancy Mike Stowell to end their search for a goalkeeper.
Tim Flowers, who replaced Peter Shilton at Southampton, is also on Chelsea's check-list
Little in line for big job
SUNDERLAND seem certain to make a change unless Malcolm Crosby produces a run of victories in the next month.
Manchester United's Bryan Robson, as we revealed, is their dream choice but we hear that Leicester's Brian Little and Chelsea's Ian Porterfield are other names to watch.
Leicester would certainly demand compensation for highly-regarded Little
Wednesday want Huddersfield midfielder Chris Marsden and we hear Trevor Francis is likely to quit playing at the end of the season.
NEWCASTLE did not rush to reinstate experienced Brian Kilcline recently — and no wonder with young Steve Howey blossoming at the back.
Chelsea and Ipswich have been impressed.
LEEDS were impressed by schemer Erik Nykland as Norway beat Holland in midweek
Bristol Rovers will sign Kevin Ratcliffe, former Everton skipper on loan this week.
Dave Beasant, the ‘keeper sacked by Chelsea, was spotted at West Ham's midweek game against Crewe.
He said he was ‘just watching.’
Chelsea, searching to replace him, have checked on Mike Stowell, of Wolves, and Tim Flowers at Southampton.
SOUTHAMPTON are keen on Oxford's exciting young striker Joey Beauchamp.
They checked him out again against Aston Villa in mid-week and he scored.
BORO, who were pipped by rivals Newcastle for Robert Lee, have switched to Arsenal squad man Jimmy Carter
Julian Dicks won't be amused if West Ham leave him out against Portsmouth today.
He completed a three-match ban last weekend but could not win back his place for the Coca-Cola Cup against Crewe.
Dicks is aware of interest from Chelsea, Palace and Wimbledon.
A spell out of the side could make him restless.
The Hammers, meanwhile, fancy Everton's Peter Beagrie
Liverpool and Everton are battling for Duncan Ferguson, Dundee United's rising star and a Scots international.
Dundee were furious when Palace publicly stated that he was on their shopping list.
We understand Liverpool and Everton have jumped to the head of the queue and Liverpool are weighing up a 2 million-plus bid.
It may take every penny to tempt the Scots into a deal.
YEN FOR ANDERS
ANDERS LIMPAR is the latest target of the cash-laden Japanese.
The Mazda club, based in Hiroshima, want in time for the start of their season.
They are coached by an exiled Brit, Stuart Baxter, and he has signalled new ambitions by signing Romero, the Paraguayan who was South American Footballer of the Year last season.
Swedish international Limpar's future is in some doubt at Highbury.
Dutch superstar Ruud Gullit of AC Milan is also a target for Sumito Metals of Furokowa 
LIMPAR: may get a call from Japan
Dons close to Kimble deal
WIMBLEDON are closing in on Cambridge United's 600,000-rated defender Ian Kimble.
Hotline reported their interest two weeks ago.
WATFORD, who failed to land West Ham striker Trevor Morley, have turned their sights towards Steve White, of Swindon.
SPURS WATCH ON WILLIAMS
Spurs are checking out Coventry's John Williams.
No wonder, since he has belted three goals past them already this season!
WE told you about Stuart Pearce's pay row with Forest just before the season kicked off.
Now we can reveal he has been offered a new deal worth an EXTRA 2,000 a week.
So far, it has not been agreed!
Forest, meanwhile, could switch their hunt for a centre-back to QPR's vastly-improved Darren Peacock.
BANG ON!
We told you last Sunday that Forest had swooped for top French defender Laurent Blanc but his wages at Napoli were a stumbling block.
Our sorry rivals did not catch until midweek.
Stick with the best to be in the know.
PEARCE: offer
BARMY ABOUT GIGGS
BILL BRADSHAW/STEVE BATES/ SHAUN CUSTIS/JOHN DILLON
RYAN GIGGS (left) has been targeted by the starmakers of European football as a 10 million man.
An Italian agent says: ‘Giggs is a sensation here and you'd have to rate a player of his age and ability at 10 million in our crazy market.’
Alex Ferguson has tied Giggs to a long contract and keeps him under his wing.
And Giggs is, of course, often out and about with pal Darren, the gaffer's son
Clough is tops for Liverpool
NIGEL CLOUGH is the player Liverpool are lining up as replacement for Dean Saunders, whom they have sold to Villa.
But they will have to beat off a challenge from French millionaires Monaco, who head a posse of foreign clubs shadowing him at Forest.
The signs are that Clough is ready to snap his link with his father.
He has been waiting for the right offer for some time after turning down an approach from Italian club Pisa several seasons ago.
BOLTON are in for Southampton winger David Lee and Pompey forward Warren Aspinall…
STAR TURN!
Vote.
vote, vote for YOUR top sports performer
BILL BRADSHAW
EVERYBODY is talking about The People-ClubCall's great British Star of Sport 1992 merit awards.
The voting forms are flooding in and ClubCall's telephone vote line is red hot — and already two men are setting a blistering pace in the race for our Star of Sport title.
And no wonder the pace is so hot!
The men racing ahead are Nigel Mansell, just crowned Formula One world champion — and the winner of our inaugural Star of Sport title last year, and Linford Christie, Great Britain's Olympic captain and 100 metres gold medal winner.
This year Mansell has finally claimed the championship he has chased for a dozen years.
Will he be your choice this time?
Or will it be Christie, the sprinter who, at 32, became the oldest man ever to win the blue riband sprint title.
There are other contenders too.
Sally Gunnell's 400 metres hurdles gold thrilled the nation and Will Carling captained England to the Rugby Union World Cup final and then to another Grand Slam success.
But we want more than just our top award decided by you, the readers.
We want you to select your top performers in all the mainstream sports — with the exception of soccer.
The soccer awards have already been determined by our famous merit marks system, the original newspaper marking scheme.
David Batty, of champions Leeds, and all our positional and divisional winners, will join the other winners YOU vote for at a splendid awards ceremony next month at the Dorchester Hotel, London.
Who, for example, will be your choice in the cricket category?
Graham Gooch, averaging 70 during his years as England skipper, had another solid summer — with successful Essex too — but he has competition from the likes of Alec Stewart and David Gower.
This year we have added a special Olympian category in addition to the athletes’ section to reflect both the track and field achievements (Christie, Gunnell and Kriss Akabusi's 400 metres hurdles bronze) and winners away from the stadium — Simon Terry (archery individual and team bronzes), gold-winning cyclist Chris Boardman and boxer Robin Reid (bronze).
We haven't forgotten the top TV sports, such as snooker.
Who is the people's choice on the green baize?
Stephen Hendry, the 1992 world champion, thrilled the watching millions with a glorious comeback to defeat Jimmy White in the Embassy world final.
And what about Rugby League's top performers?
Martin Offiah's speed and power has become one of the most thrilling features of the game.
In racing, the jockey's title on the flat seems booked for Michael Roberts.
But is your vote?
It's all down to you.
Your votes count by mail or phone — and by telephoning your choice you have the chance to join us at our superb Dorchester luncheon.
Five phone voters will be chosen at random by computer to join the fun and rub shoulders with the stars.
Each winner will, of course, be invited to bring a partner to the Dorchester.
So vote now!
And don't forget to make an additional overall choice for the year's top performer…
For he, or she, could be The People-ClubCall's Star of Sport 1992.
ClubCall are making it easy for People readers to vote by telephone if they choose not to use the voting form on Page 41.
All you need to do is dial 0891 121 PLUS the three numbers by the name of your nominated sportsman or woman.
And don't forget to leave the name of your British Star of Sport ‘92.
Calls cost approx 24p cheap rate (32p all other times 
IAN WOOSNAM
MARTIN OFFIAH
WIGAN PEER LINDSAY TO GO?
SUPER boss Maurice Lindsay has confirmed he is ready to sever his links with Wigan — the club her made the most successful in the world.
Lindsay is favourite on a short-list of 15 for Rugby League's top job as Chief executive when David Oxley retires.
And in a letter to Council representatives he says: ‘I fully realise that should I be successful it will be essential I end all my involvement with Wigan.’
Lindsay's departure from world champs Wigan would leave a huge void.
Under his influence they have enjoyed an unprecedented era of glory winning 25 cups in seven years, including five successive Wembley victories and a hat-trick of Cup and League doubles
Dexter job on the line — Lewis to take over?
TERRY GODWIN /ED CORBETT
THE future of England selectors' chief, Ted Dexter, may be on the line.
For we understand that Dexter — the man who sacked David Gower — is set to go as chairman of selectors.
His job is lined up for TV commentator Tony Lewis, another ex-England skipper.
Lewis, who played just nine Tests 20 years ago, was last night understood to be thinking over the 30,000-a-year job if Dexter goes.
The switch will only happen if Dexter decides he's had enough.
There is no pressure on him to go — other than the summer of controversy that has raged around the game and the selectors' decisions.
Like Dexter, BBC pundit Lewis would receive a wage to compensate him for giving up his TV and newspaper work.
Charge
‘Tony has just the skills we need to give cricket the right image,’ a Test and County Cricket Board insider said.
‘He is greatly admired at Lord's.’
Dexter, 57, was the first chairman to be paid when he took over in March 1989 after Peter May had been in charge for seven years.
He was given a new two-year contract in March.
But in the past year he has slipped quietly into the background as team manager Micky Stewart and captain Graham Gooch have dominated selection.
When Gower was dropped from the tour party for India, Dexter refused to answer questions on the decision and left new team manager Keith Fletcher to take the flak.
Lewis, 54, is chairman of Glamorgan but he will quit that job next week.
‘I agreed to do the job for five years but I feel that it is taking up too much of my time,’ he declared.
KEV TARGETS ACE ROBERTS
NEWCASTLE boss Kevin Keegan is set to spend again — with a 500,000 move for Huddersfield's Welsh international striker Iwan Roberts.
Keegan, who only last week splashed out 700,000 of chairman Sir John Hall's personal cash on Charlton's Robert Lee, still isn't satisfied with his record-breaking team.
If it happens, Tranmere will go in for Mike Quinn.
Keegan is planning a clearout with Mark Stimson and Franz Carr on offer.
Kevin Brock could go to Pompey and Dundee want Newcastle's Danish centre half Bjorn Kristensen.
Talks are underway.
And cover goalkeeper Pavel Srnicek may go soon.
Forest are keen.
Football League President Gordon McKeag is set to resign his post and stand again as an independent candidate.
McKeag, chairman of Newcastle before he was ousted by Hall, is still United's League representative but holds no power at the club.
He was recently banned from the directors' room at Newcastle and has also been shifted from his seat in the directors box to the back of the stand.
But one League chairman told us: ‘I think Gordon will have quite a bit of opposition when he stands again.
The League needs a strong leader.’
LORD'S SELLS ITS SOUL
English cricket is more ineptly led than our football
Gower dumped for junk
BRIAN GLANVILLE
THE one cold consolation for English football after such a wretched week is that English cricket is even more ineptly led.
While the Greed Is Good League threatens to fall apart — and who cares?— while England's team is outplayed in Spain, cricket's selectors drop David Gower and hurl themselves into a whirlpool of crazy contradictions.
‘Look at me!’ said Gower on television last week, when asked if he thought he was too old for India.
Looking at him, do you seem to see a 25-year-old rather than a player of 35?
TECHNIQUE
Mike Gatting, who is the same age, and has been fortunate indeed to be excused his South African indulgence, looks a good deal older.
Graham Gooch, with whom Gower seems locked in a strange love-hate relationship, is three years older than the boy David.
Graeme Hick is much younger, but what comparison can there be in terms of technique?
Since the English selectors, in their evasive way, have chosen to suggest that age and the need to play one-day cricket are the real reasons for Gower's exclusion, he's been right to knock both dubious arguments on the head.
He clearly believes that one-day cricket is essentially junk cricket, and who could honestly disagree with him?
Hick by contrast, is king of the one-day matches, but fails in Test after Test.
The real test you might say.
But cricket has sold its soul, and its rulers have no backbone.
The way the International Cricket Council ducked the issue whether Pakistan's fast bowlers were doctoring the ball would have shamed Pontius Pilate.
The behaviour of the Test and County Cricket Board over Gower's new book has been bizarre.
Not for a moment would I suggest that they deliberately passed it knowing it might embarrass him.
But why, with its criticisms of Micky Stewart and Indian ball-doctoring, did they pass it all.
Foreigners used mistakenly to think that British diplomats always knew what they were doing when the truth was they were dimly muddling through.
For diplomats, read cricket authorities.
Broom n' doom
ALL Airdrie manager Alex MacDonald needed to know about his Cup Winners' Cup opponents Sparta Prague was that they gave Rangers the old heave-ho last season!
The Czechs put Rangers out of the European Cup in the first round on goal difference.
So MacDonald reckons he's in for a hard night at Broomfield on Tuesday.
Even so it seems the Czechs are more worried about the tie than Airdrie.
They are alarmed at the sustained physical effort of the Broomfield players and the manner in which they battle for possession.
They look set to put up the shutters to defy Owen Coyle, Alan Lawrence and Jimmy Boyle so it threatens to be pretty dour stuff.
Super Swansea smash Scarlets
TERRY GODWIN
SWANSEA hammered Llanelli in the Heineken League's big clash yesterday with a well-planned, hard-fought for victory 14–7.
And the man who plotted the downfall of the free-scoring Scarlets, Swansea coach Mike Ruddock revealed the secret behind the big upset watched by 14,000 fans — paying Heineken League record receipts of 100,000 — at Stradey Park.
Swansea hadn't won on Llanelli's ground for five years but shrewd Ruddock had worked out a week earlier just how he would bring about the upset.
Crashing
‘We studied a tape of Llanelli beating Newport.
We were all feeling a sense of shock and apprehension at how good they might be.
‘But when we saw the tape we realised they weren't world beaters after all.
They could be beaten and that's what we set out to do.
‘I told the players to concentrate on organisation and defence.
And they responded exactly.
As far as I'm concerned I give them 10-out-of-10 and it was one of Swansea's best performances.’
And Ruddock singled out Alan Reynolds for special praise in the hit-them, bring-them-down plan.
‘Alan's tackle on Emyr Lewis at the start of the game, lifting him off his feet and sending him crashing down, was just what we needed to lift us’ said Ruddock.
Unstuck
Llanelli captain Rupert Moon who had a rare, bruising tussle with Wales No.1 Robert Jones, paid tribute to Swansea's tactics.
‘They came very well prepared.
But I was proud of the way our young players kept going.
‘We are not going to stop our style of play, we are a free-running side who want to score tries and even if we come unstuck against good sides with well-organised defences we will still keep on with the kind of game which we know pleases the fans.’
Match Report — Page 4
Rough justice for Scots
TERRY NEILL
TERRY NEILL, former Arsenal, Spurs and Northern Ireland manager, was in Berne for Scotland's disastrous clash with the Swiss.
Here he gives his expert verdict on Andy Roxburgh's World Cup chances
WHAT Andy Roxburgh really needed in Switzerland on Wednesday was the Red Cross.
Instead, he saw the dreaded red card.
When the referee sent off Richard Gough he did serious damage to Scotland's World Cup hopes.
It means they now go into the next challenge against Portugal at Ibrox in October without the most important ingredient in the team, the leadership and inspiration of Gough.
It is a cruel blow and one that again underlines the inconsistency of the red card law.
Gough's action in handling was instinctive not pre-planned and I am sure the referee knew that.
But under the present system he is not allowed any discretion.
So Gough, who had a brilliant European Championship, has to sit on the bench with Roxburgh and sweat it out against Portugal in a match the Scots have to win.
Loses
It was always going to be a tough qualifying group with Italy, Portugal and Scotland fighting for the two places.
Now Switzerland, under the management of my old friend Roy Hodgson, have made life even harder.
Their 6–0 win in Estonia and 3–1 win on Wednesday prove that they are no pushovers.
In his mind, Roxburgh must have reckoned on getting at least a point in Berne.
If he now loses at home to Portugal it could prove a mortal wound.
But the one thing I'm sure Roxburgh will not do is panic.
He is an experienced campaigner on the world stage and knows that above all else he must go into the Portugal match with a positive attitude and not use Gough's absence as a convenient excuse.
The game was already lost in Berne when Gough went and I think the reason for that was that the Scots had failed to find the fire that brought them so close to success in Sweden.
Strength
It is unusual for them, because that is normally their main strength.
I know they were not complacent about the Swiss because it was only a year earlier that they had been forced to come back from being two down to snatch a vital European point against them.
Their main problem seemed to be in midfield.
McAllister was never able to provide the influential play he produces at Leeds and I don't think he likes performing on the right hand side.
I believe there is a case to be made now for Roxburgh to play three in the middle and three up front.
Kevin Gallacher, brought on as a substitute in Berne, should be in the starting line-up against Portugal.
They need his pace to complement the strength of Durie and the artistry of McCoist.
It would allow McAllister to run the midfield from a more central position and give the team a more balanced look.
Who goes out to make way for Gallacher?
Brian McClair seems the obvious candidate.
He's a tough competitor but is tending to disappear from the action too often these days.
Whoever takes over from Gough will find it difficult to step into such influential boots.
But if he can't do it on the pitch I'm sure the skipper will be helping to inspire the lads off it.
And, with the usual fervour from the Ibrox crowd behind them, I'm looking to the Scots to rekindle the fire that burnt inside them during the summer and keep Roxburgh's World Cup dream alive.
UNCOMFORTABLE…
McAllister
KING HOKO!
Champion Hodkinson blows away Benichou to retain title
STEVE ROYCE
PAUL HODKINSON, Liverpool's action man, kept his WBC World Featherweight title here in Toulouse last night.
He was at least four rounds ahead when Swiss referee Franz Marti stopped the fight as Fabrice Benichou, the French challenger, had a badly cut mouth.
It was a magnificent fight but Hodkinson was much the classier boxer.
He was the ringmaster against the former circus act.
Working behind his left jab, he put the vastly more experienced Frenchman through the hoop.
European champion Benichou, who used to earn his living as a contortionist and highwire walker, showed amazing reserves of courage.
But no matter how much he twisted and turned, the Liverpool dynamo gave him no rest.
Hodkinson now faces a mandatory challenge from tough American Kevin Kelley.
He may dodge that and instead go for a big money battle against London's Colin McMillan, the WBO world champion, who was at ringside.
ATTACK
Hodkinson, did not waste time searching out his French opponent.
He pounded Benichou to the body and caught him with a right cross to the chin at the end of the first.
But Benichou, looking at least 10 years older than his age of 27, concentrated on body attacks.
He made Hodkinson step back in the second with a fierce right to the body.
He continued to go forward and even when Hodkinson caught him flush on the jaw with a straight right, it didn't stop his forward march.
Hodkinson's confidence was sky high.
He was more than prepared to trade blows with the former circus act Benichou.
A crisp third right hand from Hoko brought Benichou to his knees.
He got to his feet at five but had to take the mandatory count of eight.
The pace did not slacken in the fifth.
Hodkinson, encouraged by his corner, was now making all the running.
The experience of seven previous world title bids and amazing courage kept Benichou upright.
But Hoko poured in a series of two-handed attacks.
It was all over in the 10th.
Benichou emerged from a clinch with a cut mouth.
The referee took him across to the ringside doctor who insisted that the fight should be stopped.
We had a ball!
Pakistan heroes home in triumph
ANDY JALIL
PAKISTAN'S triumphant cricketers this week returned home to their second red carpet welcome within months.
In March they were received as World Champions by an ecstatic crowd after winning the Cricket World Cup for the first time.
And now they are back as winners of a gripping series against England.
Despite the accusations of ball-tampering, it's been a superb tour.
The Pakistanis produced cricket of the highest class.
From the start, their approach to the matches had been exciting with a dazzling display of flair from the batsmen.
They slammed centuries in almost every game before the internationals began.
The impulsive left- hander Aamir Sohail, on his first tour of England, showed the confidence of a veteran.
He started with a ‘ton’ in the first game and followed it with another two matches later.
But the high-point of his batting was the double-century in the Old Trafford Test.
Ramiz Raja was equally quick to make his mark with a big hundred in the opening first class game of the tour and then finished off with 135 in the last.
The architects of Pakistan's victorious tour were undoubtedly their formidable pacemen, Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis, but it was the batsmen who stole the limelight at the start.
Vice-captain Salim Malik, after gaining valuable experience in English conditions with Essex the previous season, had an amazing run of success.
He narrowly missed a century on FOUR occasions in his first six matches.
And then he battered his highest score of the tour, hitting 165 in the opening Test match.
His partnership of 322 with captain Javed Miandad set a new Pakistan record against England for the fourth wicket.
Malik's brilliant form took him to the top of the table for the tour with a total of 1,184 runs.
In Tests he averaged above 80 with 488 runs.
Much was expected of Inzamam ul Haq after his World Cup performance, but he struggled to find form on the slow English pitches.
Pakistan's most improved player by far was the diminutive left-hander Asif Mujtaba.
He batted at the pivotal position of number three and fully justified the captain's faith in him.
One of four Pakistan batsmen to hit over a thousand runs on this tour, he finished second in the averages with just under 60.
The Pakistanis' brilliant attacking style, specially in the field, won them the admiration of cricket-lovers despite the controversies of the tour.
While they were an exceptionally well-balanced side, it was their superior bowling that stood out and made the difference between them and England.
In Wasim and Waqar, Pakistan had a pair of superb fast bowlers who could be compared with the best in any era of cricket.
Their swinging ball was the key to Pakistan's success and both Wasim and Waqar were lethal with it.
They produced a late swing with the old ball at authentic pace.
Pitching it up to the batsman made it, quite often, unplayable.
Aqib Javed, a vastly improved bowler in the last year, was perfect as a back-up to the two great bowlers.
But watching the talented wrist-spinner Mushtaq Ahmed was sheer joy.
While maintaining accuracy, he bowls with a great deal of variation.
He flights the ball well and is already proving to be a master in disguising the googly.
It was no surprise when he was signed up to play for Somerset on a three-year contract after only his first tour of England.
The rumpus at Old Trafford apart, Javed Miandad, still a wonderful batsman, showed great maturity having taken over as captain from the charismatic Imran Khan.
The tourists came here principally to win the Test series and they proved to be worthy winners.
This made their defeat in the one-day internationals easier for them to bear.
It was a memorable tour by the Pakistanis and the bottom line must be the magnificent spectacle of cricket they provided for all who watched them.
LETHAL WEAPON…
Wasim Akram blasts in a bouncer against England batsman Robin Smith at The Oval
GLORY, GLORY…the Pakistani players celebrate their stunning victory in the 4th Texaco one-day international at Lord's
CONTROVERSY…
Waqar and Ramiz look on as the umpire examine the ball at Lord's.
The ball was changed during the match — and the ‘tampering’ row exploded in bitterness
Tour bosses back neutral umpires
REFS AREN'T THE ANSWER
Pakistan's managers, Khalid Mahmood and Intikhab Alam, are both backing the introduction of neutral umpires in international cricket.
At the end of a tour plagued by controversy, Intikhab said: ‘The ICC's code of conduct does not cover the umpires.
‘It's only for the players and the managers.
I think they have brought in the referee just to safeguard the umpires’ integrity.
All he seems to do is make sure that players don't misbehave and if they do, he is there to reprimand them.
‘He can't say anything to the umpires even if there was a complaint that they have been biased.’
Mahmood added: ‘The referee is not supposed to interfere in the traditional role of the umpire.
‘Pakistan have been officially pleading for the introduction of neutral umpires.
‘We have already used them in two series at home — against India when they had two umpires from England and against the West Indies when both umpires were Indian.
‘Both these series went without any anger or tension and this amply proves our point.
‘When a home country umpire makes a mistake then, unavoidably, an impression is created that he is giving an advantage to the home team.
‘I think the best solution to all this is to have third country umpires like we have in other sports.’
Adam'sa film star on the Sly
JOHN ROBINSON
MOVE over Sylvester Stallone — a real-life Rocky is on the way up!
Heavyweight boxer Adam Fogerty, top, who quit the ring to play professional Rugby League with Halifax, has now set his sights on film stardom.
He makes his screen debut in The Power Of One, a powerful Warner Brothers production which goes on general release this weekend.
The film stars Sir John Gielgud and is directed by John G. Avildsen, the man who made the Rocky blockbusters into box-office hits around the world.
Fogerty, 23, appears as a South African boxer — a role which required him to join the actors' union Equity.
‘It could be a big break for me,’ says 6ft 4in Adam, who is built in the muscle mould of movie megastar Stallone.
‘I was given a good speaking part and enjoyed making the film.
Who knows — it could lead to other offers.
That's what I'd like.’
But Fogerty's Hollywood dreams will not deter him from his other ambitions — such as becoming a League international just like his dad Terry.
He also has an open mind about returning to the ring at some point to pursue an impressive career with manager Terry Lawless.
In 20 fights, Fogerty lost only once on points.
And his victories included 15 knock-outs.
‘I'm under contract to play with Halifax for all of this season.
Then I'll be reviewing my future again,’ says Adam.
‘Financial considerations will obviously play a big part.
But my League prospects look good.
Halifax have made some great buys and we are set for a successful season.’
Fogerty, who runs The Lonsdale public house in Halifax, made 23 first-team appearances at Thrum Hall last season.
He adds: ‘After four years away from the game, I'm learning all over again.
Boxing is harder but you don't have to put your body on the line as often as in League.’
GET OFF, BOSS- YOU'RE RUBBISH!
Bradford No 2 Stuart Pearson won't be scared to substitute player-manager Frank Stapleton
ANDREW COLLOMOSSE
STUART PEARSON never shirked a challenge playing for Manchester United and England — and Bradford City fans will be glad to learn nothing has changed.
‘Pancho’ will be every bit as tough when he takes his place on the bench beside player-manager Frank Stapleton — even if it means shouting ‘come in number nine’to the boss.
Stapleton — who took over the Valley Parade hot seat in December — confirmed: ‘Stuart is the manager when I'm out playing.
There can be no other way of doing the job.
As a player, you get a feel of the game but you don't see everything.
If Stuart feels it's necessary for me to come off I will accept his decision.
‘I won't march off and ask what the hell is going on because I know he will be acting in the best interests of the team.
CHAT
‘I might be blowing a bit or struggling against a younger player and Stuart will feel we need a fresh pair of legs.
That's fair enough.
And we can always sit down and have a quiet chat about it afterwards!’
Stapleton, who is almost back to full fitness after a close-season knee operation, brought Pearson in because he wanted someone who could take charge in training — and have the respect of the players.
‘It would have been easy for me to bring in someone without any experience and ease them into the job,’ said Stapleton, now 36.
‘But I would not have been able to concentrate properly on my own game.
On the training ground I want to be just another player.’
And that's fine by Pearson, 43, formerly coach at West Brom.
‘It has to be a double act,’ he says.
‘We do the hard work together during the week.
Match day is the end product.
We may just need a bit of fine tuning on the day.’
Pearson, England's former centre-forward, is impressed with what he has seen so far at Valley Parade.
‘There's a lot of potential here and since coming I can see how much Frank has done to turn the playing side round.
‘They are a grand bunch of lads and they are honest.
There are no shirkers.
That's important.
But we need another two or three players before we can really talk seriously about a play-off place.’
That is easier said than done for cash-strapped City, who are said to be losing £10,000 a week.
But canny Stapleton has made transfer dealings which have brought in £600,000.
And so far he has spent only £25,000 on new players.
That's the kind of financial juggling that is desperately needed by Bradford.
‘The fans still talk about 1988 when City were just 90 minutes from a place in Division One,’ says Stapleton.
‘But that success created a wage structure the club could not afford.
‘The best players had to be sold and the nightmare slide into Division Three began.
‘The bottom line now is that the bank manager decides whether we can go out and buy a player.
I have had to be an accountant as well as a football manager.’
CAPPED
Valley Parade's answer to the dream team never linked up during their playing days — Pearson had moved on from Manchester United to West Ham before Stapleton, Ireland's most capped player, joined the Old Trafford side in the early eighties.
‘As strikers, we were always at opposite ends of the field so I never really came into contact with Frank on the park,’ recalls Pearson.
‘But I'll never forget his face when I collected a winners’ medal after West Ham beat Arsenal in the 1980 Cup final!’
Like Stapleton, Pearson spent most of his playing career at the top — and he sees that as an advantage in the lower divisions.
‘We know from our playing experience what can be achieved and how a successful club is run on and off the field,’ he says.
‘We know what we are aiming for and we know from experience how far players can go if they are prepared to work.
‘It is up to us to bring the levels of professionalism we were used to into this club.’
OLD BOYS…
Pearson puts his boss Stapleton through a training session at Bradford and (inset) the young Pancho in his Old Trafford heyday
SHOULDER TO LEAN ON Bradford boss Frank Stapleton is relying on his No 2 Stuart Pearson (above) to take over the reins when he's out on the park (far left).
And Stapleton insists that if he's not playing well, Pearson should yank him off
Pot back
FRED TRUEMAN meets JOE JOHNSON as he starts again after a heart attack
‘There are 800 professionals these days, so you have to be fit.
Make one mistake and even a kid of 13 goes for your jugular’
FRED TRUEMAN
I WENT to see Joe Johnson this week because I was fascinated to find out how he was rebuilding his career after the heart attack last year which threatened to stop him playing.
It did not take me long because the big grin with which Yorkshire's finest snooker player greeted me told its own story.
Joe has learned from the experience and is fitter, more disciplined and more determined than ever.
He is a great example to anyone who has a setback and it is marvellous to hear how he has put adversity behind him as he sets out on the long slog round the tough pro circuit once again.
Joe is, of course, best remembered as the first professional to overcome what had grown into a hoodoo.
From the moment the world championship reached its present stature by moving to The Crucible at Sheffield no title holder had gone beyond the first round the following year.
Players of the skill and stamina of Terry Griffiths, Steve Davis, Alex Higgins and Cliff Thorburn all followed the same pattern.
After the Lord Mayor's Show came the dust cart and the ignominy of defeat at the first hurdle next year.
infamy
Joe broke the mould.
He not only got through the first round but he reached the final again!
Then he lost to the man he had beaten the year earlier, the incredible, cool Steve Davis.
Those two finals in 1986 and 1987 were the climax of his 24-year career at the top of the game that has grown to be a part of the national heritage.
Over the same period, Joe has been one of the players who helped it develop from its infamy as the so-called sign of a mis-spent youth to become a symbol of sporting success.
It was not, in my case, the sign of a mis-spent youth at all.
I learned to play in the billiard rooms of the hotels Yorkshire used round the country when I began my cricket career.
Eddie Leadbeater, the leg spinner who played for Yorkshire just after the war, was my favourite opponent but Johnny Wardle, the old left-arm slow bowler, was a good player too and Ray Illingworth was a clever billiards player.
We played whenever we got the chance in the evenings and if it did nothing else it kept us out of the bar.
I developed so much skill that I could put together a 50 or 60 break and when I moved to York I played for the local Conservative club and reached the final of the York and District competition.
I believe I gave Joe a bit of a shock when I walked up to the table and played a few shots with him.
‘Look at this lad,’ he said.
‘He's just walked in here and picked up any old piece of wood and starting potting balls.
YOU'VE played before!’ he grinned.
Our session started out as a posed picture for the photographer but in the end I was showing the former world champion my favourite trick shot — jumping the white over two reds into the middle pocket — and he was advising me about the exact position of the white and then how to pull off one of those complicated round-the-table shots.
BEER
I offered to give him a game or two if he needed the practice but, as he soon told me, snooker training is a lot more complicated than that nowadays.
As you know, Joe has always carried a pound or two more than was absolutely necessary and he smoked and drank a few glasses of beer at the end of the day and, as he says, ‘it all adds up’.
These days are coming to an end now that he is 40 — his birthday was celebrated recently by his family and a few hundred close friends in the style of This Is Your Life at his local club.
And he looks a lot better for the change, although I have to tell you that by the time I had grilled him for an hour and tested him out on the snooker table I did notice that he reached for a cigarette.
I asked Joe about the heart attack and the changes that it had brought to his life as he settled down for his six hours' daily practice at the Manor Leisure Club in Yeadon, near Leeds-Bradford Airport.
‘It happened in the gym of this club right in the middle of my training,’ he recalled, ‘but it was not the training that brought on the attack although I had probably overdone things.
In fact, afterwards the doctor told me that the training had probably helped and that I might have been in a lot more serious trouble if I had not been so fit.
‘At first, it looked as though I might have to give up snooker completely but I have persuaded the doctor otherwise.
‘I have decided to get even fitter, to practise more and to cut down on the weight.
That's been successful to the extent that I have lost one-and-a-half stones and of course I feel better for that.
swim
‘Mostly I concentrate on the aerobics and swimming, both of which are available at this club, which also has snooker tables.
You can find me here any time of the day and in the evenings the family join me to work out and swim.’
All this training for a game that does not seem to be exactly demanding in a physical sense!
I knew players like the incomparable Joe Davis and I doubt if he did any more training than is entailed in going for a long walk.
Is this modern training necessary I asked Joe.
He pointed across the room to a slim lad wearing jeans and a T-shirt and potting balls from all angles.
‘That's Paul Hunter.
He's 13 and he is the most talented lad I have ever seen at his age.
If he had played me at the same age he'd have given me three blacks start and a beating.
‘I was in here one afternoon, practising and then playing a few frames.
Let me tell you I was playing out of my skin.
I played one lad and beat him in three successive frames.
Then I played a second lad and beat him too.
But when I played Paul he made three successive century breaks.
At 13!
‘There was I playing so well even I couldn't believe it and along comes this kid and keeps me off the table for three frames!
He will undoubtedly turn professional as soon as he is able.
‘The point I am making is that Paul is not the only young player around with that confidence.
They have all seen the game on TV, they know that if they get to the table they can build big breaks and if you make one mistake they go for your jugular.
‘That is why you have to be fit, to practise every day and all day and why the game is so competitive.
There are 800 professionals round the world now compared with the days 20 years ago when they struggled to find enough pros to compete for the world championship.
‘It does not matter if you are the world champion or a top-ranking player or if you have just won two tournaments in a row.
One mistake and your opponent, who might be half your age, steps straight to the table and attacks from the word go.
cricket
‘I am 25th in the rankings but it is so tight at the top that a few points will make a big difference.
That — and all the training and practice — gives me confidence to head back into the tournaments determined to succeed again.’
Joe also told me that he has a connection with cricket, although it is a comical one.
He was brought up in a rough area of Bradford and he and his mates used to play against the front shop of my old mate and skipper Brian Close.
‘I didn't know who he was at the time,’ Joe admits.
‘As far as I was concerned he was just a big fella who used to come out of the shop and bellow at us for playing against the wall.
‘But one day he got tired of bellowing — and came and joined in!’
He has another story that I liked and inevitably it concerned Alex Higgins, that brilliant player who has wasted his talent so often, but who has been one of the greatest stars and the source of endless tales.
hiding Joe remembers: ‘In my early days I had a big following in Barnsley, bigger even than at home in Bradford and I played Alex there one night for a few pounds.
‘The place was packed to the roof — to see me get a good hiding.
He beat me 3–0 in a five-frame match, 2–0 when we doubled the money and then we played a final frame for double-your-money again and when he reached the yellow he had already won the match.
‘Being Alex the showman he tries to pot a straight yellow one-handed and misses.
So I go to the table and pot yellow one-handed, green, brown, blue, pink and black — all one-handed.
You can imagine how that brought the house down.
‘Over the years hundreds of people have come up to me and said how they remember that night for my one-handed pots.
‘Over the years too the story has grown and at least one fan seems to recall that I potted every ball in the final frame one-handed!’
.
IN THE PINK: Being a snooker star has given Joe a luxury lifestyle, but he still practises six hours a day at his local club
SPIN BALL WiZARDs!
Joe can swerve a ball, but Fred gives him a few tips on spinning it, too — without picking the seam!
Main Pictures: HAROLD HOLBORN
CUED UP Joe Johnson gives Fred some tips on the finer points of snooker and (inset) a beaming Joe and wife Terryll share the moment of triumph when he won the world title in 1986
.
LUCKY BREAK: A young Joe shows the style that was to turn him into the world champ
NO GO MO-JO!
Johnston should never have said au revoir to the French League
SHAUN CUSTIS
MO JOHNSTON, Everton's goal hero against Aston Villa recently, should have stayed in France.
That's the shock verdict from his former Ibrox team-mate, veteran goalkeeper Dave McKellar.
Johnston had an unhappy time at Rangers after returning from French club Metz and his subsequent move to Everton has not yet proved a great success.
He was used as substitute — scoring against Manchester United — until being named in the starting line-up for the Villa game.
But McKellar reckons France suited Johnston down to the ground.
‘He was a much better technical player during his time in France.
You could see the difference.
I also think the lifestyle was better for him,’ says McKellar.
‘It's well known that Maurice likes a night out but the media attention he gets in Britain makes it difficult for him to enjoy it.
‘Maurice only had to walk out of the Ibrox ground and the abuse he took was amazing.
He can never get away from it all in this country.
CHARITY
‘I don't think people know the real Maurice Johnston.
He's one of the most generous people I've ever met.
‘I'd only been at Rangers five minutes when he offered me the use of his villa in Florida.
‘And no-one realises how much charity work he does.
He puts in loads of time but he never talks about it.’
McKellar has retired after an incredible run of 17 clubs in 20 years in league soccer — on both sides of the border.
But signing for Rangers in his mid-thirties, when the big time seemed well behind him, gave him his biggest thrill of them all.
‘The likes of Manchester United, Liverpool, Arsenal and Celtic would all like to argue but Rangers are Britain's biggest club,’ he says.
‘I've played on all the big grounds and in front of 52,000 at Old Trafford but nothing's a patch on what you get at Ibrox.’
Just ask Mo-Jo!
But Everton's recent success this season hoisted them into second place — and Johnston's Goodison story may not be over yet.
Manager Kendall was prompted to salute Johnston's contribution after his latest strike.
He said: ‘I'm delighted with the work he has done in training and the commitment he has shown when I have asked him to play.’
Will he now ask Mo to play more regularly?
Watch this space.
FRENCH LEAVE…
Johnston, back home, above, and retired McKellar, inset
Munro magic
JOCKEY Alan Munro has fond memories of Doncaster.
It was there that he rode Evichstar in the Lincoln Handicap in 1990 — and notched his first big race victory.
His followers at the Yorkshire track have raked it in over the last five years with a 1 level stake on all his mounts showing more than 45 to the good.
Veteran rider Bruce Raymond also shows a healthy plus of 53.
Those who follow the favourites will tell you that the best bet is two-year-old handicaps, which have produced a profit of 14 to a 1 level stake over the last five seasons.
MUNRO: Tracking success
Back to the front
Rodber returns north to gun for glory
TERRY GODWIN
SOLDIER Tim Rodber is about to buck the trend in English rugby by returning to his northern roots.
A newly-commissioned lieutenant in the Green Howards, the 6ft 6in, 16st 8lb back-row man has been posted to Catterick Barracks, just a drop-kick away from his Yorkshire birthplace.
The move means 23-year-old Rodber will be available to play for the Northern Division — to the delight of the selectors.
And it contrasts with double Grand Slam winners Will Carling, Jon Webb, Rory Underwood, Rob Andrew, Mick Skinner and Peter Winterbottom who all went south to further their careers.
Northern team secretary Stan Bagshaw said: ‘If England don't select Tim it will be superb for us.
He's a Yorkshireman through and through — and he's already told us he would like to play for the Northern Division.
It's great news.’
Rodber packed down for the Midlands against his northern brethren in last season's Divisional Championship.
Now he will be available for the Northern XV which plays Wales B on October 14 and the Springboks at Elland Road on November 10.
That is unless, like Wade Dooley whom Rodber joined in the England pack against Scotland and Ireland last season, he is picked for the Test against the South Africans four days later.
One thing won't change.
Versatile Rodber, who can play in the second or back row, will continue his club career at Northampton.
He has been helped there by two years under the expert tuition of All Black Wayne Shelford.
BOOST
Despite being born in Richmond, the town that also spawned Rob Andrew, Rodber has spent most of his life in the south.
At school in Hampshire he played county standard hockey and cricket.
He then moved to Oxford Polytechnic before launching his army career at Sandhurst.
His switch back to the north is a boost after the recent moves by so many of England's top players.
It has irked the Northern selectors that the talent drain has largely led to London, the side that has dominated the Divisional Championship in recent years.
With Rodber in their ranks, and the welcome return of Dooley after two-years’ self-imposed exile, maybe the North will have plenty to shout about when they face London on December 19.
BACK ROW…
Tim in his England uniform
FRONT LINE…
Lieutenant T Rodber of the Green Howards — still just as hard to get past
Ones who headed south EXILES…
England's Rob Andrew, Will Carling and Peter Winterbottom
Super Stewart
For the record
PAUL STEWART is now a 2.3 million midfield player at Liverpool but he is the first to admit it needed a referee's red card to make it all happen.
Stewart, who started his career with Blackpool, was signed by Tottenham for 1.7 million as a striker from Manchester City in July, 1988.
But he was struggling to score goals and the fans were turning against him until New Year's Day 1991.
Then Paul Gascoigne was sent off against Manchester United and Stewart moved back to fill his place.
He did so well he has since won three England caps as a midfielder and Liverpool decided he was the man they wanted, although they have tried him back in his striking role in recent games.
Club: Liverpool Position: Midfield Age: 27 Height: 5ft 11ins Weight: 11st 10lbs Birthplace: Manchester Previous clubs: Blackpool, Manchester City, Tottenham
Taylor's world
MANCHESTER CITY chairman Peter Swales' faith in England boss Graham Taylor is unlimited.
He thinks Taylor can win the World Cup.
Swales, influential chairman of the International Selection Committee, says of the manager's job: ‘It destroyed Don Revie; it didn't do Ron Greenwood too much good and Bobby Robson didn't like it one bit.
Now Taylor has experienced it and has to live with it.
But he strikes me as being the best of any of them.
‘Despite what happened in the European Championship in Sweden, I'll be very surprised if he isn't successful.
I haven't seen a team in Europe that's a great deal better than England.
‘If we have players of the calibre of Paul Gascoigne and John Barnes, we can win the World Cup in 1994.
But there can be no guarantees.’
HANDS UP CASTRO
A quiet round of golf has fired up title-hungry Henry
FRANKIE TAYLOR
HENRY WHARTON still calls Fidel Castro by his original fighting name of Slugger O'Toole but he reckons it won't matter what name he uses after they clash at Elland Road soccer ground on September 23.
Wharton is determined to add Castro's British super-middleweight title to his own Commonwealth crown and leave Fidel out in the cold.
And Wharton, 25, is convinced he is ready to move on to European and world title glory thanks to a new exercise — the sedate game of golf!
FRUSTRATED
He explains: ‘I'm fitter than ever, physically and mentally, and golf has been a big help.
‘I used to sit around between training and after meals and that meant putting on extra pounds that had to be worked off.
‘Now I'm out on the golf course whenever I can, walking over four miles and learning to cope with the frustrations of the game.
‘It teaches you to be patient and determined, and reminds you that it takes hard work and practice when things aren't going right.’
He adds: ‘I'm much more settled in my mind and I'm confident I can reach the top.
‘I used to run two or three miles — now I do six or seven and my Leeds trainer Terry O'Neill struggles to keep up on his mountain bike that has 12 gears!’
Big-punching Wharton is also free of the agony in his right hand that plagued him for months and reduced him to a one-armed fighter when he was held to a draw by Londoner Lou Gent in November.
It was a shock for Wharton who has won his other 14 battles.
He sighs: ‘The rights I threw at Lou weren't punches, I was just feeling his face and hoping to line up the target for my lefts.’
Wharton, from York, has had three wins since, including an eight round stoppage of Aussie Rod Carr who he outpointed for the Commonwealth title in June last year.
He reveals: ‘I have regular treatment on my hands with massage and ultrasound to make sure the inevitable bruises from training don't develop into harmful lumps or calluses.’
Wharton's manager Mickey Duff predicts: ‘Henry will beat Castro and take his number three spot in the European ratings.
‘Nigel Benn is number two, but he's lined up for a world title shot with Italian Mauro Galvano so Henry will be all set to fight for the vacant European title.
‘Wharton is a genuine attraction in the north.
There will be more than 10,000 fans at the Elland Road show and we'll draw 250,000 with Castro's Sheffield stablemate Herol Graham defending his British middleweight title against Frank Grant on the same the bill.’
Wharton turned pro in 1989 with the dubious distinction of having been disqualified in his ABA national final.
He smiles: ‘I've grown up a lot and I'm now enjoying important fights that used to fill me with nerves.
‘I'm sorry for Slugger, but I'm going to have fun beating him.’
PUTT IT THERE…
Wharton, right, says his new hobby, golf, has got him in par-fect shape to slug O'Toole — now known as Fidel Castro — and grab title glory at Elland Road later this month.
Below, his hand injury is now fully cured Pictures: ROSS PARRY
NO GLOVE LOST…
Castro, top, and Mickey Duff
tips for Wilko's golden wonders
England's champs set out on the glory trail with a warning to keep their cool
I back Leeds, as long as they are all present and correct!
BOBBY COLLINS /STAN LIVERSEDGE
BOBBY COLLINS believes Leeds can win the European Cup — and recalls the night they ran up their best Euro victory.
It was September 17, 1969, when they put TEN past little Lyn Oslo in a first-leg, first round match of the European Cup.
Leeds were simply unstoppable that night.
Mick Jones hit a hat-trick, while Allan Clarke, skipper Billy Bremner and midfield general Johnny Giles all bagged doubles.
Mike O'Grady also got on the record-breaking 10–0 score sheet.
True, Leeds don't expect to score 10 against Stuttgart, their first round European opponents this season — but Collins believes Wilkinson can plot the downfall of the Germans.
Collins, the pint-sized No 10 who used to skipper Leeds, assessed their European chances after watching them in the Makita Tournament: ‘While they lost to Sampdoria, they never played the way they usually play.
‘When they go into Europe, they will be a different proposition.
They will be very formidable.
I think Leeds can win the European Cup this season — they'll go very close.’
Collins wore size 4½ boots but feared no-one.
He still lives on the outskirts of his adopted city close on 30 years after he signed for them.
BATTLE
At the time, Don Revie was fighting to keep Leeds out of the Third Division.
The fee was 25,000 — and Collins ignored the advice of a friend when he signed.
He stayed overnight at his friend's house, en route from Everton to Elland Road, and left with these words ringing in his ears: ‘Don't sign on the dotted line.
You never know who else might come in.’
It was a Thursday and Collins had to sign by five o'clock to be eligible to play on Saturday.
He phoned his friend to tell him: ‘Sorry, but I've just signed.’
Leeds were European Cup Winners' Cup finalists in 1973, European Cup finalists in 1975 and won the Old Fairs Cup in 1968 and 1971.
Now it's Howard Wilkinson's turn to try to bring a European trophy back to Elland Road, as Revie did before him.
Collins says of Wilkinson: ‘Any man who wins two championships in three years must be good — he certainly can't be bad!’
Collins should know — he can now look back on a managerial career which spanned Huddersfield, Hull City and Barnsley.
But while former Leeds team-mates like Eddie Gray, Billy Bremner and Allan Clarke tried their luck in management at Elland Road, Collins didn't get the chance.
Gray, Bremner and Clarke were all deemed to have bungled the job.
But Collins — who admits that ‘anyone would like the chance to manage Leeds’— defends Gray and Bremner when he says: ‘Neither was given enough time.’
As Collins looks at the current Leeds squad, costing around 10 million, he sees real depth.
DEVIL
And while it cost Leeds 750,000 to re-sign Scott Sellars — a player who left Elland Road for Blackburn for around 35,000 — Collins says: ‘Wilkinson is no fool.
Maybe the fee is debatable but Sellars has a good touch.
‘He can beat people and put the ball where he wants.
There aren't many who can do that.
‘Sellars is one of the neatest and daintiest players in the game, though you need to show you've got a bit of devil, as well.
You have to be able to look after yourself and I think he can do that, though maybe he doesn't dish it out.’
TOP TEN…
Collins, top, with his No 10 shirt, and below good buy Sellars
DION LEARNS THE HARD WAY
Dublin bottled it once, but now he is tough enough to fight back
‘I'm desperately sorry for him’— Fergie
STEVE BATES
MANCHESTER UNITED's £1 million powerhouse Dion Dublin's Old Trafford dream turned into a nightmare last week — carried off on a stretcher with a shattered leg.
But mixing it with the hard men of football is no problem for a kid brought up the hard way on the mean streets of Leicester.
Yet before he made the astonishing leap from Paupers' Alley with Cambridge United to Millionaires' Row with Manchester City Dublin, 23, had to learn his lessons the hard way.
He was told to toughen up!
His tutor was Cambridge boss John Beck who took a gamble on the lad who was nearly booted out because he had no bottle.
Before his horrific injury against Palace, Dublin must have still pinched himself after grabbing the headlines with his later winner at Southampton.
Eric Young's tackle proved a rude awakening.
Now he is facing his toughest fight yet — back to fitness after suffering a fractured fibula and damaged ankle ligaments.
Early estimates are that he will be out of action for five months.
His new boss Alex Ferguson says: ‘I feel desperately sorry for Dion.
He has just hit his best form and now he gets this injury.
We are going to miss him.’
SHADOW
But old boss Beck knows Dublin will come back fighting: ‘The lad has battled hard to get to the big time and he won't forget where he's come from.’
Dublin's move from the war ground of Cambridge to the forefront of the Premier League with Alex Ferguson's £16 million team shocked Old Trafford.
As one of five kids living in the shadow of Filbert Street, Dublin wrote to clubs all over the country and landed a chance at Norwich.
They turfed him out as an 18-year-old before Cambridge gave him a lifeline trial.
But that nearly ended in disaster, too, with Dublin just 90 minutes away from being on soccer's scra-pheap for good.
Cambridge reckoned Dublin was just too soft for their rough-house style.
But as he banked £1 million last week, Abbey Stadium boss John Beck was glad they took the gamble.
He said: ‘We were very close to showing him the door.
He broke his nose early on in his spell here and was loath to get stuck in.
‘He wasn't keen to put his head where it hurts and that doesn't go down well here.
At the time, we didn't think he had the bottle.
TARGET
‘We were on the verge of letting him go because we had George Reilly and a couple of other strikers on the books.
‘One day we were short in defence and he offered to play centre-half.
During that game he did well and we realised he had something.
He only ever played there once but it convinced us he'd make it.’
Dublin's goals and aggressive style made him a target for several top clubs.
But when no-one came in with a firm bid Beck sent a video compilation of all Dublin's goals to every First Division club.
It worked.
Within days United, Spurs, Everton and Chelsea lodged offers.
Beck added: ‘It was a reminder of what he could do.
It wasn't just the number of goals but the variety that was impressive.
It must have done the trick!’
Ferguson confirmed it.
He says: I still wasn't sure about him until I saw the video of his goals.
I watched in admiration.
I hadn't realised he could score like that.’
SUBLIME
Dublin will need bottle — the quality Cambridge worried about in those early days — to cope with his cruel injury and the long slog back to full fitness.
There are enough big money players cut down in their prime to give the new boy nightmares.
Remember Paul Parker, John Salako, Frank McAvennie, Les Ferdinand, and, of coure, Paul Gascoigne.
United fans have been brought up on the sublime skills of attackers like Best, Law, Charlton, Stuart Pearson, Jimmy Greenhoff and Frank Stapleton.
The critics were already dubious that a six-foot plus, coloured battering ram called Dublin could tilt the title balance for Fergie!
But Dublin had no doubts.
He had said: ‘I hope my first goal will help me settle and show I can score more for the club.
I see no reason why I shouldn't continue to score goals in the top flight.
The playes at United have such quality that it will bring the out the best in me.
‘I felt overawed just looking around Old Trafford — but I'm going to enjoy it here.’
Dublin's old gaffer Beck understood why some fans remained doubtful.
‘You can't blame the fans for being sceptical,’ said Beck.
‘They've got every right to be.
I would be too if I didn't know the lad.
‘The fans up there don't know him and probably think he's a big centre forward who can just head a ball — but they're wrong.
VOLLEY
‘They must give him a chance.
He's a tremendous athlete with a good first touch and technique.
‘He can score every type of goal in the book.
Long or short range headers above or below the keeper, inside the box or outside, on the volley or off his backside — he's scored the lot at Cambridge and Alex Ferguson thinks that's what United need.’
After three years at Cambridge there's nothing soft about Dublin now.
DREAM BECOMES A NIGHTMARE…
Dublin cannot hide his agony as he is wheeled on a stretcher from the Old Trafford pitch
DREAM THAT WAS BROKEN Cambridge United boss John Beck (inset) took a gamble on Dublin and he took his chance to land a dream move to Manchester United.Now that dream is, for the moment, shattered
For the record
Deadly Davies
WELSH wizard Jonathan Davies has been a prolific scorer since quitting rugby union to turn professional with Widnes in January 1989.
Capped eight times for Great Britain and twice for Wales, the former LLanelli star has notched the fastest 1,000 career points in the history of the game.
He reached the milestone in just under three years — but his 109 matches were five more than it took Lewis Jones, of Leeds, to hit the same target in the 1950s.
Davies holds the Chemics' record for most points in a season with 342 from 30 tries and 112 goals, including two drop goals.
He also shares the club match record of 34 points with Andy Currier.
And on his debut for Wales, he set two new records with eight goals and 24 points in the 68–0 defeat of Papua New Guinea at Swansea.
On his first tour to New Zealand in 1990, he emerged as leading points scorer with 92 from six tries and 34 goals.
His scoring feats include a hat-trick of tries against Wigan in a Charity Shield final at Swansea.
He has a personal best tally of 9 goals in a match.
Club: Widnes.
Position: Utility Back Age: 29 Weight: 12 stone 7 pounds Height: Five foot eight inches
CLARK GETS IN THE SWING
HOWARD CLARK used to gorge himself on golf titles.
But the sweet taste of success has gone sour over recent years as he slumped into the doldrums.
Now he is trying to recapture his old swing having attempted a Faldo-type swing refit which hasn't worked.
Clark is too good a player to slide into obscurity, but a brittle temperament hasn't helped the recovery process.
After winning the Yorkshire Amateur Championship in 1973 and playing in the Walker Cup it was uphill all the way topped off with Ryder Cup success during the Eighties.
Those days must seem a long time ago.
Yorkshire golf fans will be hoping they aren't gone forever.
KOP THAT, BOSS
New boy Neal shoots from the lip
BRIAN MADLEY
PHIL NEAL, hero of the Kop and 50 times an international, last week stepped up to coach the England team.
He'll be at manager Graham Taylor's side in Spain on Wednesday.
But England management and Neal don't mix easily.
It's a courageous appointment by Taylor because Neal has publicly savaged two of the three England bosses he played for.
Indeed Neal is much more biting in his criticism than he was in his tackles.
Neal's autobiography, Life At The Kop, leaves no-one in any doubt about his opinions of England bosses, Don Revie and Bobby Robson.
He sums up Revie's reign by saying; ‘He enjoyed ‘dishing it out’ but couldn't take the pressure when the tide turned.
‘Many of us felt he should have had the courage to admit that the job wasn't working out instead of using his reputation as England manager to negotiate a lucrative overseas contract and then leaving everyone high and dry without a second thought.
‘In the beginning the Revie era promised so much, but in the end it turned out to be one of our national game's most unsatisfactory episodes.’
FORGOTTEN
Neal, now assistant coach at Coventry, gained his first cap under Revie against Wales in 1976 but then seemed to be forgotten.
‘There were a number of good full-backs around and Revie seemed determined to use all of them.
‘First he tried Dave Clement of QPR, then Mick Mills was given a run before he introduced Colin Todd — a naturally gifted central defender — at right back.
‘He went on to try Trevor Cherry then gave a cap to John Gidman before he somehow remembered me and let me have a second chance.
I began to believe all those stories about the Revie selection policy.
‘He chopped and changed the side at whim and never allowed any team he selected to settle down and establish a set pattern of play.’
Neal is particularly critical of Revie's famous bingo and carpet golf sessions.
‘I felt we were treated like children rather than experienced professionals and I know many of the other lads agreed with me.
‘Gerry Francis, who was then the England captain, was forever trying to get out of taking part in the silly games but the boss would have none of it.’
Bobby Robson comes in for just as much a mauling from Neal who wrote: ‘His attitude to the game was different from anything I had experienced before.
‘His whole approach was based on fear.
Not, as you might expect, on fear of him but instead on a fear of the opposition.
‘A typical Robson team-talk would go on for hours — no wonder the Ipswich lads in the squad had nicknamed him Mogadon.
QUALIFIER
‘I remember once he called the squad together ‘for ten minutes’ just before we were due to go to dinner.
Three hours later, with most of us starving, the head waiter knocked on the door, threw Robson the keys and asked us to lock up the restaurant when we'd finished.’
Neal recalls Robson's first match, a European Championship qualifier in Denmark.
‘He had us living in fear of the Great Danes for four days before the match.
He showed us videos of them in action and I was convinced he was going to bring out the old Kirk Douglas film The Vikings to empha-sise the point,’ said Neal.
Neal played 11 times under Robson and says: ‘I began to feel uneasy about the way England squads were being selected.
Too many different players were winning odd caps and the continuity that had been so important under Ron Greenwood seemed to be disappearing.
PRIDE
‘I felt there was a real danger that we would turn full circle and go back to the dark days under Revie when the manager's indecision was final.’
Neal replaces Alan Ball, who vacated the job he cherished most, coaching Graham Taylor's England squad, with pride and dignity.
‘It was a fantastic experience and I loved every minute of it,’ says Ball.
‘But both Graham and I knew it was impractical for me to continue in the job and remain as manager of Exeter.’
‘No matter what the fans and the media may think about him, I regard Taylor as a true professional and he has to get his priorities right.
‘I'll miss the involvement but it's too important for England to qualify for the World Cup finals to take any chances.’
It is perhaps ironic that Neal — so critical of the selections of Revie and Robson — arrives back on the England scene at a time when Taylor is coming in for internal FA criticism for picking too many players.
They have known each other since they were Division Three full-backs together, Taylor at Lincoln and Neal at Northampton.
As they talk over old times in Santander this week, where England start their rehabilitation course after the Swedish nightmare, perhaps Neal can start persuading the boss that giving every English player in the Premier League a cap is not the way to get to America.
Christopher Columbus did it with a smaller crew than Taylor has tried so far.
GRAHAM TAYLOR
PHIL NEAL (right) and the England bosses he played for Robson (above), Revie (inset above), and Greenwood (top)
NIGEL'S IN POLE POSITION
Who'll be THE PEOPLE ClubCall British Star of Sport'92?
But Linford could win battle of speed kings
BILL BRADSHAW
WHAT a sporting year 1992 has been!
And you, our loyal Super Sport readers, can make your own choice about who should be honoured in The People's British Star of Sport 1992 merit awards.
Already, two major contenders are bound to figure in the voting: Nigel Mansell, just crowned Formula One world champion — and the winner of our inaugural Star of Sport title last year, and Linford Christie, Great Britain's Olympic captain and 100 metres gold medal winner.
This year Mansell has finally claimed the championship he has chased for a dozen years.
Will he be your choice this time?
Or will it be Christie, the sprinter who, at 32, became the oldest man ever to win the blue riband sprint title.
When it mattered, Linford responded with the run of his life to beat a world class field in Barcelona.
There are other contenders too.
The men can't have it all their own way — Sally Gunnell's 400 metres hurdles gold thrilled the nation and Will Carling captained England to the Rugby Union World Cup final and then to another Grand Slam success.
WINNERS
But we want more than just our top award decided by you, the readers.
We want you to select your top performers in all the mainstream sports — with the exception of soccer.
The soccer awards have already been determined by our famous merit marks system, the original newspaper marking scheme.
David Batty, of champions Leeds, and all our positional and divisional winners, will join the other winners YOU vote for at a splendid awards ceremony next month at the Dorchester Hotel, London.
Who, for example, will be your choice in the cricket category?
Graham Gooch, averaging 70 during his years as England skipper, had another solid summer — with successful Essex too — but he has plenty of competition from the likes of Alec Stewart and the graceful David Gower.
This year we have added a special Olympian category in addition to the athletes' section to reflect both the track and field achievements (Christie, Gunnell and Kriss Akabusi's 400 metres hurdles bronze) and winners away from the stadium — Chris Terry (archery individual and team bronzes) and gold-winning cyclist Chris Boardman and boxer Robin Reid (bronze).
We haven't forgotten the top TV sports, such as snooker.
Who is the people's choice on the green baize?
Stephen Hendry, the 1992 world champion, thrilled the watching millions with a glorious comeback to defeat Jimmy White in the Embassy world final.
And what about Rugby League's top performers?
Martin Offiah's speed and power has become one of the most thrilling features of the game.
In racing, the jockey's title on the flat seems booked for Michael Roberts.
But is your vote?
It's all down to you.
Your votes count by mail or phone — and by telephoning your choice you have the chance to join us at our superb Dorchester luncheon.
Five phone voters will be chosen at random by computer to join the fun and rub shoulders with the stars.
Each winner will, of course, be invited to bring a partner to the Dorchester.
So vote now!
Study our category listings and make your choice.
And don't forget to make an additional overall choice for the year's top performer…
For he, or she, could be The People's Star of Sport 1992.
THE PEOPLE AND CLUBCALL STAR OF SPORT VOTING FORM
Look at the lists of sportsmen and women beside this voting form and from each category pick the person you believe has been the top performer in his or her sport over the past 12 months.
Now write the letter next to that person's name in the box by the appropriate sports category below.
And don't forget to name your nomination for The People-ClubCall's British Star of Sport 1992.
ATHLETICS
A
LINFORD CHRISTIE 900
B
KRISS AKABUSI 901
C
DAVID GRINDLEY 902
D
CURTIS ROBB 903 ESALLY GUNNELL 904
F
DEREK REDMOND 905
RUGBY UNION
A
WILL CARLING 906
B
SIMON GEOGHEGAN 907
C
CRAIG CHALMERS 908
D
RORY UNDERWOOD 909
E
EMYR LEWIS 910
F
WADE DOOLEY 911
BOXING
A
LENNOX LEWIS 920
B
CHRIS EUBANK 921
C
PAUL HODKINSON 922
D
COLIN McMILLAN 923
E
PAT CLINTON 924
F
NIGEL BENN 925
SNOOKER
A
STEPHEN HENDRY 931
B
JIMMY WHITE 932
C
JOHN PARROTT 933
D
STEVE DAVIS 934
E
ALAN McMANUS 935
F
JOHN DOHERTY 936
CRICKET
A
GRAHAM GOOCH 937
B
CHRIS LEWIS 938
C
PHIL De FREITAS 939
D
IAN BOTHAM 940
E
DAVID GOWER 941
F
ALEC STEWART 942
HORSE RACING
A
MICHAEL ROBERTS 943
B
PAT EDDERY 944
C
LESTER PIGGOTT 945
D
GEORGE DUFFIELD 946
E
PETER SCUDAMORE 947
F
ADRIAN MAGUIRE 948
RUGBY LEAGUE
A
MARTIN OFFIAH 949
B
ANDY PLATT 950
C
GARRY SCHOFIELD 951
D
GRAHAM STEADMAN 952
E
GARY CONNOLLY 953
F
DEAN BELL 954
GOLF
A
COLIN MONTGOMERY 967
B
NICK FALDO 968
C
IAN WOOSNAM 969
D
SANDY LYLE 970
E
DAVID GIFFORD 971
F
STEVE RICHARDSON 972
OLYMPIAN
A
LINFORD CHRISTIE 990
B
SIMON TERRY 991
C
CHRIS BOARDMAN 992
D
SALLY GUNNELL 993
E
STEVE REDGRAVE 994
F
ROBIN REID 995
DEREK REDMOND
VROOMING GREAT…
Nigel Mansell receives his British Star of Sport award last year
DAVID BATTY…the Leeds and England star is the Merit Award winner
GOLDEN GREATS…
Barcelona gold medallists Christie and (inset) Gunnell
FRANKIE TAYLOR
SLUGGER O'TOOLE did himself a big favour in reverting to his real name of Fidel Castro!
The IBF's latest ‘world ratings’ have O'Toole at No 6 and Castro at No 9 so if Fidel keeps on winning he could wind up fighting himself for their title!
Mike is king of the castle
TERRY GODWIN
HE has been called spiv, ticket tout, sport's shadiest wheeler-dealer and sometimes a lot worse.
But Mike Burton is also the best in the business of sports hospitality and that's why the Welsh Rugby Union appointed him to run their corporate hospitality.
The die-hards will frown but Burton will prove to be a man in a million.
I reckon that at the very least, £1 million will be heading back into the game over the next 10 years thanks to the WRU's shrewd deal in supplying Burton with 500 tickets for every Arms Park international, plus their cup final.
It's his job to sell packages to businessmen at the adjacent Cardiff Castle.
And he laughs at the idea that the Prince of Darkness will now become King of the Castle.
‘I've been dogged by humbug for years,’ he told me.
‘I've been called everything.
But I'm a prop, so words don't hurt me.
‘I tell you this, the WRU have shown the way in making this official.
And I'm proud of what I've done and delighted that this enables me to put cash back into the game.’
The scheme will work with clubs either selling their tickets back to the WRU at a fixed rate or by becoming involved in profit-sharing.
But it will not limit Burton's already well-established deals with smaller Welsh clubs.
He has lost count of the clubs he has helped, buying their entire ticket alloca-tion.
The clubs use the cash either to improve facilities or go on tour.
His only worry is that the 500 official tickets he will be getting will not be enough.
At Twickenham, the top-priced hospitality package is £405.
Burton will not be charging that much.
‘But the difference now is that the profits go back into the game and the WRU are to be congratulated on their decisions to tap in to the funds that are available.’
PSST!
You want a ticket?
Burton is your man for he has 500 for every game at the Arms Park and it is official
PIPE DOWN CLOUGH!
TIM TAYLOR
BRIAN CLOUGH loves to stand in front of the TV cameras saying: ‘I should pack all this up…
I'm shot…
I'm too old for this game.’
He knows it will always get a laugh.
Trouble is, if you keep saying something over and over, people start to believe you so he should beware.
He's 57, his Forest team is in a mess and his audience might soon start to think: ‘Yes, it might not be a bad idea if old big head did hang up his boots.’
And it would be sad if Clough, who has always carried the standard for fine football, went out of the game a beaten man.
Forest have had a lot of dodgy results lately.
His last three big-money sign-ings still at the club — Carl Tiler, Kingsley Black and Ray McKinnon — cost a total of £3.75m.
None of them commands a regular place in the team.
He tossed out Lee Chapman, who then became a major force in the Leeds team that won the League last season.
Stuart Pearce, unhappy about his wages, has lost form.
Des Walker went off to Italy in the summer then Clough allowed Darren Wassall, another class defender, to drift out of his contract and join Derby.
And he has sold Teddy Sheringham to Spurs before signing a proven replacement.
The team needs money spent on it, at a time when the club is halfway through a ground improvement scheme costing almost £10m.
They will get only £2m of that back as a government grant!
COMPLEX
But the ways of Clough are complex and, to the outsider, often strange if not downright perverse.
He left Derby many moons ago complaining they gagged him.
Yet this same champion of free speech has for years refused to hold a press conference after matches.
Not that this stopped him going through the hoops for photographers when Forest got Nigel Mansell down to their ground the other week.
But then, of course, the club had a desperate need of publicity to keep their generous new sponsors happy.
None of this should detract from Clough's monumental achievements in the game.
He has always turned out teams who, until recently, were the cream of the crop in terms of style.
Watching Forest in full flight, has always been a joy.
The standards of skill and behaviour from his players have always set his teams apart.
It will be a crime if he slides out of the game with a whimper, lashed to death by the very critics he deliberately snubs.
STRUGGLING: Clough
SORRY DURRANT
Super Macs keep Ian out
‘It would be nice to start with a win, but a draw will do for me’— ANDY ROXBURGH
ALLAN HERRON
SCOTLAND'S Mac maestros stand between Ian Durrant and a dream World Cup comeback for Scotland.
In fairytale land, Durrant would kick off against the Swiss on Wednesday night.
It would cap a courageous return by a player whose career was nearly destroyed by injury.
But this isn't fairyland.
It's Berne.
And it is Scotland's opening World Cup qualifier — there's no room for senti-ment.
So Scotland coach Andy Roxburgh will surely stick with the midfielders who made mincemeat of the CIS in Norrkoping last July.
Paul McStay, Gary McAllister, Stuart McCall and Brian McClair hit a dazzling peak of midfield control in the 3–0 European Championship win over the CIS.
Now Roxy has no option but to say: ‘Same again, please!’
Durrant is delighted to be included in the squad, but don't look for him playing from the start.
It was the goals from McStay, McAllister and McClair which gave the Scots a stirring win in Norrkoping, and the bite of McCall which gave them a formidable balance.
Wisely, Roxburgh won't change it, but says: ‘By including Durrant it gives me an added dimension and an option to our midfield play.’
STREAKY
It suggests that the 26-year-old Ranger will be a bench man until such time as someone takes a knock, runs out of steam or the game has been won with some 20 minutes to go.
If there are any changes to the side which beat the CIS it will be the return of Maurice Malpas for Tom Boyd at full back and Gordon Durie taking over from Kevin Gallacher up front.
But Boyd and Gallacher will be on standby, along with streaky striker Duncan Ferguson, probably the best youngster in British football.
Roxburgh is now a veteran on the international scene.
Along with Jack Charlton of Eire he is the only manager to survive from the 24 involved in the Italy World Cup finals just two years ago.
But he remains the realist.
He says: ‘I still see my role as one of privilege.
To be in charge of a Scotland team is something that gives me nothing but pride.’
He says that the minimum return he wants from his visit to Berne's all-seated Wankdorf stadium is a draw.
‘It would be nice to start a World Cup group with a win as we did in Norway, but a draw would be a good start for us.
The Swiss underestimated the Scots mentality when we played there a year ago.
They thought they had cuffed us when they led 2–0 at half-time.
They began to think of Sweden.
They misjudged us.
‘We came back to get the vital point.
Now they know what we are about and that will help us, and worry them.’
Roxburgh knows that the Italians are favourites to win his group and that the odds are stacked heavily against the Scots qualifying for a sixth successive appearance in the World Cup finals.
But he shrugs and says: ‘We just do our best and prepare as well as possible for each game as it comes.
‘We start with the Swiss and we are ready.
I'm confident we'll get something from the match but at this stage I'm not saying we're going to win it.
Let's wait and see what happens.’
If the Macs of the mid-line are on song then I fancy the Scots to nail a win.
EURO HERO…
McAllister was a star of the Scottish midfield in Sweden
HAMMER OF THE CIS!
Paul McStay helped mastermind the win in Norrkoping — the Scots will pray for more of the same in Berne on Wednesday night
JOKER ALLY…
McCoist clowning with Duncan Ferguson yesterday
Revenge mission of the cheeky Chappie
ALLAN HERRON
THE Scots face a man with a mission on Wednesday.
Stephane Chapuisat is proud to be Swiss — and fed up to the teeth with being a loser.
Borussia Dortmund striker Chapuisat is the most successful Swiss player ever to play in Germany's Bundesliga.
And he is the number one threat to the Scots in Berne.
He says: ‘We should never have allowed Scotland to draw 2–2 a year ago in our European tie in Berne.
‘It was our own fault.
We were naive then.
It must not happen again.’
Chapuisat, who scored 14 goals for Dortmund last season after his £850,000 transfer from Uerdingen is desperate for international success.
‘Switzerland have not qualified for a major tournament since the 1966 World Cup finals and have grown used to losing.
I'm hoping that I can help to change this attitude,’ he says.
He is still haunted by the mistakes that cost his country so dearly in the European ties last season.
‘We went to Romania and made the mistake of playing for a draw and lost to a late goal,’ he said.
‘That goal that made sure the Scots qualified.’
Chapuisat, whose ambition is to play in Italy, feels that if the Scots lose on Wednesday then he and his team mates will take a gigantic stride towards qualifying for the finals in America.
‘After their 6–0 win over Estonia it would put them four points ahead of the Scots and boost their confidence.
The English-style play of the Swiss under Roy Hodgson doesn't affect the style of the left-sided Chapuisat, who forms a dangerous partnership with Adrian Knup, another Bundesliga star — he plays with champions Stuttgart.
Chapuisat, 23, admits he was impressed with the Scots in Sweden, ‘but not overawed’.
He is a striker very much on a revenge mission.
DANGER MEN…
Chapuisat and (inset) Adrian Knup
Showdown for Arazi le chump
TRAINER Francois Boutin is confident that Arazi is a super rocket and not a damp squib.
The 20-million dol-lar question will be answered at Longchamp when the little chestnut relaunches his career in today's Prix du Moulin.
Things have not gone right this year for the colt dubbed a new ‘Champion the Wonder Horse’ after his last-to-first victory in the Breeders' Cup Juve-nile 10 months ago.
Allen Paulson, who sold a half share to Sheik Mohammed for ten million dollars, reasoned he's either not trained on or needs a psychiatrist.
Boutin believed Arazi needed a rest and he has not raced since June.
But Brief Truce and All At Sea are capable of testing Paulson's theory and Boutin's confidence.
Son-shine boy looks a real Bonny bet!
LARRY LYNX
FOLLOWING in father's footsteps, but not quite matching the old man's gait, is a fact of life in horses as well as humans.
But Luca Cumani feels certain that Bonny Scot is up to equalling his sire's performance by winning next Saturday's St Leger.
Cumani trained Commanche Run to win the Doncaster classic in 1984 — and reckons Bonny Scot is a chip off the old block.
The Newmarket man says: ‘His father was a late developer and Bonny Scot has pro-gressed the same way.’
After opening his account at Goodwood in July, he followed up by beating Sonus and Assessor at York last month.
Both victories were over one-and-a-half miles — and Cumani has no worries about next Saturday's extra two-and-a-half furlongs.
Weight
Sonus and Assessor are in opposition again but Bonny Scot should confirm that York running.
Meanwhile, Clive Brittain yesterday paid the £25,000 to supplement User Friendly, who is 6–4 favourite.
Unbeaten in five races, this treble Oaks winner is a formidable rival.
But she's had a hard season and lost 17 kilos in weight after her latest win at York.
Brittain says: ‘She has put back the weight, is in tremendous form — and deserves a tilt at another classic.’
At her best User Friendly would take some beating, but I take Bonny Scot to uphold the family tradition and confirm Cumani's faith.
HOTLINE
BILL BRADSHAW /STEVE BATES /JOHN DILLON /SHAUN CUSTIS
WE also told you last week that Liverpool had moved for Andy Awford, Pompey centre-back.
They've been back on the phone again despite Portsmouth awarding him a new two-year contract!
WEST HAM have sacked commercial manager Brian Blower after 13 years service.
Strange, that.
In Septem-ber's ‘Football League News’ Blower talks about loyal West Ham's ‘open door policy’.
Seems he's gone out of it the wrong way.
PALACE fancy Tim Breacker, West Ham full back.
MALCOLM CROSBY, hero of last season's run to the FA Cup Final, finds his short career as Sunderland boss on the line.
He has only a one-year contract and there have been differences with chairman Bob Murray, including the failure to sign Everton's Ray Atteveld, the loss of Paul Bracewell after a contract dispute and a boardroom veto on selling £750,000 Gordon Armstrong to Southampton.
They demanded £1 million.
Crosby has two ex-managers at his shoulder — Bobby Ferguson and Terry Butcher.
Atkinson fumes over Ellis
RON ATKINSON and Doug Ellis, two of the biggest personalities in the game, are on a collision course at Aston Villa.
Atkinson is privately seething at the intervention of chairman Ellis in last week's transfer talks with Liverpool for striker Dean Saunders.
He thought he had done a deal at £2.3 million.
But Ellis would not sanction anything above £2.1m.
MANCHESTER UNITED aim to buy before their UEFA Cup campaign.
They are desperately short of players and the ‘foreigners’ rule hits them hard.
Lee Sharpe, Bryan Robson and Dion Dublin are all unfit.
And all English.
But if United pursue Wimbledon's John Fashanu it could become an auction with Pescara thought to be leading the Italian interest.
The Dons have already had a written offer of £3million from Italy.
But we expect Alex Ferguson to try again for-Stuart Pearce at Forest, perhaps offering Neil Webb in part-exchange.
DOWN THE HATCH, SAY BASS
BREWERS Bass will tomorrow pull out of their proposed £9.5 million sponsorship of the new Premier League.
And they're so angry they may also drop their current backing of the Charity Shield.
Bass wanted to create the FA Carling Premier League, but last week FA chief executive Graham Kelly declared: ‘The integrity and the name of the FA Premier League should be sacrosanct.’
Bass have spent months working on the deal and we're told they will not even bother to attend tomorrow's meeting of Premier clubs.
And their branding of the ‘Ten-nent's Charity Shield’ is in doubt.
WIMBLEDON are weighin up a move for Colin Foster West Ham's transfer-listed defender.
GARY GIBSON, Hartlepool Chairman has been banned from Newcastle's hospitality suite by supremo Sir John Hall.
Gibson recently disclosed that Hall had barred ex-Newcastle chairman Gordon McKeag — now Football League president — from the directors' room.
That was the final straw for Hall!
IF Forest decide to sign Nigel Jemson, their old boy at Wednesday, winger Kingsley Black could go back as part of the deal.
Wednesday have a problem with David Hirst injured but they may make take Roy Wegerle (Blackburn) on loan.
MALCOLM CROSBY, hero of last season's run to the FA Cup Final, finds his short career as Sunderland boss on the line.
He has only a one-year contract and there have been differences with chairman Bob Murray, including the failure to sign Everton's Ray Atteveld, the loss of Paul Bracewell after a contract dispute and a boardroom veto on selling £750,000 Gordon Armstrong to Southampton.
They demanded £1 million.
Crosby has two ex-managers at his shoulder — Bobby Ferguson and Terry Butcher.
MANCHESTER CITY are weighing up a £1 million bid for Dutch forward Eric Viscaal, 24, of top Belgian side Ghent.
Manager Peter Reid wanted him on trial but Ghent will not let their man leave on approval.
City must stump up the cash and planned to watch Viscaal yesterday against Mechelin.
Newcastle were at the same game — watching their Mechelin trialist Kennet Andersson.
FULHAM'S controversial chief executive Brian Naismith, we hear, may be about to part company with the club.
This follows whispers of an alleged battle of wills with manager Don Mackay.
Arsenal check out Owers
ARSENAL made a discreet check on midfielder Gary Owers' availabilitiy when Sunderland boss Malcolm Crosby watched Wednesday's Danny Wilson at Highbury last weekend.
Spurs find nice little Turner…
JOHN DILLON
Tottenham 2 Everton 1
ANDREW TURNER, youngest kid in the Premier League, pulled off one of football's oldest tricks and set White Hart Lane alight.
Turner, just 17, scored a dramatic injury time winner for Tottenham — and was so stunned he wasn't sure how to celebrate.
‘I didn't see it go in — and I wasn't sure where to run once it had,’ he said.
Turner, who made his League debut on opening day, played for the youth team last week.
He had come on as sub just as Tottenham began to turn the tide against an Everton side who had torn them apart in the first half.
Allen's equaliser had rewarded Tottenham's gritty fight back.
Then, with the clock ticking into the third minute of injury time, Turner did his stuff.
Gray's long throw was headed clear but Turner was well placed to belt it straight back from 20 yards out.
The ball hit Watson, and was deflected past Everton keeper Southall.
That was Turner's prize for fighting back from a broken leg that threatened his young career last year.
And what a sight for his dad Pat, watching in the stands.
He was forced to pack up his career as Charlton's left back at the age of 20.
Spurs coach Doug Livermore said: ‘Andy's young but in every pre-season game, he was so good, his performances hit us in the eye.’
Tottenham had to thank another youngster for keeping them in a position to fight back.
SAVES
Keeper Walker pulled off superb saves from Johnston, Warzycha and Ebbrell as Everton ran the first hour.
Everton's crisp passing bewildered Tottenham, and it was that fellow Beardsley running the show.
Beardsley put Everton in front just before half time.
He curled a 20-yard chip past Walkerafter springing Tottenham's offside trap to pounce on Ebbrell's clever through-ball.
Later Beardsley, who has 49 caps but is not in England's squad for the match in Spain, admitted his England career is over.
‘I'm very keen to play again for England but I realise I've got no chance,’ he said.
‘The manager has made up his mind and he's going to stick to it.’
TOTTENHAM: * WALKER 8 — Austin 6, Cundy 6, Tuttle 5, Van den Hauwe 6 — Gray 6, Allen 7, Samways 6, Anderton (wdn) 5 — Durie 6, Sheringham 6.
Sub: Turner 6.
EVERTON: Southall 6 — Harper 7, Watson 7, Ablett 7, Hinchcliffe 7 — Warzycha (wdn) 7, Horne 7, Ebbrell 7, Ward 7 — * BEARDSLEY 8, Johnston (wdn) 6.
Subs: Bar-low 7, Beagrie
Ref: R Hart 7
Crowd: 7
Bookings: Gray (Tottenham), Horne (Everton)
THAT'S MY BOY!
Turner is mobbed after scoring for Spurs (right) Pictures: IAN DERRY
OWN GOLD
RAY CLARKIN
Sunderland 0 Charlton 2
CHARLTON banked £350,000 then cashed in on more good fortune.
They sold full-back Anthony Barness to Chelsea, leaving boss Alan Curbishley complaining: ‘It's disap-pointing.
We are top of the League and have to sell.
But every player here has his price, though nobody will be going cheaply.
‘I'm keeping my fingers crossed that I might get a bit of it to strengthen the squad.’
But Curbishley had few worries about beating Sunderland once they had had Kay sent off for foolishly retaliating against Walsh.
Sunderland even presented them with a couple of own goals and could be in more trouble.
A fan ran on the pitch and attempted to approach Walsh after the sending-off as early as the 14th minute.
Walsh crudely hacked down Kay but referee Peck had to send off the Sunderland player, who tried to grab Walsh and struck him in the face.
The first goal bounced off Butcher into the net when Nelson shot.
The second came when Bennett and Carter both went for the ball, which bounced off the pair of them and again into the net.
SUNDERLAND: Carter 7 — Kay 5, Butcher 6, Ball 6, Bennett 7, Rogan 7 — * OWERS 8, Ord (wdrn) 6, Cunnington 6 — Goodman 7, Byrne (inj) 7.
Subs: Armstrong 6, Colquhoun 6.
CHARLTON: Bolder 6 — Balmer 7, Webster (inj) 7, Gatting 6, Minto 6 — Pardew 7, Walsh 6, Bumstead 7 — * LEE 8, Dyer (wdrn) 7, Nelson 6.
Subs: Gritt 6, Leaburn 6.
Ref: M. Peck 6.
Bookings: Kay (Sunderland), Bumstead, Minto, Gatting (Charlton).
Sent off: Kay.
ELLIOTT AGONY
BRIAN GLANVILLE
Liverpool 2 Chelsea 1
PAUL ELLIOTT, Chelsea centre-back, has injured cruciate knee ligaments for the second time in his career.
He was carried off on a stretcher when the game was only 10 minutes old, after he had flown into a tackle from behind on Dean Saunders.
A free-kick was given against Elliott but Chelsea's players — rightly or wrongly — were infuriated by Saunders' part in the incident.
And their reaction may have cost them Liverpool's opening goal.
Elliott hurt cruciate ligaments when playing for Pisa, putting him out of the game for 18 months.
He was discharged from hospital last night, with the full extent of the damage still not known, and manager Ian Porterfield admitted: ‘This is a big, big blow for us.
It's the left leg this time, not his right.
I don't think there is anybody better that Ellitt in central defence in this country.
‘Saunders came down on top of him.
These things happen in football.’
This, for Chelsea, was surely bad enough.
Almost as cruel was the way they lost, a few minutes from the end, having fought back to equalise.
Substitute Mark Walters wriggled between Fleck and Hall and trickled a centre across the goal.
Beasant, inexplicably, missed the ball completely, and Redknapp had only to touch it in.
Saunders, who may be on his way to Aston Villa, had a curiously mixed game.
GLORIOUS
After 28 minutes, he was rashly fouled out on the left by Lee.
Molby swung in the free-kick and Saunders met it perfectly with his head on the near post to score a spectacular goal.
Five minutes after half-time he was frustrated only by a glorious flying save by Beasant.
But later in the half he twice missed badly.
The game was ineptly refereed by John Key, booking nobody till 10 minutes from the end.
Chelsea came back courageously.
Townsend was an inspiring captain, once hooking the ball off the line and once forcing James to a confident save.
James saved his team on at least three other occasions.
In the first-half, he tipped over a powerful effort by Hall.
In the second, he frustrated Lee with his legs, and later thwarted Townsend.
After 27 minutes of the second half, a mistake by Molby put them away.
Fleck roasted Rob Jones on the goal-line, Vinny Jones missed his low cross, and Harford was there to bang it in.
LIVERPOOL: *JAMES 8 — Jones 5, Wright 6, Burrows 6, Harkness 6 — McManaman (wdrn) 6, Redknapp 5, Molby 5, Whelan 6 — Rush 7, Saunders 6 — Sub: Walters.
CHELSEA: Beasant 6 — Hall 6, Elliott (inj) 7, Donaghy 7, Lee 6 — Newton 6, Jones 6, *TOWN-SEND 8, Wise 7 — Fleck 7, Harford 6.
Sub: Pearce 6
Ref: J Key 4
Crowd: 6
Bookings: Wise, Pearce, Beasant (Chelsea)
PAIN GAME…
Chelsea's Paul Elliott clutches his leg after damaging knee ligaments following Dean Saunders'challenge
CHRISTIE v DESSIE
Coming soon!
The race of a lifetime
BRIAN MADLEY
FORGET about Carl Lewis, Olympic sprint champion Linford Christie's next great showdown could be against…
Desert Orchid!
Dessie, Britain's best loved race-horse, is being lined up for a sprint spectacular against our 100 metres king Christie in the next trial Sunday race meeting.
Talk about the race have already reached Desert Orchid's owner, Richard Burridge, and the proposed venue is Cheltenham — scene of Dessie's great Gold Cup triumph.
The race is set to be one of the star attractions in the second of the trial Sunday meetings on November 15.
Dessie was used to promote the first Sunday meeting at Doncaster last month along with Red Rum.
But, I understand, Cheltenham managing director Edward Gillespie decided to go one better after Christie won his 100 metres gold medal in Barcelona.
Although Gillespie was not available to confirm the plan yesterday, the Clerk of The Course at Cheltenham, Major Philip Arkwright, said:
‘It's a real Gillespie idea this one isn't it?
I hope no-one thinks I came up with it.’
I suggested the race would involve Dessie jumping a couple of fences to warm-up with Christie joining him as he crossed the last for a sprint up the finishing hill at Cheltenham.
But Major Arkwright said:
‘Oh no, you couldn't do it that way otherwise the horse would be certain to win.’
Desert Orchid's owner Richard Burridge said: ‘Yes, I've heard about the plan but I don't know exact details.’
The most-loved horse in National Hunt history has been in constant demand for public appearances since his retirement from racing on Boxing Day last year.
Dessie won the Gold Cup at Cheltenham in 1989 and in his career won £500,000 in prize money.
But the battle between the white charger and the black flash could create the biggest interest of all.
Christie's agent was unaware of the race last night but the sprinter announced on Friday he was shelving plans for a £250,000 race against Carl Lewis and — as Super Sport forecast last month — the clash will place next year.
Dessie won his Gold Cup, over 3.25 miles, in 7 min 17 sec, an average speed of 26 .7mph.
Christie won his gold medal in 9.96s, an average speed of 22.46mph.
As you probably knew 
ON YOUR MARKS I'M on yer tail, Dessie!…
Linford Christie and Desert Orchid look set to be battling it out at Cheltenham in November.
The big question is: Will Dessie wear cycle shorts?
ROXY SLAPS BAN ON STU
No go for rusty Mac
ALLAN HERRON
ANDY ROXBURGH banned Scotland midfielder Stuart McCall from playing for Rangers reserves against Motherwell at Ibrox yesterday.
McCall, who has missed Rangers' last three games with a throat infection, was desperate to get a game before flying to Berne with Scotland's World Cup squad.
But Roxburgh said: ‘No way!
I've already had McLaren, McInally and McKimmie pull out of the squad with injuries.
There are some doubts about one or two others so I just couldn't take the chance of McCall getting an injury.
‘Apart from that, how could I allow him to play when the Scottish League have already altered their fixtures so that none of my home-based players would be playing today?
‘I have no worries about Stuart's fitness.
It was, after all, a throat infection and he's been training for the past week.’
IN TOUCH Scotland coach Roxburgh now awaits a fitness report on Leeds' skipper Gary McAllister and Brian McClair of Manchester United, who play against each other at Old Trafford this afternoon in the live satellite TV match.
Roxburgh said: ‘One of the staff will be at the game with a portable ‘phone to keep me in touch.
The moment the game ends I'll know whether everything is all right or otherwise.’
Both players will be driven North by an SFA official immediately after the game.
‘Nothing changes when you are in charge of Scotland.
I thought things had changed in Sweden when I was able to use the same team in successive games for the first time in six years.
Now I am back to normal.
If a player arrives vertical he has every chance of a game.’
Spurs' Gordon Durie, another of the Scotland injury worries, got through yesterday's Premier League game against Everton without any problems.
The rest of the Scots trained at Ibrox yesterday.
BRAVE Ian Durrant received a warm welcome back to the Scottish squad from coach Andy Roxburgh yesterday.
Durrant, returning to the international scene after serious injury nearly wrecked his career, is likely to make the subs' bench on Wednesday.
Roxburgh said: ‘The idea was to take Ian along to get him involved with the way of things after his long absence.
But the call-offs mean that he has now taken a step nearer being involved.’
I'LL MAKE BAD BOBBY GOOD AS GOULDING
‘all the best scrum halves have had some fire, but I'm looking foe controlled aggression’
JOHN ROBINSON
WIDNES coach Phil Larder has told new signing Bobby Goulding: ‘Cut out the aggro — and you will be the Lions’ scrum-half for years to come.’
Larder has vowed to reform the bad boy he sees as a natural Test successor to 25-cap veteran Andy Gregory.
Goulding has a wild streak in him which has got him sent off twice and sin-binned four times.
And Larder, who was Goulding's mentor on the 1990 tour to New Zealand, warns that he must control the wild instincts which keep getting him into hot water.
A four-match suspension, imposed for a high tackle on Wigan's Shaun Edwards, cost the 21-year-old his place on Great Britain's summer tour Down Under.
More controversy followed when Leeds showed him the door following an incident at a North Wales training camp.
And he was carpeted again this week for an incident on his Widnes debut against Castleford on the opening day of the season.
He was hauled before the disciplinary committee after a video showed him clashing with opposition scrum-half Mike Ford during a brawl.
MARAUDER
Larder has now warned Goulding: ‘COOL IT!’
He is threatening to fine him whenever he steps out of line.
Most of all, the Chemics boss knows he must curb Goulding's habit of wading into bother which does not concern him.
At the same time, however, Larder will be careful not to suppress the volatile youngster too much.
The last thing he wants is to turn a marauder into a mouse.
‘I'm looking for controlled aggression and strict discipline at all times.
I need that from Bobby and the rest of the side if we are to be successful,’ says newly-appointed Larder.
‘All the best scrum-halves have had some fire in them.
The great Alex Murphy and Aussie Tommy Raudonikis were not the most placid of players.
‘Bobby is a likeable kid with an angelic face but he has a streak of aggression which needs to be channelled in a legiti-mate way.
‘I know what happened at Leeds and he was out of order.
But I still prefer him in my side than playing against me.
‘I don't want teams to relish the thought of playing at Naughton Park.
I want us to have a reputation for controlled, aggressive football.’
Of course, when it comes to controversy, Goulding's record could be viewed as insignificant alongside that of the Widnes chairman, Jim Mills.
One of the world's best and most feared forwards in his day, ‘Big Jim’ was sent off 21 times!
But that was in an era of different attitudes when punches were swapped more freely and no one thought less of a player for standing his ground in a fracas.
SIN
Now indiscipline is a deadly sin.
As Larder points out: ‘Any team which consistently gives away penalties is not going to win.
It is as simple as that.’
Goulding, a former Wigan player who joined his home town club in a deal which took fullback Alan Tait to Leeds, has already made six appearances for Great Britain and five for the under-21s.
Larder, who quit as Great Britain's assistant coach to take over the Chemics, will go to any lengths to help Goulding build on that promising beginning — and bring more success to Widnes in the process.
BRILLIANT
‘My first priority was to sign an organising scrum-half because I felt it was one of Widnes’ weak-nesses,’revealed Larder.
‘When you look around, Bobby has more to offer than anyone else.
‘He has already performed well on tour and at Test level.
It was shown in Australia during the summer that Wigan's Shaun Edwards is best suited to stand-off.
‘Andy Gregory has been a brilliant scrum-half, but he's coming to the end of his career and can only be a short-term buy for Doug Laughton at Leeds.
‘Bradford Northern's Deryck Fox is another scrum-half I admire, but Goulding has more sting in his play.
‘There is no doubt he has problems with anger and discipline.
But I have more chance of improving that than knocking 10 years off Gregory or adding speed to Fox.
‘It will help that he has come to Widnes, where a majority of players are well-disciplined, on and off the pitch, and live locally.
He is certain to benefit from being with players such as Paul and David Hulme and Kurt Soren-sen.
‘I don't know if Bobby will break into the Great Britain team for the World Cup final against Australia in October, but he should make it for the next series and then hang on to the job.
‘Remember, he was playing for Great Britain under-21s four years ago and has all that experience behind him even though he is still a baby in playing terms.’
Larder, former national director of coaching, warns that his half-back pairing of Goulding and David Hulme will be a handful for any opposition.
And he also predicts another successful season for Welsh utility back Jonathan Davies, who has elected to replace Tait at fullback.
Larder adds: ‘Jonathan wants to play fullback because he believes he can break into the World Cup team in this position.
‘I reckon his best chance would be as a goal-kicking winger but I don't want him in this role for Widnes.
He would be wasted because we could not get enough ball to him.
‘His best club position is centre or full-back and I have agreed to give him a shot at fullback to see how he goes.
His defence is exceptional.
‘But I have two youngsters in Stuart Spruce and Paul Atcheson who will hopefully put Jonathan under pressure.
I want players to fight for positions.’
TOUGH TASK…
Phil Larder will be watching his fiery young star carefully to keep him out of trouble
ANGELS WITH DIRTY FACES…
Bobby Goulding (above) has the same fire as Alex Murphy (left), but Murphy managed to channel his aggression.
Now, says Larder, Bobby must learn to do exactly the same
Harry's lad
HARRY GREGG, the legendary Manchester United goalkeeper, on son JOHN, the Barnsley midfielder
‘His five sisters and his mother spoil him rotten, but I don't.
Too many kids fall by the wayside.
He'll only make it if he's good enough’
SHAUN CUSTIS
BARNSLEY midfielder John Gregg must count his lucky stars that he can follow in his family's football tradition.
For his dad is goal-keeping legend Harry, who survived one of the most traumatic events in British sporting history — the Munich air disaster.
Now John, 17, is quietly carving out his career with Barnsley.
It's a similar, humble beginning to father Harry, who started at Doncaster before joining Manchester United for a world record goal-keeper's fee of £27,000 in 1957.
That career at United was almost over before it began.
On February 6, 1958, Gregg saw many friends and team-mates die in that fateful crash which stunned the nation.
Twenty-three people in all died, including the great Duncan Edwards.
Miracu-lously, Matt Busby survived after a long and seemingly impossible fight for life.
Gregg, indeed, was a hero of the crash, plunging into the wreckage to pull clear several of his injured and maimed team-mates.
PRESSURE
He went on to play a starring role for Northern Ireland in that year's World Cup, being voted the world's No 1 keeper.
He remained United's top keeper for another eight years.
Gregg was a larger than life character on and off the field — but he's not about to put any pressure on his son.
‘Managers and coaches have enough trouble without having to deal with interfering fathers,’ he says.
‘The bosses at Barnsley know what John can do and I trust them to watch over his progress.
‘I understand he might be talked about because he's my son but he'll only make it if he's good enough.
‘I've seen too many youngsters come into the game full of excitement only to fall by the wayside.
There are so many lads at places like Manchester United, it's not surprising.
‘That's why I thought it was better for John to go to Barnsley where youngsters are given a chance.
I mean, Doncaster didn't do me any harm.’
John is the baby of the Gregg family.
He has five older sisters and is an uncle six times over.
‘His sisters spoil him rotten and so does his mother — but I don't,’ says Harry.
John had a good start in the game.
Even at primary school he was a familiar face around Old Trafford because Harry was coaching there.
‘He used to play head-tennis with people like Ray Wilkins and Gordon McQueen which isn't a bad grounding, is it?’ laughs Harry.
Yet for all that John was almost lost to tennis — lawn-tennis, that is.
‘He loved tennis,’ says Harry, now a hotelier in Northern Ireland.
‘I only realised he was any good when he was 13 and went down to the English schools Under-14 championships at Queens one Monday.
‘I thought he'd be back that night but he was there till Friday because he reached the semi-finals!
‘I was quite disap-pointed when he gave tennis up.
I wanted him to keep it going in case football didn't work out.
‘But he's committed now and has been capped by Northern Ireland Under-18s.
That made me as proud as anything I achieved in my career.’
Harry may be reticent about praising his son — but Barnsley boss Mel Machin certainly isn't.
Machin says: ‘John's a real leader on the pitch which is why we made him captain of the youth team.
SCORES
‘Not only is he a good ball winner, he makes good angles and scores regularly.
‘He's quite small at the moment — he only takes size 5 ½ boots — but we're expecting him to grow.
‘He's got every chance of making it as a player.’
PROSPECT…
As a schoolboy he used to play head tennis with Ray Wilkins and Gordon McQueen at Manchester United, now he is finding his own way as a youngster at Barnsley
TOUGH…
Father Harry is so proud
TRIUMPH AND THE DESPAIR SUCCESS and SYMPATHY…
Harry (right) flying high while winning one of his 25 caps for Northern Ireland and,(left) with United defender Bill Foulkes, he comforts winger Ken Morgans after the Munich crash.
COOK THE BOOKIES
Ban 'em off-course or suffer, says trainer Watts
‘Racing's in a desperate state’
LARRY LYNX
TOP trainer Bill Watts this week joined the growing band who are demanding a shake-up of racing's finances.
Bill said: ‘The sport is in a desperate state.
The cost of keeping a horse is constantly going up while prize money is static.’
His concern was echoed in a BBC Panorama investigation Only Fools And Horses? on Monday in which it was claimed that off-course bookies must pour more of their profits back into the Sport of Kings — or it could die.
The documentary hinted that several wealthy Arab owners were threatening to pull out of British racing and take their horses abroad unless prize money went up.
‘Getting people interested in owning race-horses in these recession-ary times is hard,’ said Bill.
‘You can win a couple of small races and the prize money will only pay the bills for three or four months.
‘I would dearly like to see a Tote monopoly off course with bookmakers allowed to operate on course only.
‘Australian racing has benefited from such a system and it would keep money in the game instead of it going to the big bookmaking firms who channel the cash into their other businesses.
‘The Australian system makes for a much stronger betting market on course and the vast increase in revenue gives owners, big and small, a greater incentive.’
MILLIONAIRE
Bill has not had the best of seasons this year but, unlike most northern trainers, he has some very rich owners, including Sheikh Mohammed, Robert Sangster and American millionaire Joe Albritton.
The Watts clan is one of racing's oldest families.
Bill became assistant trainer to his father Jack in 1964, who that year trained Indiana to win the St Leger and was runner-up in the Derby.
Bill's grandfather J E Watts trained two classic winners and his great-grandfather John Watts rode 19 classic winners between 1883 and 1897.
When he took over his father's stables in 1968 he became the fourth generation of the family to train at Newmarket but he broke tradition when he moved to North Yorkshire in 1970.
Watts, who is based at Hurgill Lodge stables in Richmond, has never regretted the move.
He said: ‘I have always liked this part of the world and it is perfect for training horses.’
His stables are sited on the old Richmond racetrack, which closed before the turn of the century.
The Low Moor is part of the old racecourse with the remains of the grand-stand still standing, while the High Moor is six furlongs uphill with tremendous turf.
Bill said: ‘The place has everything.
It is very relaxing for the horses and there are plenty of hills to strengthen their legs and two excellent gallops.’
While his ancestors were involved with classic winners, Bill has played his part with Waterloo winning the 1,000 Guineas in 1972.
He has also guided many to Royal Ascot fame and one of his highlights was a brilliant training feat when he won the Arlington Million in America in 1985 with Teleprompter.
Watts has the technique of being able to get the best out of a horse, whether he is a sprinter or a stayer, yet finding the optimum trip for his horses remains one of the most taxing problems.
Bill said: ‘It's all to do with the American influence creeping into our pedigrees.
‘In the States, most of the big races are over a mile or ten furlongs and it is becoming trickier by the season to be absolutely sure you have made the right decision.’
Robert Sangster's Satank is the stable's star.
This strong, lengthy colt won the Windsor Castle Stakes at Royal Ascot in June and has twice run well when the soft going was against him.
He will be entered for the good autumn races.
TARGET
Bill rates Ayr, along with Ascot, Newmarket and York, as one of his favourite tracks and he is eyeing the Ayr Gold Cup next Saturday as a possible target for his consistent Big Hand.
Last season he had 14 winners in Britain but those victories were sup-plemented by another £170,000 with two suc-cesses abroad in Kazoo and Colway Bold.
Kazoo won the German 1,000 Guineas, while Colway Bold landed the valuable Goffs Premier
Challenge race at The Curragh.
When he started at Richmond Bill had the support of American millionaire Charles Engelhard, who died in 1971.
Engelhard loved English racing and his Nijinsky, who was trained by Vincent O'Brien, completed the Triple Crown — the Derby, 2,000 Guineas and St Leger — in 1970.
At that time Watts had a stable of 75 horses but at present the number is half that quota.
There may not be any Nijinskys trotting around Hurgill Lodge but the master of the stable certainly has the classic pedigree to weather the current financial storm.
ACE…
Bill (above and left) with Teleprompter, the horse that won the Arlington Million in 1985
THE TEAM THAT EDDIE BUILT
GRAY'S ELLAND ROAD TEENAGE STARS ARE WORTH MILLIONS NOW
Stan Liversedge
LEEDS UNITED'S charge to the very top of English football has cost them a cool £10 million.
But former Elland Road favourite Eddie Gray could be forgiven a wry smile at today's free-spending ways.
While he was boss, he nurtured several youngsters who are now worth millions — but was sacked before they blossomed.
What's worse, they all got the boot but have since proved they can do the business at the highest level.
Present manager Howard Wilkinson has splashed out millions to bring in big names like Gary McAllister, Tony Dorigo, Rod Wallace and David Rocastle — and won the League title.
It's been a price worth paying as Leeds are now one of the most powerful sides in the land and are about to mount an assault on the European Cup.
But could their dramatic re-building have been done much more cheaply?
A quick glance around the line-ups of Leeds' rivals reveals a team of Elland Road rejects who've gone on to prove themselves in the Premier League.
Players like keeper David Seaman — who has played for England — Terry Phelan, Tommy Wright, John Sheridan and Dennis Irwin were all sold or given away by Leeds but are now big names at other clubs.
Leeds have even bought back two of their rejects and lost fortunes on the deals.
Goalkeeper John Lukic left for Arsenal for £100,000 but returned for £1 million.
Midfielder Scott Sellars was sold to Blackburn for £35,000 and was bought back in the summer for £750,000.
Gray, who managed Leeds between 1982 and 1985, brought on Irwin, Sellars and Sheridan.
Gray had told the board he needed three years to build a top side.
That's how long he got but, looking at the players he brought through, perhaps he should have been given longer.
Here's what Gray said in September 1985, a month before he was sacked: ‘There are lads in the team who are going right to the top.
‘People like Tommy Wright, John Sheridan and Ian Snodin could play in any company.
‘My big hope is that they will stay together and fulfil their ambition with Leeds.’
It wasn't to be.
Tommy Wright fetched up at Oldham for £80,000.
He moved on to Leicester for almost £400,000, then to Middlesbrough for £650,000.
Snodin went on to Everton.
And Forest paid Leeds £650,000 for Sheridan but, now, playing a commanding role in Sheffield Wednesday's mid-field he's worth £1 million.
Gray's other products also moved on.
Full-back Irwin left on a free transfer to Oldham — who sold him on to Manchester United for £750,000.
He is now a Republic of Ireland international.
Sellars is back in the Leeds midfield after his cut-price trip to Blackburn.
Oldham have done well out of Leeds rejects.
As well as capturing Irwin from Elland Road, they picked up defender Andy Linighan for £45,000 and sold him on to Norwich for £350,000 — and they got an extra £150,000 when he moved to Arsenal for £1 million.
Andy Ritchie left Elland Road for Boundary Park for just £50,000.
And his goals helped Oldham win promotion and reach the Rumbelows Cup final.
Wright exacted the full price for rejection when he scored twice in Boro's recent 4–1 hammering of Leeds.
And what about Terry Phelan?
He recently left Wimbledon for Manchester City for a staggering £2.5 million.
Leeds didn't want to know when he was a youngster.
Phelan's left another Elland Road discard behind at Wimbledon.
Central defender John Scales is rated at around £2 million and has attracted interest from Liverpool.
THE WAY IT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
Here's an imag-inary line-up Leeds might be fielding now if they'd held on to the stars they rejected.
Do you think they look like champions?
And cut-price champions at that!
Seaman: Irwin, Scales, Linighan, Phelan; Strachan, Sheridan, Sellars, Wright; Ritchie, Chapman.
ABLE SEAMAN…
England keeper David Seaman sold by Leeds and went on to make his name in a big way with the Gunners
STARS…
Terry Phelan (top) and Tommy Wright (above)
Fans' fury
GERRY MORTON
Southend 3 Leicester 1
LEICESTER fans almost eclipsed Southend's victory when, with their team trailing, they erupted as ref Adcock sent off defender Grayson.
There were a number of ugly scenes behind the Southend goal before police stepped in.
Benjamin slotted home the penalty.
Benjamin had scored earlier after Cornwell challenged Leicester keeper Muggleton to get to an Ansah cross.
The ball fell clear and Benjamin put it into the corner of the net from 15 yards.
Leicester had equalised through Gee.
Southend defender Prior played a poor back pass and full-back Powell was booked for bringing down the goal-bound Thompson.
Keeper Sansome blocked the free kick but Gee hammered in the rebound.
Ansah finished off Leicester with a superb goal.
GRIFF'S RED PERIL
WALES prop Mike Griffiths is facing a suspension that could rule him out of the clash with world champions Australia, after his dismissal in CARDIFF'S match at Aberavon yesterday.
Referee Robert Davies sent him packing after a mass fight.
Cardiff won 15–6, with four penalties and a drop goal by fly half Adrian Davies.
ROARING LIONS
JOHN PRICE
Millwall 2 Swindon 1
MILLWALL boss Mick McCarthy filled the air with superlatives after his side's thrilling comeback.
‘That was super stuff,’ he crowed after his Lions had come from behind to end Swindon's unbeaten start to the season.
‘You would have to go a long way to see a better game than that.
‘Both sides played their part and it shows football can be played with passion and pride without resorting to thumping the ball forward.’
This match had all the ingredients which still make the British game the most exciting to watch in the world — speed, commitment and flair.
Millwall just about deserved to take the spoils for their stirring second-half fightback and their performance must have cheered those fans who were furious at the £1m sale of forward Chris Armstrong to Crystal Palace.
Strikers Goodman and McGinlay played so well that Armstrong's absence was hardly noticed.
Goodman, in particular, was a constant threat with speed and skill.
It was fitting he should score the late winner.
He started the move with a pass to sub Dolby who let fly with a fierce shot that keeper Digby could only parry and Goodman, who had continued his run, knocked in the rebound.
McGinlay equalised for Millwall after the restart with a cracking 18-yard shot after a howler by Hoddle who'd earlier fluffed a clearance.
Swindon had taken the lead in the first half through striker Maskell.
MILLWALL: Keller 7 — Cun-ningham 7, Cooper 7, Stevens 7, Dawes 6 — Holsgrove 8, Roberts (wdrn) 6, Bogie (wdrn) 7, Barber 7 — * GOODMAN 9, McGinlay 8.
Subs: Stephenson, Dolby.
SWINDON: Digby 6 — Cal-derwood 7, Hoddle 6, Taylor 7 — Kerslake 6, Moncur 7, Hazard 6, Ling 6, Bodin 6, * MASKELL 8 — Mitchell (wdrn) 5.
Sub: White.
Ref: M. James 8.
MICK McCARTHY
DAVID BOX
Reading 1 Hull City 2
READING chairman John Madejski is to make an official complaint about referee Clive Wilkes after he sent off one Reading player and booked five.
Wilkes was escorted from the pitch by police after sending off teenage winger Barkus who lashed out after being felled as he went for goal.
Hull had gone ahead through Lund.
Taylor levelled but Windass headed Hull's late winner.
Lamb hit by writ
NATWEST TROPHY FINAL
FRED TRUEMAN
ALLAN LAMB, the man at the centre of cricket's infamous ball-doctoring row, was served with a writ at Lord's before leading Northants to a glorious eight-wicket victory over Leicester in the NatWest final.
Lamb — who had the satisfaction to be batting at the end — responded, allegedly, by throwing the legal papers in the bin!
He is being sued by Sarfraz Nawaz, the former Pakistan Test paceman, who — as Super Sport reported last week — vehemently denies Lamb's claim that he disclosed Pakistani ‘secrets’ of making an old ball swing.
Amazed
Sarfraz's solicitor Ash Karim confirmed the writ was in response to Lamb's allegations about Sarfraz in the Daily Mirror.
Mr Karim said: ‘After being served with a writ, Mr Lamb threw it in the dustbin.
But this is entirely a matter for him and his legal advisors.’
Sarfraz said: ‘I am still amazed that Allan Lamb should have mentioned me.
As I said before, I have never resorted to any improper method when I bowled.’
In the end, Lamb's men had 10 overs in hand as they cruised to success.
Their batting hero was man-of-the-match Alan Fordham, the outstanding candidate for an A team place for the tour to Australia next January.
He hit 13 fours and put on 140 in the crucial stand with Rob Bailey before skying a catch to wide mid-on nine runs short of a ton.
Bailey hit two cracking fours off Justin Benson to win the match and complete a nightmare game for the Leicester all-rounder.
Cup final nerves got the better of Benson who had guided Leicester to Lord's in the last over of the semi-final against Essex.
But with Leicester needing quick runs, Benson chopped a ball from Ambrose on to his stumps before he had scored.
Then as they tried to defend their tiny total, he put down two difficult slip catches.
Lamb hit by writ 
LORDING IT: Allan Lamb and Curtly Ambrose celebrate Northants Natwest Trophy triumph
MAC ESCAPES
BRITAIN'S top biker Niall Mackenzie had an amazing escape when he crashed at 80mph during practice for today's final and decisive South African Grand Prix.
The 31-year-old Scot skidded across the track into a fence after the back wheel of his Banco Yamaha broke away as he powered round a bend.
Mackenzie was whisked to the track hospital but suffered only a cut arm.
He said: ‘I was suddenly flung off and hitting the ground.’
Californian Wayne Rainey and Michael Doohan, separated by just two points in the title race, start side by side on the front row.
Mackenzie is sixth and Wayne Gardner, going into his final Grand Prix before retirement, starts second.
AMERICAN Dan O'Brien yesterday broke Daley Thompson's eight-year-old world decathlon record when he finished with 8,896 points in an invitation meeting in Talence, France.
O'Brien, 26, passed the 8,847 points set by Thompson at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles.
UPPING THE PRICE
BRIAN MADLEY
Wimbledon 3 Arsenal 2
THE paupers beat the princes and left Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear spe-culating how much his chairman will now be asking for his top players.
‘I suppose Sam will want £6m for John Fashanu and £12m for Robbie Earle,’ said delighted Kinnear.
Don't joke too soon, Joe.
Chairman Sam Hammam denied in a programme article that Wimbledon would merge with Crystal Palace or any other club.
‘We would sooner play in the lowest league than merge with anyone,’ he declared.
‘Players come and players go, but Wimbledon will always be there, so help me God.’
So perhaps Fashanu and Earle will soon join the long list of those who have gone.
Both scored in a win that lifts the Dons from the bottom of the table and gives Arsenal another early setback in their championship defence.
Although it was a typical crunching Wimbledon performance, there can be no doubt they deserved it.
EXCUSES
Arsenal lost Danish international Jensen with a hip injury and England defender Adams in the second half but still have no real excuses.
Adams finished with three stitches in a head wound.
‘We won't know until the doctor sees him if he will be fit to travel to Spain with England,’ said manager George Graham.
Another casualty was Ian Wright, who finished with his arm in plaster after fracturing a bone in his wrist.
But he had already scored both Arsenal goals — which may surprise Graham Taylor, who picked him for his England squad only to be told he's not fit enough.
Said Graham: ‘He's only 75 per cent fit.
You have to be 100 per cent for England.’
Sanchez scored the Dons' opening goal.
WIMBLEDON: Segers 6 — Barton 7, Fitzgerald 7, Blackwell 7, McAllister (inj) 7 — Gibson 7, * EARLE 8, Sanchez 7, Clarke
(wdn) 7 — Fashanu 7, Holdsworth 7.
Subs: Ardley 6, Anthrobus.
ARSENAL: Seaman 6 -Dixon 7, Adams (inj) 7, Bould 7, Winterburn 7 — Parlour 7, Pates 6, Jensen (inj) 6, Merson 7 — Campbell 6, * WRIGHT 8.
Subs: O'Leary 6, Smith.
Crowd rating: 7.
Ref: K Burge 6.
Bookings: Sanchez (Wimbledon), Parlour (Arsenal).
HIT-MEN…
Ian Wright (No 8) heads Arsenal's second with Wimbledon keeper Hans Segers caught off his line,
LEICESTER'S Tigers lived up to their nickname in an outstanding display against a Grand Slam England XV.
Only two smart tries from winger Nigel Heslop saved England's face as they edged home 18–11.
BRITAIN'S top motorcycle rider Niall Mackenzie escaped with only a cut arm when he skidded into a fence at 80mph during a practice session for today's final and decisive South African Grand Prix.
Wayne Rainey and Michael Doohan, separated by just two points in the title race, start side by side on the front row.
Mackenzie is sixth.
MONTY ZOOMER
POWERHOUSE Scot Colin Montgomerie cracked his third-round jinx to take a six-shot lead into the final day of the Canon European Masters in Switzerland.
Monty, 29, birdied four out of six holes from the 10th to reach 16 under before it became too dark to carry on.
He has three holes left to play today before starting the final round.
I'LL SIGN DEANO!
DENNIS SHAW
Aston Villa 3 Crystal Palace 0
BIG Ron Atkinson took a microphone on to the Villa Park pitch to promise fans that he and chairman Doug Ellis would pull together next week to sign Dean Saunders from Liverpool.
Then his team went out to demonstrate that they, too, are in perfect harmony with a storming first home win of the season.
X FOR NO PUBLICITY
Liverpool chairmen and pools heir David Moores can't avoid controversy.
He should have ticked…
‘Some believe the family is jinxed’
STAN LIVERSEDGE
LIVERPOOL chairman David Moores has the privilege of repre-senting Britain's proudest football club.
So you can bet there were raised eyebrows and knowing smiles when long-haired Moores hit the headlines recently after launching an amazing tirade on a Merseyside pressman in front of shocked hosts at Ipswich.
Shouldn't Moores, of the famous Liverpool pools family, have taken the option offered to every football coupon gambler?
Shouldn't he have but-toned his lip and ticked the box for no publicity?
HEADLINES
The flamboyant Littlewoods millionaire wasn't everyone's choice when he took control last year.
Moores is young — well, youngish at 45.
And he dresses more like a rock star than a businessman.
His hair may be long, but his bank balance is longer.
Then there's the mega-bucks Mercedes with a personalised plate, KOP 1.
After a distinctly dodgy start to the season, chairman Moores will know that Liverpool hardly need depressing headlines OFF the field too.
Of course, he has been in the headlines before.
Nephew of John Moores, founder of the Littlewoods pools empire, he had had little to do with the business when he found suddenly himself in line to the throne.
In 1977, his playboy brother Nigel plunged to his death in his car on a mountain road in South of France — and David was heir to the multi-million empire then run by his father Cecil.
That same year, tragedy struck the family again.
David was driving to his country mansion in Halsall when his car somersaulted into a water-filled ditch.
He got out with a fractured skull — but had a mental blackout and forgot his beautiful wife Kathy had been sitting beside him.
MUDDY
It wasn't until 25 minutes later that he remembered — and by then the former Miss England had drowned in two feet of muddy water.
Some believed the fabu-lously wealthy Moores family was jinxed.
In 1990, however, David finally realised his lifelong ambition.
On March 14, Liverpool announced he had been co-opted on to their board.
He was just 43 and said: ‘It's a dream come true for me as I have been a lifelong supporter of Liverpool.’
By September last year he had taken the chair — though not without those raised eyebrows.
He succeeded Noel White and it was noticed that he had, at least, dis-pensed with an ear-ring which had caused comments in at least one boardroom.
If he was not in the mould of White, he was light years away from Sir John Smith, White's predecessor.
But his credentials, apart from the huge family wealth, came in his undoubted love for the club.
Vice-chairman Sydney Moss revealed: ‘He came here at the age of four, then stood on the Kop when he was old enough.
He is not just a supporter, but a fanatical supporter.’
Sir John — chairman for 17 trophy-laden years in the 70s and 80s — put it another way: ‘David's appointment will help keep the predators at bay’.
And with Liverpool embarking on ambitious plans to upgrade their stadium, Moores' financial base was needed.
Moores declared: ‘My feelings are no different to those of the people who stand so proudly on the Kop.
Like them, I want success and will contribute to the cause in any way I can.
DIGNITY
‘This club is all about players and fans.
I make no apology for standing and shouting when Liverpool score.’
He also said his new role ‘will not change me, the person’ and insisted he would carry on ‘with dignity’.
Whether the Ipswich directors who watched him blow his top with the unwitting journalist believe that is debatable.
But it must be said that both Liverpool and Everton have cause to be grateful for the Moores' family millions.
John Moores, one of Britain's wealthiest men, became Everton's benefactor long before anyone had heard of Jack Walker's fortune at Blackburn.
John — uncle of David Moores — was no stranger to controversy himself.
He was Everton chairman during the reign of manager John Carey — and soccer was rocked as ‘Little John’ showed a ruthless streak.
At an annual meeting of League clubs, Carey took a cab with his chairman across London.
By the time he stepped down from the taxi, Carey had been fired.
The ride was long enough for Carey to get the Moores message across — that success wasn't coming quickly enough.
John Moores piloted
Everton with new manager Harry Catterick to League and FA Cup tri-umphs.
Now David Moores, and his good friend Graeme Souness, has won the FA Cup — but there is little firm evidence that Liverpool are about to emulate their dominance of the Shankly-Paisley-Fagan-Dalglish era.
At least Liverpool won't have to worry about the bills.
They shouldn't fall into the Spurs trap of mounting debts and asset-stripping sales of star players.
The Moores fortune should see to that.
But maybe, just maybe, David Moores will think twice next time before letting rip with a tongue lashing — and remember the old Littlewoods ‘no publicity’ box!
FOLLOWED BY MISFORTUNE…
Moores and (inset) with his wife Kathy, a former Miss England who later tragically drowned when his car landed in a muddy ditch and he forgot to tell rescuers that she was in it
The first men to win on the pools
HOW the Moores family made their massive mint is the greatest success story of the century.
It started almost 70 years ago in 1923 when John Moores sank £50 into a part-time football-pools venture.
He was joined by two fellow clerks from a cable company.
Because the company frowned upon such spare-time enterprise, the trio kept their identities secret…
X for no publicity!
Littlewood was the original name of one of the clerks who was known by a different, adopted name.
It was a name that would go down in history.
The first pool attracted just 35 punters and the stakes amounted to £4–17s-6d…or £4.87.
The first dividend was £2–12s (£2.60).
Worse followed when 10,000 coupons were handed out at a big match at Hull — but 9,999 vanished.
By the end of the season, Moores' partners called it a day.
John's brother Cecil — father of the present Liverpool chairman — joined him to lend support and proved to be a brilliant organiser.
They worked day and night and the whole family became involved.
And within a decade, John Moores was a millionaire at the age of 35.
During the war, Littlewoods turned their hand to producing everything from parachutes to Wel-lington bomber frames.
They even made 12 million shells for the army.
Golden
In the post-war years the pools dividends soared and by 1973, the firm's golden jubilee, Littlewoods was the biggest pools firm in the world.
The firm also provided jobs for generations of Liverpudlians.
Cecil Moores has passed on, but John is still going at the age of 96.
His own car boasted the number plate JM1 — now it's nephew David with that flash Merc and KOP 1.
FIRST £50…
John Moores
BRILLIANT…
Cecil Moores
Better Tait than never
JOHN ROBINSON
IT WAS always simply a matter of time before full back Alan Tait followed his former boss Doug Laughton to Leeds.
The Flying Scot would probably have made the move before now — if it hadn't been for a pact Laughton made when he left Widnes sixteen months ago.
Laughton pledged not to bid for any Chemics star for at least a season — unless they wanted to sell.
And he was true to his word.
But Laughton jumped in quick when Tait was listed at £220,000 after failing to agree a new contract.
Though the fee was ini-tially too high, the opportunity for a swap deal came up when scrum half Bobby Goulding became available at Headingley last month.
Laughton will be delighted to have got Tait, even though his side have opened their campaign with defeats against St. Helens and Halifax.
Tait, 28, is a former Kelso and Scottish centre.
He was first signed by Laughton for Widnes in April 1988.
He made such an impact that Laughton soon admitted: ‘He's better than I ever dreamed.’
Tait, son of an ex-Wor-kington Town star, was thrust immediately into first team action, scoring a try in the Premiership Final victory over St. Helens when he came on as substitute in only his third game.
In the following two seasons he became the first player to win the Harry Sunderland Award twice for his performances in the Premiership Final victories over Hull and Bradford Northern.
Caps
He had his best season in 1989–90 when he scored 17 tries, plus a goal and two drop goals, in 36 games.
He totalled 131 full appearances for Widnes, scoring 55 tries.
His international break-through came against France at Wigan in 1989 and he scored his first Test try in the return at Avig-non.
He went on to score tries in two of the three Tests when Great Britain beat New Zealand in the 1989 series.
Tait, has now won nine Test caps to add to the eight he won in Rugby Union.
SCOT THE LOT…
Leeds' Alan Tait
OUT OF ELLERY'S SHADOW
Fred finds out why Garry Schofield wants to be Leeds captain again
FRED TRUEMAN
GARRY Schofield, the Leeds and Great Britain stand-off, is typical of those remarkable men who play Rugby League for a living.
Fast, tough and as ruthless as necessary on the field but a gentle, quietly-spoken, humorous man in his ordinary life.
I meet him regularly at charity events and we have had many a round of golf together.
But this week I went along to ‘the other Headingley’ where he plies his trade week-in, week-out to talk to him about his hopes and ambitions and how he saw the season panning out for his big-spending club.
One subject is obviously dear to Schofield's heart — the captaincy of Great Britain and Leeds.
He lost the leadership of Leeds to Ellery Hanley and it was Hanley who was made skipper of Great Britain in Australia this summer.
Hanley was injured and so Garry led the side —‘the proudest moment in my career’— and the Lions came as near to victory as any team has ever done Down Under.
Garry would dearly love the club captaincy back but he is realistic enough to know he just has to get on with the game.
‘It is no use me spitting out my dummy,’ he said, borrowing a a popular Australian phrase.
‘I have to accept that if the coach Doug Laughton wants Ellery as captain that is the end of the matter.
‘But I would also love to be captain here again and I make no secret of the fact.’
Leeds have bought so many players in the past few months that it is tempting to call the club New Leeds — although the fans are calling them Dad's Army because they have bought so many stars over 30.
After they lost their first two matches those fans must have wondered if once again Leeds were going to flatter to deceive.
Wigan and St Helens are already putting pressure on Leeds to lift a piece of silverware but Garry believes the results will come.
‘When we played St Helens in our first match we had nine players who had never competed together before,’ he said.
‘Every club that comes here loves to beat Leeds.
They regard a trip here as their Wembley but we have to put that out of our minds and produce the results.
‘I ask our fans to be patient until the team shakes down.
Then, hopefully, we will be able to put together the results to jus-tify that big spending.
Wigan didn't build a great team overnight and neither will we.
‘Unfortunately, in the five years I have been here Leeds have not won anything but we will.’
At 27, Garry says he still has plenty of ambition left to add to his 36 international caps.
‘I hope to break Clive Sullivan's record by playing in more than 46 matches for Great Britain and I want to be captain at Wembley in the World Cup final.
‘But I also know that I will not reach any of those records on reputation.
Great Britain coach Malcolm Reilly has always picked men in form which is an encouragement to me to press hard all the time.’
Rugby League has always bred fine sportsmen and Garry Schofield is carrying on the tradition.
And he sees the promo-tional side of playing for Leeds as almost as important as the game itself.
‘You have to go out for the kids, you have to go to the schools and sign autographs.
I see it as part of my life.
‘I enjoy it totally.
I'm often asked if I get sick of making presentations and signing autographs but I always answer by saying that the time to worry is when no-one wants me to do these things.
‘I want to put something back into the game that has given me a good life.’
Alf Davies, chief executive of Leeds, said: ‘Garry is the best ambassador this game has ever had.
‘There was a little lad here the other day and he had a very obvious pair of new boots.
‘It's in your interests to keep those boots clean,’ Garry told him.
‘Clean boots can be the difference between winning and losing’.’
‘That little lad beamed.
He had been given a lesson from a great player and it was obvious that it was one he would never forget.’
HEADS YOU LOSE…
FRED FEELS WHAT IT IS LIKE TO BE TACKLED BY GARRY SCHOFIELD
SKIPPER…
ELLERY HANLEY
OUR PASSPORT TO OBLIVION
HIBS can tuck away their passports until their summer hols if they don't beat Anderlecht at Easter Road on Tuesday night.
Boss Alex Miller admits: ‘If we don't do the business at home then we are out.’
Anderlecht, beaten 3–2 by Sampdoria, in the semi-finals of the European Cup last season, have won their first five games in Belgium this season.
Miller has seen them in action and concedes: ‘They are in great shape.’
‘We will make chances against them,’ says Miller.
‘I am sure of that but whether we take them or not remains to be seen.
It is a tough one, but I know we can win the first leg.’
Hearts' manager Joe Jordan will be on a survival course in Czechoslovakia on Wednesday when his side face Slavia Prague in the other UEFA tie.
Jordan will be without injured Alan McLaren and suspended Craig Levein, his key defenders.
Jordan watched Slavia whip Dukla Prague 4–1 recently when their key hitman, Havel Kuka, scored a hat-trick.
Right now, Jordan would settle for a goalless draw and take his chances in the second leg at Tynecastle.
BHOY'S OWN GLORY
Creaney haunted by Celt legends
ALLAN HERRON
GERRY CREANEY has a dream.
It is fired by stirring memories of Celtic beating the mighty Juventus and thrashing the once-great Sporting Lisbon.
As a Celtic-mad kid of 11, Creaney stood wide-eyed on the Parkhead terraces to watch his heroes take on the best in Europe.
Juventus, built around the sublime skills of an Irishman called Liam Brady, were seen off 1–0.
Sporting Lisbon were smashed 5–0.
And Creaney's heart still beats faster when he remembers a thrilling draw with Ajax of Amsterdam, including Johann Cruyff.
Now Creaney longs to add to Celtic's European glory nights.
LEGENDS
‘These are the games still vivid in my mind,’ he says, ‘and they are the nights the Celtic fans still talk about.’
‘It's time we got back to those glory nights.’
Creaney, brought up on legends of the Lisbon Lions side who won the European Cup before he was born, is due to play his first full match in Europe when Celtic take on Cologne in the UEFA Cup first round first leg in Germany this week.
‘It will be very special to me and the rest of the lads,’ he said.
Creaney, 22, knocked in 23 goals last season.
He has been studying German football, and Cologne in particular on satellite TV for the past few weeks.
‘I watch everything I can because I feel this is a tie that could set us up for a good run in Europe,’ added Creaney.
‘Cologne may have had a poor start to the season, but they are typically disciplined like all German sides and will play as they are told to play by their coach.
‘No matter what happens they'll be inflexible.
‘Our fans shouldn't expect too much from us.
Our job is to go over there and come back with a result which keeps everything alive for us in the second leg at Parkhead.’
Creaney knows that Cologne skipper Pierre Littbarski is their key player and that their keeper Bodo Illgner, who defied Scotland's Ally McCoist and Gordon Durie in the European finals in Sweden, is the big influence in their defence.
‘I think we learned a lot from our 5–1 defeat in Neuchatel last season,’ he said.
‘I came on for the final five minutes of that match and got 45 minutes in the second half of the second leg which we won 1–0.
I think we learned then that there are times when it is best to play with some safety in away legs.’
Brady, now Creaney's boss at Celtic, has watched Cologne twice in recent weeks but he won't start talking about his plans until tomorrow.
NUDGED
And he warns: ‘Don't be fooled by the poor start they've made to the season.
They are a side trying to build up confidence at the moment.
‘They can play all right.
You've always got to handle any German side with some care.’
Creaney, who now forms a new strike partnership with Andy Payton, and has nudged his boyhood idol Charlie Nicholas into reserve football, feels the Cologne tie has come at the right time.
‘A lot of our lads are big occasion players,’ he told me.
‘They'll raise their game.
I'm confident of a good start in Europe.’
GERRY CAN Celtic striker Gerry Creaney is confident he will help bring European joy back to the fans at Parkhead
PEOPLE IN POWER
Mission Africa!
PETER MANDELSON
IT says a lot for the African National Congress in South Africa that, after their supporters were gunned down in cold blood at the beginning of the week, they are still prepared to talk peace.
Shouldn't the rest of the world now actively help these talks?
The UN-backed mission in former Yugoslavia shows the value of outside peacemakers.
After Bosnia, the next stop for Lord Owen and Cyrus Vance should be Pretoria.
NEW TASK: Lord Owen
Danger — men NOT at work
BUILDING skips and piles of rubble currently surround Downing Street.
The Chancellor's home at No 11 is being strengthened against attack — no doubt because even Mr Lamont doesn't believe his own forecasts of economic recovery.
While next door, outside the resi-dence of Inaction Man, builders erected a sign saying: ‘Danger Ahead — Men Working.’
It was removed, apparently because someone thought it might become the butt of jokes.
COLIN HANCOCK
BILL BRADSHAW /STEVE BATES /JOHN DILLON /SHAUN CUSTIS
ON March 29, 1992, we published an article which alleged that an investigation was in progress into claims that £50,000, received by Aldershot FC as its share of the gate and other receipts from the FA Cup ties against West Ham in January 1991, had gone missing.
It has been pointed out to us that our report might have been understood to reflect on Mr Hancock, who was chairman of Aldershot until June 1991.
If so, that was far from being our intention.
We are happy to accept that there are no grounds for the slightest suggestion of impropriety by Mr Hancock.
We apologise to Mr Hancock for any embarrassment which our report may have caused him.
DRUGS SHOCKER
WILF PAISH talks exclusively to SUPER SPORT
Leeds coach asks: Is sport right to ban them all?
SHAUN CUSTIS
LEEDS UNITED'S fitness coach Wilf Paish today calls on world sports chiefs to consider allowing some banned drugs BACK into competition!
Paish, former coach to Olympic gold medal javelin ace Tessa Sanderson and 800m silver medallist Peter Elliott, has blasted sports drugs laws as: ‘a total mud-dle’.
Paish recently entered the soccer world with champions Leeds United and says: ‘Sportsmen are being banned for breaking drugs rules but people should be asking are these rules right?
‘If a guitarist smokes a couple of weeds to get him in the mood to play no-one bats an eyelid because he's a public entertainer.
But isn't a soccer player an enter-tainer?
‘Is it so wrong for him to take a pep pill?
We say it's wrong because football is considered a gentleman's game.’
Paish cited betablockers as an example of the muddle.
QUESTION
‘Say I'm about 56 and I've got angina but I want to ride a horse.
The cure for the angina would be a betablocker.
I'd be able to get on the horse but I'd be ruled out of the Olympics because betablockers are banned.
‘I'm not advocating using anabolic steroids or anything like that but I would question whether certain drugs should be banned.
‘I know of a drug which is a bloody good cure for a cold but it's on the banned list because it's supposed to act as a boost.
‘We need a group of sports representatives to sit round a table with a group of doctors and sort out what's good and what's bad.’
Paish has been brought in as Leeds' fitness expert by boss Howard Wilkinson.
And he says: ‘I want to make the players faster, more powerful, and more aggressive.’
To do that he's devised a series of weird and wonderful training techniques.
One involves throwing a ball for a player to head while another one hurls a medicine ball into his back!
And he employs a zig-zag training sprint which involves a series of passes before the player finishes off by flinging himself at a rugby tackle bag!
‘If you are stronger you can kick the ball harder and if you have muscles like iron your opponent will come off second best.
‘If I can give a player an extra metre it's the difference between winning a ball and losing it.’
Paish admits the pressure on him is ‘massive’.
He's joined the champions and anything less than same again will be seen as failure.
But Paish believes in his methods.
He's already put them to good use at Halifax Rugby League club where he enjoyed four years of success.
In his time there they won the Division One title and were winners and runners-up in the Challenge Cup Final at Wembley.
OUTLOOK
He is also working with former cricket star Bob Appleyard to produce our fast bowlers of the future.
He has 15 under his command and insists: ‘I've got three who would suit any county in the country.’
Paish's outlook is the same whatever sport he's coaching.
He wants winners and nothing else will do.
‘If anyone comes up to me and says ‘It's only a game Wilf’ I get really angry.
‘Top class sport has taken over from war.
It's big business with everyone trying for an edge.
‘Continental football is harder than ours.
Top footballers the world over are about the same standard but the hun-grier, more aggressive animal is the victor.
‘Aggression is so important in the sports animal.’
Paish feels he has a tougher job instilling that killer instinct in footballers than athletes.
‘If you are on £3,000 a week with a mercedes and a lovely wife to put the tea on you are naturally going to be softer than the sportsmen who has nothing.
‘Linford Christie had nothing.
He had to fight his way up to earn his rewards.
It's the same with a lot of boxers.
‘But footballers are often on very good money before they've won anything.
What you have to instill in them is that losing is insulting to their pride.
‘The attitude should be: ‘If you can't win don't play’.
Some people might find that totally wrong and arrogant but to me it's a philosophy of sport.’
Ironically, however, it's a well paid footballer who embodies the Paish doctrine — Leeds star Gordon Strachan.
‘I've worked with a lot of top sportsmen but Strachan is the best pro I have ever come across in any sport.
LEVEL
‘He looks after his body and his fitness levels are as good as the 20 year olds if not better.
There's no doubt he can play into his late 30s at the top level.
‘He is a great example to the rest of the squad and they're bound to take note of his success and the reasons for it.
‘Footballers at the top used to be finished between 28 and 30 but you can prolong your playing life by nearly ten years if you look after yourself.
‘When you are on £3,000 a week that's a lot of money!’
CHRISTIE (top), ELLIOTT (middle), CHAPMAN (above)
TESSA SANDERSON (above) was coached by Paish while GORDON STRACHAN (left) is the best pro Paish has ever worked with
DEMON ROBB
TIM TAYLOR
GRAHAM TAYLOR searches desperately for someone to get a grip of England's midfield and you wonder if it is too late — at 28 — for Stewart Robson.
His early-season form at Coventry has been spellbinding.
He's looked the full business as an inspirational skipper.
Driving his team mates like a demon.
Passing like an angel.
Getting up and down the pitch like the Bryan Robson of old.
It is hard to think of him doing any worse for England than the cardboard cut-outs who allegedly were playing midfield in Santander the other night.
Certainly, West Ham must be choking on what they said before giving him a free transfer in the spring of last year.
Robson says he is still bitter about reading ‘you will be lucky to get 10 games a season out of him.’
Now he has just signed a new, three-year contract with Coventry and insists: ‘With hindsight, I think I should have sued West Ham.
‘The organisation of football in this country is such a shambles that sometimes I think going to law is the only way to get anything done.’
Flying
Instead, Robson settles for looking at the League table.
Coventry, flying high, take on Spurs in a live TV game tomorrow night at Highfield Road.
And West Ham were relegated last season while the footballer they wrote off won Coventry's Player of the Year award.
Robson played 44 of Coventry's 50 games and none of his rare absences was connected with the pelvic injury which at one stage of his Hammers' career restricted him to 13 games in three years.
There's no doubting Robson's pedigree.
Captain of England youth Under-21 teams.
Player of the Year twice at Arsenal and again at West Ham after his £700,000 move.
Then he paid half the £6,000 fees to attend a clinic when injured.
He says: ‘I am still bitter about what happened at West Ham.
If I had believed what they said about me, I would have crawled away and given up.
I'll never forgive them.
‘They made me look a risky proposition until Terry Butcher gave me a chance at Coventry.
‘Now Bobby Gould has given me this new contract.
So everything is OK.
‘But all around there is still this lack of organisation in the football business generally.
‘At Coventry, we kicked off the season with seven games in 21 days.
‘Do the people at the top really know what they are doing?’
STEWART ROBSON
BRYAN ROBSON
TURNER TARGET
MEL HENDERSON
CHRIS TURNER, Peterborough's boss, has no doubt how he would spend a pools fortune — he'd buy the club!
Turner likes a flutter on the dogs and horses, but is never likely to back enough winners to fund his dream team.
He says: ‘I'd love to own it — lock, stock and barrel.
I don't care if it sound's big-headed, I believe I could run the whole show.’
Posh have been up for grabs since last year and chairman John Devaney, a property magnate and ex-Oxford director, will sell if the price is right.
And Turner jokes: ‘I only wish I had Terry Venables’ cash and then I'd buy it.’
Turner nearly became Mr Big at Barnet a couple of years ago when he fronted a consortium negotiating to buy the club from chairman Stan Flash-man.
But the deal collapsed when it reached an advanced stage an advanced.
Turner, who was helping old mate Barry Fry at the time, moved on to his present job.
It's something of a miracle that Posh are still alive.
They were collecting cash in a bucket to stay afloat until Turner arrived in January last year.
Surprise
And he did far more than help them just to survive.
Turner surprised even himself by leading them to promotion in successive seasons.
He's the man with the Midas touch.
At Cambridge, he signed Dion Dublin on a free from Norwich — the same Dublin who joined Manchester United in a £1 million deal last month.
He could do it all over again with striker Ken Charlery, who scored 26 goals last season after Turner snatched him from Maidstone for a give-away £20,000.
Turner says: ‘We have not had a single offer for Ken — not yet.
But I've noticed a few faces in the crowd and it won't be long.
‘But our real gem is Ian Bennett.
Newcastle had too many keepers so Jim Smith let him go.
‘He'll be 21 next month and I honestly can't see how we'll hold onto him.’
Turner is tipping Bennett to follow another former Posh keeper, Arsenal's David Seaman, into the England squad.
KEN CHARLERY
BATTLE OF THE GERS
ALLAN HERRON
HEARD the one about the Dutchman, the Ukrainian and the two Englishmen?
Walter Smith has — and it means a European Cup headache for the Rangers boss.
He is only allowed three foreigners in his side under FIFA rules.
Alexei Mikhailichenko, the Ukrainian, will be number one choice for the first leg tie against Lyngby of Denmark at Ibrox on Wednesday.
Fighting for the other two places are England's Trevor Steven, recovering from injury, and Mark Hateley, also back from injury plus Dutch winger Pieter Huistra, who has been in inspired form recently.
Not an easy choice for Smith.
But his selection problems are nothing compared to the turmoil at Lyngby, following the sale of five of their players, the shock resignation of coach Kent Karlsson and just one win from their opening six games of the season.
Smith is still taking nothing for granted — he's had the Danish champions watched five times.
But he says: ‘They are difficult to assess because they have made changes each time.
‘I have a feeling they will react to the big occasion at Ibrox and they are bound to be on a high after Denmark winning the European title in Sweden.’
Smith reckons it's about time Rangers had a good run in Europe.
He adds: ‘We have won the championship four times in a row, but the furthest we have got is the quarter-finals four years ago.
We have got to do better this time.’
He wants to win with goals to spare — and not give away a goal.
‘This is always a priority in a home tie,’ he says.
Lyngby's new coach, former skipper Michael Schafer, knows he faces a mountain in Glasgow, but says: ‘Maybe the big crowd will bring out the best in my players.’
FIRST PICK…
Mikhailichenko
DAVID MILLS
Talking soccer sense
I WAS talking to my old mate Alan Murray, the Hartlepool boss, the other day.
He was looking forward to Friday's game with Wigan and the heady possibility of moving into the top three of Division Two.
What's this?
Pool, so often the butt of soccer jokes, on the threshold of the First Division?
Murray has brought in a couple of good players and reckons Hartlepool have a fair chance of challenging for promotion this season — and I think he's right.
But Murray knows that depends on Pool staying clear of injury problems.
He has a squad of little more than 15 senior players.
And that's likely to be stretched to the limit.
HOTLINE
BILL BRADSHAW
STEVE BATES
JOHN DILLON
SHAUN CUSTIS
WEST BROM boss Ossie Ardiles wants to spend £200,000 on defender Matt Appleby at his old club Newcastle.
CREWE's Craig Hignett is eyed by Palace and Arsenal.
OLDHAM seek a defender and Arsenal's Steve Bould tops their list…the Gunners are still chasing Manchester City's David White to plug the gap left by Rocastle.
WEST HAM may get their man if they bid for Sunder-land's John Byrne…
Millwall fancy Orient defender Adrian Whitbread and Palace are keen on Huddersfield full-back Simon Charlton.
MAKE IT A DOUBLE
NOTTS COUNTY hope to complete a £1m package deal with Peterborough.
They will add forward Ken Charlery to centre-back David Robinson, signed on Friday.
Charlery is thinking it over.
Now the auction for County defender Craig Short will begin.
A £2.5m bid from Derby has been accepted but Short is stall-ing.
Watch now for Liverpool Blackburn and Forest to join in.
Alan Buckley, Grimsby boss, is meanwhile being lined up to replace Neil Warnock at County.
Warnock is favourite to end up at Sunderland if Malcolm Crosby goes.
Relations between Warnock and Derek Pavis, County chairman, are at an all-time low and he would be delighted to move north.
ALEX FERGUSON, Manchester United boss, has spied on QPR striker Les Ferdinand and Coventry's Kevin Gallacher.
Dion Dublin is crocked and Fergie knows a goal shortage last season cost United their first title in 25 years.
He's willing to spend to stop that happening again.
WE TOLD you a few weeks back that multi-million pound striker Marco Gabbiadini was on the way out at Derby.
That's looking more likely now but whispers of a return to Sunderland in exchange for Don Goodman are wide of the mark
CZECH defender Milos Glonek, 23, of Slovan Bratis-lava, is looking for a club in England.
Chelsea, who have lost Paul Elliott, have been alerted.
ROOKIE striker John Goodman could be Millwall's next passport to a million.
Word is out that he may be in the same class as Chris Armstrong, sold to Palace for £1m after just a handful of games.
CREWE'S Craig Hignett is eyed by Palace and Arsenal.
LAWRIE McMENEMY'S job as Graham Taylor's England No 2 could be on the line tomorrow.
FA councillors meet in London to discuss the 1–0 defeat in Spain.
And Hotline has been told that some of them are to question McMenemy's position.
They also want clarifi-cation of his role.
McMenemy was a surprise appointment as Graham Taylor's assistant in 1990.
His job includes looking after under-21 teams.
Taylor has faced a barrage of criticism and calls for his resignation since last week's defeat.
McMENEMY: questions
YOU can pick up a bargain at Arsenal.
Andy Linighan can go at a cut-price £750,000; Paul Davies and defender Stephen Morrow at £500,000 apiece and Colin Pates for £250,000.
London is calling for Rocky again
LEEDS had a £4 million midfield playing reserve football last week…
David Rocastle, Scott Sellars, Steve Hodge and Kevin Sharp.
Sharp, on trial after leaving French club Auxerre, impressed and is likely to get a contract.
And what price a return to London for £2 million Rocastle?
Chelsea and Spurs are both watching his non-playing role with interest.
Goodbye Gunners
ARSENAL fan Paul Dear has vowed he will never again set foot inside Highbury after losing a court battle against the club.
We recently revealed how Dear, a 37-year-old sales manager from Stevenage, claimed a refund of the £1,500 he spent on an Arsenal Bond.
He said he had been misled into believing that buying a Bond was the only way to gain admission to Highbury in future.
But Arsenal said they had always made it clear that, while Bondholders would get priority for tickets, any still available would be sold.
Mr Dear's claim was thrown out out by Cler-kenwell County Court on Friday.
Now we will win the Arc — Clive
LARRY LYNX
USER FRIENDLY gained a 6–1 quote for the Arc at Longchamp on October 4 after an impressive victory in the St Leger at Doncaster yesterday.
Trainer Clive Brittain's brilliant filly, who won the English and Irish Oaks so easily, completed a classic treble when running away with the Leger, beating Sonus by three and a half lengths with Bonny Scot a neck away third.
George Duffield sat User Friendly in behind early pacemakers, Mack The Knife and Sonus, and waited until the two-fur-long marker before letting out a couple of inches of rein.
The response was immediate and the result never in doubt as User Friendly galloped clear.
Brittain said: ‘User Friendly showed she is as good as we always thought she was.
‘She will now go for the Arc, and after that.
who knows, maybe the Breeders’ Cup.
She will stay in training next year because she loves racing.
‘I said earlier in the year that she hadn't reached her peak.
I think we are coming up to the peaks now.’
Yorkshireman George Duffield, whose previous St Leger ride was on a pacemaker 12 years ago, said: ‘She just quickened up alongside them, and then left them for dead.’
St Jovite, Europe's leading colt who is 6–4 favourite for the Arc, runs in the Champion Stakes at Leopardtown today.
ROVER IS TOO WILD
DENZIL SULLIVAN
Crewe 4 Doncaster R 0
ROVERS had goalkeeper Paul Crichton sent off for a professional foul to complete a miserable afternoon.
Crichton had been Rovers’ hero, but he suddenly turned villain when he pulled down Hignett as he streaked clear five minutes from time.
Ref Kenneth Leach sent the keeper off and Kearney stepped up to rifle in the penalty for Crewe's fourth goal.
Their opener was another spot-kick, converted by Hignett.
Gar-vey added the second and Macauley made it three from Hignett's cross.
GREAT Britain star Michael Jackson is to be refused a new deal at Wakefield.
Trinity say that no extra cash is available and that Jackson must honour his existing contract.
But the decision could force the 22-year-old forward to seek a move when he returns from a groin injury in November.
Jackson asked for a revised contract on returning from the summer tour Down Under.
LEIGH have opened talks with Oldham in a bid to capture former Wigan and Wakefield utility back Ged Byrne (above) in a swap deal.
HULL are to sign Garry Clark, the former Hull KR and Great Britain winger, who played last season with now-defunct Scarborough Pirates.
WHITEHAVEN and Workington are eyeing Kiwi halfback Clayton Friend, who is on a weekly basis at Carlisle after failing to secure a contract.
SALFORD scrum half Mark Dobson, who has sharpened up by training with Olympic sprinter David Grindley, has been given a free transfer.
HOTLINE EXTRA
BRACEWELL BLOW
THERE are fears that Newcastle's summer buy Paul Bracewell could be facing another battle to save his career.
Brave battler Bracewell rescued his career once after serious ankle trouble at Everton.
Now, after a bright, scoring start to his Newcastle career, he's got big problems again — with the same ankle.
Manager Kevin Keegan is confident Bracewell will not be unduly troubled by the tendon trouble.
A plaster is due to come off this week.
But there is bound to be concern until Bracewell tests the ankle again.
PAUL BRACEWELL
AN ARMY of pensioners have forced Scarborough to ban late evening kick-offs after a deluge of complaints that 8pm starts are too late!
Third Division Boro's switchboard was jammed the day after their 3–0 win over Bradford City in the Coca-Cola Cup last month which kicked-off at 8pm.
Chairman Geoffrey Richmond revealed: ‘We've banned 8pm kick-offs due to complaints from pensioners.
Nursing homes complained that residents were kept out late because of the kick-off time.
They said their cocoa was burning!’
STU PLAYS LEAP FROG!
JOHN ROBINSON
ST HELENS were yesterday trying to unravel the mystery of the sudden re-appearance of their stayaway Welshman Stuart Evans — in French Rugby Union!
Evans, missing for over a season after failing to agree a contract with Saints, has been caught playing for Grenoble against Toulon.
The 19-stone prop, cleared by the French RU Federation, went on as a second half replacement and played for almost half an hour.
But it was not long before he was identified as the former Neath and Swansea star who switched codes in 1987.
And he is now certain to be banned in France under rules which forbid professionals returning to play Union.
When told how Evans had been rumbled, St Helens chairman Eric Latham said: ‘It's news to me — but nothing surprises me anymore.
‘Even though he is still on our books, there is nothing we can do, especially if the French take action and stop him playing now that he has been recognised.
‘The door is still open for him to return here.
He could win his place back or put himself on the market.’
Honour
Evans' team mates are sure to believe that he was tempted into French RU by the pay, reputedly twice that earned by League players there.
And they will recall that it's not long since Evans was talking about cashing in on Rugby Union in South Africa!
EVANS…taking French leave
TERRY Venables this week chairs a meeting of the ‘other 14’ Premier League clubs — in a Tottenham night club!
The aim is to forge a strategy in the wake of the blocking of the Bass sponsorhsip deal last week.
Eight clubs tied to an electronic stadium advertising deal stymied Bass and the rump of 14 are concerned at the influence of an elite eight.
SAUNDERS SWITCH A TURN-OFF FOR WILKO
SHAUN CUSTIS
ASTON VILLA parade £2.25 million striker Dean Saunders against champions Leeds today — and Howard Wilkinson is not batting an eyelid.
Manager Wilkinson's Leeds team have made a stuttering start to the season and Saunders will be hoping to capi-talise on a jittery defence.
But Wilkinson blasts: ‘I'm not interested in what Dean Saunders does.
He doesn't play for me.’
Leeds only have nine points from their first seven games although Wilko isn't worrying yet.
‘I don't consider that seven matches is long enough to judge us.
When we've played 12 that might be the time.’
Villa pitch Saunders straight in and manager Ron Atkinson says: ‘All the players think Dean's a great player who will score a lot of goals.’
SAUNDERS
CHELSEA chairman Ken Bates made an amazing attack on the so-called ‘Platinum Club’— the eight teams who have blocked the sponsorship of the Premier League — in yesterday's Chelsea programme.
He writes: ‘It would appear that a small number of club chairmen, or in the case of Arsenal their vice-chairman, believe they have some God-given right to an advantage — an unfair advantage — over their fellow members.
‘One wonders why this is so.
Is it their arrogance that presumes such greatness?
Or is it straight-forward cheating because that is the only way they know to play the game?’
He then attacked QPR, the club who swung the vote against the deal, saying: ‘The eventual Judas was Queens Park Rangers, a decision few people in football can comprehend.
QPR is owned by one of the wealthiest families in the UK.
They have sacrificed their principles and lost their good name for just £300,000.’
Clang!
Fed-up Chelsea call time on Lurch
BRIAN MADLEY
DAVE BEASANT was left in the lurch by Chelsea last night.
His Stamford Bridge career is in ruins.
Manager Ian Porterfield is to buy a replacement after Beasant had another nightmare match in the 3–2 home defeat by Norwich.
Beasant, nicknamed Lurch because of his towering height and raw-boned appearance, was blamed for Liverpool's winner only last weekend.
Last night former England international Beasant dashed out of a side-entrance after two more of his blunders led to Norwich goals.
And manager Porterfield admitted: ‘Dave Beasant probably needs a change as much as we do.
I've now got to seriously consider buying a replacement.
‘We can't afford to make mistakes like that.
The time's come when I've got to make a change.
I was shell-shocked.
‘In the first 45 minutes we did very well.
The second half was horrific.’
Beasant, 33, was booed every time he touched the ball after his errors led to goals for Robins and Phillips.
One Chelsea target may be Erik Thorstvedt of Spurs.
Last night Beasant's wife Sandra, said: ‘I think it's a good idea to leave Dave alone tonight.’
BEASANT
JOCKPOT
SHAUN CUSTIS
RANGERS stars are on an incredible £24,000-a-man to win just two rounds of the European Cup!
The massive incentive is way above what's on offer to English champs Leeds but Rangers are prepared to shell out to reach the lucrative group stages of Europe's premier club competition.
Rangers, millions in debt, are obsessed with European success and the rewards that go with it.
They can expect to make around £1 million a tie from the three guaranteed ‘league’ matches once they reach the last eight.
And chairman David Murray believes an outlay of over £300,000 to achieve that would be shrewd business.
Rangers kick off their European Cup campaign at home to Danish champions Lingby on Wednesday with the players on £4,000 a man to win the tie.
Even substitutes who don't get on get £2,000.
But the real golden goose comes in the second round.
It's £20,000 a man to win that one — and £10,000 just for sitting on the bench!
Success would mean full houses at Ibrox's 44,000 capacity stadium, producing gate receipts of around £million.
Add to that the £200,000 per game UEFA arrangement for televising the matches and ground advertising deals and you've got the magic million figure.
Leeds kick off their European campaign away to German champions Stuttgart.
A club insider told us: ‘Our lads definitely aren't on that much!’
WHAT A DRAG!
Angry Speedie gets shirty with fan — now faces rap
JAMES COURAGE
GERROFF!
David Speedie lost his rag with an invading fan at The Dell yesterday — but his one-man pitch clear-ing job could land him in hot water.
Furious Saints fans ran on to the pitch in anger just before the final whistle as their team headed for a 2–1 defeat by QPR.
Two supporters laid flat out near the centre circle.
Then Speedie took a hand!
He grabbed a protester by the neck, hauled him to his feet, shook him and then pushed him away.
‘Speedie had hold of him by the neck, he was really mouthing off at him,’ said one fan.
‘The fans were complaining about Saints’ poor performance, but Speedie lost his rag.’
Play halted as other Saints players raced over and pulled away Speedie — who has had clashes with fans in the past.
Stewards were called in to clear the pitch and the final moments of play continued.
Southampton secretary Brian Truscott said: ‘It is likely the referee will report the incident.
Speedie was just trying to get on with the game.
‘The police were arresting those two supporters.’
But Speedie won't be disciplined by the club.
Manager Ian Branfoot said: ‘David got a fan around the head and perhaps he was a little over-enthusiastic.
He was angry with those supporters who were wasting our time.’
Last night Hampshire police confirmed that two fans had been charged with public order offences.
BOK OFF!
South Africa's tour could be scrapped
TERRY GODWIN
SOUTH AFRICA'S tour of England is under serious threat and Rugby Union chiefs are already looking for alternative opposition for their showpiece match at Twickenham on November 14.
They're not taking the chance of losing a near-£1 million gate from a match aimed at celebrating the opening of the new £25 million East Stand.
And last night Peter Hain, veteran anti-apartheid campaigner, told Super Sport in an exclusive interview: ‘The tour should not go ahead.’
Neath MP Hain believes there will be more urgent demands for the Springboks' four-match tour to be axed if the violence in South Africa continues.
GROTESQUE
Hain said: ‘It is grotesque to resume rugby and cricket links while innocent blacks are being gunned down.
‘I'd like to see a freeze on all tours until the killings stop.
I supported the lifting of sanctions, but the avalanche of death and blood has made me realise we've all been conned’.
If the plug is pulled on the tour, there'll be a scramble to replace the Boks…but I believe the RFU are already looking to France to step into the breach.
The South Africans are scheduled to play nine matches, including two Tests, in France next month before coming to England and if that leg of the tour is also chopped the French would be obvious candidates to fill Twickenham in their place.
Hain orchestrated the campaign against the Springboks on their last tour to the UK in 1969, but he doesn't believe similar violent protests would occur this time.
‘The decision for the tour to go ahead is down to the ANC,’ said Hain.
‘The threat of stopping the tour will bring some sense to the South African government and the white population out there.
‘If the killings go on, there's going to be a big rethink in the UK about the whole question of sporting links with South Africa.’
RFU Secretary Dudley Wood said that as far as he was concerned the tour is still on.
‘Everything is in place.
It would only be prevented if the Home Office intervened.’
REVIEW
He did confirm however that England had a fall-back plan if the Boks are ruled out.
‘England would definitely play someone at Twickenham on November 14’ added Wood.
English Rugby are not the only ones concerned with events in South Africa.
The game's ruling body, the International Board, are monitoring the situation on a regular basis.
The IB secretary Keith Rowlands admitted that if the tour was cancelled, it would have an impact on the decision to play the 1995 World Cup in South Africa.
The IB meet in London in November and the World Cup will have a prominent place on the agenda.
‘The IB have the ability to review its decision, taking into account all the vari-ous aspects.’
NO GO NEATH MP Peter Hain is calling for the Springbok tour to be called off
GOUGH: NO REGRETS
Scotland skipper opens his heart
RICHARD GOUGH
ALLAN HERRON
I'M ASHAMED to be the first Scotland captain sent off in an international match.
But I am no cheat.
I'll have to live with the notoriety for the rest of my days.
But I have no regrets about grabbing that ball to prevent a goal being scored against us in our World Cup tie in Berne.
It earned me a red card.
I broke the new FIFA laws and I was punished for it.
In my defence, I have to say it is instinctive for any defender to try to prevent a goal.
It is something I might do again this week, next week or next month.
My action stopped Stephane Chapuisat scoring a fourth Swiss goal.
Was it worth it?
I hope so.
Maybe stopping that goal will mean something if our group is decided on goal difference.
You can probably guess that Berne is not my favourite city.
In fact, I hope I never see the place again.
A year ago I got the headlines when I pulled out of the European side against the Swiss at the last moment.
Again I find I'm in the headlines, and again for all the wrong reasons.
When the Swiss whipped the ball across the halfway line I was confident that I could cut it out, legally.
But it suddenly took a flier and I knew I was in trouble.
Ian Durrant told me that later that the ball had bounced off a sprinkler head.
Now I miss the tie with Portugal at Ibrox next month, and there's a hint that I might even be out against Italy in November.
That's my punishment.
It seems severe for a technical offence, and it hurts.
Losing 3–1 also hurt.
I said before the game that it would be difficult.
The Swiss played us off the field in both our European ties a year ago, yet we managed to take three points from them.
Now we have to beat Portugal and Italy at Ibrox before the end of the year to get ourselves back on course to qualify for the World Cup finals.
Tragic husband detects allergy bungle
BRIAN RADFORD
YOUR stories of hospital blunders continue to pour in.
Here are the latest:
TRUSTING Carol Tierney entered hospital for an operation to free a trapped nerve in her arm — and died ten days later, her body riddled with poison.
The mother of five's family doctor had told Hope Hospital, in Manchester, that she was extremely allergic to codeine and must NEVER be given the painkiller.
The operation was a success and husband Peter, from Wythenshawe, Manchester, visited her in the ward later in the day.
While he was there a doctor was about to inject a dose of codeine when Peter exclaimed: ‘You can't do that.
You'll kill her!’
Peter immediately explained Carol's codeine allergy but the doctor replied: ‘But she's had some already.’
From that day, Carol deteriorated until she died.
Mr Tierney said: ‘I am sure the codeine killed her.
It was a terrible blunder.’
Coroner David Blakey said: ‘I feel the stress of the operation caused bacteria in Mrs Tierney's bladder to become active.
‘I don't feel the doctors can be criticised.
I don't feel the codeine was a factor in her death.’
— FREDA SCHOFIELD is convinced the medical profession will put her family in the Guinness Book of Records.
‘My daughter's baby was born dead because the hospital took 11 hours to decide on a caesarean operation,’ she said.
‘My sister Dorothy died from stomach cancer just eight weeks after being given a clean bill of health by a Manchester hospital.
‘And my brother Ken had a massive heart attack in another Manchester hospital after two blunders during an operation.’
Freda, from Salford, Manchester, also says a ‘bungling surgeon’ at the Northern Manchester Hospital removed the WRONG ovary when she went in with a cyst.
IF you have a hospital blunder to report, call 071–822 2051, or write to: People Investigations, 33 Holborn, London EC1P 1DQ 
VICTIM: Mrs Tierney
Short cut to the catwalk
GEOFF ELLIS
A RARE chance to launch into the glamorous word of modelling — and the opportunity to become a beauty queen — are both up for grabs.
Granada's popular Asian magazine programme Chalte Chalte celebrates the start of its new series tonight with a Model Of The Year competition.
The winner will train at a top agency, have a camera test and then be offered the chance to sign up as a professional model.
Entrants must be aged 16 to 25, and must not have done any professional modelling or have an existing portfolio.
They will be featured during the series and the finalists will be chosen early next month.
The final of the contest coincides with Britain's first Miss Asia UK competition in Birmingham.
Miss Asia organiser Amarjit Sidhu — the man responsible for the UK Asian pop awards — said the aim was to put on a family show where girls would have a chance to shine.
‘The music scene is very male dominated and there is little for the girls’ he said.
‘This will be an opportunity for them to come into their own but without having to do anything that might upset their families.’
PEOPLE IN POWER
PETER MANDELSON
Sounds like too much…
CHANNEL FOUR chief Michael Grade sparked a furious row when he accused the BBC of behaving more like a commercial business than public service broadcasters.
I don't have a great deal of sympathy for his argument, since the BBC has to live in the real world like everyone else.
Even so, I was rather surprised that a family must pay 3.50 for adults and 2.50 for kids to visit and listen to the BBC's exhibition of favourite old radio programmes at Broadcasting House.
After all, our licence fee got the programmes made in the first place
Top of the poll pops
The new American film Bob Roberts has a politician singing and dancing his way to the top.
This isn't too far -fetched.
We have seen Democrat Presidential hopeful Bill Clinton playing his sax on American TV.
Just imagine what would happen if it caught on here.
John Smith on the bagpipes.
John Major playing the spoons.
And his mate David Mellor with rings on his fingers and belles on his toes…
Time to express wonder
INVITING Mussolini's grand-daughter to speak at the Tory Party conference has caused outrage.
The beautiful Alessandra (above), a Euro MP and neo-Fascist, has been invited by a right-wing Tory pressure group.
I can't think what there is to learn from Miss Mussolini — unless she's going to tell us how to make our trains run on time…
Princess who's a proper Royal
ONE member of the Royal Family quietly getting on with her life untroubled by snooping ex-bank managers, gold-digging royal authors and preying palace flunkeys is the Princess Royal.
Despite her long-standing affair and rumoured pending marriage to Commander Tim Laurence, Anne has managed to escape the sort of publicity that has dogged other female members of The Firm.
Sexist cynics might suggest this is because she doesn't have Di's looks or Fergie's telephotogenic qualities.
I prefer to think that Anne's secret is that if you act like royalty, the chance is you'll be treated like royalty
Pound Major on jobs fiasco
JOHN SMITH, understandably, is boiling with anger at the Tory refusal to recall Parliament.
But he shouldn't be surprised.
If the Premier had his way, the Commons would be suspended indefinitely and no camera crew allowed within two miles of Downing Street.
The public is used to no action on the economy from Mr Major.
But now it's no comment, too.
Yet, encouraged by Tory Central Office, sections of the Press are keener to criticise Labour for the quality of its opposition than to slam the Government for policy failures.
On radio last week, high-profile Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown was spelling out his alternative recovery programme for the umpteenth time.
‘But these are just words,’ wailed his interviewer.
‘Putting pressure on the Government isn't enough.
The need for action is now.’
True.
But the sad truth is that words are all that Labour has while the Tories rule.
However frustrating, Labour leaders must keep up the attack to put Britain back to work.
Unemployment — not devaluation or public borrowing — is THE issue dividing Labour and the Tories.
An emergency jobs programme to reduce it should be the main battleground.
The Tory-fed Press would whimper about costs and sham jobs.
But there's no bigger drain on public funds than financing the dole.
And lackeys in the Press would be better off directing their fire at the Premier, who still has a job, than at the millions who don't
Asian faces get set to take Hollywood by storm…
MICHAEL TARAT
ASIANS in the West are moving in on Hollywood.
Big names from the Asian communities in Britain, America and even the subcontinent are being snapped up by major studios in the film capital.
And many Asians, like former tennis ace Vijay Amritraj, are buying up chunks of the Hollywood media empire.
The subcontinent is increasingly being used for locations — and Hollywood is beginning to target the Asian community, seeing it as a vast untapped audience which could help bring the industry out of recession.
Heart-throb Art Malik is very much flavour of the month in Tinseltown following the releases of Turtle Beach and the film starring Patrick Swayze, City Of Joy.
Ready for release is the Year Of The Comet, in which he plays a seductive villain, and he is currently working on The Son Of Pink Panther, at Pinewood, directed by Blake Edwards.
Art's agent in America, Bob Duvet, said: ‘Hollywood loves him.
He's good looking, a brilliant actor and the producers are lining up to give him work.
He's just finished a TV pilot for the American channel CBS, entitled Beauty.’
One of the hottest directors currently in Los Angeles is 28-year-old Radha Bharadwaj, a Punjabi woman whose debut project, Closet Land, a political thriller, has been backed by film giant Oliver Stone.
Other behind-the-scenes personalities include tennis player Vijay Amritraj and his brother, Ashok.
Vijay, who has appeared in movies such as Octopussy and Star Trek IV, owns the largest Asian cable channel in America and has just bought Universal Studios' music arm.
He is hoping to rope in Madonna to record her next album there.
His younger brother Ashok, a film producer in his own right, has formed an alliance with movie star Jean Claude Van Damme and will be churning out action movies like Double Impact.
THE South Indian film producer said: ‘Indians living in America are very financially astute.
They have been backing smaller movies in previous years, but now things are changing.
‘Even the most unexpected films are becoming successful.’
City Of Joy, which is due for release in Britain next month, has given light to a showcase of talent such as Shabana Azmi and Om Puri, both of whom are tipped to take Oscars early next year.
This has prompted producers to consider joint ventures in the Indian subcontinent.
An industry insider said: ‘Hollywood is going through a slump.
There aren't many new ideas, or the money to back them, so if there is a good script that has an Asian angle, the chances are it's got a better probability of getting made.
‘Production would be cheaper in India and the actors have a lot of talent and commitment.’
BIG STAR BACKING: Oliver Stone
TAKING HOLLYWOOD BY STORM: Art Malik, pictured in Turtle Beach with Greta Scacchi, is very much flavour of the month after rave reviews for his latest films
QUIET REVOLUTION: Tennis star Vijay is hoping to recruit Madonna
NAME OF THE GAME: City Of Joy actor Patrick Swayze filmed on location in Calcutta
I know that Lord Lucan's alive, well and INNOCENT
Why ‘psychic detective’ Nella won't track down vanished peer
NELLA JONES
THE uncanny psychic powers of clairvoyant NELLA JONES (left) have helped police crack a string of baffling murder mysteries.
She even had graphic, disturbing visions of when the infamous Yorkshire Ripper was going to claim another two of his victims.
Now the remarkable psychic detective exclusively opens a casebook that spans 20 years to tell two more amazing stories: Why she believes that Lord Lucan is still alive; and how she helped the hunt to find the killers of tragic safari girl Julie Ward.
I'M CONVINCED Lord Lucan is alive and has visited Britain several times.
I could find him now.
But I won't — because I don't believe he killed the family nanny and he hasn't a hope of proving his innocence.
A warrant for the missing earl's arrest was issued after the nanny, Sandra Rivett, was found bludgeoned to death in the basement of the family's home in London's Belgravia in 1974.
His wife was also badly beaten, but survived.
One theory was that the attack on the nanny was a case of mistaken identity.
Lady Lucan and Sandra Rivett were of similar age and build.
In the dim light of the basement the earl, it was thought, had battered the wrong woman.
The Lucan case intrigued me so I told the police that I would consider working on it.
In fact, I had already picked up quite a lot about ‘Lucky’ Lucan and what had happened.
I told detectives that he had a pilot's licence and could fly himself out of the country.
They said: ‘We didn't know about that.’
So I said: ‘Well, you'd better check up on it.’
They did, and I was right.
I know there was great confusion that night.
In the pictures I was ‘seeing,’ Lord Lucan was walking past the house — then he walked back and went in.
Sandra Rivett was already dead.
Lucan arrived as the murderer was making his escape out of the back of the house.
All those stories about Sandra being mistaken for Lady Lucan are absolute rubbish as far as I am concerned.
Every person has his or her own presence.
If you were in a darkened room with your husband, you would know it was your husband.
If you were in a darkened room with a stranger, you would know it was a stranger.
LUCAN left and went to see friends in Sussex, but he took a strange route.
He did not go straight to his destination.
He left the country by air and he had a lot of help on the way.
He ended up in Nairobi and lived there for quite a long time.
Then he moved to the South of France and now he has moved on elsewhere.
He is still very much alive and he looks just like his pictures, only considerably older of course.
He has visited Britain several times but he has never been even close to being caught and I am pleased about that.
I'm sure I could find him now, but I have made a vow that I am not going to tell anyone where he is, for the man is innocent and has no hope of proving that at the moment.
TWO YEARS after the dramatic and mysterious death of pretty blonde tourist Julie Ward in a Kenyan game reserve, her father visited me.
‘I want to find the man who killed her,’ he said.
Julie, 28, was on an overland trek of Africa when her parents were told she had disappeared.
Her father John a successful hotelier from Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, flew to Nairobi where he chartered six light aircraft in the search for her.
They discovered Julie's jeep and Mr Ward found his daughter's remains on the ashes of a fire in the bush.
There were stories that she had been eaten by wild animals, but John Ward didn't believe it.
He arrived at my house with his wife and a pile of photographs of African men.
I wasn't really looking at the faces, as such, and I immediately felt drawn to one of the men.
This was a wicked man.
‘That is the man who murdered your daughter,’ I told the Wards.
Then I came to the photo of another man.
He was involved, too.
I also told them: ‘The men responsible for your daughter's murder will be brought to trial and convicted.’
John Ward picks up the story…
‘I was sceptical when we went to see Nella.
Now I am not so sceptical.
WHILE she was out of the room, I laid a selection of photos of people and places on the floor and as soon as she came back she immediately pointed out two men.
‘These pictures had never been published so there was no way she could have known who the people were.’
One of the pictured men was to be brought to trial accused of murdering Julie.
Mr Ward continued: ‘Nella also reacted strongly to a picture of an old toilet block with a corrugated roof.
After talking to Nella, I returned to Kenya and searched it.
In a cubicle I found one of Julie's hairs.
The evidence was a great help.’
But Nella was wrong about a conviction.
Two men — including the one in the photograph — were cleared of her murder.
— From NELLA: A PSYCHIC EYE by Nella Jones with Mandy Bruce (Ebury Press, 14.99).
Hiding?
Our artist's impression of Lucan as he might look today
Death in the bush: Julie Ward on safari
IT'S ENDORADO FOR THE SEX AND SANGRIA SOAP
MICHAEL BURKE
TV SOAP Eldorado, launched just two months ago in a blaze of publicity, is heading for the chop.
More than 10 million of licence-payers' money has been sunk into what some saw as a ‘last-ditch’ attempt by the Beeb to compete with ITV in the ratings war.
But BBC boss-to-be John Birt has already had enough of the sun, sex and sangria saga, which only started in July.
The final axe is expected to come after Birt takes over as the new director general in March.
He has said he will change the face of the BBC when he is in charge.
And, rather than allow Eldorado to be a drain on the Corporation for years to come, the show is expected to be the first on his hit list.
According to the Sunday Times, Birt, the present deputy director general, is thought to be planning to shed a staggering 8,000 jobs in a bid to keep the Beeb on target as a going concern.
Torrent
The BBC's current panic is that there is potential Government pressure against licences increasing as the years go by in an age of free market competition.
The corporation's charter runs out in 1996.
And it believes that if it is to survive in its present form it must become more serious in its outlook.
Eldorado's death knell has been heralded since the week it started on July 6, although BBC bosses had said they would keep it going for five years despite the torrent of criticism.
On top of EastEnders, Coronation Street and Neighbours, it was just one soap too many.
Whether viewers agree it should go or not, the amount of money spent on it — a purpose-built set in the south of Spain cost 3 million alone — was the real nail in the coffin.
A senior source told The People last night: ‘We now recognise our future lies in quality, not trying to make mass programming with a popular appeal.’
But the BBC was confused last night over Birt's comments to a Sunday Times journalist in America, in which he appeared to say that Eldorado would not survive under his tenure as director general.
One embarrassed spokesman said last night: ‘If he's said that, then there's not much more we can contribute to it.’
Another senior official said: ‘This is all speculation at the moment.
‘The BBC's position on its future will be clearly set out in the charter review document now being drafted and which will be published in the autumn.’
SHAKE-UP: John Birt
COSTA LOT: Eldorado's Pilar and Marcus
WIN A TRIP TO PARADISE
EVER wondered what it would be like if YOU could live like a pools winner?
Now The People has joined up with Vernons to let you know!
And Vernons know what they're talking about — last year they had more than 400,000 lucky winners who shared more than 40 million.
The prize in this great contest is a luxury holiday for two on a paradise coral island in the tropical Maldives.
Our winners will fly from Gatwick between February and October next year (subject to availability).
Then they'll take a 90-minute boat trip to Kanifinolhu, to spend 14 glorious nights.
Their prize will include meals, snorkelling and windsurfing.
For YOUR passport to paradise, just answer the question below on a postcard.
Add your name and address and send the card to: Vernons Contest, The People, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TY, by September 21.
Winner will be first correct entry drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply (no cash alternative).
For full details of Vernons Pools, phone FREEPHONE 0800 369369.
And now for that question:
Which ocean are the Maldives in?
A: Atlantic Ocean?
B: Indian Ocean?
C: Billy Ocean?
PARADISE: Enjoy a holiday on a coral island
Wars of the World
And still the killing goes on…the sad toll of death and destruction that spans our troubled globe
Non-stop hatred 365 days a year
KATE MOLLOY
FROM the killing fields of war-torn Bosnia to the devastation of starving Somalia, guns are being fired in hatred somewhere around the world 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
Here we give you a grim guide through the significant wars and disputes around the globe — and our graphic (above) estimates the horrifying total of lives lost in each conflict…so far.
ASIA
AZERBAIJAN: The Christian Armenians are fighting Muslim Azerbaijanis to keep control of the Nagorno Karabakh hills.
AFGHANISTAN: Soviet withdrawal has led to vicious warfare between rival Mujahedin rebels.
KASHMIR: Flare-ups between Muslims and Hindus in this territory disputed by both India and Pakistan.
TIBET: Tibetans want independence from China and unarmed protesters are in constant conflict with authorities.
CAMBODIA: On the edge of conflict as Khmer Rouge continue to violate the UN-imposed cease-fire.
Khmer Rouge's former genocidal regime responsible for two million deaths.
BURMA: Twenty-year tribal warfare continues and the repressive Marxist state is fighting growing resistance movement.
SRI LANKA: Tamil separatists in the North have ripped apart this once popular tourist island.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA: Territorial conflict over small strip of border with Indonesia.
Annexation of former Portuguese colony of East Timor by Indonesia has never been fully accepted internally.
BOUGAINVILLE: Ethnic violence and clashes between Papua New Guineas security forces and Bougainville people.
SPRATLY ISLANDS: Insoluble sovereignty dispute of these islands — strategically important because of oil — between China, Vietnam, Brunei, Taiwan, Malaysia and Philippines.
MIDDLE EAST
LEBANON: Syrian occupation has aggravated the three existing conflicts between Muslims/Christians, Muslims/Israelis and Christians/Syrians — with no end in sight.
IRAQ: Kurdish rebellion in North — and Shi'ite separatist movement in South.
Top flashpoint in the world as Saddam Hussein continues brinkmanship against West.
Its ten-year territorial war with neighbouring Iran ceased in 1989.
But conflict remains with suppression of pro-Iranian Kurds in Iraq and pro -Iraqi Mujahedin in Iran.
ISRAEL: Fighting between Israel and Palestinians over the Occupied Territories captured in the Six Day War of 1967.
OMAN/YEMEN: Tribal skirmishes continue, with Yemen claiming part of Oman in the south.
BALKANS
YUGOSLAVIA: Being torn apart by Serbian imperialism and Croat and Muslim factions — causing the largest displacement of civilian population since World War Two.
Albania and Greece could be drawn into the conflict.
AFRICA
SOMALIA: The ultimate nightmare as civil authority collapses under the weight of two battling war lords.
Whole generation faces starvation.
MOZAMBIQUE: Bloody civil war between Frelimo government forces and Renamo bandits.
LIBERIA: Stalemate in the civil war between rival tribes in Africa's first independent black state which the locals call ‘no war, no peace’.
ETHIOPIA: Ruling Democratic Front, successors to Marxist dictator Col Mengistu, face civil war from armed tribes in the East.
RWANDA: Two years of bloody, inter-tribal fighting.
No end in sight.
CHAD: Libya invaded Chad in 1988 and, despite being driven out by France, still lays claim to territory.
WESTERN SAHARA: Polisario liberation movement lays claim to former region now governed by Morocco leading to guerrilla warfare.
SOUTH AFRICA: Despite dialogue between the government and ANC, township killings threaten to lead to open civil war.
LATIN AMERICA
PERU: 12 years of bloody war.
Shining Path guerrilla force is Latin America's most savage and fastest growing shadow army.
EL SALVADOR: US-backed government is fighting left-wing r evolutionary forces in a 20-year conflict.
NICARAGUA: Clashes between left-wing Sandinista and the right -wing government.
COLOMBIA: Cocaine barons dominate the country with their own private armies which has resulted in US military involvement.
IRELAND
ULSTER: Irish Republicans want a united, independent Ireland while Loyalists want province to remain in the UK.
PEOPLE PEOPLE
SEAN SMITH
IF you are still stuck for which college course to take this autumn, here are three on offer in America.
— Household Equipment: Selection, operation and care of household equipment (Brigham Young University).
— Leisure, The Individual And Society: ‘Students formulate their own philosophy of leisure’(University of Georgia).
— And my first choice — Rope Jumping: Theory And Technique (University of Nevada)
DR MARY Archer can't take part in a celebrity sponsored walk today because she's on holiday.
She wrote to the organisers: ‘If it were in your mind to approach any B-division celebrities, I should say I shall be taking Jeffrey with me.’
BETTY'S THE GIRL WHO WILL SAY BOO!
DON'T be fooled by Betty Boo's bimbo posing all over our magazines and newspapers.
The deeply-exotic singer is, at least by pop standards, a smart businesswoman.
Rather like Madonna, Betty employs a team of accountants at her own business offices to look after her hard-earned (no, easily-earned) cash.
Even though she's only 22, she is very keen on safeguarding her future.
Meanwhile, back at bimbo ranch, Betty says her first kiss was snogging Tom Jones on the telly while he was singing on Top Of The Pops.
This is, of course, just the sort of unfortunate experience which can scar a young girl for life.
Double glammy!
Wow, it's golden Virginia
THE glamourising of Virginia Bottomley reached its pinnacle this week.
The Health Secretary posed for the lens of the famous photographer of beautiful women, Terry O'Neill.
Terry's portrait of our dishiest Cabinet Minister for years will be used to spearhead European Drug Prevention Week in November.
His brilliant work has already brought out the very best in Brigitte Bardot, Raquel Welch, Britt Ekland and his former wife Faye Dunaway, among countless Hollywood stars.
He is also the Royal Family's favourite and even managed to produce a stunning portrait of Fergie in 1988.
He will have made sure Virginia looked as beautiful and sensuous as possible.
This will probably enrage a number of female readers but since her elevation to the Cabinet after the April General Election, Virginia has seemed a new woman.
Gone is that blue-stocking look where I was sure she used to cut her own hair.
She now has a chic, new style and astutely-applied make-up.
And she is power dressing, wearing beautifully-cut, expensive clothes.
It's a trend in women's politics set, of course, by Margaret Thatcher although Virginia is naturally much more attractive.
I was told: ‘She is becoming the image of her Spitting Image.
‘If John Major didn't fancy her before, he must fancy her now.
‘It's really a case of if you've got it, make sure everybody knows you've got it.’
Seeing Virginia now, you can easily understand how Peter Bottomley jumped the gun.
NEW: Power dressing
OLD: Blue-stockinged
ON the subject of Hollywood exiles, Miss Amanda de Cadenet is moving over there.Hooray!
It may not be permanent, however.
But, needing something to do after being ditched from pop show The Word, she has signed up for acting lessons at the famous Lee Strasbourg School.
Strasbourg originated method acting and was responsible for training the great Marlon Brando and, latterly, Madonna.
INCREDIBLY, Billy Connolly, friend of Fergie and occasional comic, is about to celebrate 25 years in the business.
A quarter of a century of the Big Yin.
He has come a long way from the rough-edged, bearded Glaswegian to the rich, Hollywood smoothie, all tan and haircut.
Anyway, 25 years — nearly time for the first facelift, Billy.
‘I'm sorry, I didn't know you had someone with you.
I'll call you back.’
SOPHIA Loren is greatly upset at rumours that she has had cosmetic surgery at 58.
I don't know why she's so worked up.
Everybody else has.
To prove she hasn't she has started leaving off her trademark scarves to reveal a beautiful, swan-like neck.
SINCE she won the French championships three months ago, Monica Seles has been relatively out of form (she'll probably win the U.S. now I've said that).
The reason, according to the ladies on the circuit who notice these things, is the return of her wobbly bottom.
Monica is a wee bit overweight.
She did slim down a couple of years ago but has piled on the pounds again.
The problem is double-edged.
Firstly, she needs to carry some weight to maintain her power.
Secondly, she likes her nosh.
I was told: ‘Monica doesn't seem to care what she eats.’
A Professional you know what
A HAPLESS reporter on the Surrey Advertiser made the cardinal mistake of mentioning The Professionals when he went along to interview Martin Shaw who is currently appearing in a play at the Thorndike Theatre, Leatherhead.
‘I have nothing to say about it whatsoever.
I never talk about The Professionals.
You should know that from your cuttings,’ snapped Mr Shaw.
The star of the Professionals went on: ‘Why you want to write about something that happened in 1977 I don't know.
You must be duller than I thought.’
In case you'd forgotten, Martin Shaw was in The Professionals.
Try naming one other thing he's been in
WHEN Boris Yeltsin last visited Britain, one of the things that really impressed him was private health care, not exactly a socialist ideal.
As a result, I learn that he has decided Russia should have its own scheme and has asked BUPA to advise him.
According to my spy (who came in with a cold), BUPA plan to send a team over there shortly.
For what it's worth, the English language Moscow Magazine reports that 70 per cent of the Russian Cabinet are homosexual
PSST
A THEATRICAL lady doctor tripped up to me at a party in Covent Garden this week and told me she had phoned a film producer friend and asked how he was.
‘Incredible,’ came the reply.
‘I've just signed Schwarzenegger for a three-movie deal, my wife's oil paintings are going to be shown in a major London gallery, my son got first-class honours at Oxford and I've won half a million on the pools.’
MAN OF THE PEOPLE
JOHN SMITH
Fighting on with all flags flying
THREE Union Jacks fluttering nobly in the breeze brought a touch of patriotic pride to a British firm in Hampshire.
Bosses saw nothing wrong with flying the flag — and neither did anyone else living near the Roman Carriage car company in Winklebury.
But busybody bureaucrats on Basingstoke council didn't share this enthusiasm for the old red, white and blue.
They ordered the auto firm to haul down the flags, claiming they were ‘excessive’ in a residential area.
Paul Stapleton, who manages the company, thinks these nit-picking pen pushers are acting like proper prats — and I couldn't agree more.
‘What's wrong with having a bit of pride in your country?’ fumes Paul.
‘To see those flags flying is a smashing sight.
Far from being an eyesore, local people get pleasure seeing them blowing in the wind.
‘I've had phone calls and letters from old soldiers saying it's a pity more people don't raise the Union Jack.’
Quite so.
How the hell can our national flag be labelled ‘excessive’ when almost every High Street in the land is scarred by garish signs for everything from Indian restaurants to American burger joints?
I am delighted to report that Paul and his colleagues are going to the barricades to fight the council's decision.
Meanwhile the flags keep on defiantly flying — and long may they do so.
It will be a sad day for Britain if the Union Jack falls to town hall tyrants who are completely up the pole.
JULIE BADYEAR
POOR old Ted Sullivan has finally breathed his last in Coronation Street.
Filming has finished on the tear-jerking episode where he dies in Rita Fairclough's arms.
I hope it's more convincing than Alec Gilroy's departure from the Rovers Return last week.
Alec played a blinder but Julie Goodyear's acting as the hapless Bet Lynch was as wooden as Long John Silver's leg.
There's more to portraying sadness and torment than staring into space like a hypnotised horse 
WOODEN: Julie's farewell scene with Alec
Sorry for what?
UNION leader John Monks, deputy general secretary of the TUC, has issued a public apology to the Japanese.
He fears they were offended by a debate which described work methods introduced in their British factories as ‘alien.’
If we're talking about robots and regimentation, I reckon the Japanese approach to production is indeed alien to the way we do things over here.
Why shouldn't we say so?
Fifty years ago, British prisoners of war who dared speak their mind were forced to crawl on their bellies to say sorry to the Japanese.
How sad to see one of our senior trade union officials doing exactly the same in 1992.
A party too far
WHEN Satanic Verses author Salman Rushdie went to a party in London, a posse of armed police stood by in case of attacks by Muslim fanatics.
Since his 1989 ‘death sentence’ Mr Rushdie's bodyguards have cost the taxpayer more than 1m.
No one suggests he should be left to the mercy of mad killers, but if he's really on the run he should be sheltering in some safe house, not bopping around town.
I can't help wondering at his level of security when the police are already hard-pressed to protect less celebrated citizens from murderers, muggers, rapists and robbers.
People you can trust…
HOLLYWOOD oldie James Stewart has been named as the most trusted man in America.
The 84-year-old actor came first in a survey which asked Americans: ‘If you wanted to buy something, who would you want to sell it?’
Clint Eastwood came second.
So how about Britain?
Who's the person YOU would be prepared to trust — and why?
Let me have your suggestions.
There's 20 each for the best three.
TOP: James Stewart
All wet wet, wet
ALONG with six million other householders, I've been unable to use a hosepipe for more than two years because of a drought order.
So when the recent rains filled the gutters and left my back garden awash, I assumed an end to the ban might be at hand.
Not at all.
After torrential rainfalls over the Bank Holiday, a spokesman for the Three Valleys Water area suggested: ‘It would have to rain like this every day for three months to make any difference.’
Now, it is quite obvious that three months of non-stop rain is highly unlikely.
So what are we supposed to do before we can turn our hosepipes back on?
Sit around and pray for a miracle?
We might as well.
As far as I can see, the only thing the privatised companies are doing is keeping the bills rising as the water level drops.
FINALLY
MY mate Chalkie down at The York reckons his missus must be descended from Noah.
Every time they travel, she takes two of everything.
Why Frank's a lucky man
CATHY GALVIN
FRANK Bough is a very lucky man.
His loyal and seemingly very level-headed wife Nesta says of the second sex scandal he has been involved in during their marriage:
‘It's amazing what you can pretend is not happening.
I can't say I approve of what he has done but I don't ask him and I don't want to know the details.’
What is even more amazing is the fact that because Frank always seems such an incredibly nice man, everyone, including his TV bosses, seem to want to ignore it as well.
It will probably only be if Nesta decides to up and leave him that he'll actually crumble.
And that seems unlikely.
‘You don't just stop loving someone after all that time — unfortunately,’ she says.
SCANDAL: Frank
Godiva's city is stripped bare!
CATHY GALVIN
SPARE a thought for Coventry.
It's got very little going for it.
I know because I grew up there.
But it did have an elegant shopping precinct, the first of its kind, and a city centre flanked by the grandeur of its old and new cathedrals.
Now planners have attached bits of escalator and supposed ‘modern design’ to it willy-nilly so that there's no room for shoppers and no apparent view of the cathedrals.
There are extra shopping centres and the Lady Godiva statue now has a marquee-like canopy swamping it.
Most attractive.
Much of this has been financed by Kuwaiti money and has created the kind of visual damage to the city centre the Germans inflicted during the war.
No-one has ever wanted to be sent to Coventry.
Now what chance has it got
Thinking big
CATHY GALVIN
THE only way men could be relied on to take the proposed male contraceptive pill would be if it enlarged certain parts of their anatomy in the way the female pill enlarges breasts.
Just a thought
‘Soup kitchen’ misery of Post Office queues
CATHY GALVIN
EVERY time I go to the Post Office, there's a queue.
My local office has plenty of leaflets telling me about wonderful things like savings schemes and child benefit, but rarely stocks the mysterious forms that are supposed to accompany them.
For those, you have to traipse off to the main offices.
And queue again.
I've given up trying to buy stamps from the Post Office — again because the queues are so long — and I now get them in books from my newsagent.
Worst of all is watching those people who have to queue for their pensions and benefits in such dingy surroundings every week.
It's like a queue for a soup kitchen.
I've seen pensioners waiting outside in the rain and it's even worse for those further ahead in the line inside who are being subjected to those dreadful video adverts while they wait.
Why do we have to be so humiliated by officialdom?
Couldn't it all be better organised and more pleasant?
The Post Office says an independent survey backs their claim that their queues are less than those in banks, building societies or supermarkets.
Maybe it's because their queues are so much more miserable that the waiting seems so long
Thirty is a danger age- ask Diana!
CATHY GALVIN
IF we are to believe the current crop of Diana rumours, our once shy Di has a temper worthy of a fuming fishwife and a line in colourful verbal abuse to match.
You wouldn't want to meet her coming towards you down a dark alley.
But why should we be surprised that she chooses to vent her anger on Prince Charles and — so we are led to believe — hurl her body at cocktail cabinets when she feels a paddy coming on?
(I pity the cocktail cabinet, mind you, and not the Prince).
Diana is, after all, in her thirties — the most dangerous decade for a woman.
As the mother of a friend observed recently: ‘Ah, thirty.
That's when you start hitting your husband and sleeping with other men.’
The comment was certainly not directed at Diana.
But it nonetheless had the ring of truth about it.
Thirty is when you decide it's not on that your hubby has got time to watch the football — or the polo — and have a drink with the lads while you run from children to job to domestic chores like some demented nursemaid on speed.
Give him a wallop, why don't you?
It might be just what he needs to wake him up a bit.
It's the time you shout at your boss and your colleagues because you're sick of being taken for granted when you know you've done three times the work of any man for half the recognition.
IT'S the time you lean out of your car window when a man says something about women drivers and yell at them to ‘come over here and say that.’
They never do.
It's the time you decide to take revenge for the wrongs that have been done to you when you were too nave and scared to do anything about it.
It's the time you stamp on someone's foot, hard, when they barge past you as you smile at them innocently and say sorry.
If you don't do those things, you will never find yourself walking tall, just walked over.
Royal insiders got it wrong when they described Diana in her present state as a ‘loose cannon.’
She's a very wired missile aimed clearly at strategic targets.
No-one should get in her way
Sex case teacher is suspended
A FORMER Portsmouth soccer player has been suspended from his teaching job after claims that he had sex with a teenage girl pupil 12 years ago.
John Lovett, deputy head of Hayling School, Hayling Island, has been interviewed by detectives and is now on police bail.
Mr Lovett, who played for Portsmouth between 1958 and 1960, works part-time as Portsmouth's athletics development officer and lives in Havant.
He has taught maths at Hayling School for 21 years
Crack TV clues
TELLY TECS
Win an 80 TV licence!
Answers on a postcard to: TV Quiz 21, London SE99 7TY, by September 10.
1
How many times a week can you watch Eldorado?
Think carefully.
2
Gordon Burns brings back ‘telly's toughest quiz’ this week.
Name it.
3
In the return this week of another new series, you'll find actor David Daker playing a famous side-kick called Harry Crawford.
What's the show?
4
Men Behaving Badly, back on Tuesday night, is about the antics of a randy football team.
True or false?
5
In The Darling Buds Of May, Pop Larkin's plump wife is called a) Iris, b) Primrose, c) Ma?.
6
What was ITV's answer to Neighbours which features young stars and Aussie sunshine?
7
EastEnder Sharon Mitchell was the adopted daughter of which character, long since dead and buried?
8
Noel Edmonds brings back his quiz show for square-eyed goggle-box fans on Tuesday.
What's it called?.
9
What is the proper name of TV-AM's breakfast show, being axed on December 31?
10
Which Bob was the first presenter of Les Dennis's Friday night game show, Family Fortunes?
— LAST week's answers:
1.
Peter Falk;
2.
L A Law;
3.
Fletch;
4.
Charley;
5.
Wolfie;
6.
Keith Floyd;
7.
Miriam Karlin;
8.
Edith;
9.
Cagney and Lacey;
10.
Second Thoughts;
11.
Desmond's;
12.
Jessica Fletcher;
13.
Tracey;
14.
Me, You And Him;
15.
Patricia Brake.
Two hearts beat as one on ice.
Shame about Torvill and Dean
‘We're such very different people…even Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire never ended up together’
All the little old ladies still wish stars had got married
JEAN RAFFERTY
ONCE upon a time there was a stocky little ice skater who fell in love with her tall, fair-haired partner.
They were great champions and everyone who saw them on the ice thought they were lovers.
But they weren't, even if the stocky little one wanted them to be.
The tall, fair-haired man fell for another woman skater and his little partner's heart was broken.
No, I'm not talking about Torvill and Dean.
I'm referring to the Russian stars Irina Rodnina and Alexei Ulanov, who set the skating world alight as partners back in the early 1970s.
And you can stop wondering about Torvill and Dean's love life now because they're both married to other people.
Jayne's even got her husband Phil with her as sound engineer on their latest nationwide tour, billed as The Best Of Torvill and Dean.
It's at an ice rink near you shortly and features gymnastics as well as some of the best skaters in the world, including Robin Cousins and 60 Ukrainians.
There are even two precocious child skaters, who make you realise how long the process of togetherness takes to gell.
Torvill and Dean have always made it look easy.
In the public mind they're a single entity.
Torvill ‘n’ Dean.
Peaches ‘n’ cream.
Two hearts beating as one.
They sear across the ice, moving in unison as if some magnetic force holds them together.
They seem weightless, above the everyday world of bone and blood and muscle.
To see them is to believe in love, real old-fashioned romantic love.
BUT it doesn't just happen by accident.
They make it look natural.
They make it look NICE.
But they're two very different people.
‘They both have temperaments,’ says Andris Toppe, who has worked with the couple for eight years as choreographer and rehearsal director.
‘Chris has a bit of a temper sometimes and can go overboard.
Jayne's more placid but if provoked she can come back with an equally strong response.’
Chris, 34, admits: ‘Jayne's calm and level-headed.
I'm more erratic, up and down.
I'm a Leo and she's Libra.’
In the years when they first turned professional, Mr Leo and Ms Libra were practically inseparable.
They were young and giggly and hardly ever out of each other 's sight.
But the differences already showed.
I talked to them during rehearsals in 1985.
It was a bit like that TV programme about people's houses.
The wife poses against the bright red carpet and lime green sofa which she's chosen and goes on about her husband's appalling colour sense.
‘Do you ever surprise each other?’
Yes, says one.
No, says the other.
Chris, the extrovert, thrill-seeking Leo, felt by then that their partnership was too predictable.
‘Maybe that's what we miss,’ he said.
‘The surprise of life.’
He created that sense of surprise on the ice, going on to become probably the skating world's leading choreographer.
But he was always looking for something extra off the ice too, through dare-devil exploits like deep sea diving and motor racing.
And when he finally married last year, it was to a glamorous foreigner, the French-Canadian skater Isabelle Duchesnay.
Exotic, long-legged, fiery.
All the things that Jayne Torvill was not.
Says Chris: ‘Isabelle and I are…not fiery.
We just jump up and down more.
We're maybe not as level-headed as Jayne.’
Then he gets worried.
‘I don't want it to sound like Jayne's mundane.
She's just more practical than I am.’
Sensible Jayne, 35, married a glamorous foreigner too, Phil Christensen.
Their romance may or may not have been a whirlwind one.
Seven months before their 1990 wedding, she still thought it possible she would marry Chris.
Was it a long romance?
‘I'm not saying,’ says cool, well-balanced Libran Jayne.
‘I think private life is separate.
I'm only in the public eye because of what I do on the ice.’
In fact, what she does on the ice is scorch it up.
Torvill and Dean have made ice-dancing erotic, with eastern passion in Song Of India, volcanic passion in their Bolero routine.
They told people for years that they lived like brother and sister — but no-one believed them.
Except ex-convent girls like me who recognised sexual tension when they saw it.
‘Very few of the legendary partnerships actually get together,’ says Chris.
‘With Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, I think it was a love-hate thing on the set.
Lots of ladies come in to see us and say: ‘It's a shame you didn't marry.’
But I still think they enjoy the show.’
So what DID happen to those Russian stars?
The great partnership inevitably split up.
But Irina Rodnina went on to ever-greater skating heights with new partner Alexander Zaitsev, whom she wed in 1975.
She is now working as a coach in California with her two children and second husband.
‘She's living a very Western life and she's very happy,’ says Chris.
So though it's now Torvill and Dean PLUS Phil and Isabelle, it's all right.
They do live happily ever after in the end.
FACING TWO WAYS: Torvill and Dean go in separate directions after setting the ice alight in their spectacular shows (below)— home to their own partners, husband Phil in Jayne's case (inset top left) and wife Isabelle in Chris's (top right)
LOVING LOOK: Torvill and Dean see eye to eye in their act
Main pictures by MARTIN GILFEATHER
SEE THEM FREE
WE'VE got a total of FIFTEEN PAIRS of tickets to win to see The Best of Torvill and Dean at Wembley Arena, Birmingham NIA or Cardiff Ice Rink.
To win a pair, just answer this question on a postcard: Did Torvill and Dean win GOLD or BRONZE medals at the 1984 Winter Olympics?
Add your name and address and send to: The People/Torvill and Dean Competition, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TY.
Please indicate WHICH venue you prefer.
Winners will be first correct entries drawn on Monday September 14.
Normal MGN rules, no cash alternative.
— For more information, call Wembley Arena on 081 900 1234, Birmingham NIA on 021 200 2222, or Cardiff Ice Rink on 0222 371236
Boon beats off threat to make him too trendy
MICHAEL BURKE Television Correspondent
BOON STAR Michael Elphick has won a Boon-style battle — to save his own TV character.
He threatened to quit the hit series when writers tried to turn the gentle fireman-turned-'tec into a trendy, big-time operator involved with glamour girls and car chases: ‘It just wasn't on,’ said Michael, back on Tuesday (ITV, 9pm) for a seventh Boon series, in a 13-week run.
‘Boon has always cared for the ordinary man and woman — old ladies who need help in the post office or the bloke in the pub who breaks down and confesses he's being hounded by loan sharks.
‘But the writers wanted Boon to tear around with buildings blowing up, like something out of The Sweeney.
‘It was an attempt to get bigger ratings but I said Boon would have to stay with ordinary social issues or I was out.’
Insiders at Central TV agree there have been several off-set ‘disagreements’ over Boon's future.
‘But there's a good mix of social issues in the new series,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘And don't worry, Ken's still on his famous bike — he won't be racing around in a Ferrari!’
Michael, 45, who quit boozing because it threatened to wreck his life, has given up another ‘vice’— being too generous.
‘When Boon began, I felt guilty about earning a lot of money so I became a soft touch for begging letters and charity appeals,’ he said.
‘Over five years I gave away about a million quid.
Then two years ago I realised I was going broke.
‘Now I stick to a handful of charities which I support regularly.’
BBC makes hotel sling its hookers
BBC bosses ordered prostitutes out of a posh hotel — so they could film actresses playing hookers.
It happened on location in Warsaw for tonight's drama, A Very Polish Practice,(BBC 1, 9.25pm) starring Peter Davison and Joanna Kanska.
Peter says: ‘The Poles were furious that we wanted to show prostitutes in their hotel bar, claiming they never had them.
In fact we had to turf out dozens before we could even start filming.’
DRAMA: Joanna
WIN SINGIN' IN THE RAIN
HOLLYWOOD'S most famous musical Singin' In The Rain is 40 years young.
To celebrate, we've got together with MGM/UA Home Video to give away FIFTY copies of the fabulous film.
And 25 runners-up will each get a giant MGM umbrella.
The movie, starring Gene Kelly and Debbie Reynolds, is released on video for the first time on September 21 — with the original preview trailer and a deleted sequence of Reynolds singing You Are My Lucky Star.
To win one of these super prizes, answer the following questions in our specially-compiled quiz:
1 Who played Hollywood heart-throb Don Lockwood in the film? 2 Donald O'Connor's famous song in the movie is Make ‘Em *****? 3 Debbie Reynolds plays bubbly singer/actress Kathy Selden.
Name her real-life famous daughter.
4 What is Gene Kelly's dance ‘partner’ in the splashing Singin' In The Rain sequence? 5 During a dream sequence, Gene Kelly falls for a beautiful dark-haired dancer, said to have the greatest legs in Hollywood, Cyd C*******.
Send your answers on a postcard, with your name and address, to: The People Singin' In The Rain Competition, Blackhorse Road, London, SE99 7TY.
Entries close on September 14.
Winners are the first correct entries drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply, with no cash alternative.
FAMOUS FORTY YEARS ON: Debbie Reynolds and Gene Kelly
Michelle waits an Age
MICHELLE Pfeiffer's new blockbuster The Age Of Innocence has been zapped by Hollywood bosses.
They have put back the release date nine months to September next year.
Michelle, Catwoman in Batman Returns, is currently filming the 19th Century drama.
Columbia Pictures was set to premiere the 15 million movie at Christmas — but claim it won't be ready in time.
The studio said: ‘The new release date will put the film in an ideal position to compete for next year's Oscars.’
Secret love of jailbird Peter
BIRDS OF A FEATHER actor Peter Polycarpou has made a shock admission.
Although he's happily married, he loves another woman…stroppy TV wife Pauline Quirke.
Peter confesses: ‘I was in love the instant we met.’
The hit sitcom returns today and fans will be stunned by his confession — because the pair can't stand each other in the show.
Peter said: ‘It raises a lot of laughs when my long-suffering missus, Sharon, visits crafty Chris in prison and is horrible to him.
‘But the biggest joke is that Pauline actually recommended me for the part because she liked me so much!
As soon as we met there was a marvellous rapport.
‘The producers told me later that I got the job because of the winning chemistry between us — and that Pauline had put in a good word for me.
‘We have maintained a close relationship and I love that lady.
We often have lunch together and go out for drinks.
It's Arnie's world!
CHRIS BRANDES
SUPERSTAR Arnold Schwarzenegger plans to appear in a wacky movie spoof of his own career.
He will team up with American comic Dana Carvey, who played Garth in the smash-hit movie Wayne's World.
Arnie's fictional cousins — Austrian body-builders Hans and Franz Schwarzenegger — will make their silver-screen debut in Hans And Franz Go To Hollywood.
Carvey, currently working on Wayne's World II, will play muscle-bound Hans.
A movie insider revealed: ‘Hans and Franz are already regulars on the American comedy show Saturday Night Live.
‘Arnie thinks they're really funny.
‘He's already appeared with them on TV — and can't wait to team up with them again on the big screen.’
The new movie charts the Austrian duo's quest for Tinseltown success.
In the film, they even ask relative Arnie to help them break into action pictures.
SPOOF: Arnie sends himself up
No kidding for Lynn and hubby
LIFE is obviously just child's play for husband and wife TV presenters John Stapleton and Lynn Faulds Wood.
The two got togged up to publicise the first programme in their new series of Watchdog tomorrow night (BBC1, 7.30pm) which investigates the cost of school uniforms.
Picture: MARC BOURDILLO
MONEY PEOPLE
PETER POSH
High cost of losing
THE number of bankruptcies in the first half of the year soared by 60 per cent, while company failures rose by just over 8 per cent .
Whinge of the Week
YOUR Whinges of the Week have been pouring in.
Here's one from Mr Kimbrey, of Warwick…
‘My whinge is being charged 10 for being overdrawn with National Giro for the first time ever and by only 3.11 — and even though they were in possession of cheques for 36.53 which they knew would be honoured.’
I am glad to say that Girobank have agreed to refund the 10 because, said a spokeswoman, ‘Mr Kimbrey has never been overdrawn before, is a good customer, and it is a very small amount.’
Keep those whinges coming — on a postcard- to: Whinge of the Week, Money People, 33, Holborn Circus, London EC1P 1DQ
Perch here — 3
CANARY WHARF in London's beleaguered Docklands, above, becomes the city's newest tourist attraction next Saturday.
And its panoramic views come comparatively cheap.
At 3 a shot, its 800 feet work out at 1p for every 2.6ft — compared with 0.9ft for Blackpool Tower and 1.7ft for Paris's Eiffel Tower.
But for value for money, New York's Empire State Building has them beaten at 6.7ft a penny
Your 550m gift to the taxman!
NEVER mind whether or not the Queen should be paying income tax (I believe she should stump up), should YOU be paying it?
Millions of you don't seem to know!
The Inland Revenue reckons there are one million of you not paying tax who should be paying — and eight million paying tax who shouldn't.
And we're not talking peanuts here.
Last year the taxman pocketed 550 million from people who should not have been paying tax — or who paid too much.
The problem stems from the rule, introduced last year, which said that non-taxpayers didn't have to pay tax on bank or building society interest.
The Inland Revenue reckoned 15 million people came into this category.
But to benefit, non-taxpayers had to register by filling in a form from their banks, building societies or local tax offices.
SEVEN MILLION haven't!
The taxmen are also concerned about the people — far fewer — who have registered but should not have done so.
They're doing checks to flush them out.
If a genuine mistake has been made, then the bank or building society will be told to start deducting tax, and people might be asked to pay the tax on past interest.
Where people set out to defraud the revenue, there could be penalties.
The cardinal rule is: only register if your taxable income is less than your tax allowances.
So do your sums now.
Inland Revenue leaflet IR110 (any tax office) tells you how 
QUEEN: Will she pay?
Questions & Answers
Q Some time ago, I read that changes had been made in what ERNIE pays out each month.
I think that ERNIE isn't drawing as many prizes!
A The only significant change in Premium Bonds in recent years was four years ago when total prize money was reduced from 7 per cent of the value of all Bonds taking part to 6.5.
This resulted if anything in slightly more smaller prizes and fewer large ones.
Q What about the number of prizes awarded?
A They've gone up in line with the increase in the number of Bonds.
The odds on winning any prize remain constant at 11,000–1.
— My address: Peter Posh, Money People, 33, Holborn Circus, London EC1P 1DQ.
Please remember that I'm unable to accept legal responsibility for answers
Sink or swim!
LITTLE Joseph Baker's all washed up!
He'd just finished helping with the dishes when he decided it was time for high-jinks in the sink.
Joseph's mum, Mrs C. A. Baker, of Garforth, Leeds, wins a fabulous Konica TOPS camera and five rolls of Konica Super SR colour print film.
We'll give away one of these cameras and rolls of film EVERY WEEK to the reader who sends the best fun picture.
It MUST be in colour, and no professionals, please.
Send your shots to: Prize Pics, Picture Desk, The People, 33 Holborn, London EC1P 1DQ.
Sorry, we can't return them
PEOPLE POWER
PRIZE PICTURE
MRS E Barrett, of Wigan, sent us this super snap of great-grandson Keiran doing his Moses impression.
She wins a Konica TOPS camera and five rolls of Konica Super SR colour print film.
We'll give away one of these cameras and rolls of film every week for the best fun colour picture.
Send your shot to: Prize Pics, Picture Desk, The People, 33 Holborn, London EC1P 1DQ.
Sorry, we can't return them.
PEOPLE ON PEOPLE
WORDS of a week which reminded us there are two — sometimes three — sides to every story…
‘Everyone has a sex life.
It is no one else's business.’
— Frank Bough in the middle of a new scandal.
‘Poor old Frank.
He does seem to keep shooting himself in the foot.’
— Bough's neighbour Ernie Wise.
‘Her cooking was horrible — like eating turf.’
— Sylvester Stallone about his mum.
‘The ref called me over and gave me my marching orders.
I told him it wasn't me.’— The amateur footballer sent off for a foul by his twin brother.
‘I wouldn't want to re-live an 11-year horror story over ten more painful weeks.’
— A Brighton politician on why a college course on Margaret Thatcher failed to attract a single student.
‘It's like suits and ties.
One dog might be enough for one man, but others like more.’
— Owner of the pack of 15 dogs which savaged a 10-year-old girl.
‘He was quite put out, but there was one blessing.
At least he missed Eldorado.’
— A guard at the prison where a licence dodger was banned from watching TV.
‘I must say I felt a lot better afterwards.’
— The farmer who sprayed a trailer-load of stinking slurry over council offices when his plans for a retirement bungalow were turned down.
‘We've got to have more kids.
I mean it's just too much fun not to.’
— Goldie Hawn at 46.
‘I was a puny little guy and I didn't have the strength or courage to do anything.
But I outlasted the bastards.’
— Harrison Ford recalling his schooldays.
‘I suppose I must have got confused.’
— The 84-year-old holidaymaker who journeyed 70 miles home forgetting he'd left his wife in their broken-down car.
Time to act daffy!
MR PLANTWELL
EASY-TO-GROW daffodils are at home anywhere in the garden.
The usual planting time is this month and October at a distance of four to six inches apart and five inches deep.
Dwarf varieties should be set two to three inches deep.
Daffodils can also be grown in tubs or pots for earlier blooming.
For a mass display, put in two layers of bulbs, close but not touching, staggered in a deep pot of compost.
They will even grow in bowls of pebbles with only water added, just below the bulbs, then kept in a cool, dark place until shoots appear.
Worth considering are species producing six or more flowers per bulb — Tete A Tete is ideal for window boxes.
Bulbs can be planted on pebbles, or in two staggered layers in a compost pot
Gems in a window: The dwarf stemmed Tete A Tete
WIN NEW £½M DIAMOND BINGO
And join the Generation Game too
TODAY'S the big day!
Your NEW Diamond Bingo card is inside your People.
Make sure you keep a careful eye on it — it's a gem and just as precious!
Your NEW card (which is available from your local newsagent for readers in Ulster and Eire ONLY) sparkles with glittering prizes.
There's a cool half million pounds in the kitty just waiting to be snapped up…a NEW 50,000 Generation Name Game, the latest thing in family fun…the chance to scoop a fortune on Vernons Pools and, of course, diamonds, diamonds, diamonds.
We're setting things rolling with Game 185, the FIRST game in The People section of your NEW card.
And don't forget, the old card is no longer valid.
Waiting to be won…a 5,000 Full House, a 1,000 Bonus prize and diamond jewellery from Elizabeth Duke at Argos.
Elizabeth Duke have a range of the best quality jewellery made from beautiful gems and materials at big value prices — so our winners are getting the very best.
The first set of Game 185 numbers is printed here, in two sections.
If you cross off all five numbers on any one of the three horizontal lines on your Bingo card from the numbers in the TOP section, you win 1,000 PLUS a nine-carat gold diamond solitaire ring with diamond set shoulders worth 149.
If there's more than one winner, the 1,000 prize will be shared but EVERY winner gets the solitaire ring.
For a 5,000 Full House AND diamond jewellery in Game 185, you use ALL the numbers here PLUS the numbers printed next week.
To claim your top section prize, ring the Bingo hotline in your card between 10.30am and 4pm tomorrow.
Have your card handy.
No responsibility can be accepted for failure to contact the claims office within the stated hours.
And don't forget, you can play the great Diamond game in the Daily Mirror and the Sunday Mirror as well.
If by any chance you need a new Diamond Bingo card, send a large sae to: The People Bingo, PO Box 66, Blackburn BB1 6AX.
NOW for a real family affair — our great, new Generation Name Game.
You just complete the entry form in your Bingo card with your own name and the names of two of your family.
Send the entry form to The People Generation Name Game at the address on the card and if your entry comes out of the hat you — and your family — are in the money.
Every week there will be two prizes of 100 and four of 25.
The 100 goes to the person who sent in the form.
The 25 goes to the nominated family members.
The first winning names will appear next Sunday so don't delay, send off that form TODAY!
Your NEW card also gives you the chance to collect a fantastic fortune with Vernons Pools.
Fill in the special entry form you'll find in the card and if your entry arrives by next Sunday you can play the pools for 10 weeks for a tenner with an extra week FREE.
You can also enter by using the Freephone line 0800 369 369 any day between 8am and 8pm.
This great deal could net you a big first dividend if eight of your selections are score draws.
And, with up to five dividends payable, even with six or seven score draws you could collect a big cash prize.
For your 10, you get 165 chances each week to win for only 1.
Sorry, we can't extend this offer to readers in the Irish Republic.
TOP SECTION 20 10 43 77 51 31 68 90 15 52 41 75 11 22 61 9 26 70 19 66
SECOND SECTION 58 37 25 3 1 84 65 78 40 32 
WIN: A super solitaire ring from Elizabeth Duke (Cat no 229/0629)
OUCH!
PULLING IN THE BUSINESS
Surgery on the streets
JAVED JAFFERJI
STREET dentists are a common sight in Pakistan.
At every crowded place, there will be a couple of them.
The craftsmanship may not be long-lasting, but they are cheap — perhaps the cheapest in the world.
A filling will cost about 40p and a tooth extraction about 80p, but if you know the form and haggle, you may get a better deal.
They have simple equipment and every thing is done manually.
A bottle of disinfectant, dental powders, scalpel and other simple tools can be seen on the table.
To the unaccustomed visitor, it might seem frightening, but for the locals it's nothing unusual — a part of everyday life.
Most of the dentists do not have any educational qualifications.
Usually the skills are passed down through the family.
Abdul Hanan's father was a dentist.
He is earning his living the same way in Karachi.
And now he is teaching his son the tricks of the trade.
He said: ‘It's an exciting life.
I have been doing this for the past 15 years.
‘I have been moving my portable clinic from one place to another, but now I like it here.
‘In a normal working day, I earn around 3 to 6.
My customers are generally happy with my services and that makes me feel proud.’
A SIGN OF THE TIMES: Street dentists at work are part of everyday life and (inset) you can't miss the colourful signs
Edhi is always ready to put sunshine into a child's life
The boy who nursed his dying mum has devoted all his life to the destitute
JAVED JAFFERJI
I T'S 2.30am.
The streets of Karachi are almost deserted.
As the city slumbers, a slum area in a remote corner of the metropolis goes up in flames.
Already the inferno has claimed two lives and gutted several homes.
For its dwellers, it is a night of hell.
Some distance away, sharp sirens pierce the silence of the dark night.
Two ambulances whiz past and hurtle on towards the scene of the crisis.
Once again, Edhi has come to the rescue.
For the people of Pakistan, Maulana Abdul Sattar Edhi commands respect almost to the point of worship.
Born in the late 1930s, Edhi grew up in a small Indian village, Bantva, near Junagadh (Gujerat).
When he was still very young, his mother fell victim to the paralysis which eventually killed her.
Edhi was forever by her side, bathing, changing and feeding her, hoping that one day she might regain her strength.
When she died, he was heartbroken.
He always felt that had his mother received timely care and proper medication, she just might have lived.
In 1947, his family moved to Pakistan.
Edhi took on a job at a medical store.
BUT the memories of his mother and his helplessness still haunted him.
It drove him in 1950 to establish a committee to help people in need.
But it was beset by internal politics and narrow-mindedness.
So, a couple of years later, he founded his own welfare trust.
The public responded generously.
He established a dispensary, free for everybody, and bought an ambulance.
From then on he dedicated his life to his work.
Now in his late 50s with a flowing beard and ready smile, Edhi is still as strong as ever and, whenever the need arises, he does whatever work needs to be done — carrying the sick and the dead or driving an ambulance on a call.
The simplicity and innocence that emanates from him endears him to his workers and friends.
He met his wife, Bilquis, through the Edhi Welfare Trust.
She worked as a volunteer at a maternity home.
He had proposed to six other nurses, but been rejected.
Bilquis accepted.
The couple work devotedly together.
Edhi recalled: ‘To establish welfare centres in rural areas was her idea.’
The Edhi Trust operates more than 50 centres all over Pakistan.
There are 14 Edhi Homes for the destitute, seven of which are in Karachi alone.
So far about 5,000 people have been admitted to Edhi centres around Pakistan.
His trust also looks after 1,200 female mental patients and about 2,000 male ones.
About 4,500 old and homeless people are cared for in Edhi homes.
What's unique about Edhi's centres are that the people in them are required to carry out all the daily chores and maintenance.
That serves two purposes — it keeps the costs down and is good therapy for the inmates, making them feel more useful.
‘I want to teach these people to be practical and self-reliant,’ Edhi said.
Several drug rehabilitation centres have helped about 30,000 addicts.
The Trust now runs 18 free dispen-saries throughout the country and three maternity homes which cater for women who cannot afford the heavy cost of other hospitals.
Here, girl volunteers are trained as nurses.
Abdul Sattar Edhi's ambulance service is the country's most efficient and best-organised.
The Trust owns about 400 ambulances, of which 250 are in Karachi.
This service is the most expensive to run because of the cost of fuel, maintenance and repairs.
In a city where riots, road accidents and murders are routine events, many corpses remain unidentified every day.
The Edhi Trust takes care of the burials, averaging up to eight or ten daily.
The massive scale of Edhi's social welfare trust requires a budget of millions of rupees a year.
Even so, he gratefully, but firmly, refuses any help from the government.
Once, when the late President Zia presented a cheque to Edhi, he returned it with thanks.
‘This work is for the people,’ he said, ‘so they must pay for it.
If I start accepting funds from the government, people will lose that charitable ideal that I want to leave behind me when I'm gone.’
The thought, it seems, is catching.
Every year, Pakistanis donate more and more generously to Edhi's cause.
His ambulance service has taken off in a big way.
Now he has two air ambulances — a twin-engined plane and a helicopter.
But this is not the end.
Abdul Sattar Edhi has many more plans for the future.
He is currently working on a project for an additional 125 aid centres to be set up within the next three years.
Work is already under way on 72 of these centres, which will be built along the highways of the country.
The ultimate aim is to set up a centre every 50 kilometres.
His other projects include the establishment of trauma centres around the country, more institutions for the mentally ill, centres for the crippled and more orphanages.
Edhi and Bilquis have four children — two sons and two daughters.
One of the daughters helps her father by managing an orphanage for girls.
Edhi and Bilquis draw no salary.
They live modestly on income from securities that Edhi bought a long time ago.
Their home is a humble, two-room flat belonging to his mother-in-law.
His breakfast consists of dry bread and a cup of tea.
What does he get out of it then?
‘I can't describe the feeling tha t I get,’ he explains.
‘It sings and soars in my heart.’
An expression of satisfaction on his weather-beaten face says it all.
CARING: Abdul Sattar Edhi with a girl living at one of his homes
CARING: Abdul Sattar Edhi with a girl living at one of his homes
SUBSTITUTE DAD: An orphan gets comfort from his benefactor
ABANDONED: Edhi is providing new hope for a future to children ditched by their parents
THE GREAT STARS OF INDIAN MOVIES
BENGALI beauty Rupa Ganguli first came to the notice of the celebrated film-maker B R Chopra when she appeared in the TV serial Ganadevta. v She was sensational as a peasant girl in a blouseless sari.
Chopra cast her as Draupadi in his Mahabharat — and she was an instant hit.
Easy to see why
Song and dance over rising star
RUDY OTTER
TEENAGER Akram Hossain Khan is waiting for his chance of stardom — in a tandoori restaurant.
The 18-year-old actor and dancer, who helps his dad out as a waiter at their Indian restaurant in London's Wimbledon, has already had a taste of the big time.
He toured the world in a stage version of The Mahabharat.
The 18-month tour took in Paris, Switzerland, the United States, Australia, Japan, Denmark and Britain.
He was one of 100 youngsters who auditioned for the role of a boy who remains on stage all through, being told the story in flashback.
The nine-hour show, spread over three nights, was produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company and directed by Peter Brook, who has predicted an ‘outstanding future’ for him.
‘Acting is in my blood and always has been,’ said Akram.
‘Now I'm aiming for the top.
Performing on stage in Hollywood, with world famous stars in the audience, was beyond my wildest dreams ‘
Akram also starred in Peter Brook's Channel 4 version of the Hindu epic.
Balham-born Akram, who is studying for his A-levels, got the stage bug at the age of three when his mother taught him a few classical Indian dance steps.
He furthered his dance training at London's Bangladesh Centre and later the Bhavan's Indian Academy of Dance in West Kensington.
Akram has given Kathak dance performances all over Britain to great acclaim.
He made his acting debut at the age of eight in a Bengali play staged at the Commonwealth Institute.
Akram went on to perform in plays in English and Bengali.
Sitar maestro Ravi Shankar, who composed music for one of Akram's shows, has predicted that one day he will be famous.
MARKING TIME: Ambitious Akram
Union bans movie mags
FILM magazines, including the London-based Cine Blitz International, have been blacklisted by the Indian film union, writes Michael Tarat.
Stars and film-makers face a fine of 1,000 if they break the ban.
The move by the Cine Artists Association follows an article in Stardust, which upset Bombay's premier character actor, Anupam Kher.
Cine Blitz International publisher Rajesh Mehra attacked the blanket ban.
And he added: ‘Film magazines and stars benefit each other mutually.
The stars are kept in the public eye by the film press.’
He said: ‘Admittedly we can't do a lot of big photo shoots and adventurous features which require the star's co-operation.
But we won't come to a standstill.’
Boys will be girls!
Mix of fascination and fear shrouds lives of the hijras
JAVED JAFFERJI
SHAHID leads a curious double life — inhabiting a twilight world between genders.
For he was born a man, but chooses to live like a woman.
He is a eunuch, known as a hijra in Pakistan.
The majority of hijras are men who get themselves castrated and dress like women.
They generally consider themselves female and develop exaggerated female mannerisms.
But the highest status is reserved for those born with ambiguous genitalia.
They are venerated as ‘holy beings’.
When Shahid has dressed and put on make-up ready for business, he uses the name Sharda.
For centuries the traditional business of the hijras has been begging, dancing at melas (fairs)— and prostitution.
Hijras venture out into the streets to demand money from whoever seems affluent enough.
Few people would dare to refuse them out of a morbid fear of them and the curse a refusal may incur.
It is a popular belief that the worst horrors befall whoever invites the curse of a hijra.
Only true-born eunuchs are believed to have the power to cast a curse, But as that is not easy to establish through casual meetings in the street, people are usually not prepared to gamble.
THIS public fear has contributed much to the infiltration of fake hijras into the community of true eunuchs.
Many men have adopted this lucrative profession as a source of livelihood.
It's better than conventional begging — one is certain to get paid.
In Lahore, Karachi and other cities in Pakistan, small-scale melas are organised where the principal feature is a dance show performed by hijras.
The show takes place in a large tent that seats 100 to 150 people.
Tickets cost around 12p.
It provides cheap entertainment for illiterate people and perverts.
They know the performers are men dressed as women, but they enjoy the performances immensely, throwing money at the dancers to keep them going.
Ashi, whose real name was Arshad before he got castrated, performs at melas in Lahore.
He said: ‘I have enjoyed dressing up like a woman, making myself up and talking like them ever since I was in school.’
As he talked, he clapped his hands in the loose way typical among hijras.
Hira Mandi (the Diamond Mart) is notorious in Lahore.
Drugs, alcohol and prostitution are readily available at a price.
It is a haven for hijras.
Their services come cheaper than female prostitutes.
Here ‘surgeons’ are also available who will castrate anyone wanting to become a hijra and is willing to pay the price.
SOME poorer people invite hijras to dance at family celebrations.
They believe the blessings of these ‘holy people’ will multiply their joys.
It is also an inexpensive source of entertainment.
Though the eunuchs of Pakistan are not as organised as their counterparts in India, there still exists a community and all hijras unquestioningly obey their leader — usually a born eunuch.
Some hijras would like to marry homosexual men, but the practice is not common as there is no concept of marriage between males in Islam.
Some who yearn for children adopt orphans, if they can afford to care for them.
Since Lahore is also the largest film-making centre in Pakistan, the city hijras are much in demand.
They are excellent dancers and work for incredibly low rates — from about 73p to 1.22 a movie.
But Ashi is happy enough to do it.
He said: ‘I feel pleased at being noticed and wanted.’
QUIRK OF NATURE: The eunuchs of Pakistan dress like women, develop exaggerated female mannerisms and provide cheap entertainment
MIND OVER MATTER: A hijra thinks of herself as a woman
ENTERTAINING: Hijras often work in the film world
BEG TO DIFFER: People would not dare refuse money for fear of a hijra curse
DOUBLE LIFE: The two faces of Ashi
GRACEFUL: But looks can deceive
PEOPLE POSTER EXTRA
SO you have got a heart after all, Graeme!
Liverpool boss Graeme Souness shows off his heart-operation scar to his old Scotland team-mate Gordon Strachan when they met at Wembley on Charity Shield day.
Or maybe Souness was joking: ‘What heart scar?
This is a souvenir from a Norman Whiteside tackle!’
This exclusive, candid picture by People lensman David Graves shows Strachan sharing a joke with Souey — back in charge of his team only weeks after triple heart by-pass surgery.
But what do YOU think the two men were saying?
Why not jot your suggestion on a post-card and send it to the Sports Desk, The People, 33, Holborn Circus, London EC1P 1DQ.There'll be a special gift for the best suggested dialogue — try to keep it clean folks!
The Sports Editor's decision will be final.
You're lucky to be here Graeme — I heard that the surgeon was an Everton fan!
Copycats follow the Rostock connection
Racist thugs ape violence of neo-Nazis
SHEEL KOHLI
I T happened hundreds of miles apart in different countries, but the desired aim of striking fear into the minds of law-abiding citizens was achieved in each case.
In Rostock, East Germany, and Greenwich, South London, the ugly face of racism reared its evil head last week at almost exactly the same time, victimising the innocent and intimidating the weak.
All over Britain and Europe, ethnic minorities have suddenly begun to fear for their lives as extreme right-wing parties experience a resurgence of power and support.
For five days, the Baltic town of Rostock was under siege as several hundred hate-filled youths attacked and stoned a refugee hostel housing hundreds of Romanian and Vietnamese men, women and children.
Thousands of townsfolk just looked on and cheered the thugs.
And in the historic harbour communities of Greenwich and nearby Woolwich, Asian places of worship were terrorised within hours of each other.
Community leaders believe they were copycat incidents inspired by Rostock.
In Woolwich, the Sikh temple was attacked in broad daylight and the ceremonial flag set alight by thugs.
Just hours later, an 18-inch hole was chiselled in the wall of a mosque in Greenwich and the holy chair of the Imam set alight.
The fire gutted the building.
Some observers are warning of the possibility of a backlash from sections of the Asian community.
Makhan Bajwa, director of the Greenwich Council for Racial Equality, pleaded for quicker results from police investigating the incidents.
He said: ‘Asians need to see that something positive is being achieved by the police, that punishment is handed out to the guilty.
AT THE moment, many racists are confident the police will not do anything and even dare their victims to report them.’
He warned that the targeting of places of worship increased the danger of retaliation.
He said: ‘Community anger is running high.
‘If the police are not seen to protect us, then people might start protecting themselves.
We are an emotional people.’
Charan Athwal, head of the Greenwich Indian Workers Association, felt that some people might think peaceful protests would not solve the problem.
He said: ‘There are people who might try to take the law into their own hands if they find that the police and community leaders are not achieving results.
‘I hope it doesn't happen.’
Police in South London have a special racial incidents unit.
A spokesman said: ‘We are trying to build up close relationships with the Asian community.
‘We want to be able to understand their needs and we have put on extra patrols in areas where Asians feel that they are vulnerable.’
The riots in Rostock were blamed on mounting unemployment in East Germany.
David Musa Pidcock, leader of the Islamic Party of Great Britain, believes that economic factors are fanning incidents of racism in Britain.
Kalim Siddiqui, the outspoken leader of the Muslim ‘parliament’, also agreed that wider forces had to be tackled if racism was to be stamped out.
IN THE old days,’ he said, ‘the Soviet Union played a major part in keeping Western Europe stable.
Now that the Soviet Union no longer exists, the whole of Europe has become unstable.
‘A result of that is this rise in right-wing racist activity.
‘You cannot blame the police if racists get away with attacks.
‘The police have always been instruments of the government.
‘Asians and whites alike are dealt with callously.’
SCENE FROM THE INFERNO: A stone-thrower covers his face against the backdrop of an overturned and burning car at the height of the Rostock rioting in which 65 police were hurt
NIGHT OF RECKONING: Riot police with shields up advance on mob
STREET FURY: Mob outside immigrant hostel
Dr Kalim Siddiqui
Makhan Bajwa
Terry's quick stopover lasted 18 years
Maharajah befriended globe-trot zoologist
VERONICA JOHNSTONE
ZOOLOGIST Terry Walton stopped off for a few days in India in 1967.
And 18 years later he was still there, serving as equerry to the Maharajah of Rewa.
Terry left England in the 1950s to study grizzly bears in Canada.
He then moved on to study New Guinea's Birds of Paradise.
After five years of living with the natives and being offered the delicacy of a human thumb by cannibals — a feast which he gracefully declined — Terry was feeling homesick.
But, before he came back to his Tyneside home, he decided he would visit India to see the white tigers.
He flew into Katmandu.
After a 200-mile taxi journey, he arrived at the palace gates of the Maharajah of Rewa — at 2am.
Palace officials made him welcome.
He was shown the white tigers and was ready to be on his way when he was told the Maharajah wanted to see him.
TERRY again unpacked his knapsack.
Comfortably ensconced in a luxury suite in the 200-room palace, he awaited his highness's pleasure.
It was ten days before the Maharajah summoned him.
He said: ‘I was ushered into the presence of the most charming man I have ever met.
We got on famously.’
That meeting began a partnership that was to give birth to Bandhavgargh, the first and finest national park in India.
The Maharajah provided the jungle.
Terry provided the knowhow and, two years later, in 1970 the 10,000 square mile sanctuary opened.
Poachers were the biggest problem.
Terry said: ‘We banned shooting.
But at times that was rather difficult to enforce — especially as it was often the authorities who were responsible!’
The Maharajah presented Terry with his first elephant, Gungawatti, which means Sacred water of the Ganges.
Gungawatti, when frightened by a swarm of jungle bees, gave him his first ride on the back of a bolting elephant.
‘It was not nice!
It was like sitting on a runaway steam engine, holding the funnel with a brolly.’
Terry still has two elephants, Pukraj and Ragurag.
He visits them once or twice a year when he goes back to India.
In time Terry became the Maharajah's closest friend and equerry.
His responsibilities included arranging royal visits and schedules and ensuring the Maharajah was never offered unsuitable food.
He also dealt with the many petitioners who asked for favours or for help.
He found working for the Maharajah so enjoyable that he refused to accept one penny in payment for his 18 years' service, although the Maharajah supplied all his material needs.
A change in the British visa laws brought Terry's Indian summer to a close.
FEARING his rights as a British citizen depended on the whim of government policy, he returned to Britain.
‘It was a nightmare,’ he said.
‘I was too old, too experienced or too inexperienced to find work.
Adjusting to life in the West was terrible.
‘I could drive in the jungle, but I couldn't drive in Newcastle.
I couldn't even use a tin-opener.’
Terry now sells the work of the finest Indian craftsmen from his shop, Ghengis International, in Gateshead's Metro Centre, the largest shopping complex in Europe.
He goes back to buy the upmarket, hand-made works of art.
And, of course, to feed his pet elephants.
MAN OF THE WORLD: Terry with some of his man-eating friends in New Guinea
TRUNK CALL: He visits his elephant pets each year
TERRY'S PATRON: Maharajah of Rewa
WAR OF THE MOVIETOWN GODDESSES
Madhuri Dixit is challenging Thundering Thighs for the top slot
KHALID MOHAMED
A STAR WARS has erupted between the two screen goddesses, Sridevi and Madhuri Dixit, sweethearts of millions of moviegoers.
They are competing for plum roles and staking their claim to be the No 1 box office attraction.
Both beauties have refused offers to team them together in a film since neither wants to be upstaged.
They are running neck-and-neck in the popularity stakes.
Scores of movie producers, co-stars and fans go gaga over the pretty-baby pout of Sridevi.
She oozes a raunchy sex appeal and her legs have earned her the nickname Thundering Thighs.
Not to be outdone, Madhuri has specia-lised in bump-and-grind cabaret routines.
Lately, Sridevi has stolen a march over her rival.
She was approached for the lead role in a Hollywood production to be directed by Steven Spielberg.
But she refused the offer as she did not want to jeopardise her flourishing career in India.
‘It was a difficult decision, but I decided the grass is not always greener on the other side,’ Sridevi told me.
Spielberg's agent had insisted that Sridevi would have to stay in America for a year of rehearsals and shooting schedules.
‘I would have lost out on at least four Indian films, besides antagonising my producers and colleagues here,’ the actress explained.
Spielberg's film was about an American adven-turer who visits Bombay and falls in love with a movie star.
‘It was a fascinating script,’ Sridevi admitted.
‘The agent even agreed that I would do no kissing or nude scenes.
But there's no place like home.’
Madhuri is miffed at being left out in the cold by Spielberg.
She was not even considered for the role.
However, she points out proudly that her films have been faring better than her rival's at the box office.
TWO of the biggest moneyspinners of recent years — Dil (Heart) and Bets (The Son)— featured Madhuri as leading lady.
On the other hand, several of Sridevi's films were also-rans.
Madhuri has often been seen in the company of the popular actor Sanjay Dutt.
But they do not have marriage plans.
‘The rumours that Madhuri will shortly settle down as a housewife and give up acting are pure lies,’ said Sanjay.
‘They are being spread by her competitors.’
Sridevi, on the other hand, is living the life of a nun.
She said: ‘I have no need for boyfriends.
The man I marry will be selected by my mother.
I have implicit faith in her judgment.’
The disapproving mother was the reason the actress called a halt to her liaison with actor Mithun Chakraborty a couple of years ago.
Her family attempted to fix up a marriage with the US-settled tennis star from India, Ashok Amritraj.
But at the last moment, Sridevi developed cold feet, insisting that she did not want to throw in her career.
Sridevi has been acting since she was just five years old.
Her age, according to trade pundits, is around 32.
Madhuri, who gave up her studies in microbio-logy to become a movie star, is about 28.
YET in the ratings they are streets ahead of the new teeny heroines.
Sridevi commands a fee of around £40,000 a movie.
Madhuri is paid nearly as much — £35,000.
Every decade has had its Queen Bee — from Mumtaz in the 1960s and Hema Malini in the '70s to Rekha in the '80s.
The film world eagerly waits to see who will reign in the '90s.
RIVALS: Sridevi (above) turned down her Hollywood chance, so she could score over Madhuri Dixit (left)
REJECTED: Spielberg offered Sridevi a role
Prince is going public
Apache gets in on the act
SHEEL KOHLI
RISING reggae star Apache Indian got in on Prince's act at a glitzy fashion launch for Joe Bloggs' latest coup — a range of stagewear commissioned by the pop idol for his recent world tour.
The unique range, dubbed Prince's Trust by the fashion pundits, was specially ordered and approved by the grand master of pop for him and his backing group, sultry duo Diamond and Pearl.
Now the clothes, The Diamond and Pearl Collection, are being marketed to the public from this month and Apache was invited to try them out along with the models at the launch — and he was delighted.
Apache, already famous for his distinctive streetwear and chains, said: ‘These are just the right clothes to wear.
‘I already wear a lot of Joe Bloggs’ stuff because I don't dress up for special occasions.
But I do like to look a bit different and distinctive.’
The futuristic, raunchy gear uses body-hugging lycra adorned with rubber-looking PVC patches.
Nothing was left to the imagination as the sexy models Cookie and Polly danced, pouted and preened to Apache's latest hits.
Fashion consultant Satpal Jandu said the new style showed a ‘no-holds-barred’ approach to fashion by Joe Bloggs — incredibly sexy clothes with a slight hint of sexual deviance and whip-lashing bondage.
She said: ‘These clothes are a definite must for people who live for the night.
They are outgoing, outrageous and shockingly sexy.’
The gear was specially designed at the request of Prince's recording company, Paisley Park.
The T-shirt, worn here by Apache, was made to coincide with Prince's current hit single, Sexy MF.
THE girls' gear is daring.
Nothing is left to the imagination.
Every curve is accentuated and every line exaggerated.
The effect is irresistible.
A subtle style would be lost in the darkness of a nightclub.
Even our top models, who have worn clothes from some of the most famous fashion houses in the world, were stunned by the slinkiness and comfort of the collection.
With ethnic disco jewellery from Afghanistan and Pakistan, Apache once again shows his determination to reflect the best of East and West.
Accessories — Shoes: Shelly Shoes.
Necklace: Ethnic design from Afghanistan.
Earrings: Ethnic design from Pakistan.
Girls: The Diamond and Pearl Collection, by Joe Bloggs.
Apache: The Diamond and Pearl Collection, Sexy MF T-shirt, B1 sports shorts and jacket by Joe Bloggs.
Apache's hair by Jan at Curls, Birmingham.
HE'S THE TOPS: Reggae star Apache looks good in shorts, too, as he lines up with models Polly (left) and Cookie
FOR REAL: Prince plus Diamond and Pearl
ACE GEAR: Apache looks good in the Prince's trust
BHAWANA BALSAWAR
THE GREAT STARS OF INDIAN MOVIES
BEAUTIFUL Bhawana had no interest in showbiz when she was young, despite coming from a family with a tradition in the entertainment world — she is the daughter of veteran performer Shubha Khote.
Bhawana loved animals and planned to be a vet.
So her parents were surprised when she announced she wanted to put together a photographic portfolio.
TV shows and serials quickly followed.
Now she would like to direct.
Bhawana, who has a university diploma in fashion design, was a swimming champion at school.
She looks a winner!
Help to record piece of your history
KAMALJIT SIDHU
ASIANS are being asked to recall how they successfully adapted to British life.
Historians in London's Hounslow are requesting contributions for a forthcoming book on the history of their Asian community.
An exhibition at Gunnesbury Park Museum to highlight the borough's cultural mix is also planned.
In particular, they would also like to hear about any rags-to-riches stories in an area which has one of the highest concentrations of Asians in the United Kingdom.
Influx
Co-odinator Neil Chippendale says:
‘This is the first time this kind of survey has been done.
‘The biggest influx of Asian people to West London came in the 1970s, but there were small communities springing up in the 1960s.
‘We are looking for members of the Asian community who can provide memories of when they first came into the area, how they got employment, how the locals opened up to them, their first impressions of Britain and the problems of racism they may have encountered.’
Contributions in English, Bengali, Gujurati, or Hindi should be sent to Neil Chippendale, Treaty Library Centre, Hounslow.
India is a nation of losers!
MICHAEL TARAT
INDIA and Indians have been branded ‘a nation of losers’ who lack vision.
And even those who do achieve something lack the scope to go further because ‘Indians and India are the grandest failures in a long time’.
This scathing attack comes from Anil Dharker, a renowned writer and editor of the high-circulation Illustrated Weekly of India, and forms his latest cover story.
About Indians who live abroad, he says: ‘They work long hours, give large discounts, open when everyone else is closed and become well-off shopkeepers.
No Indian has gone global, no Indian company figures in the list of the world's largest companies.
‘Whether in Southall, Singapore or New York, it is Indians who rule the discount shops, all happy making money, selling to other Indians who are happy spending money, knowing that they are actually saving money.
Goods were cheap, so who cared about service?
You can see that scene in Southall, London, or in any area outside New York, where the goods spill over from all the Indian shops on to the pavements.
Inside you can trip over saris and those are the ones on sale.
(Who wants displays?)’
Anil's comments come in the wake of the Barcelona Olympics, where Indian competitors failed to win a single medal, and new government statistics revealing the average annual income in India is £180 compared to £5,700 in neighbouring Singapore.
Yet Indian computer engineers design software for US firms.
And India has the world's fifth largest army.
Bombay-based Anil put India's failure to exploit its manpower and mind power and its lack of excellence in sport, economics and the arts down to a ‘Learn what is there and don't question it’ attitude.
He asked: ‘Why did our civilisation produce people who were afraid to con-quer, people who were afraid to win?
‘Why did our large country, our wise and old and very large country, begin to think so small that we became a nation of losers, a country of discount shopkeepers content to bask in the glory of our heritage.’
HEARTBREAK OF SLIM DISEASE GIRLS
Survey reveals secret suffering
KAMALJIT SIDHU
ASIAN girls are six times more likely than others to suffer from the slimming diseases bulimia or anorexia nervosa, according to shock new figures.
A survey carried out at a school in Bradford, Yorks, revealed that 3.6 per cent of Asian girls aged 14 to 16 were bulimic compared to just 0.6 per cent of white girls.
The figures come as no surprise to Diana Vincent, director of the Nor-wich-based Eating Disorders Association.
Her experience shows that Asian girls suffer in silence.
She says: ‘Many must be going through hell and are frightened to ask for help, believing that nobody will understand their turmoil.
‘It's so sad they are forced to endure such stress.
‘Some parents assume their daughters are going through a phase when the harsh reality is both bulimia and anorexia can lead to long-lasting damage.
‘What sufferers need more than anything is for somebody to listen.
‘The whole issue needs to be fully addressed among all ethnic minorities.’
Anorexia nervosa is trig-gered by everyday dieting, but sufferers become obsessed with their appearance.
Bulimia nervosa is the ‘hidden eating disorder’.
It's a binge and purge syndrome associated with obsessive weight watching.
Bulimics eat huge amounts of food — up to 16 times the average daily intake in a binge — and then they force themselves to vomit, in some cases 50 times a day, or take laxa-tives.
A vicious circle devel-ops, weight fluctuations being as much as 10lbs in a couple of days.
THE aim of the Bradford study was to assess the significance of cultural factors among victims.
Diana Vincent adds: ‘For Asian girls eating disorders are much more deep-rooted and not just linked to Western attitudes to body shape, weight and dieting behaviour.
‘Many are mostly torn apart growing up with two cultures and trying to reconcile themselves to both.’
The experiences of 16-year-old Sarita — that's not her real name — from London reflect the stress of an anorexic.
Her diary shows her turmoil.
‘Because I have been born in England, I have been taught to be independent, original and to think for myself.
In school I was prepared to handle my life and stand up for myself.
‘When I was at home, I was expected to be submissive, obedient and totally dependent on my parents.
‘Like most Asian parents, they believe they know what's best.
‘They believe girls should not speak up and that they should let their parents control their lives.
‘I am treated as a big failure to my parents and am seen as unworthy, although I have done nothing wrong.’
Sarita became with-drawn, often breaking down during school.
A doctor who suspected anorexia referred her to a psychiatrist.
She now undergoes intense counselling to rebuild her life.
For Sarita there is some light at the end of the tunnel, but other Asian girls continue to suffer in darkness.
DESPAIR: Many girls are too scared to ask for help struggling to cope with conflicting cultures
SUNRISE SHINES
KAMALJIT SIDHU
SUNRISE Radio pioneer Avtar Litt is pushing on with his expansion plans in radio and television despite the failure of an ambitious £2.5 million share offer.
Tuesday's launch of Sunrise Midlands' 24-hour service adds to his existing three radio stations.
And the 42-year-old media mogul from Osterley, West London, remains buoyant in his outlook.
‘Future acquisitions of radio stations are being targeted.
The long-term aim is to provide a dedicated 24-hour service for each section of the Asian community.
Plans are also being earmarked for a global Asian television station to be up and running within five years.
That is our ultimate goal.
‘We are well-equipped and possess the necessary knowhow and resources for Sunrise TV to be up and running within two months across Europe.
‘But this will only be operational when the market is right.
That could possibly be at the end of the year.’
He has built on Sunrise's meteoric success, launching The Asian news paper and the first Asian school of broadcasting.
Des Shepherd, of Sunrise, launched in November 1989, said: ‘It showed how the needs of an affluent and up-and-coming Asian community had been ignored by mainstream broadcasters.’
Avtar, who arrived in England aged 12 and speaking no English, spent two years working with community radio in Los Angeles.
His Midas touch has given Sunrise 94 per cent of its target audience and a turnover expected to reach £4million.
Avtar said: ‘Sunrise is a family station.
Parents encourage their children to listen so they can improve their mother tongue.
‘Most youngsters are exposed to Western culture at school and in the world around them.
This is a chance to redress the balance.
‘The parents themselves view the station as their own.
They can be sure they will hear news and debates on issues that affect them and their families in Britain and back in their mother country.
‘The station also attracts top names everyone from Hollywood stars Govinda and Salman Khan to Boy George and sporting heart-throb Imran Khan.’
BIG NAMES: Avtar with Ranjeet, Govinda and Rahul Roy
HI!:
Avtar and Mithun Chakraborty
HI!:
Avtar with Salman Khan
SIKH, RATTLE ‘N’ ROLE
JOHN BURKE-DAVIES
A SINGING Sikh is hoping to become the first Asian to be listed in the Guinness Book of Records — as a chartbuster.
Peter ‘The King’ Singh wants to gain entry in the prestigious yearly book as the first Punjabi-born entertainer to have a top ten hit.
And 47-year-old Peter, who models himself on rock legend Elvis Presley, reckons he has the perfect record to make him into an all-round star — Bhingi Bajee Boogy.
The flip side of the disc cut by the fun-loving singer is called Pick Your Turban.
‘If DJs gave either side enough spins and all curry eaters bought it, I believe I could really hit the big time,’ said Peter, who lives in Bargoed, Mid-Glamorgan.
I recently sang live at the Asian Pop Awards ceremony and I got a real buzz realising I was before my own people.
‘But I believe I have the talent to entertain people from all walks of life, including British pop fans.’
He added: ‘I'd really love to get into the Guinness Book of Records.
That would be magic for me because when I arrived here, aged nine, I didn't speak one word of English.
‘I used to love listening to Elvis records, which helped me pick up the lingo, and now everyone in the business calls me the Rocking Singh.
‘I believe Elvis would have liked my act, but there's no doubting he really was the best.
‘And when I make it to the charts, then I'll have to admit that I will have owed it to the world's greatest entertainer ever — Elvis the King of Rock.’
SINGHING FOR HIS SUPPER: Peter aims for a hit impersonating Elvis
Baddies beware! 007 Sean's still licensed to thrill
RICHARD WALLACE
MOVIE chiefs have secretly asked veteran Sean Connery to pick up his old gun as 007 James Bond.
Connery, 62, still regarded as one of Hollywood's biggest heart-throbs, has been quietly sounded out by MGM studio bosses.
Timothy Dalton is officially contracted to star in the next Bond adventure but a legal row between MGM and producer Cubby Broccoli means no final casting decision will be made before Christmas.
Lethal Weapon star Mel Gibson has also been mentioned for the role, but he rejects the idea as ‘ridiculous.’
It's 30 years since Connery made his debut as the renegade secret serviceman in Dr No.
He last played the role alongside a young Kim Basinger in Never Say Never Again in 1983.
Thriller
Connery, who won an Oscar four years ago for his hard-hit-ting role in The Untouchables, is now shooting the thriller Rising Sun in Los Angeles.
‘Sean is always seen by the public as the real James Bond,’ said a studio executive.
‘We are interested in whether he'd want to come back.
Other complications can be sorted out later.’
NEVER AGAIN?
Connery with Kim Basinger in Never Say Never Again
VETERAN: Sean Connery
Anneka's a washout off screen!
TV'S Anneka Rice fixes anything with her mobile phone in Challenge Anneka, which returns on Friday (BBC1, 8pm).
But she confesses that although she's good with other people's problems, she's ‘hopeless’ with her own.
In the first show she builds an inner-city farm for kids in Sheffield in just 77 hours.
‘But if my washing machine breaks down at home, I don't know what to do, I go to pieces,’ she says.
Sultry Sade is back on song
IT HAS been two years since sultry singer Sade was last in the spotlight.
But now she's back with a superb new single called No Ordinary Love.
The Smooth Operator had all but dropped off the face of the planet.
Now based in Madrid and happily married to Spanish film producer Carlos Pliego, Sade's planning a 1993 world tour.
SUPER NEW SINGLE: Spotlight on Sade
Love secret of Eldorado starlet Buki
SANJAY RAI
EVEN if the sun sets on the ailing TV show Eldorado, it will be good news for star Buki Armstrong, the beauty who plays Gerry in the sangria soap opera.
For she could then fly back to the arms of her lover, heart-throb Ayub Khan Din.
The couple's secret romance leaked out this week when friends broke their silence.
The two became inseparable after working together on the BBC2 drama series, Salam Sha-lom.
They set up home in London's Chelsea, but busy schedules have forced them to live apart.
Ayub, currently shooting in Canada, will jet off to India to finish a love story about a Rajastani prince, while Buki is stuck in sun-soaked Spain for the BBC's tale of British life on the Costa del Sol.
Ayub and Buki have kept their romance quiet.
But a friend of the pair said: ‘They are very much in love, but take their acting careers very seriously and are determ-nined to succeed.
‘Buki's career took off when she played the detective in South Of The Border, so she is determined to continue her career.
‘Ayub is on the brink of international stardom, but, despite that, Buki is his number one topic of conversation.’
BIG ROMANCE: Buki is in love with Ayub
VICE SECRETS OF GIRLS LIVING OFF THE GAME
SHEEL KOHLI
THE scene is the same the world over in dark alleys or dimly-lit streets.
A prostitute touts for trade from potential punters.
But the young, attractive girl soliciting on this Birmingham street is Asian — and one of a rapidly-grow-ing new breed of prostitutes who are smashing the stereotype of the good, law-abiding, family-minded Asian girl.
A new documentary to be broadcast on BBC2 next Friday, Living Off The Game, highlights the lives of four Asian prostitutes who are earning their living from the world's oldest profession.
The programme, from BBC East, is bound to shock conservative Asian families who have never accepted that girls from their community could get dragged into the seedy world of prostitution.
Sarah is 19.
She started ‘working’ at the age of 14 and has been on the streets for five years.
She is the daughter of an English mother and a Pakistani father, who says that it is her Asian looks which are her greatest asset.
‘If you say you're Asian, you can make money easy.
Asian guys will go for you and so will even some white guys, if they're feeling adventurous.’
Sarah was put in care at a very young age — and was on the game even while under the supervi-sion of social workers.
She said: ‘They knew what I was doing, but they just let me carry on.’
Dalbir, 23, is another prostitute.
She does not work the streets, but puts ads in newspapers and leaves cards in London telephone boxes.
Both girls never think about what they do, saying that it is just a job for which they get paid.
Dalbir says matter-of-factly: ‘There's no feeling.
They know what they've come for.
I know what they've come for.
We just get on with it.’
But for Balbir, as for the majority of Asian girls who have turned to prostitution, they still think that it is too degrading for them to consider going out on to the streets.
Girls like Sarah shock her.
She said: ‘It amazes me that they can just stand on the street.’
Producer Denise Seneviratne and her team interviewed 55 prostitutes for the programme, but says this is only the tip of a huge iceberg.
She said: ‘The majority of Asian girls seem to work from houses and flats, so their operations are very discreet.
There has been an increase in prostitution because of the recession.’
The story behind most prostitutes found on the streets today, whether they are white, black or Asian, seems to fit a tragically standard mould — broken families, a violent father, unstable and unhappy homes.
But, the programme says, another additional pressure faced by young Asian girls is the haunting spectre of arranged marriages.
Rita, who was too afraid to show her face to the cameras, divorced her husband after she was forced to take part in an arranged marriage, a practice she believes is barbaric and almost as bad as prostitution.
She says that her life now is better than the life she could have spent with someone she had never met before.
She said: ‘Arranged marriages are like being raped.
You are forced to sleep with people you don't even know.
I know I do the same now, but at least now I am getting paid for it every day.’
Dalbir, too, tells how her father was a tyrant.
She ran away at the age of 13.
She hates what she does now, but feels that there is no alternative.
‘I think it's a nasty job and that it's very degrading, but it's there.’
Another alarming aspect of the rise in Asian prostitution is the growing number of Asian pimps.
In some areas of Bradford and Birmingham, Asian pimps are in the majority.
Many of the pimps, and some of the girls, have been forced into prostitution to feed a deadly heroin addiction.
One prostitute said: ‘I don't like what I do, I hate what I do, but there is no beating it for all the money you can get.
‘I can get a regular job and I would get about £100 a week.
If I work on the game, I can get £150 in one night.’
Jay Chauhan, director of the Asian Forum, said ‘It would be easy for us to lay the blame at the door of Western society.
‘But we have to accept that within the Asian community there is a hidden immorality.’
Some pimps claim they have seen girls with Muslim holy leaders who require their services.
Sarah said: ‘Most people wait till the end of he month to get paid.
We get paid every night.’
HIDDEN IMMORALITY: Asian prostitute at a window in the red-light district of Balsall Heath, Birmingham, and (inset) Denise Seneviratne, producer of Living Off The Game
LIFE IN THE SHADOWS: Sarah is preparing to go out for another night's work (left) and on the streets, where she is wary of police
SMALL AD: Prostitute touts for trade
Channi's film coup
Michael Tarat
SINGER-AND-SONGWRITER Channi Singh had a dream come true when one of Bombay's biggest movie moguls asked him to pen the music for a multi-million pound cinema extravaganza, writes Michael Tarat.
Channi, Southall-based lead singer of Bhangra band Alaap, has just finished the musical soundtrack for film star Feroz Khan's latest blockbuster, Yalgaar (Attack).
The movie, scheduled for release later this year, stars tough guy Sanjay Dutt as a martial arts expert out for revenge.
Originally from Punjab, Channi began his music career in England by singing religious songs in Sikh temples.
After teaming up with fellow musicians in the early Seventies, he formed Alaap, performing at Asian shows and weddings, a practice they still do as well as supporting the likes of Peter Gabriel and UB40 at international music festivals.
Now with the release of Yalgaar, Channi hopes to establish a reputation in Bombay.
He said: ‘You can do many things in the UK, but your talents will rarely get recognised.
If you are successful in Bombay, then the Asian community throughout the world will appreciate it.’
Flirty Harry!
He's wrinkly and on the wrong side of 60…but tough guy Clint still loves the ladies
Who's small and blonde…but NOT Clint's sort
JANE ODDY
WHEN it comes to women, Clint Eastwood likes to have his cake and eat it.
He wants them small and blonde but also to know their mullet from a mallet.
‘Brightness, intelligence — I like women who aren't totally dependent.’
‘It's nice,’ adds the quick-draw, slow drawl superstar in his first British interview in ages, ‘if a woman doesn't always want a hand with something.
I like it if they're independent to some degree.
Someone who has her own points of view.
I don't like a Dolly Dainty.’
Sorry, Clint, that rules me out.
I'm hopelessly impractical.
The long, crinkly face breaks out in sunrays of wrinkles.
‘But I like femininity in a woman.
I think that's very important.’
You notice that the years are leaving their mark despite daily work-outs.
The skin around his neck is loose and his waist is thicker than it has ever been.
Still, he had piloted a helicopter from Paris to Deauville the previous night to entertain himself and his entourage.
‘I like all that.
I've always been interested in machinery.
I don't ride motor-cycles anymore.
I figured they were a little wild.
But I fly a helicopter,’ he says.
The £200,000 French chopper, nicknamed The Squirrel, is the same as the one Clint owns back home in Carmel, California, and caused chaos among the French female air traffic control staff when it landed at Deauville's tiny airport.
One over-excited young controller couldn't resist asking if her hero was on board.
‘On board, honey?
I'm flying it,’ he husked back.
For Dirty Harry, read Flirty Harry.
Clint may be the wrong side of 60 but the cowboy superstar is not about to throw in the towel with the ladies just yet.
He looks offended when I tell him he is perceived as a man's man.
THE kind of man who lumbers about like an injured bear: the quintessential tough guy — strong, silent and self-con-tained.
‘Sure, I like hanging around with the guys, playing golf, having a beer but I also like ladies, too,’ he protests.
Not presum-ably for golf or beer.
So he enjoys feminine company, I ask?
‘By all means,’ he replies sexily, his husky drawl deepening an octave.
Clint, 62, has never denied his roving eye and his weakness for tough-talking little blondes.
When questioned about his long-suffering wife Maggie, now his ex, he often said: ‘She doesn't chain me.’
He is worshipped the world over as a male fan-tasy figure in classic movies like The Good The Bad And The Ugly, A Fistful Of Dollars and The Man With
No Name which have grossed £2 billion.
Now the man with a big name is back with his box office sensation Unforgiven, which opens here on Friday, which is why he has agreed to talk.
And the fact that I am a small blonde is probably a bonus on this occasion.
A ladies' man he may profess to be but he's also been a bit of a louse.
Remember when long-time lover and former muse Sondra Locke came home to the Beverly Hills mansion they shared for 13 years to find that the locks had been changed?
Shortly after she discovered she had breast cancer.
Clint may have felt some pity but he didn't want her back.
Their parting of the ways was a costly exercise for him and left him £20 million poorer after a pali-mony settlement.
His wife also pocketed a
£20 million pay-off after 26 years of marriage.
During that time Clint openly lived with blonde Sondra and fathered an illegitimate daughter Kimber in 1964.
FOR the time being Clint is a one-woman man.
He has found contentment at last with English-born actress Frances Fisher.
She co-stars as Staw-berry Alice in Unforgiven as a flame-haired prostitute who demands justice when a client mutilates one of her girls.
The petite, pretty actress met Clint 18 months ago and the couple have been inseparable ever since.
Fiercely private, he will only talk about 39-year-old Frances in professional terms but affection for her sneaks through: ‘I actually met her through work, although I never worked with her directly until now,’ he says.
‘She's a very good actress — it has nothing to do with our relationship.
If she hadn't been a good actress I wouldn't have hired her.’
Mmm…
The couple live apart and although they have been together for some time, you sense Clint's fingers have been burned by his previous bad experiences.
‘Someone asked me recently, ‘Would you ever get married again?’ and I said, ‘Sure, I might possibly one day’but I have no immediate plans,’he growls warily.
Ask Clint whether he feels it has been tough for his kids having a superstar dad and he looks cagey: ‘Everyone worries about their kids.
I worry about their future.
‘I suppose it has its difficulties and its advan-tages, it just depends on how the individual child takes it.
It's probably not as preferable as just having a normal dad.’
Daughter Alison, 20, who co-starred with Clint in the thriller Tightrope, went off the rails earlier this year and checked into a drink dependency clinic in Arizona.
‘I think it was tough for my daughter.
If my son was ever affected he didn't really tell me,’ he says.
‘It's better if children see their parents in a normal existence and not having certain attentions thrown their way.
Maybe they lose a sense of balance.’
Alison's problems appear to be resolved and she is now living near Clint in Carmel and studying acting in Los Angeles.
SON Kyle, 24, shares his father's passion for jazz and is involved in a jazz group and a pop band.
These days Clint sees as much of both as he can: ‘It was a problem when they were growing up.
My profession was so time-consuming it was hard to spend the proper amount of time with them.
‘But I see a lot of them, especially now.
We go ski-ing together and all live near each other.’
Unforgiven is a disturb-ingly violent film: a ‘male’ film in every respect.
Clint's response to this is that audience surveys show that almost the same per-centage of women as men are enjoying the movie.
‘It's got a lot in it for women.
The women are the catalyst in this story.
I create strong roles for women.
‘I've played in pictures like The Gauntlet where the woman is the smarter of the two people, it just depends on the project,’ he says in his sole reference to 43-year-old Sondra, who co-starred in six films with him.
Clint says he has been sitting on the story of Unforgiven for 15 years waiting to grow into the part but denies that this could be the last time he saddles up and rides off into the sunset.
‘I think I got trapped into that statement.
I was saying that if there was a last Western, this would be an interesting story to make because of the nature of the subject matter.
It might be but it might not be either,’ he says.
In his next movie In The Line Of Fire, he stars opposite John Malcovich: ‘I'll just be the actor.
I'll be an employee,’ he says with a grin.
He confirms that his next director's job will be a project starring Kevin Costner.
He insists ageing does not worry him: ‘I have no real strict rules.
I just try moderation.
I don't drink a lot but I do like wine or beer occasionally.
‘I like to eat a lot and because I do, I like to eat the right things.
‘I haven't thought too much about growing old — I don't feel any older.
I still do the same stupid things.
I still like to do my own stunts as long as it's practical and won't jeopardise the production.’
He pauses and gives a lazy Dirty Harry-style smile: ‘But if it's falling off a building I'll let someone else do it.’
SON OF A GUN: Clint in his new movie Unforgiven
SIXTYSOMETHING: Grey hair and wrinkles are catching up with Clint but the Hollywood giant is not ready for the bus pass yet LEAPING WITH LIFE: Clint takes pride in the fact that he still does most of his own stunts
BLONDE WITH A BULLET: Clint's latest love, British-born Frances Fisher
FADED BLONDES: Ex-wife Maggie and former lover Sondra Locke
Cher's cover up
SUPERSTAR Cher, who prefers wearing next to nothing in public, goes to bizarre lengths to keep her private life private.
The leggy actress has revealed that she now shreds all the rubbish at her Malibu home before putting it out for the dust-men.
She has passed on this tip to close pal Catwoman Michelle Pfeiffer.
‘I have to shred my garbage now,’ moans Cher.
‘Losing your privacy is terrible and Michelle is just starting to feel it.
I was famous at 18 so knew early on that it was part of my job description.’
SHREDDED WIT: Cher makes sure that her rubbish is mangled
Sick new show will capture horror stories on your screen
RICHARD WALLACE
ITV chiefs are cashing in on a sick US craze by inviting viewers to send in video film of real-life horrors.
Caught On Camera, the brainchild of London Weekend TV, will show ghoul-ish video film of fires, road crashes and other disasters.
A similar US series, Witness Video, sparked a storm of protest.
The NBC show's opening credits feature the space shuttle Challenger blowing up in January 1986 — killing all seven crew.
The American show includes film of people leaping to death from blazing buildings and other sickening true stories.
One featured a policeman recording his own murder as his patrol car camera showed him being beaten and shot to death.
‘This cheapens the value of human life by pandering to the gruesome,’ says Californian sociology professor Tod Griffin.
Caught On Camera is the latest in a glut of cheap video shows which rely on viewers doing all the hard work.
‘It's a bargain-basement idea,’ said an ITV insider.
‘It won't be as bad as the
American version but there are bound to be titillating horrors to attract viewers.’
TV chiefs insist that the series will be produced in the best possible taste but admit being inspired by America.
‘We will feature stories of triumph and survival in some of the most amazing situations possible,’ says LWT boss Robin Paxton, a colleague of Jeremy ‘Good Taste’Beadle.
A spokesman for Mrs Mary Whitehouse's National Viewers and Lis-teners' Association said: ‘We hope TV watchdogs will keep a careful eye on this programme.’
GRUESOME: Challenger crew explode in mid-air
PEOPLE POWER
LETTER OF THE WEEK
Three cheers for our kids who made the grade
I AM sick to death of people decrying this year's GCSE results.
I've seen my daughter work continually over the past two years — and I mean work — to achieve her grades.
She did not gain them because some examiner decided he or she would be lenient, nor because the questions were easy.
She gained her grades through sheer hard work, determination and two years' self-sacrifice.
It's time people gave some of our youngsters the credit for realising the state the country is in and knowing that they are the ones who are going to have to put it right — and are prepared to work hard to do so.
—
This letter wins £20 — there's £10 for the rest.
AFTER a long discourse on our economic ills on a commercial radio station, there was a break for the adverts — Italian furniture, French food, Japanese cars and a chain of Indian restaurants.
Not one British product among them.
Our balance of payments will never improve while trade continues to be a one-way traffic.
— Guy Pearson, Surrey I LAUGHED at this property ad in my local paper: ‘Two bedrooms, off-street park-ing, 5-piece bathroom suite, no chain!’—
HOW dare your reader criticise the American Democratic candidate Bill Clinton for having a smile like a used car salesman?
After the disastrous presidency of George Bush, Arfur Daley himself couldn't do a worse job.
—
ARFUR: George Cole
Small world we live in
FOR our holiday, we rented an isolated farmhouse in Nor-mandy.
On the last night the owner visited us and the conversation turned to where we live.
When we said Cumbria, she said she knew the area as friend had recently bought a cottage in a tiny village there.
We were stunned when she named it, as it's the village where we used to live, a mile from our present home.
But we nearly fainted when we asked which cottage — it was the one we'd just moved out of!—
LET'S GIVE TORIES THE BIRD
AFTER reading Voice Of The People headed Crisis, What Crisis?
(September 6) I suggest that the Tory logo of a flaming torch be replaced by either a cuckoo or an oozelum bird.
The Tories have been living in cloud-cuckoo land for the past 12 years.
And the oozelum bird is well-known for hiding its head until trouble goes away.
—
I AM one of those ‘stupid idiots’ who did not vote in the last election (Letters, September 6).
I decided not to vote for the first time in 37 years because of the EC.
As most of the decisions are now taken in Brussels and merely rubber-stamped by Westminster, just what is the point in voting?
I will continue to abstain until Britain regains its independence.
MAN of The People John Smith criticised a council for banning a car firm's excessive use of the Union Jack.
I agree with their decision.
Do we really want to see our flag waving from garages, second-hand car dealers and road-side cafes 365 days a year, as in America?
I think not.
When our flag flies, it signifies a national celebration.
Let's keep it that way.
—
So sorry, Marina
AMID all the hypocrisy, furtiveness and sordid secrets surrounding the Royals, my respect for one member of the family has risen — Marina Ogilvy.
She had the guts to decide what she wanted and went for it in an open, una-shamed way.
I hope the stuffy Royals who snubbed her now appreciate her honesty.
She deserves an apology.
— H Proctor, Canterbury  
WHY all the argument about whether or not the Queen will decide to pay tax?
Deduct her tax at source, as for almost every other citizen.
—
WHAT a crazy world!
The banks want us to pay them for the privilege of making their money from our money.
—
PEOPLE MONEY
PETER POSH
When the shares zoom thigh-high
WANT to know how the stockmarket's doing?
Forget the financial pages — have a look at women's skirts!
If they're thigh-high the stockmarket, too, will be up; long, and share prices will also be down near the floor.
It's known in the City as the Hemline Index (as opposed to the usual measure of the top 100 companies' shares, the FTSE 100).
What's more it seems to work.
In the Twenties, the era of the ‘flapper’ when skirt lengths reached a then-outra-geous knee length, shares soared.
Then came the crash of 1929 and shares — and hemlines — tumbled.
The mid-Sixties saw the celebrated mini-skirt, and again share prices rose.
But by the mid 70s shares and skirts had fallen again.
In the 80s, shares reached record heights and so did skirt lengths.
Now in the depressed 90s, they're going down again.
Diving hemlines mean a grim outlook for shares.
chance to catch up…
THE deadline for paying the final 70p instalment on your electricity shares has now gone.
Cheques should have been in last week.
But if you've forgotten and you hurry, they might still be accepted.
But be warned: this is your last chance.
Miss it and you will lose your shares — and any profit they've made.
And all you'll get back is the £1.70 you paid on the first and second instalments.
Will that bonus pay off the house?
A WORD of warning to those of you who've taken out endowment mortgages in the past five years.
No need to panic, but it's worth checking there's going to be enough in your insurance company's kitty to pay off your home-loan when the time comes.
I know that's the general idea of an endowment mortgage.
You take out an insurance policy and when this matures, it pays off the loan.
The trouble is there's no guarantee this will happen.
It usually does, and then some.
But that's when share prices are going through the roof and insurance companies are coining it in.
In the past few years, share prices have gone through the floor and insurance companies are saying they might have to cut bonuses (on which eventual repayments depend) or increase premiums.
As I say, no need to panic.
Insurance companies tend to be pretty conservative with their projections of future bonuses anyway.
But it might be as well for those of you with just a few years to go before you have to repay your loan to check with your insurance company that there's going to be enough in the kitty to repay it.
If not, it gives you time to take evasive action — either to build up your savings to make up for any expected shortfall, or to increase your premiums.
But whatever you do, don't take out a new policy.
This will only involve you in expensive start-up costs.
Meanwhile, those of you yet to take out a home-loan but thinking of doing so might be better off going for the repayment version where you pay off a little bit of the loan and interest as you go along.
Questions & Answers
A friend says I've got too many pensions.
I have a works pension, a personal pension and an AVC.
Is he right?
Not necessarily.
If your works scheme is contracted in to SERPS and you want to contract out, then you can also have a personal pension — but only to have somewhere to put your SERPS rebate.
But if your works pension is contracted out of SERPS, then you can either be a member of your works pension scheme OR take out a personal pension — but not both.
Finally, you can also make additional voluntary contributions, but only if you're a member of a works scheme.
If all you've got is a personal pension, then you simply increase your payments if you want to top up your pension.
My address: Money People, 33, Holborn Circus, London EC1P 1DQ.
Please remember that I'm unable to accept legal responsibility for answers.
Be a top Telly tec
Win an £80 TV licence!
Answers on a postcard to: TV Quiz 22, London SE99 7TY, by September 17.
1
Which Stone Age cartoon characters live at Bedrock?
2
Name the comic who made Reliant Robin cars notoriously funny, then found fame on a Funky Moped.
3
In EastEnders, Pauline Fowler and Pete Beale are twins.
True or false?
4
Actor Mark McManus plays which Scots ‘tec?
5
Who presents Crimewatch UK with Sue Cook?
6
The Sixties spy drama The Man From Uncle is back.
What's the bird-like name of the enemy?
7
Eldorado's Trish Valentine does what for a living in bars?
8
In which American state is Baywatch set?
9
Name the television quiz in which con-testants teasingly ask: ‘Can I have a P please, Bob?’
10
Larger-than-life Bella Emberg is filling our screens again as whose famous side-kick?
Last week's answers:
1
, Six times;
2
, Krypton Fac-tor;
3
, Boon;
4
, False;
5
, c) Ma;
6
, Home And Away;
7
, Dirty Den Watts;
8
, Telly Addicts;
9
, Good Morning Britain;
10
, Bob Monkhouse.
Carry on camping
GEOFF WEBSTER
IF your idea of a camping holiday is a leaky tent, eating cold baked beans and sleeping on a lilo with a slow puncture, forget it.
Life under canvas these days can be positively luxurious when you go with firms like Eurocamp.
Our destination was their Calafornie Plage site in Vias, on the French Mediterranean.
The Channel crossing on Sally Lines was superb, with a magnificent smorgasbord breakfast.
Then at Dunkirk we set off on the first 400-mile stage to our overnight stop at Vandanesse.
With our three kids, all under six, settled in their beds we considered the next stage, which would take us 370 miles further to our destination.
The following 12 sun-filled days were bliss.
The tent was fully equipped with a fridge, four-burner hob with grill, fully sprung beds, barbecue and out-door table and chairs.
The facilities were first-class, with a well-stocked shop, bar, restaurant, a pool and children's club.
The kids were happiest on the camp's private beach — only five minutes from the tent.
We enjoyed good wines at 75p a litre and gorging on fresh sardines and salads bought in the local market.
We had a wonderful, lazy time and didn't see a tin of baked beans for the whole fortnight.
Our holiday with Eurocamp from August 16–28 cost £743.
This included two overnight stops at Vandenesse and 11 nights at Vias, personal insurance and ferry cross-ings with Sally Lines.
For more information, phone 0565 633844.
LAZY DAYS: A tent beside the Med
Forget Mellor, I scored 5 times a night in Chelsea strip…
‘I was enjoying it so much I just wanted to keep going and going’
[And I had thousands of people watching!]
MARY KEMP
BIRDS do it, bees do it, even David Mellor in a Chelsea strip does it, let's do it — but five times a night?
That's what was revealed this week.
Cabinet Minister David Mellor managed to score four or five times a night, depending on which paper you read, wearing a Chelsea soccer strip.
He certainly impressed actress Antonia de Sancha with his athletic prowess.
But now we can reveal what it really felt like to make whoopee wearing nothing else but the blue kit, because Peter Osgood has done it.
Twice.
In your dreams, David.
‘I'm a big man,’ says Peter.
‘6ft 2 ½ in and I can tell you half an inch makes all the difference.’
Osgood was once the star player of Mellor's favourite team Chelsea.
Wherever he went, his tackle made the crowds gasp.
The centre forward, whom they nicknamed Ossie, wore his sideburns long and his shorts even longer — but at least he kept them on for the duration.
Unlike some, David.
He was the man who knew all the best positions and though he has now retired from football to run golfing weekends at places like the Meon Valley Hotel Golf and Country Club near Winchester, he assures you that once you've scored five times a night you never forget it.
‘It was in 1971 against the Luxembourg team Jeunesse Hautcharage in the European Cup Winners’ Cup first round,’he says.
There was no chilled Cristal champagne or smoked salmon and the floodlights could hardly be dimmed but, David, the night was full of excitement and emotions were running on four-star.
‘I could have gone on scoring all night, oh yeah, you don't get tired.
I was enjoying it so much I wanted to keep going and going.
I didn't want the night to finish,’ says 44-year-old Peter.
THAT'S probably how he felt, isn't it,’ he adds.
‘I scored the first time after eight minutes.
‘It felt good and then the next one came after just 15 minutes.
‘I thought I was satisfied then but the more you have the more you want.
‘I scored again after 38 minutes and then again four minutes later.
And this was all before half-time.
‘By the time I had scored the third time I didn't feel tired.
The thing is you feel tired when you're getting beat but once you're in front and you're scoring, you're on a high then.
‘You want to score four or five times and then push harder to score six and seven.’
Dream on, David.
‘It's a fantastic feeling.
It's like when you see a lovely lady and you get a knock-back you feel sick, but if a beautiful girl says, ‘Yes’ to you — boom you're away.
‘It's that sort of sexual feeling really because you are on a fantastic high and you feel as though you could do anything.
‘I didn't have the most stamina in the world, I was called a lazy player but I could have played till midnight.
I was really athletic.’
Sound familiar, David?
YEAH, yeah, I put myself around, I was an aggressive player but I was skilful, too.’
On this night though, David, if you can believe it, everything was not quite as it should have been, including the opposition.
‘It was too easy really because we were professionals playing a team who were part-timers, putting in an hour's hard training a week.
‘We were really expecting to win which is why I scored so well.’
Peter even had an audience, 21,000 watching and screaming every time he came with the ball from behind, their knuckles going white as they gripped their seats at Stamford Bridge.
But then he has always been on top of the situation.
In 1969 he scored four in an FA Cup game against Crystal Palace.
He says: ‘It was very cold and frosty as we went out to face them.
‘We had a guy called Charlie Cooke who was like a ballerina.
Everyone else was falling around but he was a wizard with the ball, a fabulous dribbler.
‘He shot too early a couple of times, that was his problem, but then I think I shot too early sometimes, too.
It's instinctive.
Sometimes you don't shoot quick enough.
It's one of those things that happens.’
Does it, David?
Does it really?
‘Anyway, Charlie made it really simple for me, there were two guys at the back who couldn't stand up and he laid it on a plate for me.
I KNOW we went two-nil up quite early and three-nil up before half-time.
Then the game slowed up a bit.
‘But I scored the last two goals in the second half.’
Sadly, Peter never had a favourite position for scoring.
‘I was quick over 10 yards.
It was important to get in there quick.
‘It can be more enjoyable if you're quick but it all depends who's playing alongside you.
It's always important to get in front.
‘But my aim was always to get that ball.
Those balls were mine.’
SCORING ACES: Ossie now and (right) David Mellor waves to the crowd at yesterday's Chelsea game after fans chanted ‘Throw us your shirt, David’
POSITION IS EVERYTHING: Osgood scores against Leeds in the 1970 FA Cup final replay
Have FREE family fun!
The kids will love it here
MUMS and dads, have a FREE break with The People!
You can take the kids for a super family holiday weekend at Pontin's Brean Sands near Burnham on Sea, Somerset, and save cash into the bargain.
Mum and dad go FREE when accompanied by two paying children — and the self-catering cost per child is only £34 (minimum two children).
Brean Sands is easy to reach by the M5.
You'll have an en-suite chalet with fully-equipped kitchen and colour TV.
And there's tennis, snooker, darts, bowls, an indoor swimming pool and so much more you'll be spoilt for choice!
The kids will love the fabulous SEGA fun-buses, which will be at Brean Sands for the whole holiday, with 20 megadrives on board, and lots of laughs with Sonic the Hedgehog.
The SEGA crew will also organise a host of great kids' competitions and Pontin's own children's hero, Captain Croc, will be on hand.
To make your booking, just phone 0772 621621 and quote children's holiday offer code TT 32.
PLUS, we've got a great competition for you.
The first five winners will each receive a fantastic SEGA GameGear with TV tuner.
The next five get the GameGear on its own.
This full-colour, hand-held system has more than 30 games to choose from.
The tuner turns it into a hand-held TV.
SEGA is a family entertainment brand, with more than 170 games to play with friends and family, both at home and on holiday.
For your chance to play the best, just unscramble this name of a game hedgehog: CINOS.
Write your answer on a postcard, add your name and address, and send it to: SEGA/Pontin's Contest, The People,
Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TY.
Closing date is September 21 and winners will be first correct entries drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply, with no cash alternative.
GREAT FUN: Sega Game Gear
From a carefree teenager to The Girl in The Mask…how time ran out for Claire
A PEOPLE campaign that reveals the desperate queue for transplants — and why it is happening
She lived in hope as she waited for her lung swap
MURRAY DAVIES
THIS is a tribute to pretty young Claire Kelleher who had everything to live for.
She died of cystic fibrosis awaiting a heart-lung transplant.
Claire was one of 233 patients needing the operation.
Last year only 79 had the surgery.
Just before she died, Claire and her mother Helen spoke of how they hoped the transplant would give Claire a new lease of life.
Sadly time ran out, just three days after our poignant pictures were taken.
CLAIRE, as pale as the winter daybreak she will never see again, sits on her bed wheezing through the oxygen mask she has worn for the past three months.
A year ago, she was a lively teenager studying for her A-Levels and enjoying life with her friends.
She has been in this hospital room since February waiting for her heart-lung swap.
Her life is based on hope.
To give up hope is to give up life before it is taken away.
Claire lives from day to day.
‘I keep giving myself little deadlines for when the transplant will happen,’ she says.
‘I tell myself, ‘This time next week…this time next month…by the time a nurse comes back from holidays…’ but the deadlines pass.
‘All I want is a normal life.
It's boring lying here waiting.
And it's frightening because I know people die waiting for a transplant.
‘I'm waiting as patiently as I can but it's getting a pain now.
I've been on the list for an operation since February.
My lungs are worn out.’
Fifty get-well cards, bright posters and paintings cover the walls of Room 4 in Albert Ward at London's Royal Brompton Hospital.
On the floor are 11 pairs of brand new shoes — she has another 60 pairs at home in nearby Chelsea.
Claire collects shoes.
It is her indulgence.
Most have never been worn.
Now they never will be.
She has not been out of this room for six months.
Lacking sunlight, her skin is artificially white.
SHE is very thin.
She does not want to know how little she weighs.
The only sound is the wheezing of the ventilator helping her breathe.
Claire, 18, has slept in it since June
Each year, 400 British babies are born with cystic fibrosis, our most common deadly hereditary disease.
Most survive, but only into their twenties.
CF attacks the lungs by filling them with mucous causing infection while preventing the body from digesting food.
Like her fellow-suf-ferers, Claire has had physiotherapy to keep the lungs clear and taken expensive drugs to help digest high-calorie foods.
She is proud of her own paintings on the walls.
She was studying A-Level art.
She regrets she has missed so many lessons.
‘I used to be able to do everything my friends did,’ she says.
‘I went to discos and clubs.
‘My mum used to monster me for coming home so late.
Life's on hold for a year.
‘I was doing fine art, fashion and textiles in the sixth form.
I'll have to catch up when I get back.
I want to do something with art or be a nurse.’
Mum Helen, 41, spent every daylight hour with Claire.
She sat by her only daughter and watched as she grew thinner and breathed less and less easily until the day came when she could not breathe any more.
Just three days before Claire's death, Helen said: ‘When she goes to surgery I'm going to say to her, ‘Right, Claire, this is the beginning of the rest of your life.
This is the beginning we've waited for.’
‘Claire went downhill rapidly last Christmas.
Until then she led a normal, if restricted, life.
‘Now her hospital room has become a prison.
She cannot move around because she is connected with the oxygen machine.
‘We try to make each day that bit different but you can stick up only so many cards or buy so many duvet covers.
‘If she is feeling all right, she will try to wash her hair.
It's important for her morale.’
Helen, almost as pale as Claire, gave up her job as a part-time receptionist to be with her daughter.
HER husband, Tom, has slept by her bedside for the last three months.
Claire does not like to be alone.
The most important thing in Helen's life is the bleep.
Both she and Claire have one.
When it sounds, it means that a donor heart-lung has been found.
‘I pray the transplant will be soon and that while we wait Claire's life will be as painless as possible,’ says Helen.
‘We know the operation is the only thing that will make her quality of life better.
We don't know when it will be.
‘There are fewer donors than ever before.
It is very worrying.
The transplant system is not working.
The donor organs are not getting to where they are most urgently needed.
‘I can't believe no one in Europe has died since February who does not match Claire.
She has common blood and tissue types.’
Then the guilt sets in.
‘I'm not wishing anyone dead, but I love Claire and I feel helpless.
‘A transplant is like being born again.
We've met two people who have had them.
They were wonderful, married and living normal lives.
‘Claire does not get angry but she is running out of patience.
I cry tears of helplessness.
I want to see her well again.’
At the Royal Brompton alone there are 113 patients waiting for heart-lung transplants — transplants that do not always work.
Many doctors and nurses feel the system is breaking down.
There is a chronic shortage of donors and the increase in hospitals practising the operation means there are even fewer organs to go around.
FREQUENTLY only the heart is used from a heart-lung donor.
The Royal Brompton has carried out a mere four heart-lung transplants this year.
Many argue for an ‘opt out’ system.
On death, our organs would automati-cally go to help others — unless we said otherwise.
Cystic fibrosis consultant nurse Fran DuncanSkingle said: ‘A transplant can give a new lease of life because the cystic fibrosis does not reappear in the new lung.’
Fran, 12 years a CF nurse, added: ‘Parents feel very guilty they have produced a child who is less than perfect.
‘But CF sufferers are a courageous group and they deserve the best.
They teach us how life should be lived — to the full.
You don't put off anything you can do today.’
Fran nursed Claire.
She too paid a tribute to her courage saying: ‘I feel angry and helpless that her life was taken away before she had a chance.
‘She was a fighter.
She never gave up.
Her life was taken away.’
As Claire said: ‘The waiting is the most difficult part.
My bag is already packed and I'm all ready.
It's just a question of waiting for the bleep.’
Claire died in her father's arms at 3.25am on August 30.
Helen was by her side.
The church was full of pink flowers — her favourite colour.
She was buried in her favourite shoes — the ones with the cherries.
Her funeral was the first time she'd worn them.
Voice Of The People — Page 6 
BONNY VICTIM: Happy Claire last year — before CF started to stifle her life
FIGHTER: Claire in her mask Pictures: ANDREW O'BRIEN
DEVOTED TO THE END: Claire and mum Helen
SHOES MAD: Claire with a pile, cherry pair on top
MAN OF THE PEOPLE
JOHN SMITH
Bob's daft dream
DESERT Island Discs castaway Bob Geldof told presenter Sue Lawley he would like to take a packet of condoms with him, in case some beautiful woman suddenly came ashore, like Ursula Andress in the James Bond movie Dr No.
What makes the arrogant Mr Geldof think that any female would fancy a scruffy git like him, even on a desert island?
To have any hope of bonking on the beach, he'd be better off packing something more basic.
Like a razor.
SCRUFFY: Bob Geldof
What a pickle
AN Asian family who have built up a thriving business in one of Scotland's jobless blackspots are being kicked out of Britain.
Zambian-born Mr Muslim Mahomed and his two sisters employ five people at their pickle factory in Motherwell and have plans to create 30 more jobs.
But now the Home Office has told them they are living here illegally and will be deported — unless they can each come up with £150,000 to satisfy the business investment rules of the Immigration Act.
Now I have no wish to encourage illegal immigrants.
But the Mahomeds have established themselves as solid citizens.
Isn't it a bit barmy to send them packing while we continue to open our doors to down-and-out foreigners with hard-luck stories whose only two words of English are Social Security?
Doc on a night little earner!
SANDY JORDAN is the kind of old-fashioned family doctor who still treats his patients like VIPs.
He is on call round-the-clock in Minehead, Somerset, and doesn't hesi-tate to turn out in the middle of the night if necessary.
So it was inevitable that there would be an emotional outburst when it was revealed that the local health authority are investigating the much-loved GP for working too hard.
They are querying whether all his night calls are really necessary.
Says 63-year-old Dr Jordan: ‘I don't make calls at night to make money.
I do them because I'm called out to see patients who need help.’
Quite so.
However, the fact remains that under Health Service regulations he can claim £45 for every call-out between 10pm and 8am.
The busy physician points out that he makes many more night visits than the six calls a week he puts in a £270 claim for.
Health bosses say his his night payments are five times higher than the average.
Dr Jordan says he is not prepared to drop his standard just to save the NHS some money, and I am sure many people will agree.
Limited
But with medical resources stretched to breaking point, spending by everyone from country doctors to top surgeons is under scrutiny, and rightly so.
Surely local health officials have a duty to make the most of the limited funds at their disposal.
In the case of Dr Jordan, they have the figures in front of them and it's quite understandable that questions should be asked about his unusually high night-time payments.
However worthy his motives, the good doctor is on a nice little earner.
AMERICAN senator Teddy Kennedy chose a novel way of proposing to his new wife, Vicky Reggie.
He placed an engagement ring on a piece of coral beneath the sea and waited for Vicky to find it when they were out snorkelling.
Vicky should count herself lucky.
Last time Teddy was underwater with a woman, he left her there.
WATERDATE: Teddy and new wife Vicky
Wayne's worldly goal
WAYNE LINEKER, 29-year-old brother of soccer star Gary, is angry over gossip about his friendship with 15-year-old Essex schoolgirl Zoe Davey.
‘This isn't a Bill Wy-man-Mandy Smith situta-tion,’ protests Wayne, who runs a bar in Tenerife.
‘Zoe is a virgin and she'll stay that way until she is at least 16 — and even longer if she wants to.’
That's nice.
Presum-ably, just like brother Gary, Wayne will hang around until he sees an opportunity to score.
ANNA RAEBURN
Binding clutch…
THE lovers parked the car in the darkest place they could find, on the edge of a bank.
And they were so carried away, they forgot to put on the handbrake.
The car rolled 20 yards into the river, then the man kicked out the wind-screen and they swam to safety.
Know what I like about this story?
They were married.
Madonna wins in undies farce!
IF THIS sounds like the voice of a woman from Mars, it's because I'm just back from holiday.
And I couldn't have chosen a better three weeks to absent myself.
Because, looking at Britain from abroad, all you could see was a great cloud of knickers.
There were pretty little silk ones, embroidered with the feathers of the House of Wales.
Dropped, discarded or duffed up in a temper — who knows?
Half my postbag says: ‘It'll be all right, they're in love really and the press is just being disrespectful to the monarchy.’
The rest says: ‘Tired of hearing about it.
Let's get it sorted out.
Then they can get on with the jobs they are paid for.’
Also floating in the blue were some racy little items monogrammed SF for Sarah Ferguson.
The women I met on holiday were unanimous.
‘If she wants to mess around, so be it,’ they said.
‘But not with the children looking on.’
I added grimly: ‘And not with the public paying for it.’
However, those less interested in the in-fighting in the House of Windsor than the environment will have noticed that Sarah Ferguson did one thing RIGHT.
She used only one gas-guzzling vehicle to pick up two small Royal children from school.
And above any of the Royal lingerie were some M & S specials in the colours of Chelsea Football Club, closely followed by leopard print briefs.
The all-too personal property of one would-be Prime Minister and one would-be famous actress, namely David Mellor and Antonia de Sancha.
Mr Mellor has now taken to describing himself as a ‘victim of circula-tion wars.’
I can only presume he means the cir-culation in his big toe after osculatory manipulation by his lover.
BECAUSE, prior to this little jaunt, Mr Mellor wouldn't have sold one copy of any newspaper.
And, last but not least, there are some split-crotch red lace specials, with sequins spelling out S.O.S — no, not Save Our Souls as you might expect but Sell Out Sex, belonging to Madonna.
She is the only pop star of any sex who has been shrewd enough to re-invent herself successfully at 18- months interval since David Bowie in the Seventies.
But now she wants to be taken seriously.
While admiring anyone who can stay in charge of a career in the shifty world of pop, make some money and maximise her talent, we are all too familiar — not to say intimate with — Madonna's underwear.
Word is that her latest book, featuring her sexual fantasies, goes too far.
That probably means it will offend the few and rip off the many.
Oh, knickers to the lot of them!
BROUGHT TO BOOK: Madonna's sexy new look
Time to sock it to the snorers
EVERY year or two there's a new explanation for snoring and a suggested new cure.
The latest buzz is that you're more likely to snore if you smoke.
And the cure?
The usual stuff — eat lightly before bed, nothing milky, exercise, cut out fats and keep the tubes clear.
If this sounds more like an instruction to London
Underground, it's the sort of thing researchers say when they can't really help.
Because when you're awakened by somebody else's involuntary noise, you first feel sympathy, then irritation, followed by impotent fury then tears of frustration.
You wake up.
Snorers go on sleeping
My parents snored in tandem and my sister occasionally joined in.
You'd think this would have prepared me.
I used to lie awake and worry because I couldn't sleep.
But I'm tougher now.
Marriage to a snorer requires iron nerves, a matching elbow and, pref-erably, a separate bedroom.
But if you quite like sleeping with the offending partner for other reasons, you'll need earplugs, a light where it disturbs nobody and a good book till the warm drink you've made for consolation lulls you back to the Land of Nod — pending the next onslaught.
Do men snore more than women?
Or do they just make more noise?
All I can tell you is that, yak's milk pessaries, herb pillows, special inhalants and all, I read a big thick book about the American Indian Movement, while ‘Im Indoors makes noises like an elephant in rut.
When stiff upper lip doesn't pay off
WHEN I was a kid, you ‘had a crush’ on somebody.
Now, you're obses-sional.
In those days, you ‘had an off day.’
Now you become depressed.
There are many new words to describe eternal responses and situations.
But we're not handling them any better.
Kenneth Moreton was 52.
Richard Furley was 41.
Moreton was an accountant, Furley a design engineer.
Both were proud with a strong sense of the conventional role of husband and provider.
Moreton's son is 11, Furley's just two.
Both men were made redundant.
And tragically, both killed themselves.
Mrs Moreton described her husband as ‘very proud but very private.’
Moreton and Furley are not the first men to die of redundancy.
And they won't be the last.
So please, leave the stiff upper lip to one side, at home at least.
To lose your work, your earnings, your social and professional standing, your dignity as a man — that's hard.
Let those who love you help you fight towards recovery.
There is no guaranteed golden future.
But with a greater willingness to let in somebody — a relative, best friend or counsellor — at least two little boys wouldn't have to face the future without a father.
Where there's a will
WE ALL fear an incurable illness or tragic accident.
And now the Court of Appeal has strongly indicated it would regard as binding a ‘living will.’
That's one which defines, while you are totally fit, whether you want your life artificially prolonged should you be struck down by an incapacitating illness or accident.
Living wills are common in the States, and exist here.
But we have no law dealing specifically with such documents.
AIDS causing the death of the young has highlighted that it is not only the elderly who wish to make provision against an artificially prolonged end.
The Centre of Medical Law and Ethics has spent two years working with the Terence Higgins Trust to develop the document currently under consideration.
It would cover the terminal stages of an incurable physical illness, permanent mental impairment, incurable physical illness, and permanent unconsciousness.
Some months ago, a reader sent me a copy of the form she'd received from the States, but I was then advised this wasn't likely to be honoured in law.
Now it seems this may change — one small but important change for the better.
There is still such a thing as making a good end.
PEOPLE PEOPLE
SEAN SMITH
EVEN though the ghastly Every Loser Wins was the best selling single of 1986, Nick Berry has never really cashed in as a pop star.
Until now.
He has signed a deal worth £500,000 with Sony and is secretly recording a new album at the studios owned by Ray Davies of The Kinks in Muswell Hill.
He has written the music himself.
It always looked as if old Wicksy would remain a minor TV figure until his series Heartbeat about a country plod came along.
His recording of the title song became a massive hit and I understand a new sexier image will be revealed around Christmas.
It remains to be seen whether his own observa-tion of six years ago (‘I was a rotten singer’) still applies.
Auf wiedersehen, Pet, after thirty years!
AFTER one of the longest marriages in showbusiness, Petula Clark has parted from her French-born husband Claude Wolff.
On the eve of her British comeback tour, the singer, still looking wonderful at 58, admits sadly: ‘We have simply grown apart.’
Petula has been living at her London home this year while Claude has stayed in Geneva.
Their 31-year-old marriage has been described as unconventional but the reality is that they live entirely separate lives.
‘We go our own way’, says Petula.
‘It's an intensely personal matter.
I still find it difficult to talk about, though it's been an open secret in the family for the past few years.’
The couple have received the full support of their three grown-up children — Bara, 31, Katie, 29 and Patrick, 20.
Petula explains: ‘Being a typical mother, I felt incredibly guilty at first.
But the children are quite sincere when they tell me we are the closest family they know.
‘I was terribly proud to hear them say that’.
There are no plans to divorce, although they freely see other people.
Meanwhile Petula is throwing herself into her first British tour for 10 years.
It begins at the Beck Theatre on October 7.
She says: ‘I tried to have a good marriage, be a good mother and have a career.
I wanted everything but it's impossible.
LIVING APART: Petula and husband Claude
Back at Albert Square I hear Sharon, or rather Letitia Dean, will be playing Snow White in pantomime.
This is not exactly a character that springs to mind watching her at the Queen Vic jumping into the sack with her husband's brother.
The interesting thing about the panto is that her real life brother, Stephen, will play the supporting role of Prince Danilo, who, I seem to remember, ends up marrying Snow
White.
So brother marries sister.
That sounds more like an EastEnders plot.
IT wouldn't happen on this newspaper, of course, but in Washington a reporter got fed up with his editor having a go at him because his first sentences were too long.
The next day he wrote: ‘DEAD.
That was what
Harry Serbronski was after his car hit a telephone pole at 86 miles an hour.’
He was fired.
ANNIE Lennox announced last Monday that she was happily pregnant and expecting her second child in the New Year.
All the dailies reported the news the next day.
This came as no surprise to readers of this column.
I told you all about it on July 12, two months ago.
And while babies are on my mind, my best wishes to Patsy Kensit on the birth of her son.
I also exclusively revealed her pregnancy back in March.
That's enough bragging for now.
It's Mrs Martika
EVERY other story about Martika seems to be about her dating some new love or other.
Among others she's been linked with Prince, Jason Donovan and a waiter.
Well, here's the real news.
She has secretly married (yes, MARRIED) a poet and is living in his studio apartment in Manhattan's arty SoHo district.
The deeply sultry singer who's chart success this year includes Love Thy Will Be Done disappeared from public view four months ago.
That was when she dumped her mother Marta, who had always guided her career.
Since then nobody has been able to get in touch with her.
HUSH-HUSH MARRIAGE: Pop singer Martika's a miss no longer 
When Chris turned the air Blue
MY favourite story about original Blue Peter presenter Christopher Trace, who sadly died last week, was when it was decided that the show's pesky dog Petra should have a litter.
The young viewers were kept fully informed of developments and on one programme a possible mate was being discussed.
Petra, it was pointed out, was rather nervy and scared by nature so Chris announced that a ‘bold and confident dog would be the best mate and most likely to produce a lit-ter’.
The nation's mums were outraged.
One wrote to Chris: ‘How disgusting.
I sent my 14-year-old son out of the room.’
WIN…a round with Henry Cooper
IT'S tee time with Tetley — your chance to play golf with the stars.
Tetley Tea is sponsoring the Henry Cooper Golf Classic at Hanbury Manor, Hertfordshire, as the climax to its £500,000 appeal for the Variety Club, famous for helping needy children.
And our four winners (who must have a handicap of 24 or under) will tee off alongside such celebrities as Henry himself and a host of other stars such as John Conteh, Roy Walker, Eddie Large and Richard O'Sullivan.
They will also receive a Tetley Golf jumper, golf balls and other goodies.
And after the day's play they will attend a grand dinner when Tet-ley's £500,000 cheque will be handed to the Variety Club.
A hundred runners-up will each receive a pack of Tetley Tea and a Tetley Teafolk biscuit tin.
To enter, just name the current British Open Champion.
Write your answer on a postcard, add your name, address, phone number, golf club and certified handicap.
Closing date is September 18.
The winners will be the first correct entries drawn.
Damaged by the enemy within
LESS than two months after his election as Labour leader, John Smith got a taste last week of what harmed Neil Kinnock during nine years in the job.
As Mr Smith travelled to the TUC in Blackpool, a senior union leader — sup-posedly an ally — called for the Labour leader's anti-devaluation stance to be ditched.
Three Shadow Cabinet members gave TV interviews which repudiated economic policies they had agreed just five days earlier.
Backbenchers desperate to rock Labour's boat on Europe queued up to denounce their party leadership on radio.
And these same Labour members have the nerve to criticise Mr Smith for offering weak opposition to the Government!
How can they expect their leader to devote his energy to attacking the Tories when he has to spend time dealing with his own rancorous, ill-disciplined colleagues?
When Neil Kinnock was doing Mr Smith's job, his leadership was undermined by the unremitting hostility of sections of the media.
The Press would never have been able to do its destructive job without the help of Labour figures who couldn't pass a TV camera or journalist's notebook without making a disloyal remark.
Inevitably there will be differences between Shadow Cabinet members over important issues of policy.
But in the real Cabinet, fierce debate is held behind closed doors with a united front presented when the doors open.
If Shadows and would-be Shadows started behaving like members of a government, there'd be a greater chance of them becoming the real thing.