

Setting up in Business
Setting up your own business can be the most satisfying thing you ever do.
The rewards can be enormous, but so can the risks.
Taking a solicitor's advice at the outset can bring peace of mind and mean the difference between success and failure.
A number of questions — not all of them obvious — need to be examined carefully, and from all possible angles.
Finance is usually the first issue which needs consideration:
How do you keep tax to a minimum?
How can you protect the money you put into the company?
Will the profits of the business be enough to pay back bank borrowing?
Should you mortgage the family home?
What other sources of finance are available?
Are you and others in the business dividing responsibilities and profits fairly?
The premises in which the business is to be carried on have to be found:
Do you understand the implications of all the terms of the lease?
Can the rent be put up, and by how much?
What will it cost you in dilapidations when you hand the property back?
Should you sign any personal guarantees?
Has the property got planning permission?
Running a Business — A Solicitor's Services
Once your solicitor has helped you establish your business, you will be faced with a constant range of decisions to make about its day-to-day running.
Most matters are soon dealt with by experience — but knowing you have access to a solicitor's professional advice on more complex legal problems is a valuable extra security:
Do you need a licence to extend hire purchase or other credit facilities?
Should you trade in your own name or through a company?
Which will best protect you financially?
What terms of trading will you have with your customers and suppliers?
How can you protect your inventions and secrets?
Other important matters to think about include employees and your liability for them:
What if your product or workers injure someone?
Can you limit your liability?
What insurance should you take out?
What are your obligations to employees?
Do you need to provide a written contract for them — and what should go in it?
Do the same rules apply to part-time or freelance work?
Under what circumstances can you dismiss staff?
Can you stop them taking your trade secrets or your customers with them when they leave?
A solicitor will also ensure that your business plans will take account of the future of you and your family:
What will happen to the business if you fall sick or die?
How can you provide a pension for your retirement?
What are the tax provisions for transferring a business to your children on retirement, and how can you best take advantage of the rules?
And you must also make provision for things going wrong:
Can you get your money back if the business you buy turns out to be a pig in a poke?
What if you fall out with your partner or fellow shareholders?
Can any of you be forced out — and if so, what are your rights?
If any of these questions concern you, then you need advice.
Your solicitor is the independent professional who will put your interests first and give you the right advice.
A Solicitor is an independent Legal Adviser
There are some 50,000 solicitors practising in England and Wales.
Most are in private practice, though several thousand work in commerce, industry, local and central government.
the solicitors' profession goes back to the courts of the 15th century, and to this day a solicitor's full title is ‘Solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales’.
Solicitors today are men and women who have spent up to seven years qualifying.
They can advise their clients [customers]on all aspects of the law although many tend to concentrate on a particular area.
A solicitor is required by law always to put the interests of his or her client first.
This duty means for example that a solicitor must always tell the client of anything he or she happens to know which might prejudice a client's case.
Also, solicitors must keep confidential communications between them and their clients.
The solicitors' governing body is the Law Society, which was first established in 1825.
Today the Law Society — though known first and foremost as the body which governs solicitors — is also actively involved in law reform and improving everyone's access to justice.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Planning Law and the Environment
What is the connection between building a new power station and turning your home into a fast food takeaway?
Answer: Neither can go ahead legally without first getting planning permission.
It is easy to assume that the law about planning new developments, or changing the environment around us, only affects us when we need to take a positive step — such as applying for permission to extend our own property.
But sometimes simply carrying on life as normal is not enough.
For example:
Your business or home is threatened with a compulsory purchase order.
Living near an airport which is proposing to add an extra flight path — over your house.
Watching a neighbour put up a suspiciously large extension for which he supposedly has permission.
The shoe shop next door is bought out by a firm of metal welders.
It is rumoured that an oil rig is to be set up on the local water meadows.
What can be done?
Since ancient times people have disputed the actions taken by their neighbours.
Sometimes disputes are about their own boundaries — such as arguments over fencing — and sometimes they are about land in common ownership, anything from a medieval village green to a modern multi-storey car park.
Planning Law and A Solicitor's Services
Much of the time, planning procedures work.
But there are times when a dispute is harder to resolve, or is part of a wider problem.
This is where a solicitor can be of service:
You are buying a flat in a Victorian converted house.
But in the course of the conveyancing, it emerges that planning permission was not obtained.
Technically, the flat — which you desperately want — is illegal.
You are buying a house precisely because it comes with a large plot of land.
Will you be able to build on this without trouble?
Planning permission has been refused to you.
You want to appeal but there has already been a long delay, and you urgently need to get it right this time.
A compulsory purchase order has been served on your business premises.
The amount of compensation offered to you seems very low.
The new factory nearby is not keeping to the noise levels originally agreed, and heavy traffic continues to and from it late into the night.
Several people in your neighbourhood want to complain but they are anxious for the best joint representation.
A number of professions are involved in all these areas; town planners, and surveyors, for example.
They all play different roles.
A solicitor will often already be doing the conveyancing for you if the problem concerns a property you are buying or selling.
He or she can help you as an objective legal adviser.
Solicitors are required by law to act in your interests alone.
Moreover, they are often people with long experience of the area where you live, and of your particular problem.
The legal work they do for other clients gives them this experience.
Often a solicitor will know as much or more about the history of local land as anyone.
A Solicitor is an independent Legal Adviser
There are over 50,000 solicitors practising in England and Wales.
Most are in private practice, though several thousand work in commerce, industry, local and central government.
the solicitors' profession goes back to the courts of the 15th century, and to this day a solicitor's full title is ‘Solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales’.
Solicitors today are men and women who have spent up to seven years qualifying.
They can advise their clients [customers]on all aspects of the law although many tend to concentrate on a particular area.
A solicitor is required by law always to put the interests of his or her client first.
This duty means for example that a solicitor must always tell the client of anything he or she happens to know which might prejudice a client's case.
Also, solicitors must keep completely confidential communications between them and their clients.
The solicitors' governing body is the Law Society, which was first established in 1825.
Today the Law Society — though known first and foremost as the body which governs solicitors — is also actively involved in law reform and improving everyone's access to justice.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Employment Rights
You are sacked after 20 years' service with a week's notice.
No reason is given — but you have just moved house, with a huge mortgage, and paid the deposit on a new kitchen.
Or:
At work you are told to do tasks that are not part of your job, including operating machinery which you believe to be dangerous.
Or:
Your boss and fellow workers constantly tell offensive jokes and you have been sexually  harassed .
What can you do?
Or:
Your employer has been taken over and there is talk of redundancy.
What might happen to you?
What are your rights?
Employment rights are set out in and affected by Acts of Parliament, Codes of Practice and by the decisions taken in individual cases by Courts and Industrial Tribunals.
The legal provisions are complex and, without a solicitor's advice, it can be difficult to know how these would apply to you, if you have a problem related to your job.
Rights at Work exist because problems can arise in and from employment.
Staying in work means a lot these days and if you lose your job you may face other problems as a result.
Not all work problems are covered by the law but many are.
Compensation for unfair dismissal or redundancy may be available to you if you have lost your job and fulfil the qualifying requirements.
Employers must comply with provisions covering a wide variety of other matters, such as health and safety, maternity, race and sex discrimination and trade union activities.
How can a solicitor help you?
Legal advice may be available to you if you are a trade union member [or a member of a staff association].
If not you may be able to get legal help through a law centre, or you may prefer to consult your own solicitor, if you have one already, or a local firm recommended by a friend or colleague.
In any employment matter, it is important to get advice quickly — as soon as any serious problem occurs.
In certain cases the law imposes very short time limits within which you must act.
After that, it may be too late to make a claim.
A solicitor will tell you whether you have a case and what your chances of succeeding in any claim might be; he or she will advise you where — Court or Tribunal — and will explain the procedure and steps to be taken throughout, and will represent you in negotiations with your employer if you wish.
Health and Safety, and Accidents at Work Your employer is almost certainly required to comply with a range of legal regulations concerning your health and safety at work.
These provisions vary depending on the nature of your work — a building site is obviously different from an office.
Accidents at work can often happen, yet many people do not realise they may be able to claim compensation.
If an accident does occur, you may be able to arrange a free initial interview under the ‘ALAS’ scheme [Accident Legal Advice Service]operated by many solicitors.
Look for the ALAS logo in the office window.
Discrimination Sexual and racial discrimination can be highly distressing and can take a variety of forms — you may be refused a job, miss out on promotion or suffer  harassment by your employer or colleagues.
Your solicitor can also advise you on questions relating to equal pay.
Appeals If an Industrial Tribunal's decision goes against you, you can only appeal in limited circumstances.
It is too late at the appeal stage to think about getting evidence which could have helped you at the beginning.
Maternity Rights The law now places legal obligations on employers to pay women [who qualify under the statutory rules]on maternity leave and to allow them to return to work afterwards.
If employers do not keep to their obligations, legal steps can be taken.
Whether you are a senior executive or an apprentice, whether you work in a city office or a factory, your solicitor can advise you on all the matters mentioned in this leaflet and on many other issues: for example, the consequences of a takeover, merger, or the insolvency of your employer; part time work and job sharing proposals; what happens if you are laid off; deductions from pay; relocation; or proposals for changing your terms and conditions of employment.
And sometimes a job-related problem may lead to a need for legal advice on something else.
If you have been dismissed you may be falling behind with mortgage payments, rent or other debts.
Or you may be concerned about transferring pension arrangements.
Seeking advice at an early stage could solve small worries before they become major problems.
A Solicitor is an independent Legal Adviser
There are some 70,000 solicitors in England and Wales.
Solicitors are men and women who have spent up to seven years qualifying in law.
They are under a duty to put the interests of their clients first.
They must keep confidential communications between them and their clients.
The solicitors' governing body is the Law Society.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and at Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Renting as a Tenant
Eviction, harassment, bills for disrepair: the words are well known, but no-one wants to be faced with the reality.
Renting property means not just renting a place to live in, or to run a business from.
It should mean security and peace of mind too.
A tenant needs to know exactly what a landlord can and cannot do — and what legal rights there are if problems crop up.
Legal advice is often not just advisable but essential.
Solicitors' Services for Tenants
Prevention is better than cure, and before even entering into a tenancy agreement you should seek independent legal advice from a solicitor.
This is to prevent legal problems arising either during or at the end of the tenancy.
No-one can, say, stop the pipes from bursting: but if you have sorted out in advance who will be responsible for organising the emergency repairs, much time and anguish, as well as money, may be saved.
But if you are already a tenant and you are suddenly faced with a crisis, you will need legal advice to solve it.
A solicitor is qualified to help in many different ways:
Checking the small print — ensuring there are no loopholes in the agreement which could let landlords out of their obligations.
Acting in emergencies such as eviction or harassment.
Legal aid — a solicitor can advise if you qualify, and apply on your behalf.
Business tenancies — making sure the agreement is properly drawn up.
Organising how and when to renew the tenancy, and responsibility for repairs.
Repairs — A common complaint is of essential works left undone.
The problem may be solved just by a solicitor's letter, though in many cases court action is needed.
You may also be able to claim compensation.
Marriage breakdowns — if your partner has been paying the rent and leaves you, you may still be protected from eviction; a solicitor will help.
Are you a Residential Tenant?
If you rent a place to live in rather than work in, you may need to see a solicitor about any of these legal matters:
Service charges How to control high bills is often a problem, but recent changes in the law give residents associations much greater powers.
Court proceedings and eviction A notice to quit does not always mean you have to leave.
A solicitor can advise on how you should act.
Rents A solicitor can advise whether the landlord has a right to put the rent up, how to apply for a fair rent, and whether to appeal against a rent increase.
The right to buy Council homes are now usually available for sale.
And now private tenants in flats can get together to buy the freehold from their landlord too.
Repairs and maintenance No one should put up with unrepaired property.
Legal remedies can ensure that landlords carry out the works for which they are legally responsible.
Compensation If landlords refuse to fulfil obligations, you may be entitled to compensation.
Business Tenancies
Renting a business property is quite different from renting a home.
Whether you lease one small shop or you are expanding into a number of properties, lack of legal protection could jeopardise your livelihood.
Knowing your legal rights in advance means you can negotiate with a free hand.
A typical instance where a solicitor is needed is renewing the lease at the end of the tenancy.
But a solicitor will also advise on:
Improvements and fixtures If you leave the premises you may be entitled to compensation for improvements made by you.
Structural alterations Fundamentally altering the property to suit your business could be in breach of the agreement.
Out of date leases If the agreement is very old, you may be able to apply to the court for unnecessary and infuriating clauses to be amended.
Rent review provisions, repairing obligations and service charges These are all important considerations if you are thinking of buying the lease of business premises.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
If you don't make a will
A man or woman who dies without making a will is intestate .
This means that rules of intestacy made by Parliament govern the division of their money, property and possessions.
These rules are mostly inflexible, so anyone with specific intentions about providing for a family friends or a charity after their death should definitely consider making a will.
Why everyone should make a will
You may think you are not wealthy enough.
But stop to add up the value of your house, car, shares, insurance policies — the total is probably more than you realised.
A will is particularly important for anyone with children, especially if you are a separated or unmarried parent.
A will is also necessary for anyone wanting to provide beyond their immediate family, and for anyone concerned about tax consequences after death.
In most cases intestacy may not be a problem for those you leave behind.
But all too often leaving no will could create yet another worry for your family at a time of bereavement and disruption at home.
Making a will is a way of making life easier for them.
Making a will — a Solicitor's Services
Making a will is the surest way anyone has of providing for others after their death.
Solicitors are experienced not only in drawing wills up, but in advising on important related matters of law — inheritance law, taxation, property matters, or family problems.
Solicitors can therefore provide the broadest professional legal advice service when you want to make a will:
Avoiding the pitfalls — trying to make a will alone can be full of pitfalls.
Many words and terms have specific meanings in law which are different from their everyday use.
Home-made wills do not always mean what the writer thinks they do.
And it is also important to ensure that a will is correctly witnessed.
Sentimental belongings have another kind of value.
You may want to be sure a certain heirloom — perhaps worth little financially — will be passed on to a particular person.
Inheritance tax — few people intentionally leave money to the taxman.
A solicitor can steer you through the intricacies of inheritance tax, helping you minimise its effects, and explaining the various exemptions and reliefs.
Leaving money to charity .
Some people want any money ‘left over’ to go to charity.
It is essential to be very specific about this in your will, or your intentions may not be carried out.
[Leaving a sum to charity can also minimise tax liability.]
Everyone's circumstances can change .
You should make a will every time your situation changes; if you get married, if you become a home owner, if you inherit money, or if your relationship breaks up.
If you have already made a will, it is worth reviewing it with your solicitor every few years.
Executorship — a Solicitor's Services
Your executor is the person who takes charge of administering your estate after death.
It is important to specify in your will who your executor is, to prevent delays in money being released to your family at what may be a difficult time for them.
A solicitor can both draw up your will and act as your executor if you so wish.
Banks also advertise their executorship services, which may be appropriate in some circumstances — but bank charges for acting as executor are high, and are not open to challenge or independent assessment in the same way as solicitors' fees.
A Solicitor is an independent Legal Adviser
There are over 50,000 solicitors practising in England and Wales.
Most are in private practice, though several thousand work in commerce, industry, local and central government.
The solicitors' profession goes back to the courts of the 15th century, and to this day a solicitor's full title is ‘Solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales’.
Solicitors today are men and women who have spent up to seven years qualifying.
They can advise their clients [customers]on all aspects of the law although many tend to concentrate on a particular area.
A solicitor is required by law always to put the interests of his or her client first.
This duty means for example that a solicitor must always tell the client of anything he or she happens to know which might prejudice a client's case.
Also, solicitors must keep confidential communications between them and their clients.
The solicitors' governing body is the Law society, which was first established in 1825.
Today the Law Society — though known first and foremost as the body which governs solicitors — is also actively involved in law reform and improving everyone's access to justice.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Europe 1992
31st December 1992 is the date set for the achievement of an ambitious programme.
It is designed to make Europe a place where movement from one country to the next is as easy as possible.
Removing obstacles to the free flow of people and trade involves new laws.
More and more, people are learning that these laws grant them rights and privileges unknown before the creation of the European Community.
Regulations from Brussels deal with a vast range of topics such as employment conditions, industrial safety, social security, immigration, taxation, food hygiene, environmental control, broadcasting, air-sea & land transport, cultural development, education and of course of all aspects of trade and commercial affairs.
1992 is of great importance to the business community.
It is of particular relevance to the smaller sized businesses.
Further, all of us should be aware of the new regime and how it benefits us.
Your solicitor is well placed to help you understand how the new laws and regulations affect you.
Europe 1992 and a Solicitor's Services
EUROPE AND THE INDIVIDUAL
1992 will mean changes affecting all of us as consumers, as employers or employees, or simply as citizens.
Your solicitor can help you understand the advantages in the Single Market programme.
In time you may need legal advice on any of the following matters:—
Buying a Property in the EC — Perhaps a retirement home or holiday home; or you may be selling a property, or inheriting one.
Claims for Accidents or Illness — At some point most of us travel, work or study abroad.
Where should you start if you wish to make a claim against someone in another European Community country?
Working Abroad — There are laws which ensure that your education and qualifications whether professional or technical will be recognised in all of the countries in the Community.
‘Green’ Issues, Food and Hygiene — Controls are becoming stricter than ever in the public interest, whether for water or foods.
We are all more aware than ever of environmental matters and the need to protect our surroundings.
Health and Safety — You may have a query, whether as an employer or an employee, concerning your work place and whether EC regulations will affect your working environment.
Social Security — Are you aware of your rights to participate in each State's social security system?
Education — students can benefit from programmes which provide exchange schemes between third level institutions across Europe.
EUROPE AND THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY
Barriers will be coming down, creating greater opportunities for many businesses.
Your business, old or new, may need constructive advice on any or all of the following:—
Your Products or Services — Advice on applying for or protecting trade marks and patents ; complying with new standards for the preparation and presentation of your products.
Distribution — Setting up agency agreements while avoiding possible conflicts of interest;drafting franchise agreements as an alternative distribution method.
Business Deals — Drawing up contracts with foreign suppliers or customers, and taking account of the customs regulations in transportation.
Finance — Guidance on financial procedures in the European Community including specification of payment terms, debt collection , access to foreign banking and insurance systems etc.
Partnerships — How to forge more formal links with your foreign counterparts for joint ventures.
Protection — Businesses of whatever size benefit from protection against large and established interests engaging in anti-competitive behaviour or abuses of their dominant positions.
Small and Medium Sized Enterprises — How to take advantage of the special European provisions for businesses in this sector.
Gaining New Clients — How to avail yourself of the opening of all public contracts to businesses throughout the Community.
A Solicitor is an Independent Legal Adviser
1992 and the Single Market will bring changes into all of our lives.
A solicitor is an independent legal adviser who may be able to help you through the apparent maze of new laws.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Child Care Problems
Children are special — and problems relating to them need specialised care.
A solicitor can help in all areas where legal advice and action are necessary, often at an early stage.
These include:
arrangements following divorce or separation
abduction
care proceedings
abuse
children born outside marriage
The children Act 1989, which came into force in October 1991, changed the law in relation to many of these matters.
The new law does not use the terms custody and access but talks instead of parental responsibility, residence and contact .
A solicitor will be able to explain this to you.
Arrangements following divorce or separation
Even where parents no longer live together they each continue to be responsible for their children and will need to decide who the children should live with for most of the time and how often the other parent should see the children.
A solicitor can help parents to make their decisions and where appropriate can refer them to a conciliator to assist.
Where agreement is not possible the court can make orders dealing with residence and contact .
The court can also prohibit certain steps — such as changing a child's name — or deal with specific issues like a child's religion, schooling or medical treatment.
Abduction
If you fear that your child may be abducted, either here or abroad, contact a solicitor immediately.
Solicitors have the experience and resources to act effectively in an emergency.
They will, for example, know how to alert immigration officers at all ports and airports to the possibility of a child being taken out of the country.
There are various Acts of Parliament about the return of children wrongfully taken from their country.
They relate to the recognition and enforcement of court orders abroad, and to the powers of the police to arrest people they suspect of illegally attempting to remove a child aboard.
Your solicitor will know if these laws can help in your situation.
Care proceedings
A local authority may seek to take a child into care where:
the child is suffering significant harm [or is likely to suffer harm], and
that harm is the result of a lack of parental care or the child being beyond parental control.
Harm can include impaired health or development and both physical and mental ill-treated or abuse.
A solicitor can represent parents and children at care proceedings, and advise on, eg, contact with children in care.
It is usual for parents and children to be separately represented to ensure that the child's best interests are considered.
Abuse
In cases of suspected abuse — physical or sexual — both children and parents may need legal advice and help.
A solicitor is an independent professional, whose advice will always be completely confidential.
He or she is best placed to give you legal advice, and to liaise with the other professional agencies involved.
Children born outside marriage
If a single mother wants money from the father to help with the child's upbringing, she may need to apply for maintenance payments and/or a lump sum from the father.
A solicitor can explain the circumstances in which a mother can apply for maintenance.
Solicitors are also able to advise a man who denies a mother's claim that he is the child's father.
Parental responsibilities for children born outside marriage rest completely with the mother unless a specific agreement or court order has been made conferring parental status on the father.
The Children Panel
Children in need of legal help require specialist advice.
The Law Society [the solicitors' governing body]has set up a specialist panel of solicitors to represent children where they are a party to court proceedings.
Panel lists can be found at Citizens Advice Bureaux, at Magistrates Courts and also in the Solicitors regional Directory.
This can be found in Citizens Advice Bureaux, Law Centres and many local libraries.
Parents or others with child care problems may also need legal advice.
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
Otherwise, consult a solicitor who is personally recommended to you, or ask about the panel lists described in the previous paragraph.
Legal Aid and financial help
A solicitor will be able to advise you whether you are eligible to apply for Legal Aid to cover some or all of the costs of your case.
Eligibility for Legal Aid depends on your income and savings, and on the merits of your case.
Children and parents involved in emergency protection and care proceedings will receive legal aid automatically, without any assessment of means or merits.
A Solicitor is an independent Legal Adviser
There are over 50,000 solicitors practising in england and Wales.
Most are in private practice, though several thousand work in commerce, industry, local and central government.
The solicitors' profession goes back to the courts of the 15th century, and to this day a solicitor's full title is ‘solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales’.
Tax Questions
Tax is a hard fact of life.
If nobody paid tax, many of the things often taken for granted might not be possible — education, health care, national defence, the upkeep of the roads.
The list is a long one.
Nevertheless, there is no need to pay more tax than you owe.
Determining the amount to be paid is not just a question of adding up figures.
Tax law is exceptionally complex and changes frequently.
A solicitor can interpret the law for you and help you take advantage of your full legal entitlement to reliefs and allowances.
Corporation Tax
Corporation tax covers all of a company's income and capital gains.
Special rules apply to family controlled companies.
Deciding whether to incorporate a business involves comparing the different effects of corporation tax, and the income tax and capital gains tax an individual or partnership pays.
A solicitor will advise on the different reliefs and allowances which may be available.
Inheritance Tax
A solicitor who draws up your will can help you plan to reduce or avoid inheritance tax, and explain the various exemptions and reliefs available on lifetime gifts or when property passes on death, for example, on gifts:
Between husband and wife
Made out of current income
Of business or agricultural property
to heritage bodies or charities
Inheritance tax is not just for the wealthy.
Add up the value of your home, car, shares and belongings and you may well find you are worth more than the current threshold.
Capital Gains Tax
Capital gains tax has particular significance in a business context.
A solicitor can help sole traders and partnerships to maximise the various reliefs and exemptions, for example, rollover reliefs, and advise about offsetting losses.
Capital gains tax also affects individuals.
You may be selling a second home, or buying and selling shares.
A solicitor can advise on whether capital gains tax is payable, and on ways of minimising liability.
Value Added Tax
Should you be registered?
If you are a supplier of goods or services where turnover exceeds the current registration threshold you have to charge VAT and account for it to Customs and Excise.
The regulations governing this tax are highly complex and also have to correspond with EC law.
Solicitors can explain how VAT affects your business and whether you can benefit from the special rules for small businesses.
There is a range of automatic VAT penalties in force and timely advice may help to avoid them.
You may also need a solicitor to defend you before a VAT tribunal or to fight tax assessment.
Income Tax
A solicitor can help you ensure that you are not paying too much tax and that you claim every allowance to which you are entitled.
A solicitor will explain:
When payment of tax is due
How to make repayment claims if you are entitled to
What allowances are available against income [either business or personal]
How to arrange income and outgoings between husband and wife to benefit from independent taxation
There are wide-ranging rules relating to pensions applicable to both the employed and the self-employed.
A solicitor will explain when you can claim reliefs on account of payment made towards your pension, and in due course on the pension itself.
Customs and Excise
Importers of goods may be liable to one or more of four taxes:
Excise duty
Customs duty
VAT
Agricultural levy
Rights of appeal have to be exercised quickly and a solicitor will do this on your behalf, and help you challenge assessments.
Tax is regulated by complicated and frequently changing law.
A solicitor is an independent legal adviser who will give you professional advice on tax.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and at Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Moving home
Home ownership has never been more important.
Not too long ago, property ownership was limited to just a minority — but today nearly two thirds of people in England and Wales live in their own homes, more than in many other countries.
Owning your own home means that home is no longer simply where the heart is — it is also a major financial investment.
Yet its value can change with frightening speed, depending on such unpredictable outside pressures as interest rates and recession.
Both trying to buy and trying to sell a property can have fundamental implications for most people's financial situation.
This is why moving home is a major transaction.
And why, when you have agreed a price on the home you want, you cannot simply hand the owner a cheque then move in.
The agreement drawn up when property changes hands must be absolutely watertight.
The whole process is called conveyancing .
Conveyancing and a Solicitor's Services
Numerous people are involved in the moving process.
At the centre of it all is the solicitor — organising information from bank managers, surveyors, and local authorities; from your buyer and the person you are buying from.
The solicitor's role is crucial: to ensure that the sale or purchase of your home is managed efficiently and professionally.
And to provide you — the client — with a full, independent advice service too:
Mortgage advice — a great many mortgages are now endowment mortgages, meaning that financial organisations are keen to sell insurance and pensions.
The market is highly competitive.
A solicitor is able to offer objective advice on your choice of financial loan.
Local searches — a new motorway is a boon if sited a couple of miles away, but not right at the end of the road.
A solicitor must check on this and other local matters with the local authority.
Planning permission, rights of way, etc — it is common practice to buy a property intending to say, extend it or run a business from it.
Whether this is possible must be checked from the outset.
Leasehold properties — flats in particular are often leasehold, involving detailed terms and conditions which a solicitor will check.
Survey advice — a surveyor may recommend that a purchase should only go ahead — often on an old property — if certain building work is done.
But who will pay?
A solicitor will negotiate and ensure the point is covered in the contract.
Drawing up the contract — this states not just the price, but all the terms and conditions of the transaction.
Exchange of contracts is the vital moment of agreement, after which it is very difficult to withdraw without stiff financial penalties.
Completion — the final stage, when keys and money are handed over.
Between exchanging contracts and completion, the solicitor checks the validity of the title and that existing charges on the property [eg mortgages]will be paid off.
After Completion — the solicitor registers the title and pays stamp duty where applicable on your behalf.
Some of these steps are essential, others are taken at the request of the client.
No two situations are alike, and the circumstances in which people move home often raise related legal problems.
Is the move on break-up of a marriage?
Is the divorce or separation being looked after?
Similarly, if the move follows a bereavement questions of wills and probate may arise.
Often a move may involve reconsidering a tax situation too.
In all such areas, your solicitor can offer legal advice as part of a complete professional service.
Common Questions
1
What does conveyancing cost?
Much of the cost goes to the Government in stamp duties and Land Registry fees.
For the solicitor's work the fee will vary depending on a number of factors.
Your solicitor should give you information about charges at the outset, and will be happy to discuss in advance any particular points on the cost you wish to raise.
2
Why use a solicitor?
Because solicitors are highly qualified professionals with vital experience in legal matters, and with key organisational skills.
Some people can and do their own conveyancing, though there are circumstances [such as complex leasehold properties]where detailed knowledge of the law is a distinct advantage.
Like deciding whether or not to employ an accountant or to do one's own accounts, it is a question of skill, will, inclination and above all time.
3
What about gazumping and ‘chains’?
Anyone can — and some people do — withdraw from a sale or purchase of property before exchange of contracts, but often after some weeks of wasted time.
Many solicitors' firms participate in the TransAction scheme, set up by the Law Society [the solicitors' professional body]to reduce the delays which can lead to breaks in property chains, and make the conveyancing process run more smoothly.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and at Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Financial Services
The management or investment of money is time consuming, and rarely simple.
Constant attention must be paid to such important matters as movements in interest rates, exchange rates and share prices; changes in the tax regime; inflation; economic developments here and abroad; general financial news and the terms of business offered by banks, building societies, stockbrokers, insurance brokers and others who wish to earn their living by managing your money.
We live in a world where there are few easy profits and many easy losses to be made, especially when the wrong advice is given.
Yet we all depend on money in one form or another throughout our lives, just as we depend on our physical and mental health, and everyone must be sure of receiving proper impartial, independent and professional advice.
Some Solicitors Services that you may need
Mortgage advice — how to arrange the money for your house purchase quickly and get the best bargain, without being sold a life assurance policy that you may not need
Insurance — how to guard against the unexpected disaster, perhaps the loss of someone you depend on, or an accident, or damage to your house or loss of your possessions.
Advice on Savings — how best to look after what you can afford to save.
Dealing with a Windfall — you make an unexpected profit on a house sale, or you receive damages, or a golden handshake, or a legacy.
What should you do with it?
Providing for Retirement — making sure that you will be able to afford to retire and to enjoy those golden years without being beset by financial worry in old age.
Looking after your Capital — many people are worth more than they think.
Are all your assets working well for you?
Providing for your Dependants — will they be as well off after you have gone?
Are school fees provided for, and mortgage payments?
Investor Protection through a Solicitor
A solicitor's ability to give impartial and disinterested advice is a fundamental element of his or her relationship with you, the client.
Solicitors are bound by strict rules that regulate their professional conduct and in the particular context of financial services there are important guidelines designed to protect the management or proper investment of your money:—
Dealings with clients' money — a solicitor must keep a careful and separate account of any money of yours that he handles and must account to you for deposit interest if he or she holds a significant amount of your money for a significant length of time.
Commission — many financial advisers earn large sums in commission, not all of which they are obliged to disclose.
A solicitor must not only disclose to you any commission over £10 that he or she receives but must also account to you for it unless you have agreed that he or she should keep it.
Most other financial advisers automatically keep commission.
Independence — solicitors may not be tied agents or appointed representatives of, for example, a life assurance company .
Nor may they have any business arrangement which constrains them when recommending investments for you or instructing some other agency to deal with your business.
Regulation — solicitors are subject to the same regime as all other providers of financial services and are regulated in the conduct of investment business by the Law Society.
Is a Solicitor a Financial Expert?
The expertise required by a provider of financial services comes from training in various disciplines such as law, economics, business management, and accountancy, coupled with a good deal of worldly wisdom, common sense and awareness of market forces.
Some solicitors specialise in this type of work and can provide a full in-house service.
Others prefer to use independent intermediaries and their skill lies in knowing who is the best person to deal with your particular needs.
Either way, there can be no doubt that when you deal with a solicitor you will receive truly independent professional advice.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
Splitting up
The disintegration of any relationship is painful.
But the problems which follow may not only be emotional ones, and this is where a solicitor can help.
Divorce or separation mean thinking about arrangements for children; maintenance; and the division of property.
These are all areas in which a solicitor offers professional expertise and practical advice — as well as support and comfort.
An unmarried couple splitting up can also face legal problems.
If they did not take legal advice before buying property together, its division could be complicated.
There may also be difficulties about parental responsibility for their children.
A solicitor will be able to advise on all these matters.
Common Questions
I was married 10 months ago.
Can I start divorce proceedings?
No, you can't petition for divorce until your first wedding anniversary has passed.
My wife has gone to live with someone else.
Is this a ground for divorce?
The only ground for divorce is the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage.
This is established by proving one or more of five circumstantial facts.
In your case you may be able to say that your spouse has committed adultery and you find it intolerable to live with her; or that you have lived apart for two years and you consent to the divorce.
I am a Roman Catholic and object in principle to divorce, but I need to sort out our house and arrangements for our two children.
What can I do?
You can protect your right either to stay in your home, or to realise your share in its ownership.
You can try to obtain maintenance and/or a lump sum payment for your children and yourself.
The court can decide who the children should live with and how often the other parent should see them but it is better if you can agree these arrangements between yourselves.
A solicitor will be able to help with this.
My husband insists I have no contact with my friends, and gets violent if he finds out I have seen them.
What can I do?
You can go to court for an order to exclude your husband from your home or to forbid him from harassing you in any way.
My wife wants a divorce.
I don't.
Should I defend her petition?
Defending a petition can take a long time and be expensive.
You should only consider it at all if you believe your marriage can continue.
Discuss the possibilities in full with your solicitor.
Children, Money and Property
Arrangements for children, money and property are quite separate issues from whether or not there are legal grounds for divorce or separation:
Will my wife automatically get custody of our children?
Since the Children Act 1989 came into force in October 1991 terms such as custody and access are no longer appropriate.
The new law recognises that both parents continue to be responsible for their children even when they are separated or divorced: children are not something to be ‘won or lost’ in divorce proceedings.
A solicitor will be able to explain this to you and to help you make suitable arrangements for your children.
I am about to re-marry.
Will my ex-husband still pay maintenance for me and the children?
You will lose your own payments, but he must still pay towards the children.
You should also remember that if your circumstances change significantly, a maintenance order may be altered.
A solicitor will advise on all these family problems and on the countless others which may arise — tax relief on maintenance payments, for example.
He or she can also help negotiate agreements between spouses, conduct proceedings in court or advise on conciliation and other services.
The Cost
See a solicitor as soon as possible if you are thinking of divorce or separation, or if you need money or protection for you or your children.
The cost will vary according to the circumstances.
Ask your solicitor beforehand for an idea of possible costs and whether you might qualify for one of the forms of Legal Aid.
Legal Aid may be available depending on your income, savings and the merits of your case.
It may cover some or all of the costs.
If you are claiming supplementary benefit, you automatically qualify.
A Solicitor is an independent Legal Adviser
There are over 50,000 solicitors practising in England and Wales.
Most are in private practice, though several thousand work in commerce, industry, local and central government.
The solicitors' profession goes back to the courts of the 15th century, and to this day a solicitor's full title is ‘Solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales’.
Solicitors today are men and women who have spent up to seven years qualifying.
They can advise their clients [customers]on all aspects of the law although many tend to concentrate on a particular area.
A solicitor is required by law always to put the interests of his or her client first.
This duty means for example that a solicitor must always tell the client of anything he or she happens to know which might prejudice a client's case.
Also, solicitors must keep confidential communications between them and their clients.
The solicitors' governing body is the Law Society, which was first established in 1825.
Today the Law Society — though known first and foremost as the body which governs solicitors — is also actively involved in law reform and improving everyone's access to justice.
If you don't already have a Solicitor
You may have received this leaflet directly from a solicitor.
If not, ask friends or colleagues for a personal recommendation; or ask at your nearest Citizens Advice Bureau or Law Centre; or consult one of the directories available which list all solicitors.
These are found in many public libraries, and at Citizens Advice Bureaux or Law Centres.
‘We're not married but won't we be treated as if we were?
We've lived together for eight years and have two children?
As far as inheriting property is concerned, the position for married and unmarried couples couldn't be more different.
To prevent uncertainty about the ownership of property when a person dies without having made a will, Parliament has decided how the property is to be dealt with.
The Intestacy Rules cover this situation and, broadly, state that a person can only pass their property to their legal husband or wife and blood relations.
No one else can inherit when the Rules apply.
So, if a couple are not married, the surviving partner receives nothing at all under the Intestacy Rules.
The Rules were made in 1925 and in this respect they have not been changed.
If you are not related by blood, or were not legally married to the deceased, you cannot inherit from him or her if he or she dies without a will.
This can mean considerable difficulties for many people.
If as a couple you own your home jointly, it may pass automatically to the survivor, but you should check the position with the solicitor who did the conveyancing for you.
Our factsheet Will Making for Homeowners gives additional information, but there is no substitute for a solicitor's reassurance on matters such as this.
Are Unmarried ‘Widows and Widowers’ Left Stranded?
Unfortunately, they can find themselves in very difficult circumstances, but they do have some means of claiming the dead person's property.
When someone dies unmarried [either divorced or never having married]and without a will their property goes to their children.
If he or she had no children, the Intestacy Rules dictate which relatives will be entitled to inherit.
Parents, brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews and cousins can all be included if there is no one closer.
An unmarried partner may agree with the surviving relatives that provision will be made for him or her from the estate, but this is not always possible.
Where it is not possible, the surviving partner may go to court to ask for provision from the estate.
Unless that partner was dependent on the person who has died, there may be difficulty in establishing a claim.
However, if they had lived with the deceased, an unmarried partner's children from a previous marriage or relationship might be able to prove they were dependent and obtain provision from the estate.
What about the Children?
Your own children, natural or adopted, can always inherit from you, whether or not you are or have been married to their other parent.
However, the children of your unmarried partner cannot inherit from you unless you adopt them or make a will even if they have been living as a family with you both.
Children whose parents are not married to each other are in almost the same position as children whose parents have married each other, but some differences remain.
It is obviously important that everyone understands exactly how the law applies and your solicitor will be able to explain the situation.
Appointing a Testamentary Guardian
As parents, you should consider including a clause naming a friend or family member as guardian for children until they reach 18, to act if both of you were to die together, perhaps in an accident.
You can appoint one or two guardians.
Doing this means someone will be legally responsible for your children and it avoids uncertainty or family argument, as your wishes would be clear.
The situation is different where one parent survives, however.
If parents are not married only the mother has legal responsibility for a child, unless the father has obtained a court order or [after October 1991]the couple have formally agreed that they should both have parental responsibility.
So if the mother were to be killed leaving a surviving father, without a court order or agreement, there would be no one legally responsible for the child.
It is particularly important therefore to appoint a guardian.
Doing without a Will
The Intestacy Rules will govern the distribution of your property if you do not make a will.
In addition, there are other ways in which property can be passed on to specific people without a will.
For example, a life insurance policy can be ‘written in trust’ which means that the person named as beneficiary will receive the policy proceeds immediately the insured person dies.
[Life insurance policies not written in trust may form part of the deceased's estate.
Not only can this mean additional tax being due, it can take much longer for their dependants to receive the money.]
In addition, pension scheme trustees can be asked to pay the money in the scheme to a named person, and most property can be jointly held, in the way already referred to.
So what's the point of making a will?
Here are some very good reasons:
1
You'll know who will be in charge of winding up your affairs [your executors]; otherwise your nearest relative will be given this task.
This means that, if you are not married to your partner, he or she may have to face another member of your family being responsible for dealing with this very personal task, while he or she will have no role or status at all.
2
If you don't make a will, you can't give your executors special rights to deal with your estate, such as specific authority to buy a house for your family to live in.
They may be hampered in the efficient winding up of your affairs by the limited powers Parliament gives to the next of kin in these circumstances.
Making a will which includes the necessary additional rights for executors can help ensure that as much as possible of your estate goes where you direct and that your executors can deal with your estate economically and efficiently.
Your solicitor will be able to advise on what your will needs to include.
3
If you don't make a will you can't leave a gift to charity.
Many people want to leave a legacy to a charity they have supported all their lives.
Alternatively, people sometimes leave their estate to charity as a long-stop, with the charity inheriting the estate if everyone else mentioned in their will has died, for example.
4
If you don't make a will, you can't leave a keepsake to a friend.
5
If you don't make a will, you may pay more inheritance tax than is necessary.
6
If you don't make a will, you lose the chance of getting unbiased independent advice on your general financial position from your solicitor.
Impartial advice can be hard to find nowadays, but your solicitor is bound by the Law Society's rules to give this kind of help, and always to act in your best interests.
Some advisers, for example, earn commission from selling you insurance — but don't tell you.
Your solicitor can advise about insurance, if you wish — and what's more, YOU get any commission, not your solicitor, unless you agree otherwise.
7
Mainly, though, if you don't make a will through an experienced solicitor, you are not doing the best you can either for yourself or your partner.
It's as simple as that.
Other Advice from Solicitors
Solicitors can offer help on a variety of subjects — employment, house purchase and housing, and family matters; in addition, independent, impartial advice about insurance, tax and financial services is available.
So take advantage of your solicitor's expertise to help you arrange your affairs, for your own benefit and for that of your family and friends.
Finding a Solicitors
If you already have a solicitor, he or she will be pleased to advise on any of these points.
If you do not have a solicitor, a friend, neighbour or colleague may be able to recommend someone.
Local libraries and Citizen's Advice Bureaux hold lists of solicitors practising in a locality and many firms now advertise in the Yellow Pages.
The information in this leaflet is not an alternative to specific legal advice on your circumstances.
There is no need to be anxious about the cost of seeing a solicitor; ask for an explanation of charges at the outset.
Solicitors A Career for Tomorrow
Contents
The role of Solicitors
Becoming a Solicitor
Training to be a Solicitor
Variety of Opportunities
People who work as Solicitors
The Future, including International Legal Practice
Solicitors in England and Wales
As the 21st century approaches, solicitors are more than ever at the forefront of commercial and community life.
As society becomes increasingly complex, our need for legal advice grows and the specialist advice of a solicitor is in strong demand.
The single market of 1992 finds the solicitors' profession in a prime position to take advantage of all the opportunities it has to offer.
Firms of English solicitors are to be found all over the world, while at home, complex legislation, the increasing need for financial services and growing domestic demand has led to a growth in the need for solicitors.
As the need for solicitors grows the profession's influence expands.
Prospects, therefore, for bright and well qualified people are good, although demand for solicitors varies from year to year.
For advice about the current position, you should talk to a careers adviser.
A Career with Variety
If a career as a solicitor offers anything, it offers variety of opportunity.
Variety in choice of Environment
Offices range from large commercial practices with hundreds of employees in the business area of large cities to small practices with fewer than 10 staff in the suburbs or provincial towns.
Variety in choice of Location
The international nature of the profession means that you can work in many major centres all over the world, and in offices all over the country.
Variety in choice of client
In private practice you could provide services for large, corporate clients, or for private individuals and small businesses.
You could also concentrate on one type of client, such as those accused of crime or needing other forms of specialist advice.
There is an enormous growth in opportunities to work for central or local government, a commercial or industrial organisation, the Magistrates' Courts Service, and the Crown Prosecution Service.
A Career with Tradition
The legal profession in England and Wales has a long and distinguished history.
The work of solicitors goes back to the 15th century and as time has gone on they have become increasingly influential.
If you become a solicitor, you will be joining a profession with a respected history of service to the legal profession and the community as a whole but this does not mean that tradition dominates.
The strength of the history of the profession makes it easily adaptable to the ever changing needs of modern society.
The Role of Solicitors
What does a Solicitor do?
The role of a solicitor is to provide clients with skilled legal advice and representation on all legal matters.
You can work in private practice where the clients are people who come to you for help; or you can work for central or local government, the Magistrates' Courts Service, or a commercial or industrial organisation, where the employer is your ‘client’.
The work of solicitors varies as widely as the community they service.
In a recent survey approximately 100 solicitors were asked how they spent their time.
This diagram shows the proportion of time spent on different types of work by these solicitors.
Why Clients Consult Solicitors
I need a solicitor because…
‘I want help in obtaining a divorce and gaining the best possible arrangements for me and my children’.
‘I have been knocked off by bicycle by a negligent driver and although not seriously injured, I cannot work for several weeks.
I am consulting a solicitor to gain compensation for loss of earnings from the driver's insurance company.’
‘I am threatened with eviction, and need a solicitor to negotiate with the landlord.
Although I have no money, the fees will be paid by the legal aid scheme.’
‘As the representative of a multi-national organisation, I need help from a solicitor to organise the takeover of a firm overseas.’
‘I will consult a solicitor about buying and selling my home.
Also, when I buy a holiday home in France, I will need help from a solicitor to make sure my interests are protected in a foreign country.’
‘I want to make a will.
My estate is not large, but even so, I will avoid problems for my family by consulting a solicitor.’
‘I am working on a new system in the computer industry.
I will speak to a solicitor to register the patent and this will protect my company's interests when the product is developed.’
‘After many years of working for an employer.
I am now going into business by myself.
My solicitor will advise me about running the business, how to trade and how best to run the finances.’
‘I never thought it would happen to me, but I have been left quite a large sum in a will.
I was not sure how best to deal with this and I will consult a solicitor about investments.’
‘My home is threatened by a compulsory purchase order.
If I cannot stop this, my solicitor will help me gain compensation.’
‘As chief executive of a large local authority, I employ solicitors to provide advice to the departments on many matters including child care, planning law, and negotiating with building contractors.
As a local authority, we are responsible for statutory services and it is important that we have advice on the legal implications of our activities.’
‘As the managing director of a large commercial organisation, I employ solicitors to work on all the legal issues arising from the operation of my business and to advise me about all the new developments in legislation and case law.’
Qualifying as a Solicitor
The Law Society prescribes the legal education and training required to qualify as a solicitor.
In order to qualify as a solicitor in England and Wales, you should follow one of the following paths:—
1
The Law Degree Route
About 75% of solicitors qualify in this way which is the quickest and most common way to qualify as a solicitor.
It involves studying for a qualifying law degree and then proceeding direct to the Legal Practice Course, which is the professional training for solicitors.
In order to be a qualifying law degree, the degree should contain the following six ‘core’ subjects:—
Contract Land Law Equity & Trusts Tort Criminal Law Constitutional & Administrative Law.
In order to be accepted for a qualifying law degree, it is usually necessary to have good ‘A’ level grades [or their equivalent].
You can study any subject at ‘A’ level; the important thing is that the subjects you study are academic and that you do well in them.
Science ‘A’ levels are normally just as acceptable as arts subjects and no one subject is essential for admission to a law degree course.
For further information about entry qualifications, you should contact the institutions of your choice direct.
You should always check to ensure that the six ‘core’ subjects are covered.
After successful completion of the qualifying law degree, you will then have to proceed to the Legal Practice Course which will give you the practical skills necessary to become a solicitor.
After successfully completing this course, you would then normally have to undertake a two year training contract.
Information about this is provided on page 6.
Within your training contact you must satisfactorily complete a Professional Skills Course.
Some institutions incorporate the Legal Practice Course into the degree — information about these is available from the Law Society.
2
The Non-Law Degree Route
If you prefer to take a degree in a subject other than law, this is perfectly acceptable, but qualification will take longer.
Having been awarded your degree you then complete the Academic Stage of Training by means of the Common Professional Examination or recognised alternative.
The Common Professional Examination is taken after a one year full-time or a two year part-time course covering the six core subjects.
Courses are offered by a range of institutions.
Some institutions offer a part-time or full-time Diploma in Law, at post-graduate level.
Here you would cover the six ‘core’ subjects and some additional legal topics.
A small number of institutions offer two-year post-graduate law degree courses which cover the six ‘core’ subjects and other legal studies.
[NB the usual LLM degree does not cover the six ‘core’ subjects].
After successful completion of the academic stage of training by the Common Professional Examination or an alternative, you then proceed to the Legal Practice Course, followed by the two year training contract.
It is possible for those who have taken the CPE to complete the training contract before the Legal Practice Course, if the employer agrees.
3
The Non-Graduate Route
If you have four GCSEs [waived for those over 25]you can become a student member of the Institute of Legal Executives and train to be a legal executive.
This involves obtaining a training post as a trainee legal executive with a firm of solicitors or similar organisation, joining the Institute of Legal Executives and undertaking the Institute's Part 1 and Part 11 examinations.
This normally takes between three and four years.
If possible, you should study for three of the six ‘core’ subjects of law [see above].
After passing the Part 11 Examination, you will become a Member of the Institute of Legal Executives.
You must have served five years [two after membership]in a legal office and be 25 years of age before you become eligible to become a Fellow of the Institute of Legal Executives.
During this time, you should undertake the remaining ‘core’ subjects as Diploma examinations via the Institute.
As a Fellow of the Institute of Legal Executives, having passed the six ‘core’ subjects of law, it is then possible to enrol as a student member of the Law Society and attend the Legal Practice Course.
If you have been in continuous legal employment, the requirement to serve a Training Contract [page 6]may be waived, but you would have to complete the Professional Skills Course, after completing the Legal Practice Course.
If you wish to pursue this route, you should contact the Institute of Legal Executives whose address is Kempston Manor, Kempston, Bedford, MK42 7AB.
Practical training
After successfully completing the academic stage [law degree, CPE or Diploma in Law]and the Legal Practice Course you then have to undertake a two year training contract which will enable you to put into practice the knowledge and skills that you have learnt.
You will be working in a solicitor's office or other approved organisation and will have the opportunity to handle your own cases, see clients and undertake most of the work of a solicitor whilst under supervision.
Many employing organisations nowadays pay salaries which compare favourably with those paid to graduates in other employment sectors.
The Law Society lays down minimum salaries, below which the trainee solicitor normally cannot be paid.
the training contract can also be undertaken part time over up to four years.
Finding a Suitable Employer
Many firms will visit the university or college where you are studying to talk to you about training with them and many others will provide information about themselves.
each year the Law Society runs a Careers and recruitment fair to enable employers and students to meet and discuss opportunities in the profession.
In order to find out which firms and organisations offer training, you should consult a book called ROSET [Register of Solicitors Employing Trainees]which is available from your careers library or from the Law Society.
It is published by the Law Society and lists all firms and organisations employing trainee solicitors by region and by specialism so you can find the firm offering the kind of work you want to do in the area you want to live.
Many firms offer training two years in advance but they tend to be the larger organisations and if you wish to work for a smaller firm or, for example, a local authority, you often need to apply nearer the time.
From 1994 firms and organisations which offer training have to be authorised by the Law Society which also interviews trainees and employers to ensure that the training is of the appropriate standard.
Most people train in private practice, but you can also train in local government, the Crown Prosecution Service and the Magistrates' Courts Service.
There are also opportunities to train in central government and commerce and industry.
The Training Contract
You will enter a two-year training contract with your chosen employer.
You will be offered training in at least three different areas of law, taken from a list laid down by the Law Society.
The type of work offered will depend very much on the employer you train with.
It may include matters such as landlord and tenant work, tax work, probate and wills work, matrimonial law, civil litigation, planning work or crime.
Some firms only offer commercial work, others concentrate on private client work and some may offer a mixture.
If your training contract starts in 1994, you will be required to take the Professional Skills Course which will cover the areas of accounts, investment business, personal work management, professional conduct and advocacy.
The course will last for up to twenty days, and will be offered by a number of organisations in a variety of ways.
It may be possible to study for the course by distance learning, so that the modules can be covered at an appropriate time in your training.
Some firms may offer the course ‘in house’.
You will have to consider which type of work interests you before you decide where to apply for training.
A large number of firms offer general experience, but others are more specialised, so you will need to find out about the type of work available before you apply.
The structure of your training will also depend upon the type of firm you choose.
Wherever you train you will work in at least three, but usually four or five different areas of the law over the two-year period.
Most firms are divided into departments, each dealing with a particular area of the law and you will spend up to six months working in each chosen department.
You will learn practical skills such as drafting documents, advocacy and interviewing clients.
Your work will be closely supervised and regularly reviewed but as the training progresses, the responsibility you are given will increase.
At the end of your training contract you may apply for admission as a solicitor.
The law is continually changing, and solicitors are required to undertake continuing education as long as they practise.
Sharon Turnbull — Newcastle City Council
Sharon Turnbull has been training in articles with Newcastle City Council for nearly a year.
She chose the Council because she felt she wanted something where she could contribute to the community.
She was also attracted by the opportunity to do advocacy whilst serving articles, which is only possible in a local authority.
How much does Sharon work on her own?
‘Although someone supervises me at all times, I handle all my cases myself.
Whilst there is always someone I can go to with a problem, on most occasions I see a case through from start to finish’.
What aspects of her work does Sharon find most appealing?
‘Most of the people I have met are very committed and hardworking.
We all work well together as part of a dedicated team for the good of the community.’
Sharon Turnbull graduated in Psychology at Newcastle University in 1978.
She took the CPE and Law Society finals Course at Newcastle Polytechnic and finished her finals Course in July 1989.
Magdalene Bayim-Adomako — Clifford chance
Magdalene graduated in law from Leeds University and completed the Law Society finals course at the Chester branch of the College of Law.
Why did Magdalene choose Clifford Chance?
‘When I came for interview they seemed very interested in me as an individual, and gave me a very thorough and in-depth interview.
The firm also offers opportunities to travel because they have many offices abroad and internationally based clients.’
Training is intensive, varied and includes in-house lectures.
There is a good monitoring system with an assessment every three months.
What is it like working for such a large organisation?
‘The firm is so departmentalised, it gives you an opportunity to get to know people very quickly.
The trainee solicitors are very well supported, and there is lots of organised social activity for them.’
What of the future?
‘I would like to stay with the firm, consolidate my training and use what I have learnt’.
Magdalene has been at Clifford chance in the City of London for 18 months.
David Thomas — Sylvester & Mackett
After completing his law degree and Law Society finals Course at Bristol Polytechnic, David Thomas began work with Sylvester Mackett in Trowbridge in September 1989.
The firm is small, but covers six areas of work, namely crime, commercial and employment, litigation [personal injury and landlord and tenant], matrimonial, probate and conveyancing.
Why did David choose this Firm?
‘I chose Sylvester Mackett because of the broad spread of the work in which they are involved.
I also wanted to work for a firm with work under the legal aid scheme.’
David sees cases through from beginning to end, an important aspect of the firm's training programme.
He normally takes instructions himself and is responsible for the billing and costing of his files and cases.
Before he qualifies David hopes to be sent on an advocacy course so he can handle matrimonial and crime cases in the Magistrates' and County Court.
Variety of Opportunities
Most qualified solicitors [approximately 69%]work in private practice.
Private practice is usually a business partnership of solicitors who work together.
You could join a firm as a trainee solicitor, become an assistant solicitor when qualified and hope ultimately to become a partner.
The nature of work in private practice varies enormously, as many firms will specialise in a particular field and others may offer a more general service.
Firms range from commercial practices of well over 100 partners giving a general legal service to large, corporate clients, to small, independent high street solicitors, occasionally a ‘sole practitioner’, who provide local people with the services required.
In the middle, you will find a general practice, where you could be dealing with conveyancing and property work, consumer and business matters and matrimonial and housing problems.
Here a solicitor can become an adviser and mentor to clients and can help set up or expand small businesses, draft a complex will, or draw up different types of contracts.
There is an increasing tendency nowadays for solicitors to specialise in the work that they do and in the kind of client they advise.
For example, many solicitors specialise in work with crime, others in shipping or construction, and others give a general service.
You will usually find that solicitors' practices are split into departmental specialist areas, and this enables the solicitor to develop an area of expertise.
Many solicitors specialise in clients using the legal aid scheme; others deal with purely commercial work.
If you train in private practice,[as most people do]you will find that your training will usually be split into four ‘seats’ and each of these is spent in a different department.
This enables you to decide where your strengths lie and where you would ultimately like to work.
Having trained in private practice, you may decide to stay in this field, in which case, when qualified, you will become an assistant solicitor.
Many people become partners in their early thirties and in some cases even earlier still.
The diagram below shows the position of solicitors working in private practice.
It does not include the number of consultants working in private practice or cases in which status was not recorded.
Percentages are based on a total of 46,652 solicitors altogether working in private practice .
Other Opportunities
Not all solicitors work in private practice of course, and it is possible to train in other areas such as local and central government and in commerce and industry.
Here, the solicitor is an employee of the organisation for whom he or she works, and the employer is the ‘client’.
In local government, where approximately 3,000 solicitors work, their role is to give advice on the services provided by the local authority.
This can range from education and social services to planning and construction.
This gives the solicitor a chance to feel involved in the local community and representative of it; it also offers the chance to work closely with other professionals, such as social workers, architects and planners.
In this area, solicitors can specialise in matters such as child care and other areas which specifically relate to local government.
Many of the chief executives of local authorities are solicitors and often started their training with the local authority.
Solicitors also work in central government as part of the Civil Service.
This involves giving legal advice to ministers and implementing government decisions, as well as prosecuting those who contravene regulations.
One of the biggest growth areas at present is the Crown Prosecution Service, which is also a government body, but involves prosecuting offenders on behalf of the police.
You can train with the Crown Prosecution Service if you wish and it gives the opportunity to work in all parts of the country and to practise advocacy.
In recent years, the growth in commerce and industry has brought about the ‘in-house’ legal adviser who provides legal advice to the company.
If you were to work in this sector, you would be using your knowledge of company law to contribute to the success of your employer's business.
This kind of work appeals to those who are interested in commercial law and who like the idea of working within a structured organisation.
It gives you the opportunity, not only to concentrate on legal work, but also to learn about management and the way institutions work.
You can be involved at every level, from Board level to issues relating to health and safety for employees.
Other opportunities include the Magistrates' Courts Service, law centres, charities, and even the armed services.
The nature of the work and the environment in which you operate is a matter for your choice, but few careers offer the variety of opportunity provided by the solicitors' profession.
People who work as Solicitors
Tony Roe — Ford and Warren
Tony Roe, who qualified in March 1990, works for Ford and Warren, a 15-partner firm in Leeds.
Why did Tony choose to work for Ford and Warren?
‘The firm is very departmentalised and has a strong commitment to legal aid work.
The training and the work is very well structured and I feel that the firm has a lot to offer.’
Why does Tony like this work?
‘It is satisfying to apply my knowledge to help people.
I like dealing with the individual client; each case is different.
I also enjoy being able to use other skills and interests including my languages.
It is a friendly, helpful organisation and you can always get assistance from more experienced people.
I like the way the firm is developing’.
Before qualifying, Tony was involved in the Trainee Solicitors' Group and is now involved in the National Committee of the Young Solicitors' Group which he sees as an important role both socially and in terms of his work.
Tony Roe studied for a degree in law and French at the University of Keele and his Law Society finals Examination at Leeds Polytechnic.
Kamlesh Bahl — Data Logic
Kamlesh Bahl is Company Secretary and Legal Services Manager at Data Logic, an international computing company.
With one assistant, she looks after the legal work for the whole of the company, undertakes the company secretarial work and attends Board meetings.
‘At Board meetings I can make sure that the issues which are being discussed are given a legal perspective.
I feel lawyers should always be involved from the beginning of any policy’.
What does Kamlesh like about her Work?
‘There is much diversity in the legal work and computer law is particularly fascinating because pioneering legal precedents are being developed.
I regard myself as a service provider and I have to build good relations with other members of the company.
The other aspect of my work which I enjoy is being involved in the customer care and service.’
Kamlesh was a legal adviser at British Steel and Texaco before joining Data Logic.
Since joining, she has been promoted to her present very senior position.
Kamlesh completed a law degree at Birmingham University and studied for her Finals Course at the Lancaster Gate branch of the College of Law.
She trained with the GLC, then the largest of the country's local authorities.
Helen Harrison-Hall — Allen and Overy
Helen Harrison-Hall went to Allen and Overy eight years ago to train and has worked there ever since.
Allen and Overy is a large Commercial practice in the City of London.
Helen works in the Corporate Finance Department dealing with the mergers and acquisitions and domestic corporate finance.
Where does a Solicitor fit into business operations?
‘Clients come to you with an objective and the solicitor's contribution is to help to achieve this objective within the legal framework.
I enjoy this because of the diversity and intellectual challenge’.
Helen graduated in History at Somerville College, Oxford and then went straight on to the CPE and Finals Courses at the Lancaster Gate branch of the College of Law.
Nigel Gibbon — Government Legal Service
Nigel Gibbon has worked for the Government Legal Service in the Customs and Excise Department for three and a half years.
His work involves litigation on both the criminal and civil sides as well as the usual advisory work.
‘I started off by prosecuting in drugs cases and I then dealt with major VAT fraud cases’.
What does Nigel like about his work?
‘Variety.
No two cases are the same.
I am doing work here I couldn't get elsewhere.
I enjoy having my work and my cases in the national press.
I am involved in cases that I wouldn't otherwise have the chance to deal with.
I feel we have time here to look at cases impartially.’
Nigel Gibbon completed his law degree at Leicester University and studied for the Law Society's Finals Examination at the Lancaster Gate branch of the College of Law.
He trained with a small firm in Cardiff.
Andrew Crookes — C.P.S.
Andrew Crookes works for the Crown Prosecution Service in Nottingham.
What attracted Andrew to the C.P.S.?
‘The main attraction for me was the court work.
The training is very comprehensive, with emphasis placed upon legal knowledge and the development of advocacy skills.
My role is to review the charge and the evidence available.
I must consider whether there is a realistic prospect of a conviction and whether it is in the public interest to prosecute.’
What of the Future?
‘At the moment I see a good future with the C.P.S. The career structure has recently been improved.
The starting salary is competitive, and I am acquiring experience in courts all the time.’
Andrew Crookes completed his law degree at Cardiff University and studied for the Law Society Finals Examination at the College of Law in Chester.
He trained with a small firm in Mansfield.
Joanne Robinson — Bristol City Council
Joanne trained with Hastings Borough Council and New Forest District Council, and went on to Basingstoke as a solicitor.
She then moved to Bristol City Council where she has been for some months.
Joanne specialises in town and country planning and is currently involved in work relating to a major development in the town centre.
What does Joanne like about her work?
‘I get involved in many different projects and I can to a certain degree prioritise what I want to do.
I also enjoy working with other professionals such as town planners and architects.
I gain a sense of achievement knowing I can see a job through to the end.’
Joanne Robinson studied law at Leicester University and completed her Law Society Finals Course at the branch of the College of Law in Chancery Lane.
The Future — including International Legal Practice
International Legal Practice
Some firms of English solicitors have branch offices in the major centres of commerce all over the world, to advise local clients on English law.
Many international transactions are conducted under the English jurisdiction.
Principles of English law and its attendant legal system are now adopted as a domestic legal culture in many other countries.
The common law system, as it is known, is in use in the USA, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland and in many parts of the Commonwealth.
If you qualify as an English solicitor you can work outside the U.K. for government organisations, such as the United Nations in New York or the Commission of the European Community in Brussels.
You can work for large multi-national corporations' in-house counsel or in the branch office of your firm abroad.
International Law
i
Private International Law
This refers to principles and rules which govern agreements and relationships entered into by individuals and undertakings.
It most often relates to commercial matters and the solicitor is engaged in bridging cultures and resolving conflicting laws of different countries to produce cohesive and sound agreements for clients whose interests are multi-jurisdictional.
If you work for a large commercial firm, you will almost certainly be involved in this.
ii
Public International Law
This involves agreements between governments and other public bodies.
This branch of the law most often touches upon obligations which fall upon states arising from Treaties, Conventions or other arrangements entered into by sovereign governments.
This can mean dealing with the conflicts of law between states, the implementation of Treaty obligations, seeking extradition of criminals from foreign jurisdictions, seeking remedies in international tribunals such as the World Court [in the Hague], The European Courts of Justice [in Luxembourg]or the European Court of Human Rights [in Strasbourg].
1992 — The European Single Market
The recent changes in Europe are having a great effect on the practice of law in this country, and the 1992 process will change our economic climate and the type of legal service which clients in this country and abroad will need.
The 1992 single market and the development of EC law impinges directly on the work of all solicitors in England and Wales.
Increasingly solicitors from England and Wales are entering into business and association with counterparts throughout the Community.
Many of them have to acquire language skills in order to service their clients in new market places.
Some firms of solicitors have offices in Brussels so that they can provide a good quality of service to their clients whose interests are governed directly by Community law.
Recognition of Professional Qualifications
A particularly important part of the single market programme relates to the recognition of professional qualifications attained in one of the Member States by all of the others.
For solicitors, this means that the process of becoming a lawyer in another EC Member State may be much more straightforward than previously.
International legal practice is all embracing and skills and personal characteristics required are equally broad.
However, English solicitors are best placed to take advantage of the market that the 1992 provision will offer; the profession is arguably better placed than any other to advise international clients on the legal aspects of doing business in the ‘global village’.
COMMERCE & INDUSTRY
What to look for in your career
The legal profession in England and Wales has a long and distinguished history.
Today it is in demand all over the world either from people bringing their legal disputes to courts here, or from those wishing to come here and study law.
Solicitors first appeared in the fifteenth century.
Although their exact role at that time is not certain, they were powerful officers of the Supreme Court.
Their long history explains the traditional image people often have of solicitors.
But like any profession, solicitors have had to adapt to the changing needs of the clients they represent.
Today they are not simply concerned with bringing legal disputes before the courts; they also offer legal advice to help all kinds of people in different situations.
Solicitors in commerce and industry
There are about 60,000 solicitors in practice, of whom over 3,000 are employed by commercial and industrial organisations.
Solicitors employed in commerce and industry deal exclusively with their employers' legal business.
Due to the significant impact legislation now has on most important corporate decisions, in-house solicitors are playing an increasing part in developing strategy.
The growing competitiveness of British industry and the need to operate within an international environment offer exciting challenges to the solicitor embarking on a career in commerce and industry.
VARIETY OF WORK
Working in-House
The in-house solicitor is often expected to tackle virtually anything, from a multi-million pound project to a minor disciplinary employment issue, and to provide cost effective, commercially attractive and legally correct solutions to problems.
If you work as an in-house solicitor, you will have responsibility for drafting and keeping up to date standard contract documents for use by your employer in the main business — from simple invoice terms and conditions of sale or purchase to those suitable for major projects and transactions and non-standard contracts for individual or complicated projects.
You will plan strategy with commercial colleagues, negotiate the terms of a deal with the customer [or joint venture partner and its lawyers], and take sole responsibility for the legal form of the deal.
You would be involved in a very wide range of transactions, and work with such items as:— the supply of goods or services, sales, purchases, leases or mortgages, acquisitions or mergers, co-operation agreements for research, production, distribution or marketing, syndicated transactions and joint ventures of all kinds.
You would be expected, often at a very short notice, to deal with the legal problems and issues arising from all the support services required for the operation of the employer's business such as the marketing and advertising of products and services.
You may need to cover the resolution of disputes and other problems arising from the day to day administration of business.
Those would include the raising of funds for the business default, bankruptcy or insolvency by customers and others, the acquisition, management and sale of plant equipment, computer hardware and software, sites, factories, shops and offices; the employment and disciplining of staff; industrial relations; regulatory compliance under a variety of statutes and subordinate legislation including data protection, health and safety at work, customer protection and competition, as well as administrative compliance with companies legislation.
As an in-house solicitor you will be involved and almost certainly expert in those areas of law which are particularly relevant to your employer.
This means you could specialise in property, planning and construction; insurance; banking, merchant banking and asset finance; oil chemicals; pharmaceuticals; engineering; telecommunications; electronic and computer information technology; manufacturing of household or heavy industrial goods, ships, aircraft or vehicles; entertainment; leisure; imports and exports; distribution; marketing; advertising.
There is a company or industry to satisfy every interest.
However, you would not be limited to advising on existing law.
You will have a proactive role to play and need to advise your employer on all new developments in legislation and case law which affect the business and the relevant support services.
With 1992 and the European single market, all these things will involve not just UK but also EC law.
Working in a Large Company
Here a solicitor would work in a department with several others and can choose whether to remain a generalist handling a range of legal problems, or to specialise in a specific area of law such as employment law or intellectual property.
If you were a head of the legal department of a large company, you would inevitably undertake some of the major matters yourself, but in addition you would be concerned with managing the legal function.
You may combine this with the role of company Secretary, giving support to the Board of directors by providing legal and financial information essential for the Board to make informed decisions.
The work covered by the larger legal departments in commerce and industry may cover all the legal services the company requires.
A large chemical, pharmaceutical or engineering company may require more legal services in relation to the law affecting its manufacturing operations, e.g. environmental, health and safety, and patent law; a large company in the financial services sector would place an emphasis on the law regulating the provision of financial services.
In all cases, there could be great involvement in a whole range of legal issues.
Ian Thompson — Solicitor, Rowntree Mackintosh
‘For an in-house lawyer, the ability to allocate priorities effectively is essential.’
Ian took ‘A’ Levels in Latin, French and German and graduated in Law from Downing College, Cambridge in 1982.
After taking the final Examination the following year he trained and worked for six months as an Assistant Solicitor with a general practice in Hull.
‘I received a fairly general grounding in articles, including the opportunity to undertake some commercial work.
With hindsight, it was a good preparation for an in-house career.’
Ian always wanted to work in industry, and in April 1986, he moved to the Legal Department of British Coal [then still known as the National Coal Board], specialising first in property work in the Gateshead office, and the following year joining a team of commercial solicitors based in Doncaster.
‘Though the legal skills you require are largely the same, the pressures are very different from those in private practice.
For instance when the telephone rings — especially if it's an internal call you know that you may have to give the caller prompt, detailed and sometimes unpopular advice.
The ability to communicate at all levels, and to retain the confidence of your clients is vital; you have to work with each other, so this confidence must exist and must override any personality clashes.
An in-house lawyer is usually better placed than an outside lawyer to give the advice which will most benefit his client; he should have sufficient knowledge of his employer's structure, resources and commercial objectives to enable him to give advice geared specifically to his client's needs, which will not always be the same as the ‘standard’ legal advice.
A good in-house lawyer will therefore be a valued member of his employer's management team.’
It was the quest for a greater managerial role which took Ian in 1989 to the York based confectionery giant, where he is one of two in-house solicitors.
‘Working in a much smaller department, my work is bound to be more varied.
However, I don't see myself as a jack of all trades; instead I believe that I am broadening my range of expertise while remaining a commercial lawyer.’
Ian has been involved with the Commerce and Industry Group North Eastern Section for some time, and in May 1990 was elected Secretary of that Section.
Working for the Smaller Company
Some solicitors may prefer the atmosphere of a relatively small company where most people know each other.
Being the only in-house solicitor in such a company, responsible for all legal matters can give great satisfaction.
There is the opportunity to manage and develop the legal function in the most effective manner, deciding which matters should be handled personally, which matters should be given to outside solicitors and whether or when to consult specialist counsel.
Someone who is working as the only in-house solicitor in a relatively small company, will also probably be a member of the senior management team with a high profile and the opportunity to participate in and influence commercial decisions.
Take the example of an advertising agency employing say 200-300 people, with a legal department of one solicitor and two administrative assistants.
The majority of employees would probably be concerned with production, sales and marketing and general administration.
As an in-house solicitor here, you could find yourself dealing with every legal matter arising in each of those areas.
Like the head of legal services in a giant company, the advertising agency's in-house solicitor could also be Company Secretary and, as such, would have to take charge of the company's stock, keep records, make sure the annual accounts are ready on time, set the agenda for board meetings and take the minutes.
PROFILES:
Jacqui Tomes: Solicitor with Lombard North Central PLC.
Neeta Mashru: Articles at the Prudential.
Janis Wilderspin: Solicitor with Ladbroke Racing Limited.
Jacqui Tomes
After completing a law degree at Leicester Polytechnic and the Law Society Finals Course at the College of Law, Guildford, Jacqui joined a small two partner firm in North Wales as a trainee.
‘The variety of work which included anything from milk quotas to mortgage repossessions, meant that I had to be practical and adapt quickly.
I have had to carry these abilities into my present job!’.
After qualifying, Jacqui went into a completely new role — as an in-house solicitor.
Lombard North Central plc is one of the country's largest finance houses and its legal department has about a dozen lawyers, both solicitors and barristers.
She has been there for two years.
‘I deal mainly with consumer credit law which can involve, for example solving a problem on an agreement, or ensuring that advertising material produced by Lombard and its subsidiaries complies with the appropriate regulations.’
Jacqui is involved in a variety of areas including banking, real property, and general company commercial work, which includes the development of new facilities.
‘One of the most important and difficult tasks is to give an objective legal opinion and to offer practical solutions for your client the company, and its customers.
I find it stimulating to air ideas with a variety of people, many of whom are experts in their field.’
Neeta Mashru
After graduating in law from Essex University, Neeta Mashru went on to pass the Law Society Finals Course at the Guildford branch of the College of Law in 1989.
‘I am in my second year of articles at the Prudential Corporation plc — one of the UK's leading companies and the largest financial services business outside the high street banks.
The Prudential is Britain's largest institutional investor in the London Stock Exchange, the third biggest private land-owner and a leading provider of venture capital for growing businesses.
As a result of the Prudential's unique size and spread of interests, the work dealt with by our in-house department is of high quality and prestige.
‘There are nine trainees in total out of a department of 42 qualified solicitors.
My articles are divided into three eight-month seats in each of company, commercial conveyancing and litigation.
The work is both varied and demanding.
‘Part of my training has been directed towards keeping the department abreast of new developments in the law, particularly with regard to 1992 and European harmonisation.
We need to be able to advise our ‘clients’ on any changes which might affect them.
‘Social life within the department is active and friendly and also extends to our client departments with whom we have a long-established and close relationship.
‘The practical skills and experience I have gained do not appear to differ widely from those gained by my friends in private practice.
The sole difference is that we serve one corporate client [divided into numerous business units]and are participating in the development and changes of the whole corporation to a much greater degree.
We are an integral part of a large organisation and are expected to work as a team.
Even within the Legal Department, the concept of the ‘team’ is very strong.
Trainees are treated as equal members with objectives to meet.’
Janis Wilderspin
As an in-house lawyer, Janis feels that she has a ‘hands-on’ role in the commercial development of the company.
‘After completing three ‘A’ Levels in Law, French and Economics, I did a law degree at Birmingham Polytechnic, Solicitors Finals at the College of Law, Chester and then joined the in-house Legal Department of Ladbroke Group plc as trainee solicitor.
Whilst training, I worked in three main areas: litigation, commercial property and company commercial.
The work ranged from small debt collection to very large acquisitions and disposals for the four main divisions of the company, and provided me with a great variety of work which was predominantly commercial.
‘After qualifying in early 1989, I stayed on with Ladbroke dealing with a mix of company commercial work.
‘I moved to Ladbroke Racing Limited in July 1990 — the retail betting division of Ladbroke Group as the commercial solicitor to the company.
‘The work I do now is a commercial and commercial property mix.
Obviously this utilises the experience I have gained to date and also allows me to develop further within my chosen field.
As an in-house lawyer, my ‘clients’ are the company personnel I deal with regularly.
My role as a lawyer within the company means that my work is directly linked to the development of the company's activities and encompasses everything from handling acquisitions and disposals to advising on minor matters on an ad-hoc basis, and problem solving for the company.
It is also an interesting, challenging and constantly stimulating position within a large organisation with a refreshingly informal atmosphere.’
Janis is a member of the Commerce and Industry Group and the Association of Women Solicitors of the Law Society.
SKILLS AND APTITUDES NEEDED
Although there is increasing competition for lawyers in commerce and industry, people with a thorough and analytical approach to business and the law will be successful.
Good communication skills — both verbal and written — are important.
The following skills are essential:
Good legal knowledge
Flexible and confident attitude
An ability to communicate clearly
An ability to work as part of a team
A robust personality, able to deal with unexpected demands
An understanding of what motivates business
Opportunity and Specialisation
The scope for specialising in a certain field will inevitably vary from one company to another.
Solicitors employed in commerce and industry need to be able to identify a problem and have the confidence to know when to tackle it themselves and when to consult a specialist who may be a colleague or external expert.
However, there is a tendency in the profession to develop specialist expertise and solicitors in commerce and industry are likely to follow that trend.
Working Environment
Salaries in commerce and industry are good, but to get a better picture of the sort of pay that you could expect, look through the Law Society's Gazette and the national press where prospective employers advertise available posts.
With few notable exceptions, legal department tend to be small to medium in size and it is not uncommon to find that solicitors work along.
However, some companies employ large numbers of legal staff, so there is opportunity both for those who like to go it alone and for those who thrive on team spirit.
Training and Preparation
After academic study, you have to gain practical experience before you qualify.
Most people train in private practices, as not many in-house legal departments currently offer the breadth of experience required before admission as a solicitor.
However, one practical solution to the problem is ‘mixed’ articles and some private practices offer time out during training with a commercial or industrial body.
Articles which are available in commerce or industry may well include a period in private practice.
Either way, you can keep your options open.
The Law Society is now positively encouraging articles in commerce and industry and your Careers Adviser should keep you up-dated on the possibilities.
You will also find a list of commercial or industrial bodies offering articles in ROSET [the Register of Solicitors Employing Trainees]which you can purchase from the Law Society or obtain from your college.
Currently no further formal specialist training is required for solicitors in commerce and industry.
However, the Commerce and Industry Group of the Law Society does offer a range of lectures and meetings which have proved to be useful.
The Group also organises training courses for young solicitors who wish to join or who have recently joined commerce and industry and strongly encourages participation in such courses.
All of these are eligible for points under the Law society's compulsory continuing education scheme.
The establishment of compulsory specialist training for solicitors in commerce and industry is in prospect and such training is likely to be of value to young solicitors whatever career paths they finally adopt.
SOLICITORS IN COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
WHY WORK AS AN IN-HOUSE SOLICITOR?
Advantages to the Solicitor
Involvement — by working in the employer's business the solicitor will identify with the employer's interests and be able to manage legal issues effectively.
Satisfaction and motivation which comes from working as an essential part of a dedicated management team or multi-disciplinary project team.
Variety — you would be able to handle a wide range of legal work in commerce and industry.
Executive responsibility — as part of a team the solicitor has the opportunity to participate to a greater degree than an outside solicitor in the commercial decisions resulting from advice.
Management opportunities — close involvement with line management may offer opportunities to those who wish to transfer into management.
Imaginative and valuable benefit schemes — there can be many fringe benefits sometimes unavailable in private practice, e.g. pension schemes, company car, medical insurance, life cover, bonus schemes and in the financial sector, low rate loans and mortgage schemes.
Advantages to the Employer
A solicitor is always on hand — particularly if an emergency arises.
The employer receives first and foremost priority services from its lawyers — there are no distractions from other clients.
Solicitors develop a detailed knowledge of the working of the business which enables them to represent the firm's interests more effectively.
The advice is tailored for the firm — employed solicitors know exactly who needs to know what and by when.
By having an in-house legal department, there is better control of legal costs which makes for a more profitable business.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES
Lawyers in Local government more than just a career.
Local Government is a major practice.
450 offices nationwide
3000 lawyers
2 million employees
50 million clients
£50 billion budget
Lawyers in Local government seek trainee solicitors of the highest calibre.
INTRODUCTION BY JOHN HAYES
Secretary General of the Law Society
I am delighted to commend this booklet to you which I hope will give you a flavour of the variety and interest available to solicitors in local government.
I have been asked to mention my career by way of illustration.
I was articled in Worthing in 1966 with the Borough Council where I undertook a wide variety of conveyancing and litigation, and as a local authority employee, I was authorised to appear on its behalf in the Magistrates' Court which gave me early experience in advocacy.
I prepared and presented reports to committees and worked in other departments such as planning and trading standards.
The most important thing I learnt was that the lawyer's job in local government is to help get things done rather than provide elegant reasons for doing nothing.
On then to Nottingham where, as an Assistant Solicitor, I worked with committees on huge programmes of slum clearances, undertook hundreds of prosecutions in consumer protection and began the fascinating but stressful business of presenting child care cases.
Two years later to Somerset where I learnt that the great advantage of being an in-house solicitor is that you can help your clients, the social workers, planners, and teachers to get their procedures and attitudes right before cases come to court or committee.
The satisfaction of working in a multi-disciplinary team is rarely experienced by those in private practice.
I was appointed as an Assistant Clerk of Nottinghamshire County Council in 1974 with about 15 staff, covering the work of the Planning, Highway, Police and Public Protection Committees.
I was very involved with matters of huge political and public controversy including a public inquiry into the deaths of 17 people in a fire in an old people's home.
I was then promoted to be a Deputy Chief Officer and shortly afterwards became a Chief Officer of the department with over 500 staff providing not just legal and administrative services, but purchasing, management services and estate management as well.
At the age of 34 I was appointed Chief Executive of Warwickshire County Council, an organisation with 16,000 staff and a budget of £250 million.
A very stimulating time, managing change, and finding ways around shortage of money in the pursuit of raising standards in all services.
After seven years I came to the Law Society as Secretary-General.
Local government is full of excitement and variety; it is an opportunity to be at the centre of things in the community and an excellent stepping stone to work in private practice as well as commerce and industry.
That interchange is extremely healthy because of the experience of management and politics which work in local government gives the ambitious solicitor.
WHAT TO LOOK FOR IN YOUR CAREER
Over 3,000 solicitors in England and Wales work in local government.
Listed below are some of the reasons for choosing a career as a solicitor in this area.
Variety of legal work
A career structure with a wide range of opportunities
The opportunity of moving into management
An exiting and satisfying working environment
A good starting salary
Opportunities to meet interesting people
Easy transfers between jobs
The Attraction
Local authorities provide a wide range of services for the community.
As such, a career in local government offers a challenge and opportunity to make a positive contribution to society.
You will find your professional abilities to be in constant demand and you will be directly concerned with the provision of services.
You will also handle projects involving large sums of public money.
As your expertise increases so also does the opportunity to specialise and to become involved in administration, management, and the formulation and implementation of policy.
Whether you wish to stay with one particular authority or move around the country working for different types of authorities, the prospects for promotion are excellent.
Conditions of service are attractive and increasingly competitive.
The local government lawyer works at the centre of the organisation using professional skills in support of the chief executive, the management team and the departments that provide the services for the public .
WHAT SORT OF WORK WILL YOU DO?
The work of a local authority involves a large range of legal issues.
Some arise from the very varied and specialist nature of the authority's activities, such as child care, major city centre redevelopments, education, housing, planning inquiries, leisure, highways and airports.
Others are of a more general nature, such as all forms of property transactions, employment, contracts, finance, and the whole intricate framework of local democracy itself.
In recent years, the Government has introduced legislation which has brought fundamental changes to local government.
Examples include compulsory competitive tendering, the community charge, education reform, and community care.
The law is complex and wide ranging in its effects.
It is an exciting and challenging time for local government solicitors who are responsible for advising members and fellow officers on the legal implications of the reforms and are directly involved in their successful implementation.
You will be called upon to use your professional training and ability in much the same way as if you were working in private practice.
The skills required for the practice of law are the same whatever the field in which you work.
However, local government does present the opportunity to gain experience in a particularly diverse range of work.
PROFILE
Kieren Kilgallen — Senior Assistant Solicitor Newcastle City Council
Kieren began work for the authority as a trainee solicitor in 1982 and stayed on as an Assistant Solicitor until 1987 when appointed a Senior Assistant Solicitor.
‘My share of responsibility as a Senior Assistant Solicitor is to provide legal advice on social services and employment law.
In order to cope with the workload allocated to me I have the help of two Assistant Solicitors.
‘The work of any Social Services Department demands constant legal advice.
The statutory responsibilities to safeguard the welfare of the community and children in particular often involves recourse to the courts.
Before that stage is reached, however, there will invariably have been at least one case conference with social workers, paediatricians, child psychologists and others and as Senior Solicitor it is my responsibility to ensure all important case conferences receive legal advice on the evidence available and the prospects of success.’
Another area of Kieren's duties is to advise the Passenger Transport Authority which owns a metropolitan railway, a bus company and vehicle toll tunnel under the Tyne.
‘The legal advice required has varied from transacting a management buy-out and dismissing a senior director to a host of commercial contracts.
Recent examples include a contract for the general building refurbishment of the Tyne Tunnel, contracts for both computer software and hardware for an automated tolls registration system.
The drafting of commercial contracts in this sphere requires specialised knowledge and skill’.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES IN ENGLAND AND WALES
The 449 local authorities in England and Wales together with a small number of statutory joint bodies are responsible for the provision to their communities of a range of important services.
In the seven metropolitan areas of Greater London, West Midlands, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire and Tyne & Wear, there is now only a single tier of local authorities, the London Borough Councils [33]and the Metropolitan District Councils [36]who, together with some joint bodies of those councils, are responsible for the full range of local authority services.
In the rest of the country there is a two-tier structure of County Councils [47]and Shire District Councils [333], supported in most areas by parish, town or community councils.
In most cases the range of services is provided by either County or District but in respect of some services responsibility is split or shared.
The allocation of the principal services provided by these different types of local authority is illustrated on page four.
The Legal Departments of Local Authorities
Most local authorities have an ‘in-house’ legal service.
However, not all these authorities recruit trainee solicitors.
The size of the department and the range of work undertaken within it is dictated by a number of factors including:
the functions for which the authority is responsible
the size of the population it serves
the degree to which work is, as a matter of policy, contracted out.
County Councils, London Borough Councils and Metropolitan District Councils have the broadest range of functions, serve the largest populations and will therefore have the larger legal departments.
However, some of the bigger Shire District Councils have large legal departments and all local authorities recruiting trainee solicitors can offer the range and quality of experience necessary to satisfy both Law Society requirements and the intellectual demands of the individual.
Committee Meetings
Local authorities make formal decisions through Council meetings.
Many decisions, however, are delegated to meetings of committees.
The solicitor has an important role to play in the committee process.
You would be expected to provide the committee with legal advice and to rule on matters of procedure in accordance with the authority's standing orders.
As with advocacy, this requires clarity of thought and an ability to think quickly, in a politically sensitive environment.
Who is the Client?
As a solicitor practising in local government rather than private practice, you do not have individual clients.
You work for your employer, the local authority.
In reality, however, your work will involve contact with individuals who need your advice, such as officers of the departments and elected members.
These people are in practice your ‘clients’ or ‘customers.’
PROFILE
CHRIS BOOTHMAN — Senior Assistant Solicitor Administrative Law: London Borough of Hackney
After working in private practice as an Assistant Solicitor in central London, Chris was attracted to work in the field of policing and criminal law, first as a Research Officer with the London Borough of Camden, then as a Legal Assistant with the Greater London Council.
Following the abolition of the GLC, he joined the London Strategic Policy Unit giving advice on local government powers and proposed changes of local government law.
He then moved to the London Borough of Hackney which is arguably the most deprived inner London borough and has a high proportion of ethnic minority residents.
‘Being a local government lawyer can be an extremely exciting and rewarding career but it is not for people who want a quiet easy life.
You have to be able to acquire knowledge and expertise quickly, to be adaptable and resilient, self motivating and independent, yet objective.
The work carried a lot of individual responsibility and one error can cost the authority thousands of pounds.
‘A typical working day starts by drafting legal observations on a range of committee reports for the Community Services Committee.
Next I prepare a brief to Counsel for advice and representation in a contested wage deduction case before an industrial tribunal.
Later in the morning, I deputise for the Head of Administrative Law in a compulsory competitive tendering meeting with the Director of Housing, officers from Corporate Standards and Management Services and the unions to discuss service level agreements and putting the cleaning of estates out to tender.
Returning to the office in the afternoon I write legal advice and comments on the proposed homelessness policy.
In the evening, I attend the Council's Race Relations Committee and give comments on any legal issues raised.
‘The day's events are made all the more hectic by the many telephone calls and queries I receive from members of the public, fellow officers and councillors.
Some of these may be urgent and demand immediate action.
‘My other interests involve outside professional activities as Chair of the Society of Black Lawyers and as a member of the Law Society's Criminal Law Committee.
I used to be a member of the Society's Race Relations Committee.
I have just been elected to the Council of the Law Society as a specialist member representing ethnic minority interests.’
ARTICLES IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Training to become a solicitor is an important period of your career.
The nature and quality of your basic training will determine to some considerable degree your future prospects.
Many authorities offer high quality articles.
Prospective employers are looking for suitably qualified people, normally graduates — not necessarily law graduates — who show the kind of skills needed to make a successful contribution as a solicitor to the work of a local authority: the ability to analyse a problem and to communicate effectively, flexibility, and the ability to get on well with other members of a team.
Salaries for trainee solicitors are well above the minimum level prescribed by the Law Society and compare favourably with those in private practice.
You will normally be articled to the authority's chief or deputy chief legal officer.
They are required by the Law Society's Training Regulations to provide experience in articles in a number of recognised areas of the law to give you the training necessary to qualify as a solicitor.
There will inevitably be a degree of emphasis on those areas which are most relevant to the work of local government.
It is important to see that you obtain the necessary experience.
This should ideally consist of a period in each of the different sections of a local authority legal department.
You should also be introduced to attending and advising committees of the council.
Some authorities allow trainee solicitors to spend time with a neighbouring authority to gain wider experience.
This will help you to work in any type of authority following your admission as a solicitor.
As a local authority employee you can be authorised to appear on its behalf in the Magistrates' Courts, giving you early experience in advocacy.
This is a unique opportunity not available to trainees elsewhere.
If you are interested in a career as a local government solicitor it can be useful to train with a local authority.
However, a private practice background, either during or after articles, is no bar to subsequent progress in local government.
Conversely, taking articles with a local authority does not commit you to a career in local government.
Training in local government offers you a sound basis for career flexibility.
CHOOSING YOUR ARTICLES
Advertisements appear in a number of different publications, principally the Law Society's Gazette, which are available in public or university libraries.
Most local authorities do not recruit until the months immediately before the vacancy arises although some authorities are increasingly seeing the advantage of recruiting one to two years in advance.
The Law Society's Register of Solicitors Employing Trainees [ROSET]gives details of the anticipated requirements of some local authorities for articled clerks for the ensuing two years and when and where such posts are likely to be advertised.
If you are called for an interview with a local authority, you would not be expected to answer detailed questions relating to local government law.
However, you would be expected to show some knowledge of, and interest in the affairs of the authority in question and of the issues affecting local government generally.
You should acquaint yourself with any material that is provided about the authority.
Do not be afraid to ask questions about the sort of training you will receive.
CAREER DEVELOPMENT
One advantage of local government is that the nature of your work can change as your career develops.
In the early stages, it is advisable to obtain as broad a range of experience as possible, whereas in a more senior post, you will have the opportunity to specialise.
You may also be responsible for the supervision of staff and develop management skills.
With greater experience you can choose either to continue to specialise in law or to become more closely involved in administration, management and policy.
There is less strictly legal work at this stage of your career although the ability to analyse the strengths and weaknesses of a particular course of action and to argue for and defend your authority's position all require the use of such skills.
Work at this level involves contact with elected members, on an informal and confidential basis as well as in the more formal environment of a committee or council meeting.
A degree of political sensitivity is therefore required.
Party politics are a feature of life in local authorities and as an officer it is essential that you are able to provide objective and impartial advice.
PROFILE
JACQUELINE DIXON — Director of Administration: Basingstoke and Deane Borough Council
Jacqueline has been employed by Basingstoke for two and a half years.
Previously, she was Assistant Director of Law and Administration [Legal Services]at Southampton City Council and before that Principal Solicitor at Derby city Council specialising in development and transportation.
‘My job is now entirely management.
The Administration Department consists of four divisions: Legal Services, Administrative Services, Estates Services and Personnel and Management Services.
Each division is led by a Head of Services who is responsible to me as their Chief Officer.
Each week we hold a departmental management team meeting where management policies for the department are discussed and agreed.
‘Where appropriate, I delegate as much as possible to my Heads of Services.
However, members of the public and councillors still seem to expect me to know every detail about every file in the department — an impossible task for anyone!
In addition, I have a corporate management role as one of the Council's management team of the Chief Executive and six Chief Officers.
The team meets on a regular basis to discuss corporate matters such as strategic policies, service provision and recruitment and retention of staff.
‘I probably speak to councillors two or three times a day.
On the day of a Council meeting which I attend, the number of calls increases substantially.
Members want advice on a variety of matters, such as how to amend a proposal or a motion, on the legality of proposals, or simply up to date information.
‘Being a solicitor in local government with broad experience of all areas of council work is an excellent training for a future manager in any sector, but more particularly a much needed resource in local government in the future.
In previous posts I have enjoyed the wide variety of issues in which local government is involved and working in a political environment.
The challenge now is to make local government services competitive, cost effective and responsive to the needs of the community by applying modern management skills.
The future holds exciting opportunities for changing the management culture of local government and ensuring the survival of the services.’
TERMS, CONDITIONS AND PROSPECTS
Terms and conditions of employment are, for the most part, negotiated nationally subject to local variations.
Salaries are usually calculated on nationally agreed grades.
All posts are subject to the local government superannuation scheme and it is widely acknowledged that this is one of the most attractive schemes offered anywhere.
You can expect to be promoted within two or three years of qualifying.
Thereafter there are opportunities for further promotion to posts with more complex and specialised legal work and responsibilities and eventually to positions involving the management of parts or the whole of a department.
At this level it is likely that you will be responsible not only for the supervision of legal staff but also for staff with a variety of disciplines.
Many authorities have equal opportunities policies and offer attractive and flexible arrangements for women wishing to return to work after starting a family.
PROFILE
ROSEMARY BOYLE — Assistant Solicitor Cambridgeshire County Council
Rosemary read law at Selwyn College, Cambridge and graduated in 1979.
After the Law Society Finals she served articles in private practice in Cambridge and then worked for a year as a litigation assistant in a branch office of a Suffolk firm in Mildenhall.
‘In October 1983, I came to work for Cambridgeshire County Council as an Assistant Solicitor.
[One of the other Assistant Solicitors in the department also joined us from private practice; another came from the Bar.]
I took maternity leave in October 1986 and came back to work part-time in July 1987 working two and a half days each week.
‘I have since taken maternity leave for a second time and now also work to some extent from home.
The County Council has assisted by providing me with a telephone and a personal computer linked to the main frame at County Hall.
Having the opportunity to do some work from home is of great assistance providing me with extra flexibility to help balance and organise my professional and domestic commitments.’
When Rosemary first came to work for Cambridgeshire, she was principally involved in preparing and arguing child care cases and occasionally with points of education and highway law.
‘Since coming back from maternity leave I have plunged into a new area.
I now negotiate and advise on computer contracts.
One of the most rewarding things about being a lawyer in local government [and a striking contract with private practice]is that you rarely get asked the same question twice and usually the problems require imaginative legal thinking.
The interest factor is a rather well kept secret outside local government!’
THE WAY FORWARD
Contact the solicitor or secretary of your local County or District Council to ask if you can visit the offices and talk about the job to one of the solicitors.
Most officers will be happy to help and provide you with the necessary information.
Some may be able to offer work experience during vacations.
There is now also a growing amount of information about local government legal careers generally and about particular local authorities available in your University or Polytechnic Careers Advisory Service library.
If you own Local Authority Solicitor or Careers Adviser is unable to satisfy your need for information, ask your Careers Adviser to put you in touch with one of the County or District Council Liaison Officers appointed for your particular teaching establishment.
If you still need more information, write to the Secretary of the Local government Group at the Law Society, 50 Chancery Lane, London WC2A 1SX.
It is up to you.
You now know that local government is a satisfying career choice and offers an exciting challenge to the solicitor.
People like you are needed to take up the challenge.
NEWS RELEASE
EMBARGO
EMBARGOED UNTIL: 00.01AM — WEDNESDAY, 24TH MARCH, 1993
LEGAL AID FRANCHISING: GOVERNMENT WARNED
The Law Society is seeking an assurance from the Lord Chancellor that competitive price tendering will not be introduced in legal aid cases without the authority of Parliament.
Otherwise, the Law Society might be obliged to oppose the current legal aid franchising proposals.
In a letter this week to the Lord Chancellor, Mark Sheldon, President of the Law Society, says that recent remarks made by Lord Mackay suggest that the Government is considering restricting the individual's right to choose their own solicitor.
This would be the result of any arrangement to award a ‘franchised’ firm of solicitors an exclusive contract to handle a block of legal aid cases.
The President's letter reflects mounting concern among solicitors that the Legal Aid Board's franchising proposals may conceal a hidden agenda on the Lord Chancellor's part.
The Law Society is not opposed to competitive tendering in itself — now widespread for commercial legal work — and indeed is working with the Department of the Environment on the Government's plans to compel local authorities to put their legal services out to tender.
In legal aid work, however, the Government or the Legal Aid Board, and not the client, would choose the successful tender.
This would remove a vital guarantee of independent advice.
The Law Society has been negotiating the terms of franchise contracts with the Legal Aid Board for some weeks and although a number of matters remain to be resolved, the negotiations have been conducted in a positive manner.
The Board expects to publish a specification in draft shortly.
The Law Society Council will discuss the Board's franchising proposals at its April 22 meeting.
In this letter Mr. Sheldon said:
‘Hitherto, the Council has taken a positive view of franchising, regarding the overall benefits to both the profession and its clients as outweighing the disadvantages which will undoubtedly affect particular firms.
I would not wish the Council to find itself in a position in which it felt obliged to oppose the franchising arrangements as a result of your published views as to future developments which might emerge from the franchising scheme.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — MONDAY 22 MARCH 1993
LEGAL PROFESSION WELCOMES SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT
The Law Society and the Bar, today welcomed the Home Affairs Committee's report, criticising the Lord Chancellor's proposals to cut eligibility for legal aid.
Commenting on the report, Mark Sheldon — President of the Law Society — and John Rowe, QC — Chairman of the Bar — said:—
‘We welcome the Select Committee's Report.
We have argued throughout that cutting eligibility is the worst possible way of containing the cost of legal aid, and we are pleased that the Home Affairs Committee has recognised the importance of maintaining eligibility for legal aid in order to ensure that citizens have access to advice and assistance at a price they can afford.
We will be meeting the Lord Chancellor tomorrow together with the Chairman of the National Consumer Council and the Chief Executive of the National Association of Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, to discuss his proposals.
We will be urging him to withdraw the eligibility cuts, and to work with the legal profession, and the consumer organisations — to find less damaging ways of containing legal aid expenditure.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — THURSDAY, MARCH 18, 1993
LAW SOCIETY SUPPORTS DIRECT ENFORCEMENT OF THE EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Meeting to-day, the Council of the Law Society joined the growing body of legal opinion speaking out in favour of incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights [ECHR]into UK domestic law.
The Council was unanimous in adopting a resolution in support of the view that the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights should become directly enforceable as a matter of law in the United Kingdom.
The resolution was proposed by the Chairman of the International Committee, Mrs Fiona Woolf, supported by Mr John Appleby, Chairman of the Courts and Legal Services Committee.
Mrs Woolf presented the issue primarily as one of access to justice, explaining that incorporation would short-circuit the lengthy process of taking cases to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg [which usually takes a minimum of five years].
The Convention has been binding upon the United Kingdom since 1953.
In most other member states of the Council of Europe, the provisions of the Convention are directly incorporated into national law.
In addition, most other states have constitutional instruments establishing fundamental rights.
The United Kingdom is alone in having neither.
This means that claims by UK citizens under the Convention must always be pursued to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg to obtain judgment, with the result that the UK has had the highest number of judgments made against it by the European Court of Human Rights for one or more violations of the Convention's terms.
Since most of the other states can settle the majority of claims in their national courts, this offers a distorted picture of Britain's human rights record in comparison with them.
Direct incorporation of the Convention would reduce the number of cases which have to be taken to Strasbourg, improve access to justice by making it quicker and less costly to bring claims, and enable more ready use of the safeguards in the Convention to be made by people in this country.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — TUESDAY, MARCH 16, 1993.
TRADE UNION REFORM AND EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS BILL 1992
The Law Society's Employment Law Committee has today published a Briefing on the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill 1992 [TURER Bill], currently under consideration by the House of Lords.
‘The Bill covers a great deal of ground,’ says Committee Chairman, Philip Williams.
‘The Committee takes a strictly non-political approach to the issues and has proposed a number of amendments to ensure, in particular, that Britain complies with its EC obligations.
‘We have also proposed two new clauses, one requiring the Secretary of State for Employment to increase the amounts Industrial Tribunals can award to successful applicants.
the amounts are designed to bring current award levels up to a value similar to that which they would have had when introduced.
It means, for example, that the compensatory award would increase from a maximum of £10,000 to a maximum of £30,000.
‘In addition, we have proposed a new clause suggesting the establishment of a Disability Commission to prepare a Bill to outlaw discrimination on grounds of disability.
The Committee's report ‘Disability, Discrimination and Employment Law’, published last October, supported the introduction of anti-discrimination legislation on grounds of disability.
We see that the Civil rights [Disabled Persons]Bill, which was designed to introduce legislation of this kind, failed in the Commons last week, but problems for people with disabilities at work still exist’.
A copy of the Briefing is attached.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 8TH MARCH 1993
LAW SOCIETY TO SUE LORD CHANCELLOR OVER LEGAL AID PLAN
The Law Society is to seek judicial review of the Lord chancellor's proposed scheme for standard fees in legal aid criminal cases in magistrates courts.
The Society has for over a year objected strongly to the plan under which the current arrangements for remunerating solicitors on the basis of work actually done are to be replaced by a standard fee scheme from April.
Mark Sheldon, President of the Society said today:
‘This case is about ensuring that proper representation remains available to those who need criminal legal aid.
This is not a dispute in which we are seeking more pay for solicitors.
We have made it clear that we regard this scheme as flawed since it fails to provide to those who are legally aided that to which the Act entitled them, namely that solicitors they select will be properly remunerated.
The scheme will over pay some lawyers and under pay others, and that may sow the seeds of mistrust between client and solicitor and worsen the quality of service available to those who need legal aid.
We hope the court proceedings will be concluded quickly, so that the period of uncertainty is kept to a minimum.
In the meantime, we will be urging the Lord chancellor not to make Regulations until the legal position has been clarified.’
The solicitors firm of Bindman and Partners are representing the Society.
Michael Beloff QC and Richard Drabble have been instructed as counsel.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — WEDNESDAY 3 MARCH 1993
LAW SOCIETY ATTACKS LORD CHANCELLOR'S EVASION ON LEGAL AID CUTS
Speaking to a meeting of local law society campaign co-ordinators this afternoon, John Appleby, Chairman of the Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee, attacked the Lord Chancellor for failing to make clear the effect his proposed cuts in legal aid eligibility would have.
Mr. Appleby said:—
‘The Lord Chancellor's performance before the Home Affairs Select Committee was depressing.
He seemed willing to talk about almost anything except the effect his proposed cuts in legal aid eligibility would have on millions of people.
He talked about the rising cost in legal aid; he talked about legal aid in other countries; and he arbitrarily discounted the proposals in our alternative package.
He also tried to create a smokescreen by engaging in a pointless quibble about the statistics on how many people will be affected by his proposals.
We are entitled to expect more from a Lord Chancellor.
We are entitled to expect a serious defence of his proposals, and serious consideration of our alternatives.
On the Government's own figures, over 30% of those who would have received legal aid next year will lose it because of the proposed eligibility cuts.
How does the Lord Chancellor think those people will now get access to justice?
The Government's own inquiries have repeatedly found that cutting the free limit for legal aid would do serious damage to the whole legal aid scheme.
Why does the Lord Chancellor now think he can cut the free limit by over 25%?
The Lord Chancellor says that Green Form advice can be abolished for all those above the income support level because the average Green Form bill — £82 — is not too much to afford.
£82 may not be much to a Cabinet Minister, but it is a fortune to many of our clients.
Why does the Lord Chancellor think people who need housing benefit and family credit to meet their basic living expenses can afford to pay for legal advice?
He seems to have confused eligibility with affordability.
We need serious answers to all these questions.
We need proper consideration of the very constructive alternative proposals we have put forward.
We do not need continued evasion from the Government about the effect their proposals will have.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — WEDNESDAY 10 FEBRUARY 1993
BETTER PRACTICE MANAGEMENT
Today the Law Society publishes proposed standards for good management by solicitors' practices.
David Thomas, Chairman of the Society's Practice Development Committee [in an article accompanying the draft standards in today's Gazette]explains the benefits:
‘Adoption of the standards will benefit practices and their clients by helping to ensure they provide services which meet clients’ requirements and expectations, encouraging repeat business.
The profession as a whole will benefit, because improving the general quality of office and case management will help reduce the cost of claims and complaints’.
The Legal Aid Board's franchising package will include requirements about practice management.
The Society hopes that the Board will adopt these Standards, as part of the package.
Publication of the standards is part of a series of initiatives taken over the last few years, including production of the ‘Best Practice’ management kit in 1985, The Society's model ‘Office Manual’[1987], the development of management training, and publication of the ‘Quality Briefing’and ‘Client Care Guide.’
[in 1991].
The closing date for responses to the consultation is March 26th 1993.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — MONDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 1993.
MASS LOBBY TO SAVE LEGAL AID
More than 40 charities, voluntary organisations, church and consumer groups will gather on Wednesday, February 3, at Westminster to support The Law Society's last-ditch attempt to persuade the Government to change its mind about cutting legal aid eligibility.
If the proposals announced at the end of last year by the Lord chancellor go through, up to 12 million people could find that they are not eligible or cannot afford legal aid after April 1st.
There is an alternative.
The Law Society, recognising that savings have to be found, has put together a package of proposals which would give the looked-for savings but would not have the damaging effects of the Government's plans.
Speakers from the Consumers' Association, National Consumer Council, the National Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux, Age Concern, Child Poverty Action Group, National Council of One Parent Families, Relate, MIND, Liberty, Justice, Shelter and many others will join Law Society and Bar Council representatives together with legal aid claimants and concerned members of the public from 2.30 — 6.00 p.m. in The Grand Committee Room, House of Commons, Westminster.
There will also be a debate in the House of Lords on Wednesday lead by Lord Irvine.
EMBARGO
EMBARGO: 13.30HRS — THURSDAY 28 JANUARY 1993
LAWYERS FOR BUSINESS
Today The Law Society announced the launch of a major new campaign to support businesses and promote the range of legal services which solicitors offer to them.
‘Lawyers for Business’ builds on the success of the Lawyers For Enterprise scheme.
The new expanded service will be actively promoted to businesses throughout England and Wales by a £20,000 public relations campaign involving a new range of leaflets, information packs, articles in major national and regional newspapers as well as trade journals and business magazines.
Solicitors who become members [for £35 per office]will gain a strong image and brand-name, backed by Law Society promotion.
Direct benefits for participating firms will include referrals of new clients from over 3,000 Enterprise Agencies, Business Advice Centres and TECs as well as from national organisations like the Forum of Private Business and Federation of Small Businesses.
Paul Marsh, Chairman of the Society's Property and Commercial Services Committee said:
‘The outstanding success of Will Power showed what Law Society campaigns can achieve.
As well as raising public awareness throughout the country, research shows that an average of 15 new wills were written by each firm participating with many writing more than 400 and one writing 950.
We expect to repeat that success.
‘Lawyers For Business’ will help solicitors target new clients and will alert businesses to the range of legal services they can receive.’
In early March a special campaign newsletter will tell solicitors how they can become members and take part.
The campaign to target businesses will begin in June.
Paul Marsh added: ‘I urge firms to join ‘Lawyers For Business’.
I believe that doing so is a step in the tough task of getting ready to capitalise on economic recovery.
Watch out for our newsletter in March and return the application form immediately if you want to take part in our summer campaign.’
NOTES FOR EDITORS:
Despite the recession, the market for solicitors' advice on business affairs has grown in value from £1,400m. in 1989 to an estimated £1,700m. [excluding property work].
Last week's Interfirm Comparison Centre report showed again that commercial work is the top contributor to law firms' revenue.
Law Society research shows that business affairs work provides 28% of the profession's fee income, but takes only 12% of the time; while 3 in 5 practices predict that business affairs will continue to become a more important source of fees.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — WEDNESDAY 27 JANUARY 1993
SILICONE BREAST IMPLANTS LITIGATION
Solicitors representing over 50 clients engaged in litigation in connection with Silicone Breast Implants met in London last Tuesday, 19 January 1993 to discuss tactics.
The claims involve hardening and in some cases rupturing of the implant and the injuries suffered vary but include auto-immune system disorders such as  athritus .
Amongst the issues discussed were those claims alleging negligence, those alleging product liability and the intention to bring claims in the United States.
All the solicitors were unanimous in stressing that any solicitors dealing with such claims should, as a matter of urgency, contact the Law Society's Multi-Party Co-ordination Service to register their instructions and receive essential information regarding the US action.
Similarly, any woman who felt she had a potential claim as a result of a silicone breast implant was urged to consult with a solicitor as soon as possible.
The Multi-Party Co-ordination Service is available to supply details of solicitors who would be in a position to advise and assist.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: TUESDAY, JANUARY 26, 1993
THE LAW AND REGULATION OF OCCUPATIONAL PENSION SCHEMES PENSION LAW REVIEW COMMITTEE CONSULTATION DOCUMENT
The Law Society has submitted a response to the Goode enquiry into pensions.
‘In considering this issue we started from the premise that pension schemes were created with the intention of providing working people with a secure and adequate income after retirement’, said Working Party Chairman Brian Murphy.
‘We looked with great interest at the issues raised in Professor Goode's Consultation Document and our recommendations are designed to help in the task of securing a satisfactory basis for pension provision in the future’.
Amongst the recommendations the Law Society has made are:—
1
A single regulatory body to deal with pension schemes;
2
Clear explanations to scheme members about: the difference between their rights under the scheme and discretionary benefits.
rights on winding up; policy on use of surplus funds; transfer rules and entitlements.
3
Before a scheme is entitled to receive tax exemption benefits, it should have to demonstrate that it contains certain essential rules — e.g. dealing with the rights and priorities on a winding up.
Standards for this should be made available.
The Working Party emphasised the importance of good drafting in the documents originating pension schemes, and stressed the importance of taking legal advice on the conduct of the scheme throughout its life, as well as at its inception.
The Working Party recommended that the Goode Enquiry consider the need for regular legal, as well as financial, audits of pension schemes and that the Enquiry also consider the importance of legally correct and effective originating documentation.
The Working Party also noted that only solicitors, of all professions, presently take examinations in trust law and equity and are familiar with the concepts and practical applications of this very complicated area of law.
On the major question of the legal basis for pension schemes in the future, Mr. Murphy said ‘The Working Party consider that the principles of trust law appropriately updated, continue to be valid, but we think it would be right for the central principles of trust law to be re-stated and put into the context of pension schemes.
Such a re-statement should make it clear which principles were overriding and which [if any]may be overridden by scheme rules.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — MONDAY 25TH JANUARY 1993
MALAWI RELEASE WELCOMED
The Law Society today welcomed the news that Vera Chirwa, the English-trained barrister detained in Malawi since 1981, was released yesterday afternoon on humanitarian grounds.
Her husband, Orton Chirwa, died in prison late last year.
Representations requesting her release [and that of her husband while he was alive]were made in writing to President Banda by successive Law Society Presidents, and in person by the Delegation of UK lawyers which visited Malawi and obtained permission to visit the Chirwas in prison in September last year.
Human rights organisations and lawyers' associations worldwide have been involved in the campaign for the Chirwas' release.
The President today said, ‘We are delighted that all the representations made to Life-President Banda and to representatives of the Malawi Government in this country have finally resulted in Vera Chirwa's release.
This news will be welcomed by lawyers and human rights campaigners across the world.’
Jane Deighton, the Law Society's representative on the Delegation of UK lawyers which met the Chirwas last September and produced a detailed report on the legal and human rights situation in Malawi, said,
‘This is wonderful news.
I hope that it represents a step towards the release of other detainees held in Malawi for political reasons.’
EMBARGO
EMBARGOED UNTIL: 00.01 HOURS — TUESDAY, JANUARY 19, 1993
LEGAL AID ELIGIBILITY CUTS: THE ALTERNATIVE PACKAGE
The Law Society and The Bar have today finalised an alternative package of measures which they are urging the government to accept in place of the Lord Chancellor's proposed cuts to legal aid eligibility, which the Society calculates could mean that up to 12 million people would be unable to afford legal aid.
The lawyers' proposals are calculated to save up to £43m.
This is the sum which the Lord Chancellor has indicated he has to find by way of savings in the legal aid scheme to meet Treasury targets in 1993/4.
The professional bodies believe that the Lord Chancellor's proposed reduction in legal aid eligibility and to the Green Form are particularly damaging ways of making the savings required.
The Lord Chancellor has publicly invited the profession to put forward its own proposals for savings and in the little time allowed, the following package has now been put to the Lord Chancellor.
Five measures have been put forward to make the necessary savings in 1993/4:
1
A pay freeze for legal aid lawyers for 1992/3.
Fees for legal aid work to remain at the levels set in April 1992, despite the increase in overheads of the profession.
The profession cannot be certain how much this will save, as it depends on the amount provided for when the supply estimates were settled; but we estimate a saving of £15 million on the assumption that the Government would have provided for a 1.5% increase.
2
Ceasing to pay for a solicitor's representative to attend court with a barrister in the great majority of legal aid cases;[at the moment it is a requirement that all barristers are accompanied in court by a representative of the instructing solicitor.]
It is difficult to calculate precisely the amount this would save, but we believe it would be in the order of £9.1 million in criminal cases, £3 million in family and £2 million in civil cases.
3
Removal of the need for lawyers to attend court for unopposed adjournments in the Magistrates' Court; we believe this would give rise to a saving of about £8.6 million, with a saving on committal hearings of £2 million and a resultant saving in legal aid standard fees of £1 million.
4
Removal of the need to pay for a junior barrister as well as a QC in a substantial number of legal aid cases.
We understand this would save approximately £1 million.
5
Costs penalties to be imposed on legal aid matrimonial litigants where there is clear evidence that they are adopting an unco-operative approach to their divorce or separation proceedings, thereby lengthening the process and increasing its cost.
We believe this could save up to £2 million if properly enforced.
The implementation of measures 2, 3, 4 and 5 depend upon action by both the profession and the Government, but we believe the necessary steps can be completed in time for implementation in April 1993.
These measures will be fully explained to the Annual Conference of Presidents and Secretaries of Local Law Societies in London on Tuesday 19 January when John Appleby, Chairman of the Courts and Legal Services Committee, will present the package and call on the Government to withdraw its proposed eligibility cuts immediately now that an alternative package of savings has been agreed by the profession.
He will also outline suggestions for a longer-term alternative package for 1994/95 and 1995/96.
EMBARGO
EMBARGOED UNTIL: 00.01 HOURS — MONDAY 18 JANUARY 1993
BRITISH LAW SOCIETIES JOIN IN BRUSSELS
Bruce Millan, Member of the European Commission, will today [Monday 18 January 1993]mark a new and unique venture — the combination of the Law Society of Scotland with the Law Society of England and Wales in a joint office in Brussels.
Mr Millan is speaking at a lunch to be held at the SAS Royal Hotel in Brussels to celebrate the new venture, which is the first official joint undertaking of the two law societies [which represent solicitors in their two jurisdictions].
The Law Society of England and Wales has had an office in Brussels for two years now, headed by Colm Mac Eochaidh.
The office is responsible for lobbying the European institutions and keeping the solicitors' profession at home informed of EC developments.
These tasks will now be performed on behalf of the Law Society of Scotland, and Scottish solicitors, as well.
Speaking today, Brian Adair, President of the Law Society of Scotland, said: ‘We are delighted to be joining our counterparts from England and Wales in Brussels.
The European Community plays a vital role in developing law in the United Kingdom, and it is important for Scottish solicitors both to have a say in its formation and to be kept informed of changes in Brussels.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — THURSDAY, JANUARY 14, 1993.
LAW SOCIETY WELCOMES REVIEW OF LEGAL POWERS FOR MENTALLY ILL
The Law Society's Mental Health and Disability Committee welcomes the announcement made yesterday by Virginia Bottomley, Secretary of State for Health, setting out the terms of the Review of Legal Powers for Mentally Ill People.
The Committee acknowledges that many mentally ill people in the community are not receiving the care and treatment they need, and will be putting proposals to the review aimed at finding solutions to this problem.
Such solutions must provide proper safeguards to protect the rights and interests of patients, their families and carers, while setting the framework for the provision of adequate and appropriate care.
The Committee is not convinced that the proposal for ‘Community Supervision Orders’[CSOs]put forward by the Royal College of Psychiatrists will provide the solution for ensuring patients receive the care they need.
CSOs may well assist doctors in the management of some difficult patients, but they will do little to assist those patients who have been denied proper care and treatment — whether through lack of resources, shortage of hospital beds, or ineffective use and misunderstanding of the powers already available under the Mental Health Act 1983.
The Committee has convened a special meeting to prepare a considered response to the Royal College's proposal and to begin work on its submission to the Government review of legal powers.
The Committee would welcome comments from members of the legal profession, carers and users of mental health services to contribute to its debate on these complex issues.
NOTE TO EDITORS
1
‘The Royal College of Psychiatrists has recommended that the Mental Health Act 1983 should be amended to incorporate a community supervision order.
The College proposes that this should apply to a small group of patients who are repeatedly admitted to hospital under sections 3 or 37 of the Mental Health Act 1983 and who require long-term support and supervision in the community, but are known to have a history of failing to co-operate with treatment’
2
The Secretary of State for Health has asked officials to consider, in the light of the college's proposals:
whether new legal powers are needed to ensure that mentally ill people in the community get the care they need.
whether the present legal powers in the 1983 Mental Health Act are being used as effectively as they can be, and what action could be taken in advance of any new legislation to ensure that they are.
EMBARGO
EMBARGO: 11.00AM — TUESDAY 9TH DECEMBER 1992
HUMAN RIGHTS IN MALAWI
A report —‘Human Rights in Malawi’— is published today by British lawyers who recently visited the country.
The report contains evidence of torture, maltreatment and abuse of legal process, and calls for extensive changes to bring Malawi law into line with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the African Charter.
It also calls for steps to ensure that any future aid projects in Malawi serve the cause of human rights.
The report is written by a delegation of representatives from the Law Society, the General Council of the Bar and the Scottish Faculty of Advocates.
It is a rare document, since Amnesty International and foreign journalists are barred from Malawi.
It contains a verbatim account of an historic interview with Life President Dr Hastings Banda.
The report deals with the operation of the Malawi legal system including:—
the ‘traditional courts’, where all murder cases, carrying the death penalty, are tried without lawyers;
detailed case studies of arbitrary police detention and torture;
lack of judicial independence;
flouting of court orders by the police.
It also includes transcripts of the delegation's meetings with:
Life President Dr Hastings Banda
Minister of State John Tembo;
Long standing prisoners of conscience Vera and the late Orton Chirwa, who had received no visitors for eight years before the delegation met them.
In the report, the delegation concludes:
‘We are satisfied that the report is an accurate snapshot of the state of human rights in Malawi today.
The emotion we encountered, among citizens at every level, from villagers to government officials, was fear.
There will be no real freedom in Malawi in the future until this fear is removed.’
EMBARGO: FRIDAY 27 NOVEMBER 1992
PROPERTY AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES STRATEGY: TOUGH COMPETITION FACING CONVEYANCING SOLICITORS
The Law Society today publishes a Strategy for its work in the next three years in the Property and Commercial Services fields.
The Strategy, which is being made available to all solicitors, reflects the harsh assessment made by the Society about the future of domestic conveyancing.
The Society points out that:—
The level of conveyancing work is unlikely to increase in the foreseeable future.
Members of the public are now used to shopping around to find a firm which provides a service in a form and of a quality which the client wants at a price which the client is prepared to pay.
The firm which wishes to increase its market share in a static market must do so at the expense of its competitors.
Those who are not prepared to run their practices as a business must confront the fact that their practices have no long term future.
Although the threat of competition from institutions offering conveyancing may have receded for the moment, solicitors must not be complacent about the threat from the institutions because the Government may again consider encouraging outside competition if it seems political mileage may be gained.
The Law Society published a previous strategy for property work in 1988.
This was devised in a rising market, in very different circumstances from today.
The major changes which were set out in that strategy have however been carried into effect — the establishment of a National Conveyancing Protocol, the establishment of a financial services vehicle to assist solicitors and a more positive approach to solicitors involvement in estate agency.
The new strategy sets out a number of measures to be taken by the Society in the next three years including:—
Conveyancing procedures being reviewed to see whether they could be further altered in a way which will assist the prevention of fraud.
The Society hopes that mortgage lenders will work with solicitors to combat fraud.
Model clauses for contracts and leases will be drafted to meet the higher environmental standards now expected of businesses.
Procedures used elsewhere in Europe will be scrutinised to see what lessons can be used for England and Wales.
In particular it may be possible to issue common form probate without the need for any court procedure.
The Society will continue to promote measures to inform and improve the law including
Introduction of new tenure of commonhold to facilitate communal management of buildings.
Reform of the law which makes businesses still liable for their successors' defaults even after they have assigned the lease.
The creation of an environmental tribunal.
Fundamental reform in the way in which technical legislation such as company and revenue law is formulated and introduced.
In pursuit of its campaign to improve standards within the profession, the Society hopes to sponsor a tax qualification for non-specialists.
Conveyancing fees have fallen in real terms in the last five years.
The society will consider carrying out a survey of solicitors' charges for conveyancing to compare them with those of competitors here and with professions in other countries.
Furthermore, now that solicitors are strongly recommended to provide information about costs in advance the Society will carry out a review of whether clients should continue to have the right to ask the Society to reduce a solicitor; s bill by the remuneration certificate process.
Paul Marsh, Chairman of the Property and Commercial Services Committee of the Council, said today ‘The strategy reflects the enormous changes which have taken place in the profession over the last three years and the absolute need for firms of solicitors large or small to provide legal services to the public in the form which the public want those services supplied.’
Note for Editors:
The Strategy will be sent next week to all Council Members, local law societies and interested third parties.
Members of the profession will be able to purchase copies from the Law Society's Book Shop in the Strand.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — MONDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1992
SUCCESSFUL TRIP TO ROMANIA BY BRITISH LAWYERS
A delegation of lawyers from the British Romanian Law Association has just returned from a successful trip to Romania, having given seminars in two Romanian cities and met with representatives of the Romanian Bar Association.
The trip was not without its drama.
On an internal flight returning to Bucharest, the emergency door in the middle of the plane fell inwards and could not be re-secured until the aircraft had made an emergency landing.
The seminars for Romanian lawyers given in Iasi and Bucharest concentrated on the structure of a legal profession and practical aspects of management of a law practice.
In Iasi, a provincial city in the north-east of the country, more than 70 lawyers and law students attended.
Topics for discussion with the Romanian Bar Association included the draft code for the practice of lawyers, currently before the Romanian Parliament.
Representations were made by the British delegation to liberalise the present draft to allow foreign lawyers to practise more easily in Romania.
Speaking about the trip, David Keating, Chairman of the British Romanian Law Association and Council Member of the Law Society, said today: ‘We are determined to repeat the success of this trip with further workshops, particularly in provincial centres, and also with initiatives with Romanian law students.
We shall be making further representations to the Romanian Bar Association about a more liberal approach to the practice of foreign lawyers in their country.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — FRIDAY 20 NOVEMBER 1992
FIDUCIARY DUTIES & REGULATORY RULES — THE LAW SOCIETY DISAGREES WITH THE LAW COMMISSION
The Law Society has submitted its response to the Law Commission's Consultation Paper on Fiduciary Duties and Regulatory rules, and concludes by disagreeing with the Commission's preliminary proposals to overcome current difficulties which the Commission have been examining.
Traditional English law imposes particularly strict duties — fiduciary duties — on people carrying out certain functions e.g. trustees, and financial advisers.
This is because the exercise of these functions makes others dependent on their good faith and conscientiousness, and particularly vulnerable to exploitation by them.
For example, people who give financial advice may be well placed to use this as an opportunity to make a profit for themselves, say, by recommending the purchase of property which they themselves want to sell.
The problems addressed in the Law Commission's paper arise in two ways:
the first arises where the general law imposes a stricter duty than rules made by a regulatory organisation.
For example, the general law requires an agent to account to a principal for any profit made e.g. by way of commission, out of the principal's business.
The Securities and Investments Board's Conduct of Business Rules sets a lower standard and allow agents to keep commission, though they are required to disclose the fact that it has been received.
If a dispute arose, would a court take the view that the fiduciary/agent had done all that was required by disclosure, or would it say that the general law still applied and that the fiduciary had to account as well?
It is uncertain.
the second arises where financial institutions find themselves owing conflicting fiduciary duties to different people, so that they cannot comply with their duties to one without breaching their duties to the other.
For example, the investment management section of a financial organisation is advising customers to buy shares in a company which is thought generally to have good prospects; unknown to that section, the company has consulted the corporate finance department of the same organisation about how to deal with serious losses it has suffered but which are not yet publicly known.
The organisation has a duty to use all the knowledge in its possession for the benefit of its investment customers.
It has another, a duty of confidence, not to disclose information about its ailing customer.
Which duty would prevail if a dispute was to come before the courts?
The Law Commission takes the view, provisionally, that the solution to these uncertainties in legislation to direct that, where a court considers that a regulatory rule is ‘reasonable’, it should take it into account in determining ‘the precise content of common law and equitable obligations’ in any particular situation.
However, the Law Society does not think that this would solve the problem.
Its view is that what the Commission propose is probably already the law and that a court would in any case normally have regard to reasonable regulatory rules or market practice.
Giving this practice statutory backing would change little, if anything.
That a court should take account of such a rule would [and should]not mean that it would have to accept it.
It would [and should]remain open to the court to decide that the standard set by the general law was the right one.
Thus, Thus, the present uncertainty would remain.
The Society's view is that a more positive solution is needed: to amend the Financial Services Act 1986 so as to make it clear precisely how far rules made under the Act displace the general law.
The basic problem is that the way in which the Act confers rule-making powers is deficient [except for certain powers dealing, for instance, with the regulation of unit trusts].
The powers given enable the rule-maker to direct that the regulated person must do certain things, but not to direct that that is all he or she must do.
What is needed is for Parliament to amend the Act so that it explains exactly how far the rule-making powers go.
The Law Commission consider this approach, the ‘safe harbour’ approach, very briefly in their paper but dismiss it on grounds of ‘unconstitutionality’.
In the Law Society's view, this is misconceived.
The ‘safe harbour’ approach is not designed to give the Treasury, or anyone else, unfettered rule-making powers.
It proposes simply that Parliament should decide exactly what it intends and explain it clearly.
The Chairman of the Law Society's Company Law Committee, Bill Knight, said today:
‘It is very important that we have clarity.
Those who transact business in London must know what the rules are.
If the rules are inadequate, then the answer is to get them right and enforce them, not to rely on equitable principles which are uncertain in their application to a modern market.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 12TH NOVEMBER 1992
LAW SOCIETY CONDEMNS LEGAL AID CUTS
The Law Society today condemned Government proposals to cut legal aid eligibility and to make those on low income pay even more for essential legal help.
The means test is now being set so low that only people who are unemployed or have incomes near benefit levels will be able to obtain free legal help.
For millions of others on low incomes legal aid will be offered on financial conditions they will be unable to meet.
Aid will only be available if they pay larger amounts than those demanded now and which present experience shows they cannot afford.
Cuts to the Green Form Scheme will particularly affect those facing family breakdown, those suffering from long-term mental illness, and asylum seekers and others whose immigration status is in doubt.
These cuts will also have a serious effect on the availability of legal help in criminal cases.
At a time when the Royal Commission is examining the imbalance of resources available to the defence which led to miscarriages of justice, the Government is cutting access to legal help for the accused.
The Lord Chancellor gives us indication that the need for legal help for poor people has lessened, that the law is now more simple for people to understand, or that justice in the courts will be more easily available for those appearing unrepresented.
Three years ago the Government recognised the growing problem for people on low and moderate incomes who could no longer get legal aid.
The Government agreed to address the problem of falling access to justice and they established a review of legal aid eligibility.
Before the work of that review has been completed, the Government is making proposals that would take millions more out of legal aid eligibility, and increase the amount that those still eligible would have to pay for their legal help.
The President of the Law Society, Mark Sheldon, said:
‘These proposals represent the most serious attack on legal aid since the scheme began over forty years ago.
Never before has a Government sought to cut the free limit, so that millions of people seeking legal aid will be expected to pay a contribution they cannot afford.
The changes to the Green Form Scheme would deprive millions more people of legal advice.
We believe it is quite wrong for the Government to deny access to justice to many of the poorest and most vulnerable in our society.
We will do all in our power to persuade the Lord chancellor to drop these damaging proposals.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — FRIDAY 6 NOVEMBER 1992
LORD ENNALS TO SPEAK AT LAW SOCIETY CONFERENCE ON COMMUNITY CARE
The Rt Hon Lord David Ennals will give the keynote speech at a major conference being held by the Law Society; s Mental Health and Disability Committee on COMMUNITY CARE: A CHALLENGE TO THE LEGAL PROFESSION? on Friday 20th November 1992.
Lord Ennals was Secretary of State for Social Services from 1976–86, and Opposition Spokesperson on Health in the House of Lords from 1986–91.
He has a long-standing interest in the provision of community care for disabled and older people, through his involvement with voluntary organisations including MIND, the  Alzheimer's Disease Society, the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation and the National Aids Trust.
Lord Ennals will be joined by a variety of eminent speakers looking at the role of the law, and of lawyers in finding legal remedies for people in need of community care services.
The conference will be chaired by psychiatrist Professor Anthony Clare.
Sessions will include:
The rights of disabled people and carers.
Challenging assessments and enforcing provision: Judicial Review and other legal remedies.
Mentally disordered offenders: practical steps to diversion from custody.
Paying for community care: a partnership between family and state?
Contracts for care.
A few places are still available at the conference, which will be of interest to solicitors in private practice, local government and health service lawyers, as well as other professionals and voluntary organisations involved in the provision of community care.
EMBARGOED; 11.00AM — WEDNESDAY, 4TH NOVEMBER 1992
‘DISABILITY, DISCRIMINATION AND EMPLOYMENT’
A REPORT FROM THE LAW SOCIETY'S EMPLOYMENT LAW COMMITTEE
The Law Society's Employment Law Committee has concluded that a new law, to protect people with disabilities from discrimination, is needed.
In a report entitled ‘Disability, Discrimination and Employment’ the Committee calls for new legislation, on principles similar to those already set out in the law prohibiting sex and race discrimination.
Chairman of the Committee, Philip Williams, said today, ‘People with disabilities face particular problems in finding and keeping work.
The existing law [primarily the disabled Persons [Employment]Act 1944]has failed.
Attempts to improve the position of voluntary and educational measures need to be backed up by a new law, offering protection against discrimination.’
‘The Civil Rights [Disabled Persons]Bill, introduced by Alf Morris MP as a Private Member's Bill earlier this year, which receives its third reading in the House of Lords today, could form the basis of the new Act.
But the matter is too important to be left to the Private Member's Bill procedure.’
The Committee believes that this is the first time a group of solicitors, experts in their field, have considered the legal feasibility of an anti-discrimination law to help people with disabilities work.
The Committee decided to examine the question because some of the arguments against legislation suggest that a law in this area would be impracticable.
Using their experience of existing anti-discrimination laws, and considering the recently introduced Americans with Disabilities Act in particular, Committee members concluded that legislation here could be effective.
The Committee's principal conclusions set out by Stephen Levinson, Chairman of the Employment Law Committee's Working Group on Disability, are:
people with disabilities face particular difficulties in employment
existing means of solving these problems [for example, the Disabled Persons [Employment]Act 1944]have failed
education and voluntary approaches to improving matters are insufficient on their own
anti-discrimination legislation, similar to existing laws banning discrimination on grounds of sex and race, could be effective
the Civil Rights [Disabled Persons]Bill could form the basis for the new law, but the matter is too significant for the Private Member's procedure — a Government Bill is needed.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — FRIDAY 21 MAY 1993
LAW SOCIETY TO APPEAL STANDARD FEES DECISION
The Law Society announced today that it would appeal to the Court of Appeal against the Divisional Court's refusal of its application for a declaration that the Lord Chancellor's proposed standard fee scheme was unlawful.
Commenting on this decision, John Appleby, Chairman of the Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee said:—
‘In the light of the Divisional Court's decision, we have naturally considered very carefully whether or not we should take the matter any further.
The advice we have received leads us to the conclusion that we should ask the Court of Appeal to rule on this important point of principle involved in this case.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — FRIDAY 21 MAY 1993
MENTALLY INCAPACITATED ADULTS AND DECISION-MAKING — HOW THE LAW CAN HELP
The Law Society today joined the Law Commission in calling for changes to the law relating to decision-making and mentally incapacitated adults.
The Society strongly supports the Commission's overall approach, and is pleased that many of the Commission's proposals reflect the comments made by the Society in response to earlier consultations.
The Society welcomes the proposals to establish a new jurisdiction covering all aspects of private law decision-making for people with all forms of mental incapacity.
In particular, the Society supports
the recognition that an incapacitated person should be allowed and encouraged to participate in any decision-making to the fullest possible extent.
proposals to clarify the statutory authority for carers to act on behalf of an incapacitated person, while setting out the principles which must be taken into account when acting in that person's ‘best interests’
a new definition of incapacity which also caters for partial and fluctuating capacity
proposals for a graded system of decision-making, covering both personal and financial decisions, reflecting decisions made by carers and by administrative bodies, both subject to review by a judicial authority
The Law Society considers that the Law Commission's proposals will have a significant practical application, not only to solve problems in relation to incapacitated people, but also to provide ways in which potential conflicts or disputes can be avoided.
The Society's comments are intended to improve the practicability of the proposals.
David Keating, Chair of the Law Society's Mental Health and Disability Sub-committee said
‘Reform of the law in this area is long overdue, and the need for such reform is now urgent.
Demographic changes, combined with reforms in the provision of social and health care services are creating practical and legal problems to which the current law offers no solution, leaving vulnerable people open to exploitation, abuse and neglect.
The Law Society urges the Government to make a firm commitment to implement the Law Commission's proposals at the earliest opportunity’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 7TH MAY 1993
SOCIETY'S DELEGATED POWERS UPHELD
The Law Society has successfully resisted a judicial review application by Mr Raymond Curtin concerning imposition of a condition on his practising certificate by an Assistant Director of the Solicitors complaints Bureau.
The Assistant Director was acting under the authority of a Council resolution made under Section 79 of the Solicitors Act 1974 [as substituted by Section 97 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990].
The section gives wide powers for the Council to arrange for its functions to be discharged by committees, sub-committees and individuals [whether members of the Law Society staff or not].
Mr Curtin had been suspended from practice for three months in 1991 by the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal and the condition imposed by an Assistant Director of the Solicitors Complaints Bureau when Mr Curtin applied for renewal of his practising certificate was that of practising only in approved employment, as opposed to in approved partnership, which had been the condition applicable to Mr Curtin's certificate prior to his suspension from practice.
In the case, heard by Lord Justice Lloyd and Mr Justice Blofeld in the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division, the arguments put forward on behalf of Mr Curtin centred on the validity of the Council decision to delegate its powers to the Assistant Director, and on the rationality and fairness of the Assistant Director's decision.
In the judgment delivered on 7th May the court found that Section 79 had been correctly interpreted by the Law Society and that the Assistant Director's decision could not be faulted in terms of rationality or fairness.
The court noted that Mr Curtin had not exercised either the informal right of appeal against the Assistant Director's decision which was available to him, nor his statutory right to appeal to the Master of the Rolls.
He had also declined an offer from the Law Society of a new hearing before another SCB Assistant Director.
Commenting on the judgment John Hayes, the Secretary-General, said:
‘I am pleased the Court has upheld the interpretation of Section 79 that we have always given to it, and that the section, which had been introduced at our request, had been correctly framed to allow for the flexible exercise of delegated powers.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — WEDNESDAY 5 MAY 1993
LAW SOCIETY PUBLISHES TENDERING CONSULTATION PAPER
The Law Society has three main purposes in proposing a tender code and model contract conditions:
To seek a consistent approach amongst local authorities
To encourage good practice
To reduce the risk of standards unsuited to legal work being imposed
The Code is for use of both voluntary and compulsory tendering.
It offers authorities a number of different approaches to competitive tendering and lists criteria against which potential contractors and submitted tenders can be evaluated.
The Model Contract Conditions set out fairly and succinctly the principle obligations of the solicitors and of the authority.
They also establish a framework for communications between the two.
The Society has worked very closely with a number of groups — especially its Local Government Group — to prepare the model documents.
The work began in 1991 following publication of the Government's proposals for the extension of CCT to professional services [including legal].
In response the Society rejected the need to compel local authorities to put out aspects of their legal services to competitive tender.
As part of an alternative approach the Society suggested that local authorities should comply with a Code of Tendering Practice and they stressed the desirability of standard form tender procedure and documents.
The draft Code and Model Contract Conditions have been approved for consultation by the Law Society's Practice Development Committee.
The consultation period runs until 30th June and comments should be sent to:
EMBARGOED UNTIL: 00.01 — WEDNESDAY 5TH MAY 1993
PRACTICE MANAGEMENT IN SOLICITORS FIRMS
A Research Study by the Law Society Research & Policy Planning Unit
The Law Society has today published the findings of a research survey into practice management in solicitors' firms.
The survey, by John Jenkins of the Law Society's Research and Policy Planning Unit, has been used by the Law Society to assist the development of the Practice Management Standards for solicitors firms recently published in draft.
The Study shows the practice management methods which are currently used in firms of solicitors with up to ten partners.
The study shows that:
Solicitors' firms believe that the most important changes which have led to improvements in their efficiency are the introduction of new technology and better management systems
The appointment of a practice manager was regarded as important by a third of firms with over fifty staff and the findings show that management systems tend to be much better developed in firms where decision making is in the hands of a single practice manager rather than, for example , in committee meetings of the whole partnership.
There are still firms which have not thought it necessary to change their methods of working and some of the smaller firms have not yet introduced in-house complaints procedures, despite the introduction by the Society of a new Practice Rule in 1991.
More detailed systems are in place in the larger firms than in smaller ones, as would be expected.
Fee earning pressures, lack of time and the recession were the main factors which respondents mentioned as obstacles to improving the business efficiency of their firms.
The statistics in the report will enable all firms, except for the 400 with over eleven partners, to compare their own systems with firms of a similar size.
They will be able to make comparisons of how firms organise management responsibility, undertake business and marketing planning and conduct methods of client care and client communication.
Future research will examine in detail the views of clients and seek to demonstrate how effective management systems can be designed to reflect the strengths, weaknesses and aspirations of the people who make up solicitors' firms.
A full summary of the research findings is attached.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — FRIDAY 30TH APRIL 1993
LAW SOCIETY'S STATEMENT ON FEES CHALLENGE DEFEAT
Following the High Court's decision today in favour of the Government on the Law Society's challenge to the introduction of standard fees for magistrates' courts' costs the Chairman of the Law Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee, John Appleby said:
‘It is now clear that the powers the Lord Chancellor was granted under the Legal Aid Act are wider than anyone had previously thought and that he can restrict access to justice simply by cutting or restricting lawyers’ fees.
Naturally we are disappointed to discover that the Lord Chancellor's powers are as wide as that.
After taking advice we shall consider carefully whether this case should be argued in the Court of Appeal.’
The Law Society has also taken proceedings against the Government on its decision to restrict legal aid eligibility.
That case is not affected by today's decision and is expected to be heard at the end of May.
EMBARGO: 12.30 — WEDNESDAY 28TH APRIL 1993
COMMENT BY PRESIDENT OF THE LAW SOCIETY, MARK SHELDON, ON THE APPOINTMENT OF KAMLESH BAHL AS CHAIR OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION
‘The Law Society is proud that a solicitor and member of its Council has been chosen for the important post of Chair of the Equal Opportunities Commission.
The solicitors’ profession is, and must be, a place where equal career opportunities are recognised and promoted, and Kamlesh's appointment emphasises that commitment.
She will have the congratulations and good wishes of the many in the profession who know her and respect her incisive intellect, drive and professional ability.
I am particularly glad that she will be able to combine her new duties with continuing membership of the Law Society Council.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 1993
SCHEME TO EXCLUDE INCOMPETENT POLICE STATION ADVICE
The Law Society and the Legal Aid Board have agreed to introduce a Scheme which is designed to ensure that only competent solicitors' representatives advise suspects at police stations.
From October 1994, the Board will pay solicitors' representatives only if they have passed an independent test to carry out police station work.
Research conducted for the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice found that solicitors' representatives involved in giving advice in police stations are often inexperienced and lack proper training.
This research is known to have caused the Commission great concern and the Society has told the Royal Commission that it is determined to deal with the problem.
The Scheme will ensure that all solicitors' representatives who give police station advice do so to an agreed standard of competence.
To help solicitors' firms train their representatives to meet acceptable standards, the Society is producing comprehensive training material which should be available by October 1993.
The Legal Aid Board, which administers legal aid, proposes to stop paying for work carried out by unaccredited solicitors' representatives after 1st October 1994.
Under the Law Society's Scheme, representatives who are not accredited will have a period of six months during which they can develop their skills by being paid for work on less serious cases.
A Working Group has been set up to assist the Law Society to prepare the training material and accreditation test.
It includes representatives of professional associations [the London Criminal Courts Solicitors' Association, the Criminal Law Solicitors' Association, the Legal Aid Practitioners' Group and the Institute of Legal Executives], the Legal Aid Board and academic institutions,[the College of Law and the University of the West of England].
The training material and accreditation proposals will be tested in pilots to be held in May in London, Sheffield, Brighton, Bristol and Bedford.
The text of the training material is being prepared with the assistance of Dr Eric Shepherd, who is an independent forensic psychology consultant who specialises in investigative interviewing.
His work in the last ten years has included extensive work with the Police Service, developing training to assist officers to interview suspects in a more principled and fairer way.
The accreditation test, which should be available by April 1994, will set out to assess the representatives' practical skills, their belief in the primacy of their professional duty to their clients and their knowledge of law and procedure.
It is proposed that representatives will have to compile a Professional Practice Portfolio, comprising records of different visits which they have made to police stations.
There will be a written test of the representatives' knowledge of law and procedure and ability to think through a problem and formulate advice and a practical assessment of the representatives' ability to argue their clients' case and intervene appropriately and assertively during interview.
NOTES TO EDITORS
1
The Home Office Code under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 [PACE]requires that as soon as a suspect arrives at a police station, they should be told by the custody officer of their right to independent, free legal advice.
A person who requests legal advice should be given an opportunity to consult a named solicitor or a duty solicitor [solicitors in private practice who take it in turns to be available to give advice, particularly overnight and at weekends].
The solicitor should be present during the police interviews, which are tape recorded.
A named solicitor may delegate the giving of advice and assistance to a representative who is not a solicitor.
2
Duty solicitor schemes were established under PACE.
Duty solicitors are subject to the control of the Legal Aid Board which requires them and their authorised representatives to have relevant experience and to submit themselves to selection by a local committee.
Named solicitors [whose representatives will have to be accredited under the Law Society Scheme]are not subject to any specific selection requirements.
3
Solicitors, at times, have to rely upon their representatives, in order to meet the demand for advice in the police station which is unpredictable.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 1993.
LAW SOCIETY GIVES CONDITIONAL APPROVAL TO FRANCHISING
The Law Society today give provisional support to the Legal Aid Board's ‘franchising’ scheme.
The Society had received assurances just before the Council meeting from John Pitts, Chairman of the Legal Aid Board, that the Board had no plans to move towards competitive tendering, and that ‘there can be no question of franchise holders being compelled to participate in any competitive tendering exercise and no question of franchise holders being excluded from legal aid work because they choose not to participate in any competitive tendering exercise or do tender and fail’.
However, the Society's support is conditional upon the negotiations achieving an improvement in a number of the terms on offer.
Commenting on the Council's decision, John Appleby, Chairman of the Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee said:—
‘The Lord Chancellor's interest in introducing competitive tendering caused the Society very great concern because competitive tendering would destroy the principle that legal aid clients — like all others — are free to choose their own solicitor.
I believe the Legal Aid Board's assurances remove the risk of franchising being used as a stepping stone to competitive tendering for many years to come.
There are still a number of important issues to be sorted out with the Board before the Society can approve the franchising proposals, but we have made a very good start.’
The most important outstanding issue is the length of the franchising contracts to be offered to solicitors.
The Board originally offered three years, and has now increased it to five.
John Pitts' letter says that there is ‘room for further discussion on this issue.’
The Law society is seeking a ten year term for the contract, with some crucial provisions entrenched so that they cannot be altered for the duration of the contract, except with the Society's agreement.
The Society sees this as the best protection against the exclusion of some firms from franchising and against any attempt to force them to tender for legal aid work on the basis of price.
In addition, the Council called for the financial incentives available to franchised firms to be improved before it would confirm its support for franchising.
The Council also approved the issue of Practice Management Standards.
The Standards will form part of the criteria which have to be met by firms applying for a legal aid franchise, but they will apply to all solicitors' practices, whether seeking a franchise or not.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 1993.
NEW DEPUTY VICE-PRESIDENT FOR LAW SOCIETY
The Council of the Law Society has today elected John Young, Council Member for the City of London, as the Council's candidate to be nominated as Deputy Vice-President for the year 1993–1994.
Mr Young [aged 58]is a partner with Cameron Markby Hewitt in the City of London, which he joined in 1964, and specialises in commercial work.
He worked on the staff of the Law Society from 1958 to 1964, having first taken articles with Maxwell Batley & Co, in London.
He was first elected to the Council in 1971.
He has served on several Law Society committees, was Chair of the Young Solicitors Group, and Chair of the International Relations Committee from 1983 to 1987.
He is currently Chair of the Solicitors Indemnity Fund.
He also leads the Law Society's exercise on ‘Cost of Default.’
Married, with four adult children, Mr Young is an enthusiastic musician.
He runs a church choir and plays the organ.
Speaking immediately after his election, John Young said: ‘I am honoured and delighted to be elected Deputy Vice President and I see it as an opportunity to contribute to some of the serious issues facing the profession, and to represent a body with which I have been involved for much of my life.
I am particularly pleased to have been able to see through the work to stamp out default and to promote high standards in the profession.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — TUESDAY, APRIL 6, 1993
LAW SOCIETY TAKES TO THE ROAD CONFERENCES ON FRANCHISING AND PRACTICE MANAGEMENT THROUGHOUT COUNTRY
The Law Society has responded to the introduction of Legal Aid franchising and the Society's development of the Practice Management Standards by organising a major series of conferences during May, June and July 1993.
There are two conference programmes:
1
How to Gain a Legal Aid Franchise, will feature Legal Aid Board Chief Executive, Steve Orchard, with John Appleby, Chair of the Law Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee
2
Implementing the Practice Management Standards with a wide range of practitioners and experienced speakers.
It is hoped delegates attending the franchising events will also attend the second seminar, as these will provide an effective overview on how to bring in the various sections of the Practice Management Standards at firm level.
Timed to coincide with the conference programme is the Law Society's new Office Manual for law firms.
Scheduled for publication in June, the Manual will provide an invaluable aid to implementing the Practice Management Standards.
The conferences will be run at 24 venues throughout England and Wales from Newcastle-upon-Tyne to Exeter [list attached]and have been modestly priced to attract delegates.
The price for the franchising conference will be £89.00 and that for the Practice Management Standards Conference £165.00.
Delegates can attend both conferences for a combined fee of £225.00 excl.
VAT.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE; MONDAY, 5TH APRIL 1993
LAW SOCIETY TAKES LORD CHANCELLOR TO COURT OVER LEGAL AID CUTS
The Law Society announced today that it intends to seek leave to apply for judicial review of the Lord chancellor's decision to reduce the free limit for legal aid and legal advice and to abolish legal advice under the Green Form Scheme for those above the free limit.
Commenting on the Society's application, Mark Sheldon, President of the Law Society said:—
‘We have been left with no alternative but to take action through the courts to defend the Legal Aid Scheme.
Legal aid is a fundamental part of our system of justice, and we do not believe it is proper for the Lord chancellor to make drastic reductions in it through Regulations, particularly in view of the entirely inadequate consultation on his proposals.
I hope it will be possible for the operation of the Regulations to be suspended until the courts have considered the matter, so that no unnecessary injustice is caused to those who would lose legal aid as a result of these proposals.’
The Lord chancellor's proposals, contained in Regulations due to come into effect on 12th April, would potentially affect about 12–14 million adults: some would cease to be eligible for legal aid; some would have to pay much more than at present; and some would be required to pay a contribution for the first time.
On the Government's own figures, over 30% of those who would otherwise have received legal aid next year would lose it as a result of the proposed changes.
The Society's action, initiated after taking advice from leading counsel, is based on two main grounds.
First, the Society believes the Regulations to be outside the powers granted to the Lord chancellor by the Legal Aid Act.
The purpose of the Act is to ‘establish a framework for the provision of advice, assistance and representation which is publicly funded with a view to helping persons who might otherwise be unable to obtain advice, assistance or representation on account of their means’.
The Regulations would undermine that purpose.
The Society believes it is particularly unacceptable for changes of this sort to be put forward through Regulations when the White Paper preceding the Legal Aid Act, and the Lord Chancellor's comments during the passage of the Act, made it clear that the Regulation-making powers were intended to be used for routine upratings, rather than for radical changes to the scheme.
Secondly, the Society argues that the Lord Chancellor is obliged to consult with the profession, the consumer organisations and others before introducing changes of such magnitude to the legal aid scheme.
In the past, proposals for major change — such as those emerging from the Lord Chancellor's Department's review of the financial conditions for legal aid, and those arising from the Legal Aid Scrutiny — were published in a consultation document so that all concerned had a full opportunity to comment before final decisions were taken.
No such consultation took place before these proposals were introduced, and the Society argues that that failure makes the Regulations unlawful.
The Society has urged the Lord chancellor to suspend the operation of the proposed regulations until the matter can be fully considered by the courts.
In the Society's view, there is a risk that many thousands of people will be improperly denied legal advice if the Regulations come into force on 12th April, but are subsequently held to be unlawful.
EMBARGOED UNTIL 00.01 WEDNESDAY, 31ST MARCH 1993
LAW SOCIETY URGES MP'S TO OPPOSE LEGAL AID CUTS
The Law Society has urged MP's to oppose the Lord chancellor's proposals for cuts in legal aid eligibility in the debate taking place in the House of Commons this afternoon.
The Lord Chancellor's proposals would mean that legal aid would no longer be affordable for between 12 to 14 million adults.
On the Lord Chancellor's estimates about 30% of those who would have received civil legal aid next year — over 120,000 individuals — will be deprived of legal aid as a result of his proposals.
The Society has urged that the eligibility cuts be withdrawn, and any necessary savings made instead by implementing the alternative package of savings which the legal profession has put forward.
In its briefing to MP's, the Society makes the following main points:—
The Lord Chancellor's proposals to cut eligibility represent the most serious threat to access to justice since the Legal Aid Scheme was introduced some 40 years ago.
Legal aid will become unaffordable to 12 to 14 million adults as a result of the Lord Chancellor's proposals.
On the Lord Chancellor's own figures, over 30% of those who should have got legal aid next year will now lose it.
The proposals would cause disproportionate damage to the Legal Aid Scheme — cutting the number of legal aid certificates by 30% in order to make a saving of only 4% of the total costs of the Scheme.
It is unrealistic to expect those with incomes just above the level of income support to pay contributions.
Research evidence from The Joseph Rowntree Foundation, and previous Governments enquiries into the financial conditions for legal aid, demonstrate that those on such low incomes cannot afford to pay.
The Lord Chancellor's proposals to cut eligibility for legal aid were put forward with no prior consultation.
In the past, major changes in the financial conditions for legal aid have been proceeded by full consultation.
The use of regulations to cut legal aid eligibility contravenes the explanation the Lord Chancellor gave to Parliament about the way he would use these powers.
Legal aid expenditure has risen rapidly in recent years, and the legal profession has repeatedly offered to work with the Government to control the rising costs of legal aid.
The Government has failed to take up those offers.
The legal profession has already put forward alternative proposals which would save the money the Lord Chancellor requires to save next year.
The unexpected reduction in the number of criminal legal aid orders granted over the last few months means that expenditure will in any event be lower than originally expected.
The Lord Chancellor's proposals have been universally condemned by those organisations with knowledge of the legal aid system.
Commenting on the prospects for the debate, John Appleby, Chairman of the Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee, said:
‘It is still not too late for the Lord chancellor to change his mind.
He should bow to the views of all of those who submitted evidence to the Home Affairs Committee and withdraw these proposals.
We have shown him a better way of making the savings he requires next year, and we will be happy to work with him — and with the consumer groups — to find ways of improving the value obtained for the money spent on legal aid in the future.
But it is imperative that savings are not made at the expense of those the legal aid system exists to serve.
We hope that MP's will express forcibly their concern for the impact these changes would have on their constituents, and that they will persuade the Lord chancellor to think again.’
EMBARGOED UNTIL: 11.30 AM — WEDNESDAY, 31ST MARCH, 1993
LAW SOCIETY SECRETARY-GENERAL URGES FRESH THINKING ON FUNDING OF TRAINEE SOLICITORS
The Secretary-General of the Law Society, John Hayes, has warned that in the future only the well off may be able to become solicitors.
Speaking at a one day conference at the University of Sheffield on ways forward in the training of solicitors, Mr Hayes urged the Government and the profession to seek urgently new ways of funding the training of young solicitors.
He criticised ‘as a policy mess’ the present position where so many would-be solicitors are prevented from obtaining discretionary awards from local authorities, are unable to enjoy preferential rates under the Government's student loan scheme, and are finding it increasingly difficult to find places in already hard pressed high street firms who do legal aid work.
He urged the Government to look hard at a number of other measures, short and long-term, to improve the position:
to extend the student loan scheme to trainees for their vocational course;
to provide tax relief to those already working in the law who are studying part-time to become solicitors;
for the Government [as part of a radical review of legal aid]to fund bursaries in legal aid practices;
to copy the Scottish system and for central Government, instead of the current unsatisfactory position with discretionary awards, to fund a set number of places nationally;
as part of a longer term review of legal aid policy, to pay modest sums to firms who allow their trainees and young solicitors to undertake the more straightforward cases now undertaken on legal aid.
Unless action is taken only the rich will be able to contemplate being solicitors and only those firms doing commercial work are going to offer traineeships.
This would amount to a denial of justice to the public seeking legal help and deny those of moderate means the opportunity to become solicitors — a denial of justice to public and student alike.
EMBARGOED UNTIL: 00.01 — THURSDAY 25TH MARCH 1993
NEW LEGAL HELP FOR TENANTS
New help for tenants — especially those who are victims of harassment or illegal eviction — was announced today by the Law Society and the Campaign for Bedsit Rights [CBR].
A directory — the first of its kind — will now make it easier for tenants to get specialist legal help.
The directory —‘Legal Help for Private Tenants’— was compiled from recommendations made by advice centres, tenants' groups, local authorities and housing professionals around England and Wales.
The directory has Government support.
Commenting on it's launch, Tony Baldry the Junior Housing Minister, said:
‘I welcome this helpful initiative.
It is important that private tenants who are suffering harassment or illegal eviction have access to solicitors to help them enforce their legal rights.
Private tenants and advice agencies will find the list compiled by the Law Society and CBR very helpful in doing this.’
As well as giving details of housing solicitors working in private practice and Law Centres, the list provides information on:
Harassment and Illegal Eviction Law and how to use it.
How to get the best out of a solicitor.
Paying for legal costs.
.
The directory will be widely distributed to advice centres and tenants groups and it is hoped that other agencies such as local police stations will be interested in obtaining copies.
Phil Jew, Campaign worker at CBR said today:
‘Based on the latest Government survey of private tenants, we believe that over 140,000 privately renting households in England alone could be experiencing harassment or attempts at illegal eviction at any one time.
Thousands may therefore be in need of urgent legal advice and assistance with the enforcement of their rights.
We hope that the new directory will raise awareness of harassment, illegal eviction and private tenants’ rights and provide a reliable guide to local expertise in private rented housing law.’
Nicola Howells from the Law Society said today:
‘Very few people in housing need are aware of the legal remedies available to them and how a solicitor can help enforce these rights.
The housing directory will help bridge this gap — although the proposed legal aid cuts do cast a cloud over this.
We hope this initiative will encourage other solicitors to do housing work’.
NOTES FOR EDITORS
1
Campaign for Bedsit Rights is a national federation including tenants' groups, local councils, students unions, advice centres and voluntary organisations.
CBR campaigns to improve the rights, conditions and living standards for the 2.6 million private tenants living in bedsits, shared houses, lodgings, flatlets, hostels and B&B hotels.
2
The referral list has been produced on a regional basis.
Advice centres, CABx and council departments will be supplied with a list free of charge for their area.
It has been possible to do this with the help of donations from Crisis — the national charity for single homeless people; the Law Society; the London Boroughs Grants C Committee and the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux.
3
A limited number of copies of the directory for the North West, North East, Midlands and East, South East, South West, Wales and Greater London [£3.50 each inc p+p]and for England and Wales as a whole [£10.00 each inc p+p]are available from Campaign for Bedsit Rights, 7 Whitechapel Road, London E1 1DU.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — THURSDAY 15 JULY 1993
PRESIDENT PANNONE SETS NEW DIRECTION FOR JUSTICE
Rodger Pannone, elected today as Law Society President, admitted that the legal system too often fails the public and hit out at critics who blame lawyers for defects in the system.
Speaking at the Society's Annual general Meeting in London he said,
‘For too long judges, barristers and solicitors have proclaimed the immutable wonders of our legal system.
We have embodied the highest possible standards in our ethical codes.
But the reality for most of our clients has been a poor service from the system.
It rarely seems to deliver what any of us, hand on heart, could say is justice.
Too often, the result is a shabby compromise forced by pressures of exorbitant cost, extended delays and exhausted energies.
We are forced to defend a system we know to be indefensible.
We will never reform the justice system until we are prepared to acknowledge its fundamental defects.
I have a deep and abiding resentment of the unfair attacks that are made on us as a profession.
It is understandable that the public, disillusioned by what the system produces, find it easy to blame the producers.
Instead of being seen as fighters on behalf of those who struggle with the system, we are seen as architects and defenders of it.
This unfair distortion of our role is given continuing currency by the media and infuriatingly increasingly often by the Government.
We should stop being defensive.
I am proud of what I have done as a practising solicitor and I expect all other solicitors feel the same.
We believe many of our problems to be unique to our profession.
This is not correct.
I have been talking to the leaders in Medicine and Education and clearly there are many areas where we can and will be working together in telling the Government that they must support us in supplying quality services and that the Treasury is a support service, not the determinant of policy.
I am committed to ensuring that the few incompetent and dishonest members of our profession are rooted out.
The Law Society no longer can support equally those who have put their house in order and those who have not.
During my year in office I want every solicitor to reflect on how his or her work serves the community and consider whether there is anything more they may wish to do in their practices, their local communities or their home lives which would widen their contribution.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — MONDAY 12 JULY 1993
LAW SOCIETY ACTS TO CURB ‘AMBUSH’ CHARGING BY SOLICITORS
Solicitors who do not tell their clients in advance as much as they can about the likely cost of a piece of work — or exceed an estimate without notice — are now at risk of having their charges reduced by the Law Society under its powers to penalise Inadequate Professional Services.
All complaints about solicitors' charges will in future be conciliated if possible, under proposals to be considered by The Law Society Council at its meeting on 15 July.
At the same time, new rights are proposed for beneficiaries under wills.
They will be able to challenge the charges of a solicitor executor who has carried out the administration of the estate, by applying for a Remuneration Certificate from the Law Society.
This change has been recommended by the Legal Services Ombudsman, and will require a change in the law, expected to come into force at the beginning of 1994.
These recommendations are some of the conclusions of a wide-ranging review of the ways in which dissatisfaction about solicitors' charges is handled.
The review team has concluded that the main objective must be to reduce the scope for dissatisfaction by stepping up the pressure on those solicitors who are not yet ‘up-front’ about charges.
In 60% of cases referred to the Remuneration Certificate procedure in February and March 1993, solicitors had apparently not discussed with, or written to, clients about their charges at any stage before sending the bill.
These firms will be  targeted for educational measures.
Other recommendations include:—
The Law Society's Remuneration Certificate service should remain free of charge, but the Society will have a power to require up to 50% of a bill to be paid by the client before the certificate is granted.
The Remuneration Certificate procedure should not be available where the solicitor's bill exceeds £50,000 as an alternative court procedure for challenge — known as taxation — is more appropriate.
A full list of recommendations is at paragraph 76 of the report for the Council, which is attached.
Accordingly, the Committees recommend that the Council:
A
Approve the amendment of the Solicitors' Remuneration Order 1972 to provide for the Law Society to grant Remuneration Certificates to either [i]residuary beneficiaries in cases where the only executor is a solicitor acting in his or her professional capacity, with a review of the position one year from the date of implementation of the new SRO,or [ii]residuary beneficiaries in cases where at least one executor is a solicitor acting in his or her professional capacity.
B
Approve that the SRO is amended to provide that where a bill is paid by deduction, then either [i]if within a three month period following delivery of the bill written objections are made by the entitled third party or client, notice of rights under the SRO should then be given,or [ii]the notice of rights under the SRO must be served on all clients and entitled third parties at the time of delivery of the bill.
C
Note that attempts will be made wherever possible to conciliate between solicitor and client where the client is dissatisfied with the solicitor's charges, and the dispute has not been resolved under the firm's internal PR15 procedure.
D
Agree that in the event of conciliation being unsuccessful, and the client wishing to proceed with a Remuneration Certificate application, then a provisional certificate would be issued by an admitted member of staff under delegated powers to be granted by the Council.
E
Agree that both the solicitor and the client should have a right of appeal against the provisional certificate to a Sub-Committee of three experienced non-contentious practitioners appointed by the Council.
F
Agree that in the event of no appeal being lodged by either party within 28 days of the provisional certificate, the certificate becomes final.
G
Agree that the responsibility for Remuneration Certificates should, with effect from 1 September 1993 pass to the Adjudication and Appeals Committee from the Standards and guidance Committee.
H
Agree that charges for the Remuneration Certificate service be not introduced at the present time.
I
Agree that the Solicitors' Remuneration Order 1972 be amended to provide that the Society may require up to 50% of a client's profit costs all disbursements and VAT to be paid during the process of application for a Remuneration Certificate, in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Adjudication and Appeals Committee after consultation with the Lord Chancellor.
J
Agree either that there continue to be no lower limit for the remuneration certificate jurisdiction or that the Solicitors' Remuneration Order 1972 be amended to provide for a lower limit of £100 profit costs.
K
Agree that the Solicitors' Remuneration Order 1972 be amended to provide an upper limit to the jurisdiction of £50,000.
L
Agree that Practice Rule 15 be not amended at the present time.
M
Note that the Adjudication and Appeals Committee will treat material non-compliance with the Written Professional Standards on costs, including exceeding an estimate without notice, as prima facie evidence of IPS.
N
Note the support and educational measures intended to increase compliance with the Written Professional Standards set out in paragraph 71 above.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: WEDNESDAY, 7TH JULY 1993
CARSBERG SUPPORTS ADVOCACY RIGHTS EXTENSION
The Law Society welcomes the findings of the Director-General of Fair Trading, Sir Bryan Carsberg, on the Society's application for extended rights of audience for solicitors.
Sir Bryan rejects all of the many arguments advanced by the Bar to the effect that the extension of audience rights would reduce rather than extend competition.
Extending higher court advocacy rights for solicitors, he finds, is likely to widen the choice for the consumers of those services and may lead to efficiency gains in some areas such as those services supplied to the Crown.
This supportive advice now falls to be considered by the Lord Chancellor and the designated judges, alongside the advice from the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee which recommended that the application be rejected.
The Lord Chancellor and the judges will have to consider both sets of advice together with formal representations the Law Society plans to make shortly.
Mark Sheldon, President of the Law Society, said:
‘In its report published yesterday, the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice said that giving solicitors advocacy rights might improve the overall quality of advocacy in the Crown Court.
The Lord Chancellor will have to weigh carefully whether those benefits, as well as the competition gains and advantages for the consumer identified by Sir Bryan, which stand at the heart of the Government's policy for legal services, should be pursued, or — as the Advisory Committee and the Bar would prefer — they should be lost and the application rejected.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — TUESDAY 6TH JULY 1993
LAW SOCIETY RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE
The Law Society responded today to the Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice.
The Commission, which was set up in 1991 after a series of miscarriage of justice cases culminating in the release of the Birmingham Six after 16 years in prison, reported today.
Charles Elly, Deputy Vice President of the Law Society and former Chairman of the Law Society's Criminal Law Committee said today: ‘We warmly welcome the Commission's support for the retention of the right to silence.
However, we are strongly opposed to the recommendation that defendants should lose the right to choose jury trial.
The recommendation can only have been based on the interests of cost-cutting, not of justice.
Taking the Report as a whole, the Commission has naturally paid attention to the different interests of those involved in the day to day running of the criminal justice system.
It has chosen to steer a middle course between them rather than undertake a strategic review.
Many people concerned about the shortcomings of the existing system will be disappointed by this short-term approach.
We will be studying the Report as a whole with care, to examine whether a proper balance has been struck between the prosecution and the defence’.
The Law Society supports some of the Commission's main recommendations, such as:—
The maintenance of the right of silence in police station interviews — the Commission's own research showed that this right is little used and has little effect on the decision of the police whether or not to prosecute or on the outcome of the proceedings.
Never the less, it is a basic principle of English law that a person is innocent until proven guilty and should not be required to attempt to prove their innocence by having to explain their actions.
Video surveillance of the custody suite — this will help to ensure necessary protection of the suspect by enforcing adherence to PACE and the Codes of Practice.
Video recording of police station interviews with suspects — this should help the court by showing exactly what took place during the interview.
Establishment of an Independent Review Body containing both lay and lawyer members — this popular recommendation is long overdue and should lead to a more independent and searching investigation of alleged miscarriages of justice.
To ensure its independence, its members must comprise a specified mixture of lay and legal representatives who should be appointed by a Parliamentary Committee and report direct to Parliament.
Pre-trial defence disclosure — this should focus the minds of the jury on what really matters in the case which they are trying by identifying the key issues before the trial.
National training in basic interviewing skills to be given to all police officers — this recognises the central role that confessions play in the police investigative strategy and the need to train officers out of the use of the ‘persuasive techniques’, witnessed by the Commission's researchers, which run the risk of producing unreliable evidence, in favour of a more open minded and even handed approach.
To keep juries for all crown court trials including fraud — the Commission's own research has shown a high level of satisfaction with the jury system and their ability to understand the evidence.
A warning to be given by the Judge about the danger of relying on uncorroborated confession evidence — this is a recognition of the inherent danger of confession evidence being unreliable and the need for the police to secure other independent evidence, whenever possible.
To abolish committal proceedings — this is a practical proposal which will cut the cost of magistrates' court hearings by eliminating the need for solicitors and defendants to attend court when it is not absolutely necessary.
We regret though that it will not allow the defence to make an early submission of no case to answer in the magistrates' court.
To introduce a more open system of sentence discounts and ask the judge what the maximum sentence could be — this recognises the need of all parties for more certainty about the options which are available and the value of saving the victim from giving evidence and the public from having to bear the cost of an unnecessary trial.
The innocent defendant must be protected though from pressure to plead guilty as a result.
The Law Society strongly opposes the Commission's recommendation that defendants be denied the right to choose trial by jury .
Whilst agreeing with the Commission about the desirability of reducing the number of crown court cases which are prepared for trial but where the defendant unexpectedly pleads guilty at the last moment, it believes that there are other ways of tackling this problem which do not pose a threat to the interests of justice.
Examples of these are the Commission's own proposals to extend privileges for unconvicted prisoners on remand to convicted prisoners awaiting sentence [which will encourage early guilty pleas]and the adjustment of legal aid fee scales to encourage more early preparatory work by counsel so that important decisions are not made at the last minute.
This decision must not be left to the magistrates to make as they are likely to base it upon pragmatic considerations only.
An allegation of dishonesty, however small the amount, is never a minor matter for a defendant and choosing the appropriate venue for a criminal trial is not just a matter of considering whether the magistrates' court has adequate sentencing powers.
There is the important question of which court is likely to produce the fairest result following a trial, and in certain cases a jury trial has a number of important procedural benefits which are more likely to produce a just result.
Whilst welcoming the recommendation that the defence has an enforceable right of access to forensic material held by the prosecution, the Law Society is concerned and surprised that it is not proposed that this will extend to unused material generally.
The Law Society also considers that the recommendation enabling judges to exclude relevant evidence in certain circumstances is capable of being abused.
There also appear to be some significant omissions from the Commission's Report, such as giving the CPS instead of the police, the power to decide who should be cautioned and charged.
This logical change would have had the effect of encouraging the diversion of more people from court proceedings.
It would also have ensured that people are dealt with in a consistent way and that the interests of the public were always taken into account when these important decisions are made.
It is surprising that the Commission has failed to recognise that if uncorroborated confessions are to be admitted in court then their accuracy must be above suspicion.
Any confession which is not tape-recorded is open to question as capable of fabrication and research conducted for the Commission has shown that most admissions/confessions are made outside the police station.
Over half of these are made either at the scene of the crime, the scene of arrest or the defendant's home.
Others are made in the police car and elsewhere.
The Law Society has reservations about the likely benefits of other of the Commission's recommendations.
In particular:—
Improved supervision and training in the supervision of investigations — whilst recognising the de-motivating ‘pressure for results’[which do not necessarily benefit the public]under which the police often work, the Law Society is concerned that unless these pressures are removed and replaced by monitoring which measures the quality of their work instead, some police officers will continue to allow their preconceptions about an individual's guilt to affect the way in which they investigate crimes, limiting their enquiries to those which bolster the prosecution case.
The Commission's recommendations for the extension of DNA profiling must be accompanied, as the Commission's own researchers proposed, by the safeguard that legal aid should be provided in all cases to a defence expert to carry out an assessment of the evidence by replicating the tests conducted by the prosecution and considering their interpretation of the results.
Improved forensic science standards and public sector laboratories equally available to the defence and prosecution — this may only go part way to ensuring an equality of arms between the prosecution and defence, which is essential in an adversarial system.
The Forensic Science Service laboratories are already open to the defence but lack credibility because they will always principally serve the prosecution and the Commission's own research shows that these scientists are used to writing reports which are designed to assist the prosecution case.
The Commission's other research findings — that much of forensic science is far from certain, capable of misinterpretation and relies upon the defence to draw out its limitations — only add to the need for the defence to have already access to real defence experts.
Ahead of the Commission's recommendations, the Law Society has taken steps to guarantee the competence of police station advice given by unqualified staff by producing a scheme which will provide comprehensive training for solicitor's representatives, followed by a test which they will have to pass in order to continue to be paid for the work by the Legal Aid Board.
The Law Society has already stepped up its drive to improve the quality of other areas of criminal defence work by publishing ‘The Magistrates’ Court — A Guide To Good Practice In The Preparation of Cases’.
The aim of this Guide is to ensure that criminal practitioners know about all the many active steps which they should take in the preparation of their client's defence.
It urges them t to press for full prosecution disclosure and advises them of the frequent need to obtain their own evaluation of prosecution scientific evidence.
For the first time, the Guide clearly defines what needs to be done by the defence at each stage of the proceedings.
It complements the other good practice guides, ‘Advising A Suspect in the Police Station’ and the ‘Crown Court — A Guide to Good Practice’.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — FRIDAY 2 JULY 1993
ADVOCACY CHOICE SET-BACK
Commenting on the report of the Advisory committee the President of the Law Society Mark Sheldon said:
‘This is a depressing day for the profession and the public.
Naturally we welcome the Committee's endorsement of our training and conduct proposals for solicitors in private practice.
But the fact remains that twenty seven months after legislation to allow clients to choose solicitors to appear for them in the higher courts came into effect, the Advisory Committee has been unable to advance the process.
Parliamentarians who believed that the machinery they had established would end the barristers’ monopoly are entitled to feel let down.
After determined opposition from the Bar, Parliament gave the Committee clear instructions to open up ‘new or better ways of providing [legal]services and a wider choice of persons providing this.’
[Section 17 Courts and Legal Services Act 1990].
Sadly the Committee has been side tracked from that task by diversionary arguments about employed lawyers in criminal cases.
Here the Committee has preferred to rely on speculation about hypothetical problems rather than on the unchallenged evidence that employed solicitors have conducted cases for years in the lower courts without complaint.
These speculations are used as justification not only for opposing more prosecution advocacy by employed lawyers, but for blocking the entire application.
Unrealistic concerns about the CPS are evidently more important to the Committee than wider client choice.
This flies in the face of the current public policy to bring about greater competition in the professions and more choice for the consumer.
Many in the legal profession hoped that the Committee would help heal the rift between the two branches of the legal profession.
It has not only failed in this, it has opened up a potential new division between private practice and employed lawyers.
I am determined to avoid such division in the solicitors' branch of the profession.
This advice will be followed shortly by advice from the Director General of Fair Trading on the competition aspects.
The Law Society will then make representations to the Lord Chancellor in support of the application, and we look forward to a favourable outcome when the Lord chancellor and the judges consider it.
We are confident that they will find nothing in the application which is ‘incompatible with the statutory objective or the general principle of the Act’.
EMBARGO: 00.01 — MONDAY 28TH JUNE 1993
LAW SOCIETY PUBLISHES JOB DESCRIPTION FOR A JUDGE
The Law Society, the professional body for 60,000 solicitors in England and Wales, has today published a draft job description and personal profile for a judge.
The job description and personal profile cover areas such as job responsibilities, knowledge and skills, special aptitudes and disposition.
They aim to put in writing in a clear and precise form — similar to job descriptions covering many thousands of other jobs around the country — the duties and qualities required to be judge.
The documents were prepared by the Law Society's Race Relations Committee to ensure that all candidates for the judiciary know what is expected of them.
If the Lord Chancellor were to adopt open and public criteria for judges along the lines proposed, it would mean that for the first time candidates would know clearly what standards were required, and performance of the judiciary could be measured against them.
This is particularly relevant not only to encourage applicants from among under-represented groups such as women and ethnic minorities who do not figure in great numbers among present appointments but also [in the light of recent controversy over sentencing decisions by judges], to encourage further consideration of the standards themselves.
Some of the items included in the job description and profile are:
compliance with the duty [mentioned in Section 95 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991]to avoid discriminating against any persons on the ground of race or sex or any other improper ground;
empathy with men, women and children from all classes, races, religions, and sexualities; and
knowledge of the variety of human nature and characteristics, the range of backgrounds and lifestyles of individuals, and the culture and lifestyle of ethnic minorities.
Commenting on the drafts, Henry Hodge, Chairman of the Law Society's Race Relations Committee, said today: ‘We consider this an important contribution to the debate on the training and suitability of people to become judges.
We realise that there will need to be additions to the job description and profile to take account of the different judicial offices such as district judge or circuit judge, but overall the job description and personal profile describe the essential qualities needed for any judge.
We would ask the Lord Chancellor to look at our contribution closely with a view to adopting it for the judiciary.’
Copies of the job description and personal profile are attached.
JOB DESCRIPTION FOR A JUDGE
PURPOSE OF JOB
To control proceedings and determine cases in the courts, both in chambers and open court.
To see that all parties get justice, are dealt with fairly and get the chance to put their cases to the best of their abilities.
To ensure that all issues presented to the court are considered as fairly and expeditiously as possible and are seen to be so.
NATURE AND SCOPE OF POSITION
The courts of the United Kingdom exist to deal with individual civil and criminal cases, according to the legal aspects and content of each particular case.
The Judge has the specific role of making final and interlocutory decisions and generally controlling the proceedings in the court in which the Judge sits.
KEY RESULT AREAS
i
Authority over the court, controlling court hearings in such a way that all concerned accept the authority of the Judge and accept the rulings made.
ii
Full comprehension of the case being heard, including absorption of all strands of information, extraction of important points and logical pursuit of relevant arguments.
iii
Understanding of relevant law and of major background issues appropriate to the case; good knowledge of basic law, a sound legal instinct and rapid absorption of new areas of law; accurate application of the law.
iv
Ensuring smooth and just running of the case by encouraging parties and witnesses to perform to the best of their abilities; and by checking unnecessary paperwork, disallowing repetition, speaking concisely, and always remaining aware of costs.
v
Providing explanations; promoting a fair hearing of the case by means of: seeking clarification, elucidating evidence and preventing inadmissible evidence, checking excessive domination by any one participant, diffusing emotion, counterbalancing bias, and maintaining high standards of courtesy; complying with the duty [mentioned in section 95 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991]to avoid discriminating against any persons on the ground of race or sex or any other improper ground.
vi
Throughout exercising a judicial approach and maintaining judicial independence; doing all that is possible to enhance the perceptions of justice of all those who use the courts, be they lawyers, litigants, defendants, witnesses or jurors.
RESPONSIBILITIES STEMMING FROM KEY AREAS
1
Dealing with interlocutory hearings.
ii
Maintaining and updating knowledge of legal developments by appropriate reading and study.
iii
Attending external events, and giving training, including giving speeches where required to do so, thereby contributing to public understanding of the judiciary.
iv
Some support of the sectors involved in the administration of justice, for example, by serving on Advisory Committee, Compensation Boards, The Parole Board, Mental Health Act Tribunal and assisting in appointing magistrates [voluntary].
v
Administrative out of court responsibilities.
JOB FACTORS/RESPONSIBILITIES
a
Planning and control — responsible for the running of each case.
Controlling the case as it is underway.
Deciding the court timetable in order to maintain a high level of attention for the duration of sittings.
Making such interlocutory orders and arbitration decisions as are likely to bring about a just, expeditious and economical disposal of the case; monitoring the progress of any case or class of case [e.g. involving children]the conduct of which the Judge considers should not be left solely to the parties and their advisers.
b
Raising with the administration any defects in, or possible improvements of, the way cases are managed in the court.
Supervising the participants in cases.
c
Deciding financial considerations — for compensation where appropriate, lawyers costs where appropriate, fines where appropriate and costs of the trial.
d
Responsibilities — for judgements and the sentencing of defendants.
COMPLEXITY
a
Making decisions of fact and law, and discretionary decisions.
b
Level of difficulty — may have to deal with extremely complex legal points and follow wide ranging and complex arguments.
c
Deciding whether to transfer a case to a higher court.
IMPACT ON OTHERS
An enabling role, required to establish co-operation between all parties.
Enormous impact on parties and on lawyers involved.
Decisions may be reported locally and/or nationally.
3 KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS
a
Education/qualifications — qualification in a legal profession required, further statutory qualifications as set out in the LCD booklet ‘Judicial Appointments’.
b
Experience — experience of the appropriate areas of the law and the working of the appropriate court/tribunal.
Further statutory experience as set out in the LCD booklet ‘Judicial Appointments’.
c
Special Skills/Abilities/Aptitudes Quick thinking and perception to understand the arguments put forward Ability to absorb all the strands of information Clear thinking to pick out the important points from the mass of facts Logical thinking to pursue and develop the relevant arguments Authority to control all participants in the case and achieve general acceptance of judgements made Integrity and fairness trusted by all Empathy with men, women and children from all classes, races, religions and sexualities Ability to come to decisions and reach a speedy judgement Courtesy
d
Other relevant knowledge — The working of the courts and the legal system The variety of human nature and characteristics The range of backgrounds and lifestyles of individuals The culture and lifestyle of ethnic minorities Self-knowledge
PROFILE OF AN INDIVIDUAL SUITABLE TO BE A JUDGE
1
ATTAINMENTS
Qualification in a legal profession Further statutory qualifications as set out in the LCD booklet ‘Judicial Appointments’
2
EXPERIENCE
Experience of the appropriate areas of the law and the working of the appropriate court/tribunal, knowledge of court practice, previous management of legal cases Further statutory and other experience as set out in the LCD booklet ‘Judicial Appointments’
3
ABILITIES
Quick thinking and perception to understand the arguments put forward Ability to absorb all the strands of information Clear thinking to pick out the important points from the mass of facts Logical thinking to pursue and develop the relevant arguments Empathy with men, women and children from all classes, races, religions and sexualities Ability to come to decisions and reach a speedy judgment.
Clarity of expression Ability to listen attentively without interrupting
4
KNOWLEDGE
The working of the courts and the legal system The variety of human nature and characteristics The range of backgrounds and lifestyles of individuals The culture and lifestyle of ethnic minorities Self-knowledge
5
SPECIAL APTITUDES
Authority to manage all participants in the trial and achieve general acceptance of judgements made Integrity and fairness trusted by all Independence of mind
6
INTERESTS
Problem solving People
7
DISPOSITION
Self control — controlling personal reactions that might threaten objectivity Calmness Slow to anger Firmness Sympathy Courtesy
8
CIRCUMSTANCES
Good health and faculties Age, location, etc depend on particular appointment — set out in the LCD booklet ‘Judicial Appointments’ No current active political involvement No criminal convictions
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — MONDAY 21 JUNE 1993
LAW SOCIETY VOWS TO CONTINUE LEGAL AID CAMPAIGN
In a judgement delivered to-day, the Divisional Court held that the Lord Chancellor's Regulations, reducing eligibility for legal aid, were lawful.
However, the Court emphasised the need in the future for the Lord Chancellor to consult the Law Society and other interested bodies before far-reaching proposals are introduced.
Commenting on the judgement, the President of the Law Society, Mark Sheldon said:—
‘We are naturally disappointed that the Court has upheld the Regulations, especially as it is already clear that the legal aid cuts are causing real hardship to a substantial number of people.
We are heartened, however, by the emphasis the Court placed on the need for proper consultation with the Law Society before such significant decisions are taken.
As Lord Justice Neill said:—
‘The Law Society has enormous knowledge and experience of the workings of the legal aid scheme.
It is difficult to imagine any body of persons which has a greater interest in the proper and fair working of legal aid…
The Law Society and their members have unrivalled knowledge and experience of what access to justice means in practice.
It is therefore to be hoped that a satisfactory dialogue can be resumed in the near future.’
The Lord Chancellor is on record as wishing to reverse the cuts in eligibility if an opportunity arose.
Our task now is to work to persuade him to reverse them as soon as possible, so that legal aid can once again serve its purpose of enabling all those unable to afford legal advice and representation to have access to justice’.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — WEDNESDAY, JUNE 16, 1993.
LAW SOCIETY OPENS REGIONAL OFFICE IN WALES
The Law Society, the professional body representing 60,000 solicitors in England and Wales, has this week opened a regional office in Wales.
Heading the new office is Ann Garrard, who has had a dual career in Welsh language broadcasting [radio and television]and housing.
She has been a J.P.
in Llanelli for three years.
The office, based at 5 Park Place, Cardiff, will serve to promote the interests of Welsh solicitors and to improve liaison between them and Law Society headquarters.
In addition, the office aims to provide training for Welsh solicitors, and to facilitate international links.
Speaking of her appointment, Ms Garrard said today: ‘This is a challenging post.
I will be working for all Welsh solicitors.
My first task will be to listen to their needs, and then translate what I have heard into positive action.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: MONDAY, JUNE 14, 1993.
‘THINK AGAIN,’ LAW SOCIETY SAYS ON PROBATE
The Law Society has today urged the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct to reconsider its approach for allowing people to obtain grants of probate for reward under the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
The Advisory Committee published a consultation document on the subject in February 1993, but the Law Society's Property and Commercial Services Committee has condemned the approach in the document as gravely inadequate and based on a fundamental misunderstanding of the implications.
In particular, the Society says that the Advisory Committee's proposals on training, ‘fitness and properness,’ regulation and compliance are seriously flawed, and contain no indemnity and compensation measures at all [unlike the equivalent structure which was established on the introduction of licensed conveyancers].
The requirements for the training of probate practitioners should be at least as rigorous as those for licensed conveyancers — two years — and the ‘fitness and properness’ should also.
The indemnity and compensation requirements should match those which apply to solicitors [indemnity cover — against negligence claims etc. — of not less than £1 million; and compensation protection — against dishonesty — unlimited].
Speaking today, the Chair of the Property and Commercial Services Committee, Paul Marsh, said; ‘Probate practitioners will expect to be appointed to wind up estates.
This will require them to deal with complex legal questions and to control large sums of money.
The protections for the public envisaged in the consultation document are completely inadequate and the Lord Chancellor's Advisory committee must think again about its approach.’
A copy of the response of the Property and Commercial Services Committee is attached.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — TUESDAY 1 JUNE 1993
NEW FACE IN LAW CAREERS PROMOTION
Timothy Toghill has joined the Law Society staff as Careers and recruitment Service Manager.
He takes over from Jenny Goddard who has held the post since 1989, and who leaves to set up a new careers service at the College of Law.
Tim Toghill joins the Law Society from the Association of Accounting Technicians [AAT], a professional body which trains support staff for chartered accountants.
During the six years he spent as the AAT's Public Relations Officer, their membership rose from 30,000 to 100,000.
‘My move from accountancy to law will be both a challenge and a change of emphasis’ said Mr Toghill, ‘I am aware of the present employment difficulties in the profession.
Addressing these will be a priority.’
Mr Toghill has a degree in English Literature, and his career has been in PR and marketing, and latterly in careers work and the promotion of membership for the AAT.
In his new role he will be based at the Law Society Shop in the Strand.
‘The Shop is the public face of the Law Society and it's in an excellent position from which to put the message across,’ he said, ‘I am looking forward to becoming involved with a new profession.’
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE — TUESDAY, MAY 25, 1993.
LAW SOCIETY TAKES LORD CHANCELLOR TO COURT ON LEGAL AID ELIGIBILITY CUTS
The Law Society's challenge to the Lord Chancellor's cuts in eligibility for legal aid is to be heard in the High Court today [26th May].
The Law Society argues that the cuts are unlawful because they are inconsistent with the purpose of legal aid —‘ensuring that people of small and moderate means receive access to proper legal advice, and to justice’— and because there was no proper consultation before the decision to make the cuts were taken.
On the Government's own figures, 37% of households — between 12m and 14m adults — will potentially be affected by the proposals, either becoming ineligible for legal aid altogether, or being eligible only on payment of a contribution they are unlikely to be able to afford.
The Government has itself predicted that the number of Legal Aid Certificates issued this year will drop from 410,000 to 287,000 which means that over 30% of those who should have received legal aid will be deprived of access to justice.
It is already clear that the cuts are having a devastating effect on people needing legal advice.
Solicitors throughout the country have sent the Law Society examples of cases where people in desperate need of legal advice are no longer eligible for help, but cannot possibly afford to pay for it themselves.
A brief description of a selection of cases is attached.
John Appleby, Chairman of the Law Society's Courts and Legal Services Committee, commented:—
‘It is already clear that — as the Law Society and a wide variety of voluntary groups predicted — the cuts in legal aid eligibility are having a devastating effect on individuals in need of help.
The court action we are bringing is the last chance to stop these damaging cuts.
If it fails, only the very rich and the very poor will have access to justice’.
ANNEX
The Law Society has received many examples from practitioners across the country, of the detrimental impact of the eligibility changes on individual clients since the 12th April.
A selection of these case histories are reproduced below:
EXAMPLE 1
A 13 year old boy from Kent described as ‘borderline autistic’ reported to his mother that he had been buggered by another pupil at his residential school.
His mother wishes to consider taking proceedings against the education authority.
Before applying for legal aid, the solicitors consider that it will be necessary to see the video of the boy's interview with the police and social services, and to obtain and consider the social service records.
It may also be necessary to obtain a psychological profile of the boy.
The family have three children and a gross income of £217.00 After deduction of allowances, the mother's weekly disposable income is £78.50 and she does not qualify for advice and assistance.
Before the changes, she would have been eligible upon payment of a contribution of £5.00.
EXAMPLE 2
A Kent social worker wishes to consult solicitors about an assault on her by a client two years ago.
She is now unable to work and receives benefits, including invalidity benefit, amounting to approximately £90.00 per week.
She has no dependants and is now ineligible for advice and assistance.
Previously, she would have had a contribution of £19.00.
EXAMPLE 3
This client from the West Midlands wishes to petition for divorce on the ground of her husband's unreasonable behaviour.
She has communication difficulties and is unlikely to be able to deal with the matter herself.
She has an income of £65 per week.
EXAMPLE 4
The client is a woman from Devon who has Multiple Sclerosis and is separated from her husband.
She has one dependent child aged 16.
Her income recently increased to:— Invalidity Benefit £77.00 Disability Living Allowance £30.00 Child Benefit £16.05 Total Income £123.90 Income for Green Form Scheme £93.90 Less deduction for child £26.45 Total Income £123.90 Income for Green Form Scheme £93.90 Less deduction for child £26.45 Leaving total weekly disposable income £67.45
Her income support entitlement ended when she obtained maintenance at £5.00 per week but only one payment has been made this year.
The client was not able to sign a green form to obtain advice as she was not in receipt of income support but has been advised to make a claim for income support since she is not receiving the maintenance.
Her entitlement to income support is: Personal Allowance £44.00 Child Allowance £26.75 Family Premium 9.65 Disability Premium £18.45 Total £98.85
The care component of the disability living allowance is not taken into account for income support.
The client receives a mobility component which is paid direct to Motability for her car.
The client originally attended the appointment to seek a divorce and sort out her problems with maintenance.
EXAMPLE 5
The client is a man from Devon aged 40 who is registered disabled and in receipt of invalidity benefit of £56.10 and higher rate addition of £11.95.
He has a total income of £68.05, although housing benefit is paid direct.
The client is disabled as a result of brain damage when a child and was unable to work after problems with his back which are getting progressively worse.
The client has difficulty communicating and understanding.
He was seeking advice with regard to the Council's refusal to rehouse him in suitable ground floor accommodation.
The Council refused to rehouse because the tenancy was held in joint names with his ex-wife who has disappeared.
Considerable efforts have been made to try and trace her.
A brief calculation showed that if the client is entitled to severe disability premium he would be entitled to income support but could not sign a green form to give this initial advice or to act on the other matter.
EXAMPLE 6
This client from Somerset consulted a solicitor on 15th April.
He wished to be advised about the possibility of seeking compensation for an assault by his neighbour, for which he had received hospital treatment.
He is married with a 5 year old child.
He receives invalidity benefit of £105 per week and the family receive £10 per week child benefit.
He is therefore assessed to have a disposable income of £74.95 per week and is ineligible for advice and assistance under the Green Form Scheme.
Had he consulted a solicitor the previous week, before the regulations came into force, he would have been eligible without contribution.
EXAMPLE 7
A student teacher from Essex living on a grant equivalent to £65.00 per week sought advice on personal injury claim following a road traffic accident.
As a student the client is not required to pay tax and the whole of her weekly grant of £65.00 had to be taken into account therefore placing her outside the Green Form limit.
EXAMPLE 8
Two London women, both with dependent children, sought advice to divorce their abusive husbands.
Their disposable incomes amounted to £65.92 and £64.86 respectively.
They are both paying mortgages.
Prior to 12th April, both women would have been eligible for free advice.
This is now unavailable to them and neither woman can afford to seek advice on a private basis.
EXAMPLE 9
A single man from Preston facing serious criminal charges has been ordered to pay £5.25 per week towards his legal aid for the duration of the case.
His sole income is invalidity benefit of £65.75 per week.
The client is not voluntarily engaging in these proceedings but as he strongly denies the charges he has no option but to defend himself.
The case, because of its serious nature, is to go before the Crown Court and is likely to be subject to considerable delay due to the inefficiencies of the court listing procedures.
The client has no control over these factors and yet for the duration of the case he will be required to continue to pay the assessed contribution from his invalidity benefit.