

Oil magazines in gold strike
Publications serving the oil industry won two of the three gold awards in the Editing for Industry competition, announced at the BAIE annual convention in Torquay.
Shell World, a 48-page glossy covering more than 100 countries, took the top prize for magazines, and Current Account, aimed at BP's financial experts in six countries, was voted best newsletter or newsmagazine.
The third gold award, for newspapers, went to Cable & Wireless World, a full-colour tabloid for employees of the international telecommunications company.
The awards were presented by entertainer Roy Castle as the climax to the Editing for Industry dinner at the convention.
The names of the gold winners were not known until the judges' scores, which had been sealed, were opened and added up on the night.
Castle, who introduced himself as ‘that other castle almost destroyed by smoke’ as a reference to his battle against lung cancer, handed out 49 certificates in all — to class winners as well as the gold winners.
The Shell award was picked up by editor Richard Felton and the Cable & Wireless prize by editor Alan Jones, who the previous month had drawn praise for his newspaper from the Prime Minister.
But Brigid Cleary, editor of Current Account, was unable to attend.
Her award was handed over to Suzanne Peck, of Barkers Trident Communications, the agency that designs the publication.
Awards chairman Alan Peaford told the audience at Torquay that 1,266 entries, the second highest so far, had been received for the 1992 contest, from every continent except Antarctica.
He said the new judging format, in which panels of experts choose class winners from a short-list, had never been fairer.
There had been a record of only three complains — two of them from his wife Jane, who administers the BPCC-sponsored competition.
Catchline's new catch is Mitchell of Commpress
BAIE member Andy Mitchell has left Edinburgh agency Commpress, where he was publishing director, to become an account manager with Catchline PR in Kirkcaldy.
His clients will include Fife Enterprise and the Scottish Centre for Falconry.
He will also be developing new business.
Mitchell trained as a journalist on The Scotsman and worked for the Scottish Tourist Board, Apex Publishing in Oman and British Gas Scotland before setting up Elliot Mitchell Communications, which later merged with Commpress.
Two out of three prefer company newspaper to the notice board
A survey of Dixons Group employees has revealed that nearly two thirds of them get most of their information about the company from the staff newspaper, Frontline, rather than from notice boards or staff briefings.
Frontline received praise from its readers in the independent survey.
Three-quarters said its design appealed to them and 92 per cent found it easy to read.
As well as asking readers for their opinions on the newspaper's existing style and content, the survey also sought views on how it could be improved.
Some of the suggestions — including a crossword, a staff letters page and a health and safety column — have now been incorporated in the paper.
BAIE member Bernadette Mayhew, of Surrey-based Stuart Hyslop Editorial Services, who has been responsible for producing Frontline since its launch four years ago, said: ‘We are delighted with the results of the survey.
It's so important to get the contents right.
‘The findings clearly demonstrate the real value to a company of an informative and well designed staff newspaper, and now that we have added to that by taking some of the readers’ suggestions on board, we can be absolutely certain that Frontline has a style and format most staff find appealing.’
Frontline, produced quarterly, has 14,000 readers, mainly Dixons staff in Britain, through copies are also sent to Silo, the company's American subsidiary, and to City analysts and stockbrokers.
Freeman is free after 31 years in the gas industry
Rex Freeman (above), British Gas North Western's PR manager, has retired after 31 years in the gas industry.
He began work as a journalist on the Melton Times in his home town, Melton Mowbray, and then worked in Coventry before joining the West Midlands Gas Board in 1962 to edit employee publications.
He moved to the Wales Gas Board in 1974 as PR manager and to North Western's Altrincham headquarters three years later.
Freeman, a BAIE member, initiated British Gas's sponsorship of the Bobby Charlton sports school, which has enabled 10,000 youngsters all over Britain to receive free tuition in a wide range of sports over the past four years.
He is a keen follower of football and cricket and has recently been made an honorary vice-president of Altrincham FC.
Burbedge ‘falls foul’ of Courage re-focus
Award-winning journalist John Burbedge has been made redundant after 13 years with the brewing giant, Courage.
He says he has ‘fallen foul of corporate re-focussing ‘, which sees the company concentrating on its public affairs activities on brands PR and sponsorship.
Burbedge has been a class winner in both the video and newsmagazine categories of the Editing for Industry awards, as well as winning awards for excellence of internal and external newspapers and certificates of merit for special publications and internal newspapers.
He was a member of the committee that organised this year's BAIE convention in Torquay, where he hosted an open forum on layout and design and delighted members by staging a tasting of Courage ales.
He began work as a journalist with the Reading Newspaper Group, where he ‘chased fire engines, attended excessively long council meetings and was trained in various styles of writing, layout and subbing’.
After joining Courage, he used his editing experience on in-house newspapers and magazines and branched out into video news and promotional programmes.
He claims once to have ‘dusted the fake snow off Samantha Fox's assets’.
He intends to set up as a PR and communications consultant, freelance writer and designer.
OBE ‘an honour for Navy News’
John Tucker, a member of BAIE and editor of Navy News for the past 16 years, was made an OBE in the Queen's birthday honours.
The newspaper, produced by the Royal Navy in Portsmouth, has won more than 50 awards since 1977 in the Editing for Industry competition, including 10 class prizes and 19 awards of excellence.
Tucker, who is due to retire in the autumn, said: ‘I regard the honour as a tribute to the work of Navy News staff past and present, and I'm particularly proud of the fact that ours has always been virtually an in-house production.
‘We have also had excellent services from our printers, Portsmouth Publishing and Printing, for nearly a quarter of a century.’
Navy News is widely read both inside and outside the service and achieved a circulation of 100,000 in the mid-1980s.
John Tucker worked on the Wiltshire Times, the Evening Chronicle, Bath, and the Somerset Guardian, which he edited, before moving to PR and advertising in the gas industry, including the Sou'Wester, the house journal of the South Western Gas Board.
His first professional contact with the Royal Navy came when he joined Navy News in 1969.
His first experience of the services was National Service in the Royal Air Force.
Smith means business
BAIE member Harvey Smith (right), who edits the Institute of Public Relations Journal, has won the South East PR Means Business competition.
His entry described his part as a PR consultant to a firm of paper merchants in persuading designers and print buyers to specify 100 per cent recycled paper for colour publications.
The awards were organised by the Home Counties South group of the IPR and presented by explorer Sir Ranulph Fiennes.
CONVENTION AFTERMATH
LETTERS
Editing awards: case of jobs for the boys?
An open exchange of views between the marketing director of Forward Publishing and the chairman of the BAIE Editing for Industry committee, Alan Peaford
Dear Mr Peaford,
It is with great dismay that I am writing to you following the presentation of the Editing for Industry awards in Torquay.
I found it most questionable that Forward Publishing, having won fifteen awards — including a class winner — was not mentioned once throughout the whole ceremony.
Had it been the form that all agencies were not mentioned, this may have been acceptable, but to be forced to listen to a litany of other agency names — not least Barkers Trident — without a single mention of our own was deplorable.
This was further aggravated by the continual irrelevant mention of the various printers of our publications.
We, not the printers, paid a substantial sum to enter the awards.
While I would not seek to question the decision of the judges of a number of the awards (although you may note for the record, however, that there were a lot of eyebrows raised in the trade by the comments on and judging of Helpware magazine, which won both contract title of the year and runner-up to best consumer launch of the year in the 1992 Publishing Awards), I would like to question the appropriateness of the chairman of the judges presiding over a ceremony where his own company won the most number of awards.
While you will doubtless be quick to retaliate about the scrupulous judging procedure, please note that my observation was about the ‘appropriateness’ of the situation, particularly to outsiders.
It smacks of jobs for the boys.
If my comments appear to be churlish, perhaps you would like to attend next year having won as many awards as you did and suffer the embarrassment of being approached by clients and peers to be asked sympathetically whether you had won anything.
Such negative marketing does more harm than good to our credibility, and if it happens again next year, we will not attend.
Had we not spent even more money on the BAIE Awards this year by advertising on the inside front cover of the magazine, we would not have received a single name check for 15 awards during the whole evening and in all the attendant publicity.
Having won more than 75 awards in the past five years, we might also have been asked to nominate a judge or two.
Yet we have never been approached.
Is there a good reason for this?
Plainly by the defensive introduction that you have written in the results publication, we are not the only people wondering whether the BAIE is nothing more than a self-serving cabal.
As well as a personal response, I would like this letter published in the next BAIE News.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Fairest and best contest of its kind
Dear Emma,
All winners of certificates and awards were written to individually asking them to check the details on their forms as this was the information that would be used in the presentations.
Several companies who had previously written ‘in-house’ for the designer changed it to the name of an individual; some agencies changed the name of the individual to that of their agency.
Forward Publishing did not bother to reply or make any changes to their entry form.
As a result, the information read out at the ceremony was the information used on the certificate which, in turn, was the information given by Forward Publishing on their entry form.
The appropriateness of the comments is not one for the committee since the committee has no responsibility for the judges, their selection or their comments.
However, this may support comments seen elsewhere that BAIE publications are at least as good as, if not better than, many in the commercial sector.
On the question of the nomination of judges, it is open for anybody to recommend a judge.
This should be done via Sevenoaks.
Agency staff or their principals are not asked to judge classes, with the exception of the solo editors' class, from which agency personnel are barred.
I would remind you that contrary to the comments made in your letter, I am not the chairman of the judges, simply the chairman of the committee that has the responsibility of organising the event that surrounds the judging and MC (unpaid) for the awards dinner.
The comments in the results brochure are hardly defensive.
On the contrary, I found it fairly positive to announce that complaints were down to one (now doubled); that in recession 1,266 entries were judged; that entries came from all over the world; that the system had changed in direct response to comments made by members.
There is certainly no defensiveness nor any sour grapes from me or any of the Editing for Industry committee.
You might be interested to note that a member of Forward's staff had been on the committee for two years but was, unfortunately, unable to stay on this year due to pressure of work.
As always, we would welcome other volunteers prepared to devote a couple of weeks' work a year, unpaid and unthanked, to help make this competition the fairest and best of its kind — particularly for those who read the correspondence.
Three reasons why Peaford continues
Having looked at the growing success of the Editing for Industry awards and noted the fact that Alan Peaford was due to step down after a three-year stint in the chair, I decided to ask him to continue in the post for my year of office.
Conflict of interest is something that potentially faces all the people involved in running the Association.
Last year, in fact, I abstained on a couple of issues voted on at Council.
As regards Editing for Industry, I am satisfied the management structure and the people involved ensure that it is far and above board — I would not wish to be associated with anything that damaged my reputation or that of the Association.
Following this correspondence, if more  wish to become involved in running the Association, that is great news; after all, it is your Association.
It takes energy, commitment and enthusiasm above and beyond the call of work duties.
Those are just three of the reasons I am pleased Alan Peaford has agreed to chair Editing for Industry for a fourth term.
Appalled by the level of noise
I write to say how appalled I was at the bad manners of BAIE members at the Editing for Industry awards dinner in Torquay.
They should be ashamed that their concentration couldn't even last an hour.
I count being courteous as part of being professional — and the noise level of delegates and their guests chatting over the awards announcements was at best discourteous to other guests and at worse downright rude to the awards organisers.
This team — led by Alan Peaford — puts incredible effort into the organisation of one of the Association's events which has a high public profile, and which incidentally brings some welcome funds into the BAIE coffers.
Before the event, I had debated whether to bring my director to the event, to reinforce the quality image of the Association which he in effect supports by sponsoring me.
I'm glad I didn't — it would only have shown us in a very discreditable light.
CONVENTION REPORTS
Consultants win vote of ‘waste of money’
Consultants are not a waste of money, it was decided by an overwhelming majority at one of the liveliest debates of the 1993 BAIE convention.
Delegates attending the session in Torquay were asked to sit on the right-hand side of the room if they were in favour of the motion and on the left if they were against it.
Only one member crossed the floor during the discussion and only two or three others indicated afterwards that they had been persuaded to change their minds.
Steve Knight, of Railnews, who proposed the motion, said consultants were not just a waste of money, but also a waste of time, a waste of resources and a drain on the whole of British industry.
‘Consultants are like high court judges,’ he said.
‘They are not of this world.
And some of them spend more on lunch than the workers get in wages in an entire week.’
‘Gutless management is one reason why consultants are flourishing,’ said Knight.
‘We have managers who have been promoted beyond their means.
They are prolific meeting-goers who can't do the job themselves and some of them will become consultants later in their careers.’
Playing
Another reason was that people had to be seen to be playing the management game.
‘The latest quirk is to bring in a consultant to talk about quality management,’ he complained.
‘But what on earth is quality management and how is it any different from ordinary management?
If there is a difference, ordinary managers should have been sacked by now.
‘All the time your bosses and peers are listening to consultants, they are not listening to you.
You know what is best for your department or your industry — every time you hand that responsibility to a consultant, you destroy your own credibility.
Consultants cannot do anything you can't do yourself.’
Evan Ivey, of Aspen Business Communications, who opposed the motion, said the music hall vision of consultants was that they were ‘slick, arrogant, expensive and crap’.
But the truth was different.
‘Provided you select the right consultants, they can bring knowledge, experience and temporary additional resources to your company,’ he said.
Ivey suggested that consultants were a way of expanding available time without incurring an increase in fixed costs.
‘A consultant should be able to help you because, unlike you, he has faced the same problems elsewhere,’ he said.
‘Choose your consultant carefully, manage him properly and benefit from his help and advice.’
From the floor, Norman Woodhouse pointed out that there were good consultants and bad consultants.
‘I don't recognise the consultant described by Steve Knight,’ he said.
Bob Gooding owned up to using consultants such as a doctor and a lawyer and complained the debate had dealt with ‘parody portraits of people’.
He was supported by David Buckley, who didn't consider using a consultant accountant as a weakness of management but as a strength.
John Burbedge believed money was the key to the problem.
‘Consultants charge too much,’ he said.
‘I have had consultants who have done a full cowboy job and then charged me £25.000.’
Gooding joins the Fellows
Former BAIE national chairman Bob Gooding has been elected a Fellow of the Association.
He was presented with his Fellowship certificate at the annual convention by president Barry Istid, along with two other long-serving members whose election as Fellows had already been announced — typographical consultant Tom Dawson and former BAIE News editor Valerie Shepard, who now edits BS's international employee magazine, Shield.
Gooding, chairman of London agency Chandler Gooding, joined BAIE in 1973.
He became chairman of London and Home Counties region and a Council member in 1986.
He was national vice-chairman in 1990–91 before serving as chairman the following year at a time of great change in the Association.
Scottish stalwart wins '93 Chairman's award
Scottish stalwart Ann Packard has received the 1993 Chairman's Award for services to BAIE.
Retiring chairman Phillipa Burrow told the Association's annual dinner at Torquay that Packard had made a significant contribution, both regionally and nationally, to the Association's educational, training and personal development issues.
‘Besides being a tower of strength in education,’ said Burrow, ‘she has also made a systematic and significant contribution to our membership recruitment drives in collating more than 700 names and addresses of potential members from strategically important organisations.’
The award had been instituted by the late John Fenton in 1983–84, and Ann Packard joined ‘an illustrious peerage’ of holders —
Regional honours go North
The regional award went to the Northern region — for its good programme of events, good communications and for tackling difficult issues.
Phillipa Burrow told Northern members at the dinner: ‘You have under-promised and over-delivered a varied and interesting programme of activity for members in your area.
‘You have kept members in the picture through your excellency quarterly newsletter, Northern Newsround.
And you have incorporated visits to the controversial THORP complex at Sellafield and had the USDAW chief executive talk to BAIE members over lunch.’
In addition, Burrow said the region had been well led.
‘We felt Terry Chaplin had done a good job over two years and that the continuity was reflected in your activities,’ she said.
PROFILE
Whizz kid takes the driving seat
Ken Hunter, the youngest national chairman in BAIE history, has two main aims during his year in office: to listen to what members say and to give them value for money.
‘We have to take notice of people,’ he says.
‘We have to listen to what they want out of the Association.
‘My one motto or guiding principle for the year is value for members in all we do.
If something doesn't improve the lot of the membership, then we should stop doing it.’
Hunter sees his job as leading the Association along a road that has already been clearly charted by the President's Conference two years ago and by the strategy review seminar last year.
‘There is a danger,’ he says, ‘that with the chairman sitting for only one year, we could end up with short-termism.
But I intend to drive the strategy that is already in place and leave my successor to drive it even further.’
Hunter wants to see BAIE become a more professional organisation, encouraging quality and good standards.
And he believes that the introduction of a third-party examination accreditation such as the National Vocational Qualification is essential to the Association's development.
‘We will then start to be recognised by the people who specify job descriptions and conditions of employment,’ he says.
His other priorities include a review of the bureaucracy of BAIE's committee structure, getting the Association's finances on a firmer footing after a period of change, and creating greater influence over leading lights in the business world.
Hunter succeeded Phillipa Burrow as chairman at the Torquay convention, less than two weeks after his 30th birthday and only 10 years after leaving college in his native Edinburgh with a Higher National Diploma in communications studies.
He says he didn't have a clue what he wanted to do when he left school.
‘I worked at the Bank of Scotland on a three-week attachment in my fifth year at school,’ he recalls.
‘My mother thought it was a safe job but it just wasn't for me.’
He thought, briefly, about the police and the Fleet Air Arm, but when he was halfway through the sixth form, he discovered communications studies.
‘The initial attraction was advertising,’ he says, ‘and particularly the way it achieved communication in such a slick way.
But when I was at Napier College, I found myself drifting more towards business communications and PR.’
While he was at college, he got a Saturday job with Austin Reed, the men's outfitters, ‘which gave me experience of a real shop-floor environment — right at the front line of customer service.
It was never going to be a career for me but kept me in beer money and taught me about how to deal with the public.’
His first job in his chosen profession was with Ferranti as a publicity assistant under John Ford, a former BAIE national chairman, who got him to join the Association.
Three years later, in 1987, Hunter moved to the Royal Dockyard at Rosyth, which had been  contractorised —‘that practically means privatised’— only a month earlier.
As the PR officer in charge of internal affairs, he launched an eight-time-a-year publication for employees, called Profile, which won him an Editing for Industry Certificate of Merit as a solo editor.
Hunter had by now become one of BAIE's leading lights in Scotland.
He had been on the committee of the Scottish region, as it was ten called, since 1984 —‘they flung me on as naive new blood’—— and was vice-chairman for two years before becoming chairman at the tender age of 25.
As a regional chairman, he had a seat on the national — or UK as the Scots prefer it — BAIE Council, which he found a strange experience.
‘I remember going to my first meeting,’ he recalls.
‘I only said four words —‘I am Ken Hunter.’
By my second meeting, I was up to 20 words.
Now you can't keep me quiet.’
Scotland was about to lose its whizz kid, however, for Hunter succumbed to a bit of crafty recruiting at the Jersey convention in 1989 and migrated to England with his wife Lesley to join BP Oil UK as a senior journalist at Hemel Hempstead, editing Distributor magazine and acting as deputy editor of BP Oil News.
He was made redundant at the end of last year but before going out of the door for the final time, he had been offered a job as employee communications manager with Eastern Electricity in Ipswich.
‘It's a very challenging environment,’ he says.
‘Utilities such as electricity have a boring image but scratch the surface and it's fascinating.
‘I'm now going through what I experienced at Rosyth, except that Eastern Electricity had been privatised three years before I joined whereas the dockyard was  contractorised only a month before.’
He seems to be coping amazingly well with the dual demands of a new.
high-profile job and the leadership of a professional association, which might have proven too much for a lesser, or older, man.
But then incompatible interests never did bother our new hero.
He professes to be an atheist but met his wife at the Youth Fellowship at a church in Edinburgh.
And although he was brought up in the Protestant culture of Scotland's capital, he is a  fervent supporter of Celtic, the club of Roman Catholic persuasion in the hostile territory of Glasgow.
Raising the gold standard
SUSAN NOWAK looks at the winners of the top three awards in the Editing for Industry competition
Alan Jones joined Cable & Wireless to relaunch its worldwide employee Recorder as a whole new product with a new title.
It burst from its chrysalis in February 1992 as Cable & Wireless World, swiftly to reach such a high standard that the third edition, published in July, is a gold award winner.
‘The remit was to make it brighter and newsier, to appeal to as many employees as possible at all levels,’ says Jones, the editorial manager.
‘We wanted a more newsy, tabloid format but it couldn't be too much like the Mirror.’
With both Dame Edna and Lord Young on the front page, it might be described as finding the middle ground.
Response over the first year to the new look has been ‘overwhelmingly positive — if the yardstick is a demand for the paper.
We've seen an increase in orders from business units around the world and also in information supplied and requests for inclusion.’
The redesign contract was won by Pressgang, a publications company where MD Bob Ireland and designer James Parks both worked on a concept chosen by Alan Jones and C & W communications group manager David Baird over other competitive pitches.
Pressgang use an  Apple Mac system to its most flexible effect with plenty of colourful graphics making year-end figures easy to grasp in a pull-out annual report.
Publication dates for the eight-pager, which comes out around nine times a year, are flexible, to encompass major events or announcements.
The story count is high — page three of the winning issue positively buzzed with 11 stories, and eight were crammed on to the back, which is as it should be in a conglomerate all about communication.
C & w World has to pull together a huge number of companies under the umbrella of the parent group, including Hong Kong Telecom and an 80 per cent share of Mercury in the UK.
Twenty-six thousand copies are published in English — second language of many of the readers — 16,000 in Chinese.
It is distributed to employees in 50 countries worldwide, finding its way to unlikely corners like the Falklands, and to 14 separate companies in the Caribbean alone.
It is a true employee newspaper, mixing weighty news like enhanced performance despite recession and acquisitions in Russian telecommunications, with the top sales and service people living it up in Hawaii and a picture story on the golfing achievements of the directors' butler.
‘We're always on the look-out for stories of good performance and good practice somewhere in the group,’ says Jones, who writes all the copy in a job taking him on a growing number of foreign assignments.
‘The newspaper is part of an integrated programme of international communications.
We also produce a quarterly video and various one-offs.’
Small but perfectly put together — that's sassy Current Account, a compact A4 publication distributed three or four times a year to a circulation below 1,000, which might well make it the least-read of any of the winners in the Editing for Industry competition.
But what it's readers lack in numbers, they make up in intellect, for the newsy magazine goes out to BP's elite financial wizards of many different nationalities scattered across six countries from Singapore to the USA — share-dealers boosting BP's revenue on the world's money markets, or making multi-million pound acquisitions and disposals.
‘That's one of the main reasons for having the newsletter in the first place, because they're all working to the same end, but it isn't always easy to know what they're up to,’ says Current Account editor Brigid Cleary.
She describes her readers' profession as ‘dynamic and exciting’, all of which presents her with the problem of writing content erudite yet lively, weighty but not pompous.
Many of the articles are submitted by the readers themselves.
‘I had to learn the gentle art of sensitive snubbing — jargon can be a problem,’ she says.
‘When I started, I erred too far the wrong way and was massacring copy.’
Current Account got fulsome praise from the judge, who was especially impressed by the news content of the September 1992 issue — and the presence of bad news (32 redundancies in America) as the front-page splash.
‘A strong news sense lifts Current Account to the ranks of the best’ was the comment.
The judged also liked the look of it: ‘Design, layout and typography give the publication a stylish, orderly look.
It is easy to read.’
Michael Robertson is the designer, one of Cleary's colleagues at Barkers Trident Communications, where Current Account is produced along with many other companies' publications.
Cleary herself works on some of the others, in particular London Electricity's Livewire; the firm had two other publications among the class winners — BP Oil News and Landscape.
Singled out for praise was the use of a cartoon Michelangelo across the centre spread to illustrate a feature headlined ‘Invest in your future’— all about Personal Development Plans.
The character achieved ‘a humane explanation of the highly commendable but somewhat dull PDPs’, said the judge.
Cartoonist Christine O'Leary, who used to work at Barkers Trident and is now freelance, gets to work on other pages with graphics and illustrations.
A special feature on the Trade Finance team (they assess whether credit risk countries are likely to cough up for BP oil they have bought) written by freelancer Mike Martin got a separate award from the judges.
‘I worked very closely with the clients who see two sets of proofs,’ says Cleary, 28, a history graduate who started out in the antiques world but didn't find the challenge she expected and joined Barkers Trident as an editorial assistant.
From the teeming slums of Rio de Janeiro to hurricane-blasted Florida and Louisiana…almost anywhere can expect coverage by the aptly named Shell World.
It was Rio and the children of a Brazilian shanty town that provided the dramatic black-and-white cover to the October 1992 issue of the 48-page glossy that won the gold award for magazines.
Editor Richard Felton, who writes a large proportion of the magazine himself, flew out to report on Shell Brazil's initiative to fund sport and dance programmes for the street kids.
The result was a stunning 10-page spread that National Geographic might carry with pride.
Black-and-white photos of slums were starkly juxtaposed with colour images of children taking part in the Shell Olympics and musical events.
The following passage shows the quality of Felton's writing: ‘It is, perhaps, the problems of Brazil's street children which gave the media its most poignant images in the background coverage of the Rio conference.
It was not hype or cleverly taken pictures designed for ‘sophisticated’ audiences, sated daily by instant coverage of war and disaster; the problem is real enough — and in real terms, it very nearly defies description.
For poverty is by no means passive; it gives rise to hopelessness; to a general cheapening of essential values; and to crime in all its forms.’
October 92 was a particularly ‘caring’ edition of Shell World — equally mouthwatering photography illustrated a crisis relief centre set up by Shell Oil's staff and dealers after Hurricane Andrew had devastated huge areas of the United States, and young entrepreneurs cheerfully at work on the Shell-initiated Livewire youth enterprise programme in Britain.
The magazine covers any issue relating to Shell companies and employees in more than 100 countries worldwide.
The winning issue carried an impressive number of topics from six pages of news items, to Thai Shell's centenary and a meaty, commissioned article by political economist Susan Strange on corporate glue; it's the only corporate publication within the Shell group at a public level,’ says Felton, adding that over the five years of his editorship, Shell has allowed him ‘an awful lot of space’.
There's a fair amount of white space in the magazine, too; freelance art editor John Hawkins is jointly named in the award.
Felton declines to comment on the cost of producing a magazine lavish enough to make many editors green with envy, but says Shell underwrites 50 to 70 per cent of it.
The rest is met by a cover-charge of £2.50 an issue to around 40,000 subscribers worldwide.
‘You can trace its history back to 1925 in various titles, and then it probably was paid for almost 100 per cent,’ says Felton.
The only other staffer at London's Shell Centre is editorial assistant George Phillips, who has to divide his time between Shell World and other publications.
‘We're quite a tight team,’ concludes Felton.
CONVENTION TECHNICALITIES
COMPUTER UPDATE
Camera without a film steals the show
For me, the star of the BAIE convention was undoubtedly the Kodak DCS200 digital camera used by Ian Billinghurst.
Instead of beavering away in his bathroom with developer, fixer and other evil brews, he was able to take his shots, plug the camera into the Macintosh DTP kit being used by Alistair Smith and Gill Twyman to produce the convention newspaper and — hey presto!— his prints were on screen.
The grin on Ian's face said it all, but what is the DCS200 and what does your £7,000 buy?
The DCS200 is built around a Nikon 801 35mm professional camera, which means that conventional Nikon lenses can be used.
The difference lies in how the image is captured.
Conventionally, the 35mm film would run across the back of the camera, being exposed to light as the shutter is opened.
In the DCS200, the film has been replaced by a single CCD (Charged Coupled Device) chip.
This is similar to the chip you will find in a video camcorder, though the DCS is capable of much higher definition.
The CCD is actually composed of thousands of light sensitive elements (pixels) laid out in a grid pattern — 1,542 horizontally by 1,012 vertically.
When the photograph is taken, the chip converts the light into its red, green and blue values and stores the shot on its internal 200Mb hard disk memory.
Up to 50 images can be stored at once and if that is not enough, you can always transfer the images to an Apple Powerbook to make more space — a bit of a culture shock for anyone used to filling up a camera bag with film and dashing off to the nearest photo lab.
To use the pictures, just plug the SCSI (pronounced scuzzy) port of your Apple Macintosh and call the images up.
Once transferred, the (4.5Mb) full-colour images can be retouched, enhanced, colour corrected or otherwise messed around using Adobe Photoshop, saved as TIFF files and then placed in DTP.
There is no reason why the system shouldn't work with an IBM PC, as long as you have a SCSI card, a 24-bit colour card and monitor, an external removable 44Mb disk drive and appropriate software, such as Aldus Photostyler.
We are talking serious IBMs here — corporate PS/2 model 50 users can forget it without upgrades.
In use, the camera handles rather like a bulky 35mm unit, with a maximum shooting rate of one image every three seconds.
It can pretend it is using colour film from 50 to 400 ASA, which will keep most happy snappers occupied, but doesn't really lend itself to low-light photography or sports.
The viewfinder is blanked off to show a smaller image.
I imagine this as because the CCD isn't as big as the original 35mm image area.
This does cause a problem in that you need shorter focal length lenses to obtain the same effect.
That is, a DCS200 fitted with a 28mm (normally wide-angle) lens will produce images that look as though they have been shot on a 50mm (standard) lens.
This is not a great problem unless you are heavily into fish-eye effects with lenses in the sub-24mm range.
The other problem concerns technology's old enemy — batteries.
The DCS200 uses rechargeables, which will last only a few hours per charge.
An AC adaptor is supplied, but I can't see any photographer taking too kindly to being tied to a mains outlet.
The images used in the convention newspaper were rather coarse, due to the limitations of the laser printer being used to produce the printer.
I have seen full-colour prints from the DCS200 that are virtually on a part with conventional 35mm images.
Unfortunately, you need either an expensive Kodak Digital Image Recorder to get prints or process the images through DTP software to get colour separations, cromalins or prints.
All in all, the DCS200 is a fine tool and evidence of how quickly technology is moving.
For a daily paper (given that the images can be transferred down a phone line) I see it as a Godsend.
For industrial editors, with our usual slower turnaround times, the DCS200 might be seen as an expensive toy.
Either way, full marks to Kodak and Nikon for producing the goods and Ian Billinghurst for taking the excellent shots....
How BAIE News got the pictures
Three of the pictures in this issue of BAIE News were taken by Ian Billinghurst on the DCS200, but a lot of work was needed before they could be transferred from the computer system at the BAIE convention to the system at Hardman Press Services.
Firstly, I used AppleShare to connect my Powerbook to Design Publications' Quadra in Torquay.
Then a selection of images were transferred across, ready for the trip back to Norwich.
As you will have gathered the images are too big to put on floppy disks.
Once back, I transferred them in Information Technology's main system and used Adobe Photoshop to convert the full colour images to black and white, adjusting the brightness, contrast and grey levels to give more punch to the shots.
Using LZW file compression (a standard feature in Photoshop) I then resaved the images.
This brought them from 4.5Mb per image to less than 1Mb — much easier to put on floppies.
The pictures were sent to BAIE News in Dorking on three disks and input into the QuarkXPress file used for the typesetting and artwork.
The publication was sent to the printer on disk in the usual way, along with the three disks of pictures.
All four disks were put on to the printer's hard disk and the images were fine-tuned before the final film and plates were made.
COMMUNICATOR OF THE YEAR
Put yourself in the shoes of your audience, says CBI chief
Howard Davies, director general of the CBI and the new Communicator of the Year, had some useful advice for communicators when he received his trophy during the BAIE convention: put yourself in the shoes of your audience.
Explaining how he had instituted a series of business briefs, which go out to CBI members by fax every week, he said each message ‘should be conversational, it should be easily accessible and it should have some value to the reader or the listener’.
‘In every speech I make, I try to communicate to the audience why I think they should bother to listen to what I've got to say,’ he told delegates over a video link between London and Torquay.
‘I try to answer the question — If I were here, what would I be getting out of this experience?’
The same policy could be applied to all areas of communication, such as between the CBI and the Government, which Mr Davies described as ‘quite a tricky business’.
The Government, he said, was not predisposed to pay attention and believed that no idea was worth listening to unless Ministers had thought of it themselves.
‘But fortunately,’ he added, ‘I think the basics of good communication apply to communication with the Government as they do with anything else.
You have to create a demand for your message.
Again, what is the value to the listener?
‘I often think many lobbyists are not making a very good effort to put themselves in, say, the position of the Chancellor.
‘People have a tendency to present their messages as a new problem…rather than as something which has within it the elements of a solution.’
Experience
As controller of the Audit Commission before taking over at the helm of the CBI last year, Mr Davies said he had first had experience of the Government's approach to industry and commerce.
Delegates in Torquay, under the direction of BAIE president Barry Isted, watched Mr Davies receiving the new Communicator of the Year trophy, a wooden bowl provided by Digital, from Digital managing director Chris Conway in the LWT television studios in London.
The video link was provided by BT's Business Television.
Mr Davies, the CBI's youngest director general and the first to address a Trades Union Congress, ended with praise for business communicators.
‘The jobs that you all do are, I believe, crucial to the success of our companies,’ he said.
‘Without good communications, chairmen and chief executives may huff and puff, but they will get nowhere.
‘There is some decent evidence that you are doing that job quite well.
Our surveys show employees are more and more satisfied with the communications they receive from their companies and they believe they understand more now about what is going on around them.
‘That is a tribute to your work and I thank you for it.
It was the first time the Communicator of the Year presentation had left London and the first time it had been staged as part of the annual convention.
Anne Diamond ‘has brought solace to the inconsolable’
Television presenter Anne Diamond, who was given a special award by the Communicator of the Year committee for her work in highlighting the issue of cot deaths, appeared in a video screened at Torquay.
Outgoing BAIE national chairman Phillipa Burrow, who appeared with her in the BBC studios at Pebble Mill in Birmingham, said the number of cot deaths had fallen by 60 per cent since Anne Diamond had brought them to the attention of the public and the Government.
She had made change happen, with the strength and support of her husband, Mike Hollinsworth.
Anne had begun her campaign after losing their baby son in a cot death and Phillipa Burrow said: ‘You have used your skills to bring solace to the inconsolable, Your contribution will not be forgotten.’
Anne Diamond explained that she could not be at Torquay because of programme commitments and what she called ‘another thing’, patting her midriff to show that she was heavily pregnant.
In the event, she gave birth to a son only two days before the convention opened.
‘The breakthrough was simple,’ she said on the video.
‘The risk of cot death could be greatly reduced if children could be put to sleep on their backs.’
She said she was proud to receive the special award, ‘particularly in the name of my son Sebastian’.
Publication aims to calm pension fears
London agency Media & Design Associates has written and produced the first issue of a special twice-a-year publication for Taylor Woodrow pension fund members in the wake of the Robert Maxwell scandal.
Team Pension News, which has been written in a bright, punchy style, carries an in-depth analysis of how money from the Mirror pension fund was misappropriated by Maxwell and an explanation of how a repeat can be avoided.
It also gives full financial details about money in the Taylor Woodrow fund and where it is invested.
Group pensions officer Martin Bailey said: ‘We decided our staff and pensioners would sleep more easily with some sort of formal reassurance.
‘Although we have good employee communications, we thought it best to produce a publication tailored specifically to allay the fears of our fund members.’
BAIE member Anne Harling, a director of Media & Design, predicts that more companies will follow Taylor Woodrow's example.
‘The Daily Mirror scandal has raised public awareness of how company pensions are managed,’ she said.
REGIONAL NEWS
CENTRAL
Name change is part of plan to generate more interest
BAIE's Midlands region has been renamed Central region as part of a new programme aimed at generating more interest among members.
New regional chairman Neil McCrae, of Design Publications in Banbury, said: ‘We want to see an end to the beer-and-skittles approach and arrange a series of events that will be relevant and attractive to professional communicators.
‘The first will be a publications clinic on 1 September, at a venue to be decided.
This and subsequent events will be promoted using flyers in BAIE News, mailshots and a telephone campaign if necessary.
‘We also want to establish and develop a database of members in the Central region.’
Other members on the new committee:
SOUTH WEST
Boots are recommended for visit to bridge site
Two trips — to the site of the new Severn Bridge and to the Western Mail offices in Cardiff — have been arranged for South West region members.
The Severn Bridge tour will start from the visitors' centre, off the A403, at 2 p.m. on Wednesday 28 July.
Members, who are advised to take walking boots or track shoes because of the likelihood of a muddy site, have been given these directions to get to the centre: from the M5 motorway, exit 17, take the B4055, signposted Severn Beach: straight on through Pilning and across the A403 dual carriageway at the traffic lights, then through Redwick and take first left B4064, signposted Severn Beach half a mile; through first set of temporary traffic lights (plant crossing), then sharp right at next set of lights; look for visitors' centre on left-hand side.
The visit to the Western Mail, at Thomson House, Cardiff, is on Wednesday 8 September at 7 p.m.
Four newspapers are printed at Thomson House —.
LONDON AND HOME COUNTIES
A chance to study secrets of success
Find out how to produce an award-winning publication at London and Home Counties region's Meet the Winners event on Tuesday 13 July.
Members will be able to see the winning publications from the region in BAIE's Editing for Industry competition at St Bride's Institute, off Fleet Street.
Awards committee chairman Alan Peaford will explain how the 1,275 entries were judged.
The event, sponsored by Garden House Press, begins at 6.30 p.m. and costs £10 for members and £15 for non-members.
Repro workshops
The region's season of workshops begins with a morning training session on reproduction technology on Tuesday 27 July.
Brian Elsworth, of Belmont Press, will compare conventional reproduction techniques with the new technology available, taking delegates through the reprographic stages of house journals and looking at ways of saving money.
Pauline Kavalali, of the Robert Horne Paper Company, will explain how to choose the right material and outline the process of selecting coatings, finishes, paper weight, smoothness, bulk and rigidity.
The workshop is at  from 10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and costs £10 for members and £15 for non-members, including a buffet lunch.
New chairman
Sixty people attended the region's annual meeting and new members' party in the crypt of St Martin-in-the-Fields.
The new chairman is Daniel Isted, of Company Communications.
Other committee members elected:.
NORTHERN
First-hand view of nuclear controversy
A party of Northern region members got a first-hand view of British Nuclear Fuels' controversial thermal oxide reprocessing plant when they visited the company's Sellafield site.
A dozen of them travelled to west Cumbria at the invitation of BNFL News editor Steve Howarth, who is also a Northern region committee member, and spent two days as guests of BNFL.
Touring the huge THORP plant and Sellafield's visitors' centre took up one day and then the group were given a guided tour of nearby Muncaster Castle by Sir Patrick Gordon-Duff Pennington, whose family have lived in the historic castle for more than 300 years.
The region's new vice-chairman, John Jessop of British Gas, said: ‘We were all very impressed with the scale of THORP and the built-in safety features.’
Freelance Peter Donlan added: ‘BNFL laid on a tremendous visit.
It was probably the region's event of the year.’
EAST ANGLIA
Newmarket is tipped again
Fancy a flutter?
East Anglia region is repeating its popular night out at Newmarket races on Friday 30 July.
Racing starts at 6.15 p.m. and there will be a cabaret with Acker Bilk and his Paramount Jazz Band, plus a barbecue with beer and wine.
Tickets, which cost £8.50 for the races and £7.50 for the barbecue, must be booked by 16 July.
Send cheques, payable to BAIE, to  
SCOTLAND
Diversity ‘one of BAIE strengths’
The new chairman of BAIE Scotland, Rosemary Wake, wants members in the region to get to know each other better, for professional as well as social reasons.
Wake, who has taken over from Ron Aitken, said one of BAIE's strengths was its diversity and it made sound practice, as well as fun, to tap into the network.
‘The chairman and committee's role is to provide central focus and support, to encourage ideas and initiatives from everyone, not just the elected few,’ she said.
Other committee members elected: