

CURRENT NEWS
Group buys stake in ERC
AT THE beginning of the year, John Wood Group PLC announced the acquisition of 47 per cent of the shares of Houston-based ERC Industries Inc.
This acquisition complements the Group's existing interest in the oilfield sector and is the fifth acquisition in the United States, the others being Turbine Engine Services, Electric Submersible Pumps, NDT Systems and Trico Submersible Services [now part of ESP].
ERC is involved in the re-manufacture, repair and manufacture of a new wellhead equipment using innovative design techniques.
With 17 sites strategically located throughout the United States and Canada, ERC can offer full repair, machining, welding and field service capability 24 hours a day, every day of the year.
Looking for the most cost-effective approach, ERC's highly qualified and experienced employees will make a thorough inspection of a customer's used equipment, wellheads and valves and make repairs according to industry standards.
Providing a full service is advantageous to the customer; with ERC as ‘equipment partner’, equipment service life is extended and operational costs are reduced, thus providing a ‘win-win’ situation for both client and company.
John Wood Group chairman, Ian Wood believes that the Wood Group's considerable international presence will help ERC to develop markets outside North America.
‘We are now providing a growing range of services to the majority of principal oilfield provinces throughout the world,’ he said, ‘and ERC's business will dovetail well with our existing areas of expertise.
There is clearly mutual benefit to be gained from this acquisition, for both our UK and US companies, and we look forward to this area of our business competing effectively on an international basis.’
President of ERC, Richard H. Rau is also looking forward to a successful partnership.
‘We are excited to have the Wood Group as a large equity holder,’ he said.
‘In the first few days, we saw tangible benefits from the association in the form of lower insurance costs, coupled with much improved coverage.
In fact we had a new customer waiting for the certificate in order to give us a job.’
Mr Rau continued: ‘Over time we expect our association with the Wood Group to lead to faster growth through acquisitions, as well as quicker penetration into the markets outside the US.’
Ian Wood goes on the road
DURING January and February, John Wood Group PLC chairman and managing director Ian Wood began a series of ‘roadshows’.
Held at each company premises or in hotels, the roadshows gave employees an insight into the Group's operations as a whole and how their Company fitted into the overall scheme of things.
Giving details on the financial status of the Group and new policies being introduced, the meetings also gave employees an opportunity to put any questions to Mr Wood regarding the Group or their specific Company.
These roadshows are to be held on a regular basis and the public affairs department would be pleased to receive any suggestions, such as additional information that you would like to see included.
Pleasing start for Grampian
Grampian Shipping Services has recently been formed as a division of our joint venture company Aberdeen Cargo Handling Services Ltd.
Colin Philip, together with assistants Karen and Agnes, specialise in ships' agency work at Peterhead, Fraserburgh and Aberdeen.
These include seismic ships, oil tankers and standby and safety vessels.
They also deal with Russian frozen fish carriers and factory ships, which are regular callers at Peterhead.
Hendry Morrison, general manager of Aberdeen Cargo Handling Services is pleased by the way the business has grown since last December.
He said: ‘Colin and his staff have been kept busy in Peterhead and Aberdeen, using our office at 36 Commerce Street as his Aberdeen base.
We are able to give him the support necessary to ensure a comprehensive service for his broad base of clients.’
Streamlined cargo handlers
GREAT Yarmouth Cargo Handling Services Limited has moved its operational office from South Denes Marine Base to Ventureforth House — part of a streamlining programme to utilise the administration services of Ventureforth Marine Services Limited.
Ventureforth Marine Services Limited and Wood Group Offshore Limited are joint owners of Great Yarmouth Cargo Handling Services Limited, which was formed in 1989.
Currently employing 17 cargo handlers, the Company has successfully provided stevedoring services through the port of great Yarmouth and is also engaged in both offshore and general cargo work.
Current clients include Arco British, BJ Services, Chevron, Conoco UK, Hamilton Oil, Mobil North Sea, Total Oil Marine and Pasta Foods.
Great Yarmouth Cargo Handling Services operations manager, Basil Farman, said: ‘The move to Ventureforth House will ease administration costs and allow us to become even more competitive.
‘Although the offshore industry provides the core of our work, we are specifically looking to expand our general cargo activities which will benefit the port as a whole.’
Success for Fireater
FIREATER, based in Great Yarmouth, has been awarded a contract to supply fire hoses to all British Coal depots in Britain during 1993.
Fireater will be supplying their renowned Viking layflat hose complete with couplings specified by British Coal made of plastic and alloy materials.
A guarantee of quality
WOOD Group Fire Protection Ltd in great Yarmouth has gained the coveted BS5750 Part 2 quality assurance award covering the servicing and maintenance of portable fire extinguishers to BS5306 Part 3.
This award confirms a commitment to clients by offering both products and an after-sales service monitored by a guaranteed quality assurance policy.
Rolls-Royce approval
GAS TURBINE Fuel Systems was recently approved by Rolls-Royce plc as a repair vendor for the overhaul of RB211-524 type fuel nozzles.
These nozzles are mainly used on wide bodied aircrafts and marketing of the product is now in hand with significant interest being shown from large airline operators.
First orders have just been completed for Air New Zealand.
TES lights up Malaysia
IN THE Autumn of 1992, Connecticut-based Turbine Engine Services [TES]brought a continuous electricity supply to an isolated town in Eastern Malaysia — the first location in that part of the country not to endure three to four hours a day of blackouts on a regular basis.
It was also a first for TES.
In late 1991 TES was the successful bidder on a Pratt & Whitney FT4A-9 power pack generating station from the Amoco Production Company in West Texas.
The 20 megawatt power station was completely dismantled with the engine, free turbine, control house, generator and other major components being sent to the Company's engine shop in Connecticut for overhaul under the direction of TES vice president of Rod Vilasuso.
In addition, a retrofit control system designed by TES, was installed to ensure reliability of the unit.
Early in 1992 TES sales representative, began negotiating with a Malaysian company called Time-Epe and they subsequently secured a $4 million contract for the sale of the FT4 equipment which was to be installed for the Sabah Electricity Board in the town of Tawau [population 40,000].
In July TES began the task of installing and commissioning the equipment normally a six month job, but for Randy Jones and ‘Mac’ McNeal it took a record 58 days to successful completion.
After the unit was commissioned and turned over to Sabah Electric, TES was contacted by Dr Jamaludin Bin Dato Jarjis, managing director of Time-Epe and also member of the Malaysian parliament, to voice his extreme satisfaction with the entire project.
And they have had many letters too — thanking them for giving the people of Tawau an electricity supply that is the envy of the rest of Eastern Malaysia.
RWG meets Quality standard
IN MID-December, after seven months of protracted audits and negotiation, Rolls Wood Group [Repair & Overhauls]Ltd achieved full approval by Rolls-Royce to its standard CQC 103 — Total Quality Control requirements for suppliers to Rolls-Royce plc.
This approval will allow Rolls Wood Group to compete for the maintenance of the Rolls-Royce owned fleet of Avon, Olympus and RB211 gas turbines which are leased to customers.
Considering the major developments that have taken place during the past 12 months within Rolls Wood Group, the achievement in such a period of time reflects the workforce's determination to establish Rolls Wood Group as a leader in this market.
In addition, the East Tullos test bed has now been fully approved for Olympus engine testing and is well advanced in achieving the same status for RB211 engines.
The next stage is to extend the approval to cover the repair and overhaul of engine components which will involve the new component repair facility at Kirkhill.
This will involve a detailed examination of process controls in addition to approval of the quality assurance systems.
Initial planning has started with the intention of obtaining approval in early 1993.
New Electronic test for subsea cables
CONGRATULATIONS to Electric Submersible Pumps Inc [ESP]engineer, for his work on the development of a computerised cable testing system.
‘wrote the book’ on computerised electric submersible pump cable testing — a new service of testing cable to IEEE 1017 — 1985 or customer specifications.
This new testing process has been installed in several of the facilities throughout ESP's organisation.
Fireater makes its mark on Chunnel
HAVING already installed 19 gas extinguishing systems in the Channel Tunnel, Fireater was approached to look at protecting risks using high expansion foam as the extinguishing media.
The areas to be protected had no water supply, so a self-contained system needed to be developed and tested to Trans Manche Link specifications.
Fireater designed a system using the existing Fireater range of high expansion generators, a foam pre-mix solution storage tank and a regulated supply of nitrogen as a propellant.
After a series of tests, Fireater successfully gained approval and a specification from TML for this installation.
There are currently two systems installed at the Lower Shakespeare Drift with a further six due for installation during the first quarter of 1993.
Woodacon…then and now
FEBRUARY 15 marked the 25th anniversary of the official opening of Woodacon Oils' terminal at Sinclair Road in Torry, Aberdeen.
A small lunchtime party was held for the entire staff, at which commemorative mementos were distributed.
Of the present-day staff, only terminal manager  was at Woodacon in February 1967, although  — the most senior of Woodacon's drivers — joined a few months later.
The terminal has expanded its storage capacity five-fold since its initial inauguration and has been a major and consistent profit earner in the intervening years.
Terry's baptism by fire
TERRY Alderton recently joined Rolls Wood Group [Repair & Overhauls]repair facility as production manager.
On his first day, Monday, 1 February, Terry arrived at the building — which was recently opened by Sir Ralph Robins, chairman of Rolls-Royce plc — to find there was more going on than a usual day's work; they were cleaning up in the aftermath of a fire.
On the evening of Saturday 30 January, a fire had broken out in a process area on the mezzanine floor of the building.
The fire brigade arrived promptly and the fire was contained in one area, causing only minimal damage to equipment.
The new building was stained by smoke, but there was no disruption to normal operations.
Asked about his first day, Terry said: ‘I was stunned when I turned up on the Monday only to be confronted with the aftermath of the weekend fire.
‘It was a strange situation, but it gave me a unique opportunity to work alongside the workforce under difficult conditions.
‘I was very pleased and encouraged by the teamwork during the clean-up operation and production was up and running within a day.
It really was a baptism by fire!’
Thistle's really going places
THISTLE Engineering Services Ltd [TESL]has recently been awarded a one year call off contract with NAM in Holland.
As a result, two of the Company's surveyors had to travel to Holland at short notice.
Their destination was Ameland, an island off the northern coastline and home to AME-1, an extraction and processing plant for gas from an offshore field.
The job, which involved surveying three wells for tubing change-out, was doubly challenging since the only way to reach the plant was to drive along the beach in a four-wheel drive vehicle.
As reported in the October issue of Wood News , TESL's operations revolve around a system called MERCAD [Measurements Electronically Recorded Computer Automated Draughting].
The Company was recently invited to give a practical demonstration and visual presentation of MERCAD to the European Economic Interest Group [EEIG]in Reading.
If successful in winning the contract, it will involve a survey team travelling to Kasurstan.
Next stop China?
Big day for LTS
Workshop more than doubles LTS's workspace
Important role in division's growth
WHAT do you do when the date and time of your official opening has been set, the invitations sent out and your guest of honour has to drop out at the last minute due to matters of national importance?
That's just what happened to Lincoln Turbine Service, when at the eleventh hour Energy Minister Tim Eggar had to cancel his trip to Aberdeen in order to be in London for the publication of the Trade & Industry Select Committee's Energy Report.
Undaunted, LTS asked Wood Group chairman Ian Wood to step into Mr Eggar's shoes — a duty that he was, of course, happy to perform.
On Friday 29 January around 150 guests, together with employees from LTS's Aberdeen and Lincoln offices gathered to witness the official opening of the Company's new facility at Kirkhill Industrial Estate in Dyce, Aberdeen.
As reported in the December issue of Wood News , this was the third new facility to be opened on the 9.5 acre site, representing a total investment of £3 million by the Group.
Part of the gas turbine division, LTS carries out repair and overhaul of gas turbines and ancillary equipment from both its Aberdeen and Lincoln facilities, with overseas workshops located in Dubai, Abu Dhabi and Qatar.
The new Kirkhill workshop more than doubles LTS's workspace at Dyce and increases the lifting capacity of overhead cranage to 10 tonnes.
The facility also has a test bed for Ruston and Solar turbine engines.
In addition to LTS's impressive on-site equipment and services on view at the opening, the guests were able to see a 11.6-megawatt, 172-tonne mobile power generating plant, one of three currently owned by LTS.
The 86 foot long piece of equipment took five days to be transported from Teesside, requiring an abnormal load permit and police escorts from each of the seven counties, covering its route.
Subcontractor, Woodward Governor, also provided an interesting display with the Netcon 500 gas turbine monitoring and control system.
In his speech at the opening Tom Motherwell, director of Wood Group Gas Turbines, said that he felt the expansion was an important move for the Company.
‘LTS is now in a good position to handle significantly greater volumes of business, particularly with the new in-house test facility which can test turbines up to 4.5 megawatts,’ he said.
‘We also have at our disposal some of the best industrial turbine component repair facilities world-wide, operated by our sister company, Rolls Wood Group.’
Before unveiling the official plaque, Ian Wood made specific comment on the Trade & Industry Select Committee's report that had prevented Tim Eggar attending the opening, since it would significantly affect all the industries gathered there on the day.
Turning to the specific task on hand, he commended the gas turbine division as a whole for the great strides it had made over the last few years and stressed the important role that LTS had played in the division's growth.
Managing director Bert Daly thanked Ian and presented him with a gift to mark the occasion.
There was, after all, a benefit for stepping into a Minister's shoes!
TRAINING
NDT's double first
AS WELL as being the only centre of its kind in the North-east of Scotland offering NDT training.
NDT Eagle's training facility can now boast that it is the first to employ three ASNT level III accredited tutors.
NDT Eagle employees  and  will join the Company's training manager enabling the Company to extend their consultancy services and training.
who recently received the British Institute of NDT Accreditation certificate on behalf of NDT Eagle, is delighted to have  on board and looks forward to providing a unique service to customers, ‘The training centre has been fully equipped to cover a variety of courses as well as NDT including Painting Inspection [BGAS], Welding Inspection [CSWIP], NDT Appreciation and Magnetic Flux Leakage.
We want to provide the best package and extend our services.’
Accreditation continued
FOSTER Wheeler Wood Group [FWWG]is pleased to announce that its graduate training scheme has achieved continued accreditation from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers [IMechE]for a five-year period.
This recognition is in no small part due to the enthusiasm and commitment of , chief mechanical engineer, and the late , personnel and administration manager.
Given that a large part of FWWG's assessment was based on interviews with engineers on the Monitored Professional Development Scheme [MPDS], the training scheme has clearly received ‘customer’ approval.
The MPDS is a route to early membership of the IMechE [and chartered status].
Trainees of the scheme are assigned to a Mentor [a senior member of staff with chartered status]who acts as a professional guide and confidante.
Mentors at FWWG are , engineering director, and .
A log book is maintained by the individual trainee over a four year period to record work experience and career progression and must be approved by the Mentor.
Asked to rate their training out of five, one trainee insisted on scoring FWWG at five — the others all gave four!
The Company is also working towards accreditation with the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
‘Apprentice of the Year’ Award renamed
THE FIRST winner of the renamed ‘Peter Cooper Apprentice of the Year’ award in Foster Wheeler Wood Group [FWWG]is 24-year-old Paul Usher.
Paul joined FWWG in November 1991 as a trainee instrument designer having already gained a HND in Electrical and Electronic Engineering at Glasgow Polytechnic — a fair achievement having started out on a Youth Training Scheme [YTS]course as a trainee computer programmer.
Paul, who commutes daily — a weekly total of 630 miles — from his home town of Dundee has proven to be an excellent draughtsman both manually and on CAD, gaining expertise on CADvance, AUTOCAD and Microstation Intergraph systems which are supported throughout FWWG.
During his relatively short time with us, Paul was seconded to Wood Group Industrial Controls [WGIC]for an initial period of two months which ultimately stretched to five months.
He performed his tasks at WGIC apparently too well, so that we subsequently had great difficulty in getting him back!
Although Paul is training to become an instrument designer, his sights are now set on an engineering post.
He hopes to start a BSc course later this year — an opportunity available to apprentices who demonstrate high levels of achievements and commitment in the FWWG training scheme.
Daran's big achievement!
LINCOLN Turbine Service Ltd in Lincoln was pleased that hard work had finally paid off when they heard that Daran Blatherwick had been awarded ‘Best Trainee — City and Guilds 201’.
Daran [18], a Youth Training Scheme trainee in the workshops at Lincoln Turbine Service, has been with the Company since April 1991.
Since receiving the award Daran has been taken on permanently and is being trained in all aspects of the turbine industry.
The City and Guilds 201 certificate was for doing a course on the theory and practical aspects of machining and was presented by the director general of Lincoln Technology College, John A Barnes.
NEBOSH training initiative
THE YEAR got off to a safe start with 13 trainees taking part in a two week NEBOSH general certificate course in occupational safety and health held at the training centre during January and February.
The technical training department set up the NEBOSH course, which is seen as a logical progression building from the broad base of safety representatives training.
This has now established a level of trained personnel, largely from the shop floor, who have gained preliminary safety qualifications and expertise.
A secondary level of trained safety practitioners, aimed at those with divisional safety responsibilities and their back-ups, has now been covered by the NEBOSH qualification.
Our approach to safety training via this route is compatible with the Wood Group competency standards policy as the objectives are to have competent staff in each division who hold nationally recognised qualifications.
Additionally, a uniform quality standard in safety training will be created throughout the Group.
Later, each division will be able to undertake their own risk assessments, using their NEBOSH trained personnel, who will also have completed a short risk assessment course.
This will ensure compliance with the requirements of the six European Community directives on health and safety at work.
The course providers, Safety Audit Services has had a 100 per cent pass rate to date on previous NEBOSH courses, which we are confident they will maintain on the Wood Group in-house course.
Finally, the training will be eligible for funding under the Business Credits Scheme.
If successfully claimed, 50 per cent of the total costs of the training would be refunded by Grampian Enterprise.
It is planned to run a second certificate level course during weeks commencing 29 March and 26 April.
Interested parties should contact the training centre for details.
WOOD GROUP WORLDWIDE
FOCUS ON Middle East Operations
As an increasing exporter and provider of goods and services on a worldwide basis, the John Wood Group now spans many countries throughout the world.
In the next few issues of Wood News we will focus on different regions of the world, starting in this issue with the Middle East.
Still the dominant oil producing region of the world, the Wood Group's involvement in the Middle East is mainly related to the oil industry.
Our main operational bases are in Kuwait through Wood Group Engineering [Kuwait]Ltd.
[WGE], Dubai through Wood Group Engineering [Overseas]Ltd., and in Abu Dhabi with Arabian Oil Equipment Services [AOES].
The Group's largest and longest established operation is in oil-rich Kuwait, a small but strategically placed country at the top of what used to be known as the Persian gulf — now politically just referred to as the gulf.
Prior to the 1991 war with Iraq, WGE had maintenance contracts for Kuwaiti oil fields and pipelines.
The destruction of Kuwait's oil infrastructure was widely televised both during and after the cessation of hostilities, providing us all with a vivid reminder of how volatile hydrocarbons can be.
In 1992, WGE was successful in winning two major contracts with joint venture partner Kuwait Shipbuilding and Repair.
The contracts are with the Kuwait Oil company and cover maintenance of all KOC's production facilities and the provision of manpower for the ‘Al Tameer’ rebuild project of Kuwait's oil gathering centres.
Together the joint venture is now employing nearly 1,000 people under the leadership of projects director Alex Rodgers.
Heading up Wood Group engineering's activities in Dubai and Abu Dhabi is Bill Reid who has sent us the following report:.
‘WOOD Group realised through years of business relations in the Gulf area [mostly related to gas turbine support of the oil, gas and petrochemical industries]that there was a need for good quality support of general oil field equipment including hi-tech rotating equipment such as gas turbines, pumps and compressors.
‘In 1991 the Group took a 49 per cent share in AOES in Abu Dhabi and began to transfer equipment and technology into this long established workshop in order to enter the value and wellhead market, predominantly in the UAE but also in other Gulf countries.
‘The decision was then taken to significantly extend this Company's activities and a new 25,000 square foot facility has been built at Musaffah in the industrial area of Abu Dhabi.
Under general manager Danny Collins, services are being extended to cover servicing of pumps, compressors, skid work, fabrication and general machining.
‘At the same time it was decided to go ahead with a new 14,000 square foot facility in the Dubai Free Zone of Jebel Ali.
As well as servicing local Dubai markets, this workshop will also access surrounding territories of Iran, India, Pakistan, Oman, Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
The Dubai workshop will provide a number of specialist hi-tech repair services to rotating equipment including the refurbishment of heavy frame gas turbines.
‘The Group's £3-million investment in this area means we have effectively reproduced the level of technology and quality of workshops that service our North Sea markets — a timely investment as we believe that the Middle East market is now demanding this kind of support.
‘Both facilities provide some unique machining and refurbishment capabilities and all procedures and systems are in accordance with internationally recognised quality standards to ISO 9000.
We are looking forward to a good start in trading and yet another Wood Group success story in this international development.’
Major breakthrough for Fire Protection
WOOD GROUP Fire Protection Ltd has won two major projects in the United Arab emirates to design and supply fire and safety equipment and fire protection systems.
Both projects, which were won against stiff competition, are for offshore fixed installations for Abu Dhabi based company Adma Opco.
The fire and safety project represents a substantial order and is for a new installation on the Umm-Shaif development, whilst the second incorporates a major element of fire protection systems for retrofit of an existing installation, the Zakum Central Super Complex.
These projects are a breakthrough for the Company especially for the projects department and hopefully will be two of many more to come.
SPONSORSHIP/CHARITIES
Best yet from young artists
THE WOOD Group Young Artists Competition is now in its seventh year and, with 73 entries received, saw the highest standard of work ever submitted.
Run in conjunction with Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, the competition was open to any artist aged between 16 and 25 resident in the Grampian Region.
This year, the panel of judges saw the addition of prominent artist Ralph Steadman, who joined Norman Mathieson, Arthur Watson and Helen Wood.
‘With two £1,000 commissions to be won and a further £1,000 to purchase additional works, it was extremely difficult to make a final choice,’ explained Grampian Hospital Arts Administrator Graham Smart.
The winning artists were presented with their cash prizes by John Wood Group PLC chairman and managing director, Ian Wood and guest judge Ralph Steadman, who stayed on especially so that he could attend the presentation.
The first prize went to Neil McIvor for his piece entitled William , and the schools prize went to Gabrielle Reith from Westhill Academy for her piece entitled Blue Moon, White Dove .
The Grampian Hospital Arts Project £1,000 commission was awarded to Morcant Tod and his piece entitled Notes on Buildings 1 was purchased for display in the hospital.
John Wood Group PLC's £1,000 commission was awarded to Andrew Braidwood and his piece entitled Hamburg was purchased for display in John Wood House.
Other pieces were purchased by John Wood Group PLC for the hospital from Jennifer Young Eynhallow Windlass II ; Michael Agnew Religious Images with Red Hand Man and Elizabeth Crombie Wah Wah .
Three pieces which were submitted were commended by the panel, although not purchased.
They were: Tom Webster Reflections , Simon Raynor Summer , and Kerry Gibson Two Fools .
Ralph Steadman is currently working with Peacock Artspace and was delighted to see young talent being given an opportunity to display their work.
‘The variety of entries received was staggering,’ he said.
‘This is probably the first time a lot of these artists have exhibited their work and it made our job even harder having to eliminate pieces to decide on the final winners.
I have thoroughly enjoyed this experience and would like to wish all these young artists, both winners and losers, all the best for future.’
Chairman and managing director of John Wood Group PLC Ian Wood agreed with Mr Steadman: ‘I am glad I did not have the difficult task of judging the competition and can only say that I look forward to adding another series of works to our existing collection at John Wood House.’
Junior Chamber update
The Junior Chamber of Commerce began in 1937 in Glasgow and progressed to see the formation of Junior Chamber Aberdeen in 1948.
After two years as a patron of Junior Chamber Aberdeen, we report on John Wood Group PLC's involvement to date.
NOWADAYS, Junior Chamber is an international organisation open to men and women between 18 and 40 years old, who are part of the professions, industry, commerce, and/or the community.
The Chamber aims to provide training in management and leadership skills through participation and service to the community involving members in project work.
An extensive training programme is also run, where management skills, public speaking and debating, to name a few, can be put to the test.
Junior Chamber also provides the chance to make friends in a lively atmosphere and could be one of the reasons why the Aberdeen branch has approximately 75 members.
On becoming a member, you are encouraged to follow your own Personal Achievement Plan and training is offered from a local and national level.
On local training evenings, several topics are covered including project management, quality management, creative thinking and body language.
Assertiveness, stress management and time management are topics covered annually by a professional tutor on national training days.
All members are urged to take part in the organisation of events by way of projects.
The three main categories are: business projects, social projects and community projects.
Business projects include such events as trade exhibitions, interviewing techniques for school pupils, school/industry liaison conference and an architectural design competition.
Barn dances, fancy dress parties, ski weekends and twinning events with foreign chambers fall into the social projects category.
Last but not least, community projects include events such as school quizzes, sheltered shopping and the annual Aberdeen Carnival.
John Wood Group PLC sponsored the carnival parade in 1992 and have agreed to continue this sponsorship in 1993.
The parade consists of a procession of floats [many of which are transported on Wood Group Offshore lorries], bands and entertainers which proceeds down Union Street to the Beach Boulevard.
Last year, Denise Long of Alexander McKay acted as Wood Group's representative at the parade.
Denise, a member of Junior Chamber Aberdeen, has again volunteered to take part in the parade, which she described as ‘a thoroughly rewarding experience’.
She has also been involved with the organisation of a few other projects including a National Sleep Out, which aimed to increase public awareness of Aberdeen's homeless people and Dial-a-Santa which took place at the end of last year.
Stuart Caughey of Rolls Wood Group, Repair Division, has also joined Junior Chamber and is still in his probationary period.
Stuart was recently part of a local team that won the national Price Waterhouse Business Management Competition.
The team from Junior Chamber Aberdeen, won £500 and £1,500 of management consultancy from the sponsors to support their plan for a proposed holistic health centre.
Another project that received sponsorship from the Wood Group was the Granite Foundations book for start-up businesses, which has now been published and is proving a great success.
On Saturday 19 June Wood Group employees are invited to enter a float into this year's Bon Accord Carnival which is organised by Junior Chamber Aberdeen.
If you fancy your chances, contact Carolyn Andrews at the public affairs department who will send you the necessary registration forms.
Monte Carlo or bust
For the second year running, Alex Back, a senior mechanical engineer with Foster Wheeler Wood Group (FWWG), and his wife Judy will be tackling the rigours of Alpine roads through the middle of winter on the historic version of the Monte Carlo Rally.
Copy dates prevent an account of this year's adventure but here is a shortened version of the 1992 event which took them from Edinburgh to Monte Carlo, to a final position of 26th out of 102 starters and third in class.
They also raised over £800 for the Sick Children's Hospital.
Now Alex and Judy take up the story…
THE RALLY started on Sunday, 2 February at 10 am and the freezing cold morning saw many last-minute checks by various crews on all those things they had forgotten or already checked three times.
Our 1963 Herald 12/50 was keen to get going, and at the allotted time we set off through the Borders and towards North Yorkshire.
Passage controls were few and well spaced out, so most crews reached Dover with a fairly uneventful run.
The overnight snooze [all of one-and-a-half hours]on the ferry was hardly over when it was time to drive onto Reims, where crews from Oslo, Berlin and Edinburgh met for a deserved rest.
At this point the real scrutineering took place — checking eligibility of the vehicle.
Only period modifications and factory option equipment are allowed, but for an event like the Monte Carlo, reliability is the number one priority, not  tweaked , revvy little numbers!
Period dress is greatly encouraged, with jeans and trainers being banned!
From Reims, a long day through to Aix-les-Bains saw us losing time when a broken throttle spring caused an unbalanced descent on a slippery downhill run.
A minor skirmish with the bank on a hairpin gave us a puncture [and heart failure!].
Fortunately an adept four-minute tyre change and an elastic band — to give some resilience to full throttle — meant we only lost three minutes on that section.
As the organisers keep reminding us, that was the easy bit.
Electrical reliability is a constant cause of aggravation for many crews and too many lights, wipers and heater fans took their toll on small batteries and hot, over-worked dynamos.
During an overnight assault through the Alps we bounced off a wall of snow but, luckily, only lost the number on the driver's door.
The handbrake was extensively used to cope with icy conditions on what seemed to be never-ending hairpins and headlights in the distance changing direction constantly made us wonder whether the word insanity had taken on a new meaning [going up and down snowy mountains in a 30-year-old car].
Of the 102 starters, 81 finished after six days of hard driving and intensive navigation.
Needless to say the Herald proved itself admirably with a few lessons learned for next time.
The 1993 event started in York on 14 February and we will report on how they got on in the next issue.
Alex and Judy were self funded but had some sponsorship from FWWG and John Wood Group PLC, again going towards the Sick Children's Hospital.
In the meantime those of you with Sky TV can watch their progress when the rally is televised in April.
Stonehaven Walker Road team dressed for the occasion
Stonehaven Walker Road football club proudly display their training tops, sponsored by Woodacon Oils.
Woodacon has sponsored the team for the last four years and would like to take this opportunity to wish them all well for the future.
Helping Wood Group Volunteers
FOR A number of years, Wood Group has been involved in providing support for a number of local community projects, particularly those in which our employees are directly involved.
As a result of the requests we receive from employees, we are aware that many of you give up your own time to work for charitable organisations.
John Wood Group is, therefore, in the process of establishing an Employee Community Fund committee which will be based at John Wood House.
The committee will consider applications from employees seeking financial support for their charity.
A leaflet giving details and criteria for support is being produced which will be available shortly.
If you wish to receive a leaflet contact the public affairs department at John Wood House.
WOOD GROUP PEOPLE
FACT-FINDING VISITORS
Thailand links up with Peterhead
DURING December last year Wood Group Engineering Contractors [Peterhead]Ltd were host to a graduate engineer from Thailand.
, an employee with the Thai Petroleum Exploration and Production Company, was in the UK on a fact-finding visit organised by Total Oil Marine, since the two companies are part of a joint venture company in the Far East.
During the week that he was with Wood Group, spent time at Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]Ltd.
Enterprise Engineering Services Ltd, Wood Group Engineering Services workshop in Peterhead, Lincoln Turbine Service Ltd, Gas Turbine Fuels Systems Ltd, Wood-Way Hydraulic Services Ltd and Wood Group Engineering Contractors.
The visit was concluded with a question and answer session about Wood Group's activities, workshops and companies which was chaired by Wood Group Engineering Contractors divisional manager, Ivor Harries.
asked that we relay his heartfelt thanks to all Wood Group personnel who contributed to his successful visit.
Student brothers visit from Kuwait
THE TWO eldest sons of the managing director of Kuwait Shipbuilding and Repairyard Company [KSRC]— a joint venture between the Kuwait Oil Company and Wood Group engineering Contractors — have been on a three-week fact-finding visit to Wood Group.
and  are both students at Kuwait University.
is studying mechanical engineering and  chemical engineering.
During their visit to Aberdeen they have been looked after by  a contract representative with Wood Group Engineering Contractors.
has arranged visits to the following Group companies for the brothers: Rolls Wood Group [Repair and Overhauls]Ltd; Enterprise Engineering Services Ltd; Gas turbine Fuel Systems Ltd; Scottish Rig Repairers Ltd; Wood-Way Hydraulic Services Ltd; Wood Group Engineering Services [Peterhead]Ltd; Wood Group Fire Protection Ltd.
They also visited Davidson Paper Mills.
The visit has not all been work orientated, however, as a visit to Loch Ness has been fitted in, together with sight-seeing visits to Dundee and Inverness.
On the sports scene, and  have played tenpin bowling and watched football matches at Pittodrie [the Dons against Dundee United]and at Tannadice when Dundee United played Hearts.
The highlight of the visit was, they say, when they played football for the Wood Group team against chambers at Hazlehead Park and won 4-O.
Apparently a video of this match was made which will make a fine memento.
Haste ye back.
Glasnost in Aberdeen
A RUSSIAN delegation, on a week's visit to the UK, arrived on the doorstep of Wood Group Production technology [WGPT]on 26 January.
WGPT's staff was pleased to host the delegates, who represented the production association Megionneftegaz, located near the city of Nizhnevartovsk in West Siberia.
The purpose of the visit was to review North Sea technologies with a view to utilising them in their own oilfields.
They visited WGPT's Forties Road premises where presentations were given by  on Production Services and  on the Company's Permanent Downhole readout instrumentation [PDR].
A demonstration of the PDR and Slickline Production Logging Tool [SPLT]excited delegates' interest and resulted in an invitation to visit their operations in Siberia.
A presentation was also given by  and  on the services and capabilities of NDT Eagle Ltd, following which the delegates toured WGPT's Woodlands Drive Service Centre, the new calibration laboratory and NDT's on-site facility.
Gas Turbines' haggis tribute to the bard
WOOD GROUP Gas Turbines held its annual Burns Supper on the evening of 22 January at the Kirkhill Lodge Hotel at Dyce, Aberdeen.
The formal event was well attended by Wood Group Gas Turbines' staff and guests.
Guests were from major oil companies and other associated gas turbine users from as far afield as the United States and Indonesia.
The end of January saw the culmination of 10 months painstaking work by the Telephones Project Team when its recommendations to improve our telephone system were approved by the Quality Council and the Group Board.
It should serve as proof, for those who need it, that….
TQM works!
THE PROJECT began in April 1992 with a four-day training workshop in quality improvement tools and techniques.
Work then started in earnest ‘…to improve the response time of incoming telephone calls to John Wood House to an acceptable level’.
At one-hour weekly meetings, the team started the process by looking for the symptoms of the problem, which meant pulling together all the relevant facts.
Questionnaires and check sheets were designed and sent out to internal users of the system, clients and other Wood Group sites.
Many Wood News readers assisted in this exercise and all concerned in the project would like to extend their thanks to you all.
When the data had been collected, it was analysed in order to identify the real causes of the problem.
Further data was then collected concentrating on the major areas for concern.
For example: it was found that many staff had made no provision for their phones to be answered when they were absent from their desks.
To solve the problem, members of the team went round the office and showed staff how to form ‘hunt groups’ so that extensions were always answered.
Another finding was that having a combined receptionist and switchboard operator resulted in delays either to dealing with visitors or in answering incoming calls — and often both.
The two functions were therefore segregated and resulted in a substantial improvement.
Further monitoring and analysis, however, showed that the improvement still did not fully resolve the problem since aborted calls were still being experienced.
The team had already identified the capability of the switchboard equipment itself as a major cause of delays and one recommendation was that Direct Dial In [DDI]facilities should be installed so that calls could be dialled direct to specific people, by-passing the switchboard.
When British Telecom was approached on the subject, we found that DDI can only be operated on a digital system; the existing system is analogue.
It was also found that the system had virtually reached capacity as regards the number of extensions which could be serviced.
The team concluded that an updated system was required.
With the help of a technical communications consultant, the team then devised specifications for a new system to serve John Wood House including Group, WGEC and SRR as well as linking the BP project building and the Materials handling building.
The specifications were sent to seven suppliers who were invited to bid for the installation of a new system.
Five tenders were returned and following a thorough examination by the team, the bid of Ericsson was selected for recommendation.
The team then gave a detailed presentation to the Quality Council complete with financial justification which showed an attractive return on what is a significant investment.
The Council, and subsequently the Group, gave their approval and the target date for bringing the new system into service has been set for 31 May.
There is still much work to be done to ensure successful implementation of the project, so the team will still be hard at work considering training; how to keep staff informed; and ensuring a smooth change of telephone number [necessary for a digital system].
The success of this project is due in no small measure to the way the group worked as a team to apply the principles of TQM.
The main ingredient for success, however, has been hard work and determination to complete the task.
Congratulations on a job well done!
Passat trap
TWO MEMBERS of staff at Lincoln Turbine Service Ltd, Aberdeen, who wish to remain anonymous, are convinced that when you enter a company car, you enter the twilight zone.
After driving to Rolls Wood Group [Repair & Overhauls]Ltd, they tried to get out of the car.
The doors were stuck solid.
‘Wind down the window’, I hear you say.
Unfortunately due to an electrical fault, the windows were also stuck solid, so back they went to LTS.
It was dark and getting someone's attention wasn't easy.
After much beeping someone heard them and came out — they were still stuck.
Eventually, the spare key was found and they were released from the clutches of the car.
The mental scars will eventually heal!
WGPT Employee of the Year
ROGER Catherall, sales manager, Wood Group Production Technology has won the Company's Employee of the Year award for 1992.
All WGPT employees were balloted and Roger emerged the clear winner.
The award was announced at the Company's Christmas function on 11 December.
OBITUARY
Peter Cooper — an appreciation
AS YOU may be aware from the last issue of Wood News,Foster Wheeler Wood Group [FWWG]has been mourning the loss of Peter Cooper, personnel and administration manager, who died suddenly on 14 December 1992.
Peter had been with the Company since its creation in 1986, joining the original management team from Foster Wheeler Petroleum Development Limited.
He had previously spent 30 years in the royal Navy reaching the rank of lieutenant commander.
His energy, kindness and humour were driving forces in the Company's development.
He is particularly remembered, however, for his enthusiasm and affinity for young people.
Peter quickly established a graduate and apprentice training scheme, which achieved accreditation from the IMechE, and was working on a similar scheme for the Institute of Electrical Engineers accreditation.
As a permanent reminder of his contribution in this area, FWWG have renamed the apprentice of the year award as the Peter Cooper Apprentice of the Year Award.
Perhaps his greatest tribute, however, has been the comments made by so many people in the organisation: ‘Peter always took time to listen’.
He will be sadly missed by all.
Congratulations to the two Colins
COLIN McDougall , senior safety engineer with Rolls Wood Group recently graduated with BA through the Open University.
He started studying for the degree with in 1986.
The six credits required for the BA have been largely technology based with a strong emphasis on environmental issues and their control.
STAFF at Lincoln Turbine Service Limited, Aberdeen would like to congratulate Colin Macpherson .
technical assistant, on his speedy recovery from a lung operation which he underwent just before Christmas.
Yvette said ‘Yes’
STAFF AT Lincoln turbine Service Limited turned up at the Moat House Hotel, Aberdeen on 5 December for their five-course Christmas Dinner [well, who wouldn't].
After a few drinks and dancing, all were quite content until they heard that some people get proposed to on Christmas Eve.
Yvette Andrews, Wood News Correspondent for Lincoln Turbine Service in Lincoln had been quietly sitting in the administration office when her boyfriend Paul waltzed in and, on bended knee, asked her to marry him.
We are pleased to announce that she accepted!
DEPARTURES
Geraldine Phillips recently left Wood Group Offshore Ltd, Great Yarmouth after two years service.
Geraldine, who worked as accounts clerk at Yarmouth Marine Base left to accompany her RAF husband to Cyprus where he has been posted for three years.
All at Wood Group Offshore Ltd, Great Yarmouth wish them both all the best for the future.
Chief celebrates the big 65
ROBIN Graves, chief engineer at Rolls Wood Group, celebrated his 65th birthday on 25 January.
To recognise this occasion, senior management presented Robin with a leather bound edition of The Works of Robert Burns — an appropriate gift on the birthday of the Scottish bard.
Calling all sportswomen
ARE YOU looking for something to liven up your Monday evenings?
Then look no further.
If you are interested in playing netball then this might be your answer.
John Wood Group PLC sponsor the Wood Group netball team who are always on the lookout for fresh talent.
They currently meet every Monday night from 7.00pm — 9.00pm at Hazlehead Academy for training session and the occasional game.
The training sessions cost £1.
Well done Correspondents!
AS THE deadline approached for this quarter's issue of Wood News , there was a certain amount of nervousness at John Wood House, since only a few stories had come through from our new network of Correspondents.
The deadline came, the flood gates opened and we breathed a sigh of relief.
A week later, another panic set in.
We had so many articles that a decision had to be taken.
Should we go to an all-time record of 16 pages, shelve several articles or edit them all so much they would hardly be recognisable?
Taking a deep breath we elected to go the whole hog and print 16 pages.
We hope our readers enjoy this bumper issue, and many thanks to all Correspondents [and their deputies!]for finding the time to contribute on top of their normal daily tasks.
And readers — don't forget to help your Correspondent by passing on your news and views!
Three winners who always put safety first
IN CONJUNCTION with the national Health and Safety week, held in November last year, Wood Group Offshore Limited in Great Yarmouth held a safety quiz.
The quiz was held to encourage members of staff to discuss safety issues and seek information.
Pictured above are two of the three winners receiving vouchers from  (left), safety and personnel manager;(centre), quay foreman at Yarmouth Marine Base and  (right), secretary/receptionist on contract to Hamilton Oil.
Unfortunately, the other winner,, of Conoco, was unable to attend the presentation.
CAPTION COMPETITION
What was Gerald saying?
WOOD Group Fire Protection managing director Gerald Hocking was caught taking the weight off his feet on a trip to  Cincinnati .
What do you think he was saying to the photographer?
There's a side of smoked salmon for the best caption.
Send your entries to the Public Affairs Department to arrive no later than 30 April.
Salmon for Emma
EMMA Spiers, John Wood Group PLC wins a side of smoked salmon for her winning caption in the Christmas issue competition.
John:‘George, why are you standing in that plant pot?’
George:‘Flubalub lub, Jon.’
John:‘Hmm, yes quite.’
Crossword winner
CONGRATULATIONS to Chris Reiter from Foster Wheeler Wood Group, who was the lucky winner picked from dozens of correct entries for the Christmas crossword competition.
£25 of Marks & Spencer vouchers are winging their way to Chris.
If you have oil fired central heating, read on…
WOODACON Oils, based in Torry has been supplying home heating oil in the Grampian area for 27 years.
As a Wood Group employee you are entitled to bargain prices on your oil for heating.
Interested?
Then contact either  on  or  on  for further details.