

CHAIRMAN'S REPORT
‘Another year of growth, despite reduced activity in some areas, and record spend on investments’
In 1992 we again achieved record results, even though activity at some Wood Group companies was affected by reduced levels in North Sea exploration.
Fortunately, this was offset by an increase in our overseas sales and good performance by our companies serving markets outside the oil industry.
You will see from the graphs below that our turnover and pre-tax profit figures reached record levels last year.
We also stepped up our programme of investing in new companies and new buildings, plant and equipment.
What is probably less apparent in the figures is the significant expenditure we made in the areas of health, safety, quality, the environment and in developing and training our personnel.
These activities not only improve our working conditions and practices, but also enhance the quality of service to our customers and add up to what we have termed the Group's ‘Quality Culture’.
More details of what we have achieved in these areas can be found on the back page of this report.
1992 HIGHLIGHTS
We responded positively to increasing demands for service companies to play a greater role in ensuring the long term viability of the North Sea .
Wood Group Engineering continued to work closely with Shell Expro on their Northern plants at St. Fergus and Mossmorran and on the MMSC contract for the Brent field's Charlie and Delta platforms.
1992 also saw the award of an important five year contract with BP for integrated design and engineering services on the Magnus, Thistle and Miller platforms.
OLS continued to expand its partnering contracts and is now recognised as the UK's leading offshore support company with extensive shore base facilities in both Great Yarmouth and Aberdeen.
The Gas Turbine division has also played a leading role in this area and is pioneering the concept of total maintenance [health care]contracts for critical power packs both on and offshore.
1992 saw a significant increase in the Group's penetration of overseas oil and gas markets
Two large contracts in Kuwait were awarded to our joint venture company and some 1,000 people are now employed there providing mechanical maintenance services on Kuwait Oil Company's oil fields.
The Group invested £1.5 million in the United Arab Emirates to establish two high quality mechanical engineering workshops.
Between them, these facilities offer the majority of our UK repair and overhaul services including the valve and wellhead market, pumps, compressors, skid work, fabrication, specialist hi-tech repair of rotating equipment and refurbishment of heavy frame gas turbines.
In the United States, we have made strategic acquisitions in order to extend and strengthen the range of our drilling and production sector services.
We have made real progress in developing our non-oil related businesses where sales now account for a good proportion of the Group's turnover 
The Gas Turbine division is now recognised as a world leader in the repair and overhaul of industrial gas turbines and £3 million was invested during the year to increase the size and scope of its facilities in Aberdeen.
The division was also awarded a major five year contract from National Power covering the repair and maintenance of their fleet of gas turbine driven alternators.
Turbine Engine Services won an important contract to provide and install power generation equipment in Malaysia.
The Fire Protection companies also made notable strides, increasing their market share in non-oil related markets both in the UK and overseas.
Fireater now exports more than 50 per cent of its turnover.
ADDITIONS TO THE GROUP
Six new companies joined the Group in 1992:
Thistle Engineering Limited [Engineering Design], who are specialists in dimensional control.
Wood-Way Hydraulic Services Limited , formerly Marioff Services Limited [Engineering Services], who are involved with hydraulic flushing and testing systems.
ESP Products Inc.,formerly Trico Submersible Systems [D&PS], who manufacture downhole pumps.
ERC Industries, Inc.
[D&PS], who remanufacture and repair wellhead equipment.
NDT VICORP [D&PS], who refurbish and service tubular inspection equipment.
Tubular Ultrasound Limited [D&PS], who specialise in advance ultrasonic tubular inspection.
BUSINESS PLAN
Last year we published our five-year business plan.
Our intentions remain the same:
to continue to strengthen our North Sea market share,
to extend our overseas development, and
to increase our non-oil related activities.
Our short term aim is that our business is split 50 per cent North Sea oil, 25 per cent international oil and 25 per cent non-oil related activities and we are already close to reaching these targets.
OUR VISION AND MISSION
In the early part of this year I, along with the relevant Group director, visited the majority of Wood Group companies to report on progress and our future plans.
At these roadshows, we introduced the Group's Vision and Mission Statement — where we see ourselves in the future and the principals by which we intend to conduct our business.
In my report to you last year I attempted to answer the question ‘What is Wood Group's culture and the secret of our success?’
I feel a large part of this question can now be summed up by the following:
Our Vision
To be the UK's leading international contracting and service company in energy related markets and Scotland's outstanding growth company of the 1990s.
Our Mission
to understand and exceed our customers' needs for high quality, value for money products and services;
to develop innovative servicing techniques and proprietary products;
to attain the highest achievable standards of occupational health and safety;
to develop the knowledge, skills, creativity and potential of all our people and generate involvement, teamwork and pride in their work;
to care for the local communities in which we operate and ensure the highest level of performance in protecting the environment;
to achieve profitable growth and an attractive return on capital for our shareholders.
above all, we will out-perform our competition by ensuring that quality is at the forefront of everything we do.
The quality of our products and services is totally dependent on the quality and commitment of our people.
The Group's Vision and Mission is about you and how we can maximise your skills, commitment and enthusiasm to continue our successful growth.
I would therefore like to finish by thanking you all most sincerely for helping us to write a further chapter in what continues to be a major UK success story.
John Wood Group PLC is recognised as the UK's largest indigenous oil service company.
With over 20 years' experience in servicing the oil and gas sector, we employ approximately 2,800 personnel worldwide providing engineering and high technology services and products to offshore oil, power generation and general industrial markets.
The Group's competitive strengths in oilfield markets in the North Sea, Europe, North America and the Middle East are complemented by our fast growing reputation as one of the world's foremost gas turbine overhaul and repair companies, giving the Group a strong non-oil activity base.
OILFIELD LOGISTICS & SUPPLIES
The UK's leading offshore support company
In our Employee Report last year, we forecast lower business levels due to the reduction in exploration drilling following lower oil prices.
This downturn did happen — and at even lower levels than those experienced in the slump of 1987, affecting our Great Yarmouth operations in particular.
Despite this, Wood Group Offshore continued to trade successfully.
This was largely due to our changing role as offshore operators increasingly contracted out activities not directly involved in their core business of exploration and production.
Greater responsibility has therefore been passed to us to take care of the day-to-day logistics involved with offshore work.
We disposed of surplus property and focused our investment expenditure on quayside facilities where we bought the former Texaco fuel terminal in Aberdeen, which is being substantially upgraded, and spent £1.2 million on building 27,000 square feet of offices and warehousing at the Wood Marine Base in Aberdeen.
A third of this accommodation has already been let to Deminex and we have also extended and upgraded our premises at East Tullos at a cost of £500,000 to support a new long-term contract with Enterprise Oil.
Finaserve continued to handle good levels of product volume in a competitive market and our two joint venture cargo handling companies have also made progress, particularly in Aberdeen where a good level of general cargo business was secured.
As a result of reduced exploration activity, Moray Firth Service Company achieved a disappointing 173 rig days during the year.
However, the level of support activities to the oil industry was maintained with sales of gas oil reaching their highest level since the company was formed.
Woodacon Oils continued to perform steadily, increasing product storage capacity.
Alexander McKay had a satisfactory year in a more difficult market and continued to work hard to increase their offshore market penetration.
ENGINEERING CONTRACTING
Promoting an innovative approach to partnering contracts
Wood Group Engineering Contractors had a good year, maintaining last year's levels of sales and profits.
One of our largest contracts — the maintenance, modifications and services contract [MMSC]for Shell Expro — made good progress in cutting costs and meeting shutdown targets and a programme is in place to achieve further improvements in 1993 and beyond.
A major redevelopment programme is planned to extend the life of the Brent field and we aim to play a significant part in this project.
We were also successful in securing a long term contract from BP for integrated engineering services on their Magnus, Thistle and Miller platforms.
The contract covers design and construction services, utilising the services of both Wood Group Engineering Contractors and Foster Wheeler Wood Group.
Significant contracts were also undertaken for Total, Amoco, Marathon and other major operators.
Onshore, our plant change engineering [PCE]contract for Shell Northern Plants at St. Fergus continued to make good progress and we were successful in being able to extend this contract to Shell's gas terminal at Mossmorran.
Overseas, the Kuwait operation has been successful in managing the contracts won in the early part of last year.
We continue to seek new business in this area and to extend our existing contracts.
The reduction in exploration drilling particularly affected Scottish Rig Repairers who experienced a difficult year due to the low level of rig conversion and modification activities.
AHT Surveys again had a satisfactory year and the Company was able to extend its premises in Great Yarmouth and move into a purpose-built facility in Aberdeen.
Towards the end of the year, AHT was successful in securing a four-year inspection services contract for the Shell Southern North Sea MMSC which represents a major breakthrough for the company in this area.
ENGINEERING DESIGN
Securing the long-term profitability and safety of the North Sea
Since the formation of Foster Wheeler Wood Group six years ago, the Company enjoyed its most successful year with manpower levels peaking at over 500 personnel.
The Chevron Third Party Entrants project continued to be our largest project during the year.
Detailed design for major modifications on the Ninian Southern and Central platforms was nearly complete at the year end and construction of the last of the new modules is well on the way for completion in 1993.
For Total, we progressed with a long term contract to modify the Alwyn North platform and the St. Fergus gas terminal.
We also provided multi-purpose engineering and design services to convert the MCP-01 gas compression platform into a ‘not normally manned’ installation.
Work on the Control and Safety Systems Upgrade project for shell's Cormorant Alpha and Dunlin Alpha platforms also continued well.
With our sister company, Wood Group Engineering Contractors, we successfully secured a long term contract from BP to provide integrated engineering services for the Miller, Magnus and Thistle platforms.
We are now well underway with planning the scope of work required.
In June Thistle Engineering Services, specialists in dimensional control, joined the division.
Their proprietary MERCAD system is particularly successful in reducing the need for hot work offshore, enabling the operators to reduce costs and greatly enhance safety.
The benefits of the system have already been recognised and Thistle has been successful in securing a number of major contracts for several North Sea oil operators.
Mech-Tool Wood Group made slow progress in the last year since many of the oil companies have only recently completed their offshore Safety Risk Assessments.
A delay of some 12 months is therefore anticipated before work opportunities appear.
FIRE & SAFETY
Increasing market share in both the UK and overseas
With steady growth and increased profits in both the servicing and manufacture of fire protection and safety products, Wood Group Fire Protection achieved a greater balance between supplies to offshore and industrial based clients.
For example: a major onshore contract was won from Rolls-Royce to supply, install, test and commission CO 2 fixed extinguishing systems for a new engine test cell.
Offshore sales, however, remained buoyant and exports through third party contracts increased substantially.
All the Fire Protection branches made steady progress.
Great Yarmouth was successfully awarded a long term contract with Shell Expro, while Falkirk and Milford Haven increased their market share in support of the onshore petro-chemical industry.
Fireater experienced its most successful year to date, increasing sales to both overseas and UK markets and introducing innovative product lines to meet customers demands.
Export sales accounted for more than 50 per cent of the company's turnover, with the Middle East being a particularly successful market.
We also made significant in-roads into a number of major UK public utilities and district fire brigades.
Environmental concerns have been responded to by embarking on a halon replacement programme and developing a range of ‘environmentally friendly’ alternatives to these ozone depletant systems.
GAS TURBINES
Now a world market leader in its field
The division enjoyed significant growth in 1992, due to Rolls Wood Group developing its RB211 and Olympus business and the sale of TES of power generation equipment to Malaysia.
In last year's report, we stated that we were working hard to win some significant maintenance contracts with power generation companies.
This hard work was rewarded by the securing of a major five year contract with National Power covering their fleet of gas turbine driven alternators throughout England and Wales.
Considerable investment has been made throughout the Division.
£2 million was spent on building and equipping the component repair facility for Rolls Wood Group at Kirkhill in Dyce.
The new workshop has allowed us to handle much larger volumes of work and double the capacity of our RB211 and Olympus workshops.
We have also upgraded the test best facility at East Tullos so that it can now handle RB211 and Olympus engines.
Prior to this these engines had to be returned to Rolls-Royce for testing, so we can now save our customers considerable time and money.
LTS also moved into new purpose-built premises at Kirkhill at the end of the year.
These are located next door to the Ruston test bed and bring our total investment in premises and equipment for LTS to £1.5 million.
Gas Turbine Fuel Systems enjoyed continued success, thanks to growth in our traditional market and investment has been made in line with this growth.
We also expect to increase sales in the aviation fuel nozzle servicing business.
Despite a recession in the US aerospace market, Turbine Engine Services recorded a good year in both the core business of fuel nozzle repair and calibration and the developing engine repair and overhaul market.
ENGINEERING SERVICES
Providing an unparalleled range of engineering services
This Division had a more difficult year with a down-turn in drilling activity affecting all Aberdeen-based companies.
In spite of this, we have continued to invest in existing facilities and in extending our range of services in order to strengthen our position for the future.
In June, the Group acquired Wood-Way Hydraulic Services [formerly Marioff Services], who specialise in hydraulic flushing and testing systems.
In parallel, Wood-Way made significant investment in pump test facilities.
These investments played an important part in enabling the enlarged Wood-Way operation to continue its growth throughout the year.
We also bought Marioff Nortest at the beginning of this year, allowing the Group to establish its first operating base in Norway.
Enterprise Engineering made a small operating profit, but did not meet expectations due to a reduced level of work from its major oil industry customers.
We have introduced automated welding techniques into the workshop which should show real benefits when the company secures larger volumes of work.
Wood Group Engineering Services [Peterhead]enjoyed a particularly successful year due mainly to a major one-off contract being secured from Europe.
Lower levels of activity are expected in 1993 but investment continues to be made in order to streamline services.
Wood Group Industrial Controls completed the Sizewell contract early in the year and resumed its previous lower manpower levels.
Future work will concentrate on our strengths in the more specialised nuclear and petrochemical sector.
In the 1991 Employee Report, we outlined our plans to penetrate the Middle East market.
Since then we have invested £1.5 million in new premises, plant and equipment and we now have the facilities and capabilities to service valves, wellheads, high speed rotating equipment and heavy frame turbine components in the area.
Prospects for 1993 look promising and we are working towards further penetration of the petroleum and petro-chemical markets throughout the Middle East.
DRILLING AND PRODUCTION SERVICES
Capabilities extended by further investment
The reduction in oil industry exploration, both in the UK and North America, affected all companies within the division, which now operates in four distinct areas:
Submersible Pumps
Wood Group ESP has now been enlarged by acquiring downhole pump manufacturer ESP Products [formerly Trico Submersible Systems].
1993 and 1994 will see the Company undergoing a period of restructuring and product development, but we already have a comprehensive product and supply package and this should provide good medium term prospects within the principal oil field markets worldwide.
Downhole Data Acquisition
Wood Group Production Technology made considerable strides with its Permanent Downhole Readout gauge and the proven capability of this equipment has now established us as a leader in this field.
Our Slickline Production Logging Tool also achieved successful commercial tests during the year.
To accommodate the ongoing growth, we have now added a highly advanced environmentally controlled pressure sensor calibration laboratory to our existing facilities.
Copgo Wood Group enjoyed a profitable year with strong service sales to its oil company and geothermal customers.
Wellhead Equipment
With the acquisition of ERC Industries based in Houston, plans are now underway to develop its valve and wellhead manufacturing and servicing activities in the international market.
Tubular Inspection
NDT Systems and NDT Eagle both incurred development costs during the year in order to increase the quality and scope of their services.
This included the acquisition of NDT VICORP, specialists in refurbished equipment and services.
The Group also took equity in Tubular Ultrasound Limited, adding advanced ultrasonic inspection services to the division's capabilities in the UK.
THE QUALITY CULTURE
‘Our significant investment programme in quality, personnel development, health, safety and the environment is vital to our continuing success.’
Along with launching our Vision and Mission statement, the Group has made some significant developments in quality, safety and personnel policies.
Health, Safety and Environment
‘We aim to attain the highest practically achievable standards of occupational health and safety and the highest levels of performance in protecting the environment.’
We recognise that good HS&E management can contribute significantly to our long term business success and these issues have equal standing with our other major objectives.
In this respect Ramsay Spence was given overall responsibility for quality, health, safety and environmental matters during the year.
A new HS&E Policy and Management System has been developed and will be launched shortly at a number of Wood Group companies with the aim that all companies will adapt the Group Policy and Management System to their own needs by the end of the year.
Our health and safety performance in 1992 was very encouraging with lost time incidents and the associated frequency index both substantially down from last year.
We set a frequency rate target of 0.7 per 100,000 manhours for 1992 — in fact we achieved a rate of 0.5 which was excellent and all concerned must be congratulated for their vigilance.
Following on from our silver award in 1991, we were very pleased that our excellent safety record in 1992 was recognised by our achieving the RoSPA gold award which was presented in May of this year.
Environmental performance has also been reviewed at a number of companies and this review should be complete by the end of 1993.
Quality
‘We aim to understand and exceed our customers’ needs for high quality, value for money products and services.’
Most Wood Group companies now have BS5750 and specific certification relevant to their individual activities.
Rolls Wood Group and Wood Group Engineering Contractors are well underway with their TQM programmes which are already showing real advances in some key areas of our business.
Other companies are expected to join the programme this year.
Communications
The quarterly newspaper Wood News continues to be our principal source of communication and in 1992 we established a network of local Correspondents to ensure that news from all companies reaches us for publication.
This has proved to be a great success and is encouraging participation from a wider range of companies than before.
We are aware that many employees are interested to learn about what Wood Group companies do and where they are located.
The 1993 editions are therefore concentrating on different areas of the world and have so far covered the Middle East and the United States of America.
Personnel Development
‘We aim to develop the knowledge, skills, creativity and potential of all our people and to generate involvement, teamwork and pride in their work.’
Since the last Employee Report, the Group personnel department has been involved in reviewing and updating personnel policies throughout the Group including induction procedures, substance misuse and harassment at work.
These and other personnel policies will gradually be introduced into all companies via the implementation of updated staff handbooks.
Training and development continues to form an important part of the Group personnel department's remit.
The emphasis is on the performance appraisal system which identifies employees' training and development needs.
We place great importance on individual job and performance objectives reflecting the organisation's overall business aims.
The Group's training centre was opened in August of last year with four teaching rooms available for both in-house courses and external use.
The centre has had a very promising first year with good uptake and usage rates.
With increasing client support, some notable achievement were made in respect of individual trainees:
Two WGEC pipefitting apprentices became the first apprentices to go offshore.
This was achieved via the shell MMSC contract.
Four HNC trainees were recruited and training plans developed for offshore duties in the instrumentation field.
Graduate trainee Simon Roberts, a 23-year-old process engineer, won the Offshore Contractors Council Training Award for 1992.
Simon gained valuable site experience which helped him to gain chartered engineer status.
Two 16-year-old process control trainees have been sponsored for a two-year college-based training course in Edinburgh.
They will eventually work offshore.
The technical training department is currently working on the issue of competency assurance which is required by the new Safety Case Regulations.
In addition, the department is assisting several Group companies who are aiming to secure nationally recognised vocational qualifications to illustrate the competency of Wood Group employees to our clients.
Community Activities
‘We aim to care for the local communities in which we operate.’
In 1992 we extended our programme of support to a variety of charities, particularly those related to local community projects and where employees are directly involved.
In this respect, we have launched the John Wood Group Employee Community Fund whereby employees can request funds for a charity in they are directly involved.
Long-term projects include support to the Aberdeen Cyrenians who help homeless young people, a Young Artists Competition run in conjunction with Aberdeen Royal Infirmary and the D.E.S.K.
project which educates children in the use of desktop publishing and provides computer equipment to winning schools.
Charitable donations in 1992 were £78,000 in direct contribution with various contributions being made in kind.