

How we perform now will affect what ultimately happens to AEA, says chairman 
‘As a newcomer to AEA the Strategic Options Exercise gave me the chance to focus on some fundamental issues about the way we manage our activities,’ he told AEA Times .
In particular it showed me the many opportunities we have, and that we are a talented organisation.
said it was important that AEA was recognized as being talented to secure a successful future.
‘By this I mean that we must show that we can meet current targets; that we have the blend of skills and abilities our customers want; that we have the desire to compete.
We must also demonstrate a good track record.
So how we perform over coming months will have a profound affect on what ultimately happens to AEA.
and I are convinced that the new structure will support us in this.
It will enable us to focus our activities and give us even greater clarity of purpose.
This, in turn, will help us to build up the evidence we need to convince our audiences.
For example, we must prove the potential of our commercial activities and, particularly, the effectiveness of keeping them together.
We must equally demonstrate to Government our fitness to undertake the important work of managing nuclear activities on their behalf safely and cost-effectively.
I understand the concerns that people will have about the forthcoming changes, not least because I have seen similar exercises in IBM.
There we also had to restructure to give us a better market focus.
It led to some job losses but it was justified in the company's longer-term interests — and therefore the interests of the majority of employees.
The overriding lesson I learned is that no one can afford to stand still given today's commercial pressures.
Any organisation that wants to survive and succeed must constantly question itself about how it operates, whether it has the right balance of products/skills and — most important of all — whether it is actually providing what its customers want.
said he believed we had all to be constantly critical of ourselves in AEA.
‘Above all we must ask are we providing the evidence to customers (whoever they are that will enable us to secure a successful outcome for all of us in AEA’.
I will be working closely with Brian Eyre over coming months to help to create the climate that will lead to favourable decisions about our future.
I am also visiting the various sites over coming weeks and look forward to hearing your views about how we can work together to secure the best outcome for AEA and its employees.
There's often a lot of hot air spoken about airbags — you know, the devices that inflate rapidly in an accident — but one things for sure, they certainly help save lives.
These devices hit the headlines a few years back when two cars in the United States collided at a closing speed of some 70 miles per hour.
The cars were written off in the accident, but both drivers amazingly walked away with just minor cuts and bruises.
They both had cars equipped with airbags.
By the year 2000, experts believe that airbags will be saving some 9,000 lives per year in the US alone.
In fact, in America all new passenger cars must be fitted with these devices by 1998.
Ford has recently announced that it is to offer airbags as standard equipment on every model in its range in the UK.
By December even the most basic Fiesta models will have a driver's side airbag with a passenger one as an option.
Vauxhall, a major player on the safety front, is to offer twin airbags as standard equipment on its pricier Calibra and Cavalier models.
Jaguar is offering them on every new model and Audi is said to be phasing out its Procon-Ten safety system in favour of driver's-side airbags.
Sales of airbags as optional extras is also on the way up as many drivers think safety instead of the usual comforts like sunroofs and fancy paintwork.
The testimony of these devices was shown by a Ford employee who was involved in a serious accident in his new Mondeo.
He was hit by a stolen car at a combined impact speed of 120 miles per hour which forced his car 100 metres backwards and destroyed the whole side of the car.
He got out with just cuts and bruises.
Road traffic accidents — a personal experience
I suppose that many of you will have heard about my motoring experience a few weeks ago as I was travelling from Winfrith to Harwell.
If you haven't then the story goes like this….
It was a gloomy, drizzly morning, the radio was playing, the roads were quiet and my speed was about 50 miles per hour.
I turned into a gentle left hand bend, saw a queue of cars ahead and hit the brake.
The car skidded for what seemed like an eternity and the lady driver coming the other way did her best to stop, but we collided head on.
I remember thinking ‘Is this the end?’,
‘Will I be badly hurt?’.
In fact, luck was with me as there was not as much damage as I thought.
I felt perfectly well.
What a relief.
The other driver was also only shaken.
The car was crumpled where it was supposed to be crumpled, but seemed otherwise repairable.
However, there was more excitement in store.
The car engine continued to run despite my having the ignition key in my pocket!
Within a mere fifteen minutes, the new rental car with 1500 miles on the clock — and had only had in my possession for under an hour — was a burnt out shell.
I remember thinking that if I had been trapped in the car, the firemen would not have reached me in time.
It is an experience I will never forget.
It was with a good measure of personal interest that I read a British Medical Journal article on the study of ‘psychological consequences of road traffic accidents’.
Conducted by a psychiatrist and an orthopaedic surgeon, the study looked at nearly 200 road accident victims aged between 18 and 70 with multiple injuries or whiplash neck injury who had not been unconscious.
They followed up the cases for 12 months to discover how the accident had affected their general mental state, travel anxiety and their attitude to driving or being a passenger.
The study found that almost 20 per cent developed significant problems including anxiety, depression, fear of driving or being a passenger and many continued to have vivid memories of the accident months after the event.
It also showed that these consequences occur not only in those who are severely injured, but also for the very many people who suffer minor injury or are uninjured.
The researchers suggest that victims would benefit from knowing that these effects are common and should discuss their feelings openly with colleagues or medical staff.
The article helped me to cope and thanks also to my colleagues who heard the story dozens of times.
My most vivid memory is not the accident, but my telephone call to the car rental company later that morning.
You can imagine my reluctance to call as I didn't think that they would be too pleased to say the least.
‘I am very sorry,’ I said.
‘I have had a bit of an accident and the car you rented to me this morning is now a burnt out shell!’
The receptionist replied, ‘Are you alright, though, sir?’
Who says no-one cares.
, currently marketing director with the Electric Power Division of Lucas Aerospace, has been appointed director of international business development.
At Lucas, 38 year old  has been responsible for the creation of a global marketing and commercial function worth some £750 million.
Prior to his eight years at Lucas, he worked with Noel Penny Turbines Limited and Rolls Royce.
He joins AEA on 18 October.
IN STRICT CONFIDENCE
DRAFT
AEA TIMES BULLETIN — MESSAGE FROM THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
NEXT STEPS FOR AEA
In the last issue of AEA Times, I wrote about some of the key developments in our review of privatisation options.
Since then, we have sent a formal paper to the Minister setting out our views.
DTI's own advisers, Barclays de Zoete Wedd (BZW), have also submitted their report but we have not seen this.
It will probably be some months yet before we get the final government reaction to our proposals.
But the discussions we have had point clearly to the next step, which will be to reorganise AEA Technology to better reflect our main activities and the requirements of our customers.
It is clear that AEA has two quite distinct missions: the first is to fulfil our traditional nuclear role by:
decommissioning our facilities and disposing of the radioactive waste cost-effectively, consistent with meeting stringent safety and environmental requirements.
managing a small number of government programmes which remain
the second is to carry forward our commercially led strategy by developing the unparalleled expertise we needed for our nuclear mission into a successful robust business which could potentially move into the private sector;
This is not a new concept for us.
Pursuing a focused commercial strategy while effectively managing the nuclear liabilities has been central to our implementation of the Pushing the Limits strategy over the last three years.
The Monopoly and Mergers Commission (MMC) report in 1992 concluded that AEA's commercial business activities now rested ‘uneasily in the public sector’ since this inevitably constrained our entrepreneurial activities.
It also accepted that part of AEA would need to remain in the public sector.
Since then we have taken steps to sharpen the focus on both our separate missions as we have become increasingly confident that our commercial work can prosper on its merits.
This is an evolutionary process and, while we must not pre-empt the various options which still remain for AEA's future, neither must we lose our momentum and fail to make the progress we know is needed.
The world outside is not standing still and neither must we.
I and my colleagues on the Board are convinced that we must continue to develop our organisational basis with the aim of creating the conditions for success whatever the future may hold.
We therefore need to start to make these further changes within AEA right away.
We have not yet resolved all the detail but I should tell you about the key aspects of these changes so that we can go forward together to put the new arrangements successfully in place.
The Board have agreed that from 1 April 1994 our basic organisation should distinguish more clearly between our two separate missions.
We shall therefore be dividing AEA's activities and employees between:
a Government Division;
a Commercial Division;
and a Services Division, which will support them for a transitional period
The Government Division and the Commercial Division will need to meet basically different requirements in a number of key areas.
This is particularly so with respect to commercial and financial objectives, which will require different management and operational styles.
Such a difference of focus needs to be implemented now in order to foster the conditions for both parts to be a success.
There is much to be done over the next few months to achieve implementation in 1994/5.
This will start with working out in more detail the implications for management structures and responsibilities, and for the arrangements governing relations between the different parts of AEA.
The aim is to have made sufficient progress with these aspects for work on the 1994/5 Budget to start using the new basis of organisation at the end of this calendar year.
AEA BOARD
The organisational changes we are now proposing are still within the overall framework of AEA.
Therefore the Board of AEA of course remains in being.
It will be a special concern of myself and the Chairman to maintain the overall coherence and integrity of the organisation, and I will be making this a specific strand in Executive management of the changes.
THE NEW ORGANISATION
The three new Divisions will function as follows:
GOVERNMENT DIVISION
The key objectives for the Division will be to discharge the AEA's still major responsibilities for Government in the most effective way, whilst meeting all of the requirements for safety and the protection of the environment and of nuclear materials.
It will carry out commercial work for example using the Dounreay Fuel Plants only if doing so uses facilities important for the government work and also reduces the net cost to Government.
Government Division will therefore be primarily a procurement organisation eventually containing:
responsibility for the nuclear liabilities currently managed by the Corporate DRAWMOPS Directorate (CDD);
the landlord function for all AEA sites, leasing property to Commercial Division and other tenants as required and buying in property services
From the business side it will include:
the operation of the radioactive waste plants at Dounreay, Harwell and Winfrith
the Fuel Services work at Dounreay
and also the Fusion Programme at Culham
The management of Dounreay under the new arrangements will be a particularly important responsibility.
We are therefore appointing a Director of Dounreay Site Operations.
currently Business Director of Engineering Project Management (EPM), will manage all operations at Dounreay, including the fuel plants.
He will report to  and will be accountable to the Director of CDD, for DRAWMOPS work.
I have asked  to take the lead for setting up Government Division.
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
This will contain:
Nuclear Services: Reactor Services and the Harwell part of Fuel Services; Consultancy Services;
Decommissioning and Waste Management;
Industrial Technology;
Engineering Project Management;
Teams transferring from Warren Spring Laboratory will be part of the Commercial Division.
Fuel Services will cease to operate as a separate business from 1 April 1994, and  will retire at that time.
As mentioned earlier Fuel Services activities at Dounreay will be managed by .
The Commercial Division will have to demonstrate strong commercial performance by winning new business, particularly overseas and in the UK private sector reducing costs still further and abandoning unpromising work.
If, as we expect, the track record of the Division justifies privatisation from 1995 onwards, we see three main options.
The Board and the Executive team are convinced that
the best way forward for our customers, for AEA and for our Government owners is either a public flotation or a private placement combined with a measure of employee ownership (open to all employees at the time of flotation).
We must recognise that a trade sale as a single entity is theoretically possible, although we believe that there is no obvious buyer.
In any case we further believe that could jeopardise our value to some customers as an independent source of support.
Least attractive in our view would be a piecemeal trade sale: we believe this would sacrifice AEA's ability to deliver an integrated solution to our customers' safety, environmental or operational problems.
However, the final decision will be for government and they will wish to review all the options.
Whatever the outcome we are confident that we have the basis of a viable and profitable business.
I have asked  to take the lead in setting up Commercial Division.
I should stress that this will not pre-empt Government options on the form of privatisation.
SERVICES DIVISION
Both Government and Commercial Divisions will require support services but it will take time to define just what is essential.
Some services, notably safety and finance, must also be sustained on a corporate basis while AEA retains current statutory accountabilities.
We therefore propose to retain corporate service structures, but for a finite period only.
Corporate Finance and Safety teams will continue to report separately at top level to AEA corporate management, who will continue to have a small CHQ support team.
The remaining services will form a Services Division operating for 1994/5 only.
This covers Estates, QIS, Personnel, Security, Constabulary and Communications.
During that time, the task for the Service Division management will be:
to continue to make improvements in cost-effectiveness;
to continue to match overall service provision to evolving needs;
to agree with the other Divisions the core service specification, procurement and management they will wish to retain in-house;
to create the teams required and plan their integration with the other two Divisions;
and to move the balance of the service teams and their work into the private sector.
The last point will be of major importance to significant parts of Estates and possibly other service areas.
It is inevitable that the market for these teams is bound to continue to contract within AEA.
However, the market is developing rapidly externally.
Moving the teams out of AEA, on a basis which sustains the motivation of those involved, will also give scope for greater flexibility and clearer focus for the other parts of AEA.
I have asked  to take the lead in establishing in more detail the structure and approach for Services Division.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS
These are major changes, and I realise that for many people a further round of reorganisation will not be welcome.
These changes may result in somewhat greater reductions in employee numbers than we had previously envisaged, in addition to any transfer out of teams.
It is too early to quantify this but I hope that as before any redundancies can be managed as far as possible on a voluntary basis.
Specific redundancies will be discussed with the unions in the normal manner.
I and my colleagues understand the anxiety caused by uncertainties like this and will clarify the position as early as possible.
Because I recognise you will have concerns I am committed to a vigorous programme of communication both at corporate and at local level.
In the next few days you will be briefed by your managers who will be picking up issues specific to your particular part of the organisation and who will act as feedback channels for your questions and concerns.
I will be updating you at least once a month through AEA Times and will do my best to respond to your questions.
A great deal of work now needs to be done to work out the details of the new arrangements.
In addition, considerable uncertainty must remain until we know government's firm views on our future.
However, I believe that the steps that we are now taking are logical and, indeed, essential.
Ref dp/sc/special
By the time our major advertising campaign is complete, millions will have seen our adverts and thus have a clearer perception of AEA.
This is the view of Leo Burnett Limited, the advertising agency that handled the £450,000 campaign and boasts clients such as Mercedes Benz, United Airlines, Save the Children and the Bradford and Bingley Building Society.
Since the campaign broke in the Financial Times on 20 September — and with subsequent adverts in the Daily Telegraph and The Times a few days later — response has been good.
‘We have had enquires, a great response considering it is still early days,’ said  a specialist calls agency.
, director of Corporate Communication Service, explained the thinking behind the campaign.
‘The main aim is to raise the awareness of AEA among our key audiences — particularly amongst our existing and potential customers,’ he said.
‘All our research has shown a general lack of awareness of AEA which we have to overcome if we are to break into new markets at the rate determined by our ambitious sales targets,’ added.
The adverts were designed to generate some sales leads as well as the main aim of raising awareness and these will be handled by .
They have skilled operators who will ask focused questions and get a complete set of contact and requirement details.
‘We don't believe that these adverts are specific enough to do more than stimulate people's interest in our general services,’ said .
‘We are working on a much more specific case study adverts in early 1994 that will build on the awareness of this campaign and will focus more on lead generation.’
So, what did you think of the adverts? of Decommissioning and Waste Management's Transport Technology Department felt that the idea of the high-profile campaign was ‘good, but it should have been done years ago’.
He added, ‘I think the concept of mentioning major customers was useful, but the design of the advert was rather dull.’
In research for the advertising campaign — where we carried out in-depth, face-to-face interviews with senior representatives of 50 existing and potential customers — we looked at existing attitudes and probed them on what it would take to persuade them to come to us to answer their problems.
Typical quotes were: ‘They only work in the nuclear industry’.
‘It's only a small company — they don't advertise much’.
‘They only work for Government’.
‘They're not very commercial’.
It can be seen that their knowledge of AEA was very sketchy and fragmented, they were confused about our range of services and they felt we were too civil service and bureaucratic.
‘Many did, however, recognise our skills and expertise — our intellectual ‘horsepower’— and many wanted to know more,’ he added.
To build on this campaign and extend the message, a series of smaller value-for-money adverts will run until mid-November.
‘These will re-emphasise the identity of AEA as a science and engineering services business and give people a second chance to respond,’ he said.
A direct mail programme will also be undertaken and will reach some 15,000 named people who have been thoroughly researched as existing or potential customers.
The calls will build to a comprehensive database and will be passed through to our Business Strategy Unit (BSU) who will collate all the information.
Looking at the best of chemical engineering within AEA is what the Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow Service will be focusing on in a two day conference starting on 30 November 1993.
The event, to be held at Milton Common in Oxfordshire, will cover the most interesting and important areas of chemical engineering research currently being carried out within AEA.
‘The purpose of this event is to get people to ‘network’ a lot more,’explained , HTFS product group manager.
‘It is important to bring people together to exchange information.
It will certainly help in the cross-fertilisation of ideas.’
Further details are available from  on 
As you will see from this issue of AEA Times, there has been an enormous response to the announcement that we are to restructure into three divisions from 1 April next year.
Completed questionnaires are flooding into Corporate Communication Service.
From these it is clear that there is a wide variety of emotional reactions to the news, ranging from those of you who are depressed and worried to those who are enthusiastic and supportive.
In many areas there is deep concern about the future of jobs, others express worry about reporting relationships, some express eagerness to get on with making it work and many want more information on pension rights and redundancy terms.
The announcement heralds a period of great uncertainty as the implications of these changes are fully worked through.
Research by Market and Opinion Research International (MORI) shows that employees in any organisation in similar circumstances express a common need at a time like this — they call for fast, straight forward communications, even when the news is bad.
Your response confirms that you are no different.
You told us that you appreciated the special AEA Times bulletin, that it was user-friendly, direct and plain-speaking.
You also appreciated the face-to-face briefings and, especially, the commitment to regular communications.
Above all, you asked that we continue to ‘tell it like it is.’
AEA Times will continue to play its part in the communication process.
But, to help us give you want you want, we need your feedback.
Please let us know if you have any constructive suggestions as how we can improve further .
MP, Minister of State for Energy, visited Culham and Harwell last month.
As the Minister responsible for AEA at the Department of Trade and Industry, his perceptions of us are critical to our future.
The Minister was accompanied throughout by chief executive,, and was interested in our skills and expertise as well as our progress in developing an increasingly commercially-orientated culture.
He was briefed on our core competencies, focusing on environment, safety and plant optimisation.
These are areas crucial to the competitiveness of UK industry and where tighter UK and EC legislative and operating standards offer significant prospect for the sale of AEA expertise.
managing director of our Industrial Business Group, introduced the first part of the Minister's tour, with a visit to industrial Businesses, where presentations were made on our work on electromagnetic compatibility, technology for medical and health care markets, advanced batteries and technology transfer to the process industries.
The Minister was interested in the exploitation of our work on advanced batteries and was also shown laser techniques for keyhole surgery and our licensed laser technology for the removal of ‘port-wine’ birth marks.
He was able to see for himself how problems of electrical interference from laptop computers are being tackled by our Electromagnetic Compatibility Unit.
The Unit demonstrates how AEA can respond to problems faced through the everyday use of advanced technologies and by solving problems, grow and develop world markets.
The next stop was the nuclear Businesses, accompanied by , where our work on technical services to Japanese nuclear facilities and special services for the MoD and nuclear generating companies was described.
He was briefed on how our skills are playing a key role in servicing the world's nuclear energy industry and that there is significant potential for business in the global market.
The Minister then joined  and a group of technical staff from the Businesses for lunch.
This produced a lively discussion about customer perceptions of AEA and staff's own thoughts about our future development.
Commenting on the visit, said, ‘The Minister was interested to see how AEA is developing into a commercially-sustainable business.
We were very pleased to be able to show him the range of products and services which are being exploited in our various markets.
We are looking forward to welcoming him to see our work at other sites and hope that he will be able to visit Risley in the near future.
Staff within Engineering Project Management are leading a £760,000 environmental project designed to reduce the heavy metal content in industrial liquid discharges.
The project is a spin-off from the nuclear work carried out by Decommissioning and Waste Management at Dounreay and has the support of the Department of Environment through its Environmental Technology Innovation Scheme, which will provide half of the funding.
‘The project will concentrate on removing mercury and cadmium in particular from these discharges,’ explained  business development manager.
‘The manufacture and especially the disposal of primary batteries containing mercury, and rechargeable batteries containing cadmium, have a major impact on the environment.’
Experts believe that the discharge limits for these substances — many of which are included on the EEC's ‘black list’ due to their toxicity, persistence and tendency to accumulate in organisms — should always be based on the best available control technology.
AEA will be collaborating with Pall Process Filtration Limited of Portsmouth on this three year project.
A pilot plant will test the effectiveness of various combinations of chemical conditioning and filtration.
‘Higher environmental standards are now a reality that regulators, waste producers and technologists have to face daily in this ever greening world,’ said  project manager and manager of Waste Process Development at Dounreay.
‘Our experience shows that suitable chemical conditioning and filtration can meet tightening legislation and the project we are starting is aimed at demonstrating this for heavy metal removal.’
Tens of tonnes of mercury are dumped in batteries each year and worldwide tens of thousands of tonnes of cadmium are used in battery manufacture — 50 per cent of total cadmium usage.
Contrary to expectations and the weather forecast, the Lake District sun shone on Decommissioning and Waste Management's second annual inter-site football tournament.
Based this year at Windscale and played on British Nuclear Fuels' Falcon Club ground at Egremont, the teams travelled as far and wide as Dounreay, Harwell and Winfrith for this popular one day event.
In a closely contested competition, ably refereed by Windscale's superfit Keith Birkett, Windscale emerged victorious with two wins and a draw, with Winfrith coming second, followed by Harwell and Dounreay in third and fourth places respectively.
At the close of play, the presentations were made by , wife of site manager,.
The D&W Challenge Cup was presented to the winning team captain, and the highest scorer trophies were awarded to Dounreay's  and  of Windscale with four goals each.
‘The occasion was voted a success, not least because 60 footballers AEA-wide renewed acquaintances from the first tournament,’ said Windscale's Steven White.
‘Dounreay have offered to host next year's event with the promise of some fine Scottish hospitality.
Roll on ‘94!’
, who took care of all the administrative arrangements, was presented with a bouquet of fresh flowers from the teams.
‘Mission or market?— the challenge for research and development centres in Europe’ is the theme of an ISC Forum five-day symposium, organised by AEA.
The opening session will be chaired by , head of the Business Strategy Unit and , managing director of our Nuclear Businesses, will speak of AEA's market orientation.
AEA is one of 42 member organisations within the Forum, which was set up in 1977 to provide European research centres with the opportunity to mutually exchange information.
Discomfort for hip replacement patients could be dramatically reduced by two major advances in orthopaedic medicine say leading experts from AEA, Corin Medical and Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre in Oxford.
The first is the launch by Corin of a revolutionary universal hip that enables surgeons to tailor hip replacements to the patient, whilst the second is the advance by AEA of a technique for measuring bone density that has made early detection of bone wastage possible for the first time.
Invented by surgeon Peter McLardy-Smith of Nuffield, and developed by Corin, the universal hip reduces damaging and potentially painful wastage — or resorption — of bone around the implant following surgery.
‘I have come across numerous cases where a hip replacement has failed simply because it was not an exact fit in the first place,’ said .
‘I felt that if the implant could be made up from a range of different sized components, surgeons would be able to produce a much better fit.’
Bone is a living tissue which constantly adapts to the body's changing requirements.
For this reason, the bones of road runners — which undergo high levels of stress — tend to be denser than less active people.
It is exactly this problem which causes a percentage of artificial hip joint failures.
Unless the implant directs stresses out into the surrounding femur, bone tissue will be resorbed and the implant will become loose causing severe pain to the patient and eventual failure.
Although this hip reduces the likelihood of resorption, early detection of problems is vital.
This is where AEA's dual energy x-ray absorptiometry — DXA — comes in, as it offers orthopaedic surgeons a safe and accurate method to investigate the outcome of surgery at a much earlier stage.
Using conventional x-ray films, a bone loss of some 30 per cent would be needed before a clinician could be sure that changes had occurred.
DXA's precision of two per cent means that much smaller changes can be observed.
‘The earlier we can obtain an indication of implant failure the better,’ explained  head of the Bone and Biomaterials Group at Harwell.
‘The early results are encouraging and I'm sure that DXA will play a major role in future clinical trials in orthopaedics.’
Travelling in this country or overseas?
Need a hotel?
Want to save money?
If you answer yes to the above, then some of the initiatives introduced by Purchasing and Supply could help your journey cost less and run more efficiently.
They have published a list of recommended hotels close to AEA sites and beyond, organised corporate rates with hotels and negotiated preferential rates with Eurodollar for hire cars.
Purchasing and Supply's  will be issuing an updated version of his ‘Recommended Hotels’ list in early October to those previously on the mailing list.
Contact your business secretary or Administration Office for further details.
‘The list includes special deals which have been negotiated at specific hotels as well as agreements with two major chains,’ said .
‘The whole range of accommodation is covered, from basic bed and breakfast through to four star business hotels.’
He went on, ‘The two chains we are using — Forte and Stakis — both have 0800 freephone booking numbers.
When you use these numbers — you will need to use a credit card with Forte — your booking will be logged up as an AEA purchase.’
AEA's main travel agents, Wagons-Lits have a number of corporate rates agreed with hotels worldwide.
Their comprehensive service goes from booking planes, ferries and trains at the best rates through to hotel bookings and visa emergency services.
Purchasing has also negotiated preferential rates with Eurodollar, supported by other companies where necessary.
‘Whilst the service has been very high, we are investigating with Eurodollar of ways to further increase customer satisfaction,’ explained .
‘And don't forget, provided you use AEA's travel deals, all issues are automatically taken care of.’
The stock of 168 houses situated at Harwell and in neighbouring towns are being offered to existing tenants at discounts of up to 60 per cent.
‘This is the first time that discounts have been extended to include householders on short term lets and others,’ explained  Harwell estate manager.
‘We are delighted that since we announced the sales, we have received over 70 applications to purchase from tenants.’
The sale of surplus housing, which was built in the 1950s, and land near Harwell is to be managed by Kemp and Kemp, an Oxford firm of surveyors and planning consultants.
AEA is also exploring the potential for modest residential development on small areas of surplus land at nearby Abingdon and Wantage.
Discussions are at ‘an early stage’ with local authorities on how best to protect other areas of land.
‘We are considering various options for the surplus land associated with the housing stock,’ added .
‘For example, some local residents have expressed interest in acquiring small plots of nearby land and we shall ensure that other residents have the same opportunity.’
The Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow Service has upgraded its software for designing shell and tube heat exchangers to run on Microsoft Windows.
‘Our research showed that over half our customers were using a Windows operating system,’ commented , managing director of HTFS, a joint venture between AEA, NEL and the Atomic Energy of Canada.
‘We have upgraded our software to meet our customers’ needs.’
HTFS has found that its M-TASC software is used every minute of the day by oil, chemical and petrochemical companies in the design of heat exchangers.
You too can read news about a week before it is printed in paper journals!
Much like the international telephone network and unlike UK-restricted e-mail, the Internet the worlds largest computer network is now accessible to you.
As fast as FAX and having user groups for just about every computer and software product around, it is becoming one of the main channels for passing information around the scientific community for example, much of the debate on Cold Fusion was carried out over the Internet.
Already, 200 AEA staff are among its 15 million users worldwide covering some 800,000 organisations.
of AEA Industrial Technology said ‘Benefits include improved communications with overseas clients, i.e. no lost faxes!
Another satisfied customer is  of Consultancy Services.
had a paper to submit to a workshop in the Netherlands.
The deadline was the following day and the couriers could not guarantee that a floppy disk would get there in time.
The WordPerfect documents were sent via the Internet and arrived within five minutes!
In order to use the Internet simply register with QIS.
For further information telephone 
Two years’ hard work by  and  in talking to in-house experts and visiting other companies has resulted in a new guide for the international offshore oil industry.
The pair, who work in the Process Studies department at Harwell, made a lot of contacts — a few of which resulted in more work for AEA — when researching the manual.
‘It was a big coordinating exercise,’ said , section manager.
‘We produced a major amount of paperwork.’
The Field Developer's Manual was published in response to the growing need for both technical and economic information on the application of novel offshore production techniques.
Jointly published by techno-economic specialists Smith Rea Energy Associates Limited, the five-volume companion guide will be of assistance to oil field development groups and engineering support within the industry, as well as its suppliers and contractors.
In a preface to the manual, the CEC's director general for energy, said, ‘It addresses innovations of great interest and importance to the international oil industry.
I am confident, therefore, that it will find a wide audience not only in this industry, but also in other organisations that follow closely such technological developments.’
Win £15 cash or a new-style AEA umbrella
Last month's lucky winners were  of the Aerosol Science Centre, Winfrith and  Printing Services, Culham
You can win £15 cash or a new AEA umbrella in the AEA Times word search competition.
All you have to do is study the grid below and find the hidden words.
Please send your entry to The Editor,AEA Times , to arrive no later than Wednesday 20 October 1993.
The first correct answer drawn will win £15 cash and the second a new AEA umbrella.
Reading forwards, backwards, up, down and diagonally, find the listed words hidden in the grid.
The unused letters will spell out a key word.
has been re-appointed for a further year as part-time member of AEA Board.
He was Isaac Woolfson Professor of Metallurgy at the University of Oxford from 1966 to 1992.  was part-time chairman of AEA from 1982 to 1984 and has been a part-time member since then.
Bratislava in Slovakia is the venue of AEA's latest overseas venture after a new office was officially opened earlier this month.
This move will enable us to work closely with Slovak authorities and industry in the fields of hazardous waste management, decommissioning, land remediation and reactor safety, as well as energy strategy and efficiency, plant life management and industrial risk management.
‘Our aim is to help them achieve their goals of a safe and efficient nuclear power programme and an effective means of managing hazardous waste,’ commented  head of business development for Slovakia.
‘We will assist in the removal of old facilities that have been used previously in operations using radioactive or other hazardous materials,’ he added.
‘This will allow existing buildings and land that has been contaminated to be returned to use.’
The office will be headed by Slovak-born nuclear engineer,, who joined us in April this year.
He said, ‘We are currently in the process of completing a contract for SEP at the A1 nuclear power station at Bohunice to decontaminate the reactor hall.
‘The opening of our new office demonstrates our commitment to our future involvement in Slovakia and gives us the opportunity to continue to build on the excellent relations that have already been established,’ he added.
‘I will have access to all the expertise required to solve a problem and provide a swift and cost effective solution.’
AEA employees have been reacting to the recent announcement about our forthcoming restructuring into three Divisions.
Your comments, concerns and suggestions have been flooding in and are being studied by management at all locations.
In this issue we ask chief executive  to respond to some of the key questions you have raised and to describe what he sees happening next.
‘In the recent AEA Times bulletin I stressed the need to start work right away to work out the details of the forthcoming changes.
— who are taking the lead in setting up the new Divisions — are now starting discussions, where necessary backed by targeted groups to take our thinking forward.
They will be advising myself and the Chairman and I will be reporting progress to you,’ he explains.
‘On the wider front, Government have been considering the recently submitted report from BZW.
Although we have not seen the report we have had encouraging indication that in some of the key areas BZW's views and recommendations are broadly consistent with the views we have submitted to DTI and that they support the next steps we are taking.
They have raised some issues which we are discussing with Government, particularly on the various options for the timing and route of any privatisation.’
said it was likely to be some time before we know Government's position on our future.
‘In the meantime we must not forget that we have tough targets to meet for the current year.
I recognise that we have a great deal of work to do in planning for the next steps in taking our strategy forward.
But this would be weakened if we were to be deflected from our existing targets.
Also, achieving them is vital for creating continuing Government backing for our plans,’ he said.
‘I would like to restate the commitment of the Chairman and myself to keeping you informed.
In the current situation many issues as yet remain unresolved and we do not have all the answers.
But our intention is to take account of your views and address the issues that concern you at the earliest practicable opportunity.
‘I am grateful to all those who fed back their comments after the recent cascade.
I hope the coverage in this edition of AEA Times and in future will demonstrate we recognize the difficult questions and are working hard, involving a large number of people to develop the answers.’
The recent AEA Times bulletin gave the details of the AEA's new structure.
To recap, the Board has decided that from 1.4.94.
AEA's activities and employees will be divided between:
a Government Division
a Commercial Division
a Services Division to support them for a transitional period
This reorganisation is necessary to enable us to focus even more sharply on our two distinct missions to continue our traditional but much changed nuclear work for UK Government by:
decommissioning our radioactive facilities and disposing of the waste cost-effectively, while meeting stringent safety and environmental requirements, as well as managing a small number of other government nuclear programmes which remain;
driving forward our commercial strategy by:
developing the unparalleled expertise we needed for our nuclear mission into a successful robust business which could potentially move into the private sector.
Your questions answered by 
We put the key questions you raised during the recent feedback exercise to :
(i) When will more details be available?
As we explained in the AEA Times bulletin we have not yet resolved all the issues and to some extent we must be flexible in taking account of the way Government thinking develops.
A great deal of work remains to be done.
I am now working with the Chairman, with external advisers, to make sure the principles of the design of the new structure and a vision for each part are further developed.
This work will set the tone for the new structure, and I hope can be completed well within two months.
In parallel the three Managing Directors are starting to sort out the detailed issues connected with the new structure.
This will involve a large number of managers, some further external help, and considerable debate.
Again, my aim is to have clarified as much as possible by the end of November, so we can bring it all together at the Senior Management Strategy Conference.
All AEA Management is committed to regular communication with staff throughout this exercise and we intend to provide regular updates on the way it develops.
But it will be several weeks before we are in a position to provide greater detail on the composition of the three Divisions, and on the next steps in setting them up.
ii) Will we be told what was in our submission to DTI?
And when?
The key messages of our submission to DTI were publicised in the AEA Times bulletin.
The submission has now been circulated to senior managers throughout AEA.
While it contains some sensitive commercial information, and is not suitable for free distribution to everyone, I know they will draw on it further in their discussions about creating the new structure.
(iii) Will we be told what BZW's recommendations were?
And when?
The BZW report was a confidential document commissioned by DTI.
AEA has not seen a copy and does not expect to do so.
Our knowledge of the report contents is based on our discussions with BZW and DTI in recent weeks.
AEA Management met DTI officials on 13 September for a general discussion of the two submissions.
We were pleased to get indications that the recommendations in the BZW report were consistent with those in our own submission in many key areas.
There are inevitably areas where our views diverge and these will be the subject of further discussion and negotiation with DTI in the coming months.
(iv) What form of privatisation is likely?
It is still too soon to comment with any authority on the likely form of privatisation.
Experience of earlier privatisations is that the form of sale is rarely settled until quite a late stage in the exercise.
As stated in the AEA Times bulletin our clear preference is for our commercial business to be retained essentially in a single company that is transferred to the private sector either by a public flotation or private placement.
We are particularly keen to ensure that there will be a measure of employee ownership — open to all AEA employees.
(v) Have any organisations expressed an interest in buying AEA or parts of it?
We have received no formal approaches of this sort although we believe some organisations may have expressed some informal interest to DTI.
(vi) How will Government and Commercial Divisions decide which Services Division teams to absorb by 1.4.95?
There will be a period of detailed discussions between the respective Divisions about the nature and level of in-house services support that the Government and Commercial Divisions will require.
No decisions have yet been taken.
(vii) What does the announcement mean for the future of the Windscale site?
We want to continue a range of business activities in the nuclear area and of course Government Division will have a strong interest in dealing with the nuclear liabilities.
Thus our activities at Windscale will be an essential part of the overall review we will be carrying out in preparation for the three Divisions.
Fuel Services MOX development activities at Windscale are subject to separate discussions with BNFL.
viii) On what conditions will Dounreay be able to undertake commercial work?
The existing programme of commercial work in the Fuel Services fuel plants at Dounreay is already subject to DTI/government endorsement.
This reorganisation will not necessarily change anything.
The scope and extent of the commercial undertakings at Dounreay will continue to be a matter for negotiation and agreement with DTI.
(ix) What is the role of CDD?
In essence the role discharged by CDD will not change.
It will be a pivotal part of Government Division as the procurement agent for DTI for nuclear liabilities.
It will continue its policy of competitive tendering and this reorganisation will reinforce the contractual relationship it must have with D&W and other business units in Commercial Division on the same basis as with external contractors.
The precise way in which the CDD team works with other parts of Government Division is now being discussed by .
(x) How will the reorganisation of AEA affect the management of safety?
It is paramount that safety standards are maintained during this period of change.
Individual managers have a special responsibility to ensure that staff in looking forward to future alternative arrangements do not neglect to do what they have to do, now and in the near future, prudently and safely.
Overall responsibility for meeting safety standards will continue to lie with AEA through myself and the Chairman until any division of the organisation is formally implemented.
xi) Will pay and conditions be the same in the new Divisions?
Yes.
There is no intention to differentiate between the pay and conditions of AEA employees.
(xii) What job losses are likely as a result of this reorganisation?
The current planning target for 1.4.94 is 7569 compared with our existing strength of 7900.
We do not yet know the implications for job numbers of the reorganisation, but as stated in the AEA Times Bulletin there may be a need to plan for more reductions than previously anticipated.
We are in the process of defining new plans which will also cover any changes needed to reflect market developments and continuing competitive pressures.
(xiii) How will any staff reductions be achieved — any compulsory redundancy?
Natural wastage in AEA is currently very low so if there is a need to reduce numbers this will need to be through further redundancies.
It remains AEA's intention to achieve this on a voluntary basis to the greatest extent possible.
xiv) Will be SERT be available and when?
For the vast majority of the workforce the enhanced terms known as SERT ceased to be available last March.
There are no plans to reintroduce them.
The early retirement provisions for existing employees currently available in AEA remain generous, and similarly there are no plans to change them.
(xv) What are the implications for our existing redundancy/pension rights:
a.
a. on reorganisation
b.
b. on privatisation
a.
a.
The reorganisation scheduled for 1.4.94. will not alter in any way the present pensions and redundancy arrangements that are available to all AEA employees.
b.
b.
The status of current pensions/redundancy arrangements would alter on privatisation, but UK and European legislation will afford protection to employees to ensure that they do not suffer any relative disadvantage as a result of privatisation.
And it will be a priority of the AEA Board to ensure that any AEA employees who do move into the private sector do so on terms that are no less favourable than those they currently enjoy.
(xvi) Is there still going to be a single pay and staffing framework for AEA, now that AEA is going to be reorganised into three Divisions with different objectives?
Yes.
Management's key objective has always been to introduce a simpler, single status pay and staffing structure, with sufficient flexibility to meet the needs of different parts of AEA.
That remains equally appropriate for the new organisational structure.
(xvii) Will the job evaluation exercise still go ahead?
Yes, the exercise will be proceeding as planned on a fully corporate basis, consistent with the continued aim of introducing a single status pay and staffing framework.
The reorganisation does not affect the range of work covered by AEA though obviously some jobs will change on 1 April 1994 and this will need to be taken into account in the detailed planning of the implementation stage.
The work on designing the scheme is already taking into account the need to cover areas of work with a range of different objectives and requirements.
Ref dp.sc.aeasoe
Flying some of the fastest kites in the world is not an easy task, just ask  's nine year old nephew,
, who works for Decommissioning and Waste Management at Harwell, gave  a try of one of his two FlexiFoil power kites and the next thing he knew ‘he was being dragged across the field on his bottom!’
explained, ‘These stunt kites produce enormous amounts of lift.
My ten foot span model can produce something like 150 kilos of lift.
They can be quite a handful, particularly in strong winds.’
You can really put these kites through paces with high-speed low level flying, glides and power dives with split-second recovery.
‘The stronger the wind and the bigger the kite, the more exciting it is,’ he added.
began power kiting several years ago after seeing BBC TV's Tomorrow's World programme.
‘Some students were using these kites to haul grain from the bottom of a Welsh mountain right to the top.
‘I had always been interested in flying kites ever since I was young, so when someone offered me one for sale, I jumped at the chance,’ added , whose wife  has also become hooked on the sport.
Flying these kites is ‘quite simple’ commented , ‘a pull on the left hand cord sends the kite left and vice versa.
However, performing many of the stunts requires good eye and hand coordination, as well as lots and lots of grip and strength.
It is basically a hobby for , as he has no interest in clubs or competitions, although he would now like to try some ‘stacking’ This involves, as the name suggests, attaching extra kites to the same line, considerably increasing the pull of the kite.
‘This offers a greater physical challenge and it makes the kite more visibly spectacular,’ he added.
In fact, such is the power of ‘stacking’ that these kites helped win a world sailing record.
A stack of ten, ten-foot power kites recently powered the catamaran ‘Jacobs Ladder’ to a class C world speed record.
When the wind picks up, sometimes flies the kites during his lunchbreak.
‘This caused some amusement amongst the lads at work,’ he said.
‘They used to pull my leg, but once they'd had a go they soon changed their minds.’
In  's view, no matter what your age, you can take part in kiting.
‘Everyone — young and old — can enjoy this sport,’ he explained.
‘Certainly, all the people who I've let loose on my kites have had a great time.’
Nuclear power has been given an encouraging thumbs up in a recent Daily Telegraph survey which looked into what kind of country the British public wanted their children to inherit.
Respondents to the UK2012 survey were split between the choice of nuclear and coal when asked which source — assuming renewables would not be sufficient to cater for the country's energy needs — they would prefer.
In a message to the Environment Secretary,, the paper stated, ‘It is remarkable that such a high percentage chose nuclear, indicating that readers are aware that coal has severe environmental problems.
An inquiry into British energy should be undertaken to weigh up the arguments and to give the UK a national strategy for the years to 2012 and beyond.’
Commenting on the recent poll,, managing director of our Nuclear Business Group, said that he was not surprised at the results.
‘It is now clear in countries such as the USA, where public apprehension about nuclear power grew before it did in Britain, that people are now moving away from outright opposition,’ he said.
‘They were coming to see that no energy source is perfect and that nuclear power might, as its supporters continue to claim, be more acceptable in safety and environmental terms than any of the others.’
also thought that the media had, in recent years, turned their attention much more strongly to the downside environmental impact of coal, especially to its producing large amounts of carbon dioxide which could well be changing the earth's climate in undesirable ways.
‘The media also realised that the burning of coal causes acid rain — causing damage to lakes and forests — whilst nuclear power does not,’ he added.
‘The British public has a respect and affection for its coal mining communities, who show such courage in the face of danger and difficulties.
Surely the proper response to this is to help the mining communities to find other employment, not to pay them to continue in a rather dangerous occupation.
Mining coal can rarely compete on world markets and the use of it has such a damaging effect on our environment.’
Young  receives a gold medal from Dounreay site manager,, after winning the ten years and under 50 metre butterfly event at Thurso Amateur Swimming Club.
, along with swimming club president and Prototype Fast Reactor station manager , was invited to present medals at the event, which attracts youngsters from all over Scotland.
‘I spent an enjoyable afternoon at the pool watching the races and was pleased to present the winning medals,’ explained .
and his team of officials had a hectic weekend setting up the event, which was again supported by AEA.
Winfrith has become the home to a new apprenticeship scheme serving the South West following the move of Headwey (UK) Limited to lease facilities on site.
The Dorset-based training and business development company will train up to 25 youngsters in mechanical, electrical, electronic and welding skills from numerous companies throughout the region.
‘There is certainly a need in this region for providing youngsters with sound engineering knowledge,’ said , engineering supervisor.
‘To date, we have had quite a lot of interest in our facilities.’
The company will take up to 25 youngsters on courses ranging from up-skilling and cross-skilling to a 36-week block course for gaining a basic engineering training certificate.
The initiative is supported by the Dorset Training and Enterprise Council.
a physicist in Fusion at Culham, said he felt the outcome ‘Was the best conceivable that staff in the Fusion business could have hoped for.’
He hoped that AEAs strategy was long term and would be approved by DTI.
He felt that for staff outside Government division the future looked alarming.
Whilst understanding the reasons for change as part of AEAs evolution, he was unclear as to why the announcement had been made now but appreciated being given the information so explicitly and comprehensively.
He would like to hear any information available on AEAs preferred strategy for privatisation and would like to know what will happen over terms and conditions for staff when Government division and Commercial division diverge.
a senior consultant in Consultancy Services, Risley, said although feelings generally were a bit mixed, ‘I feel that we have been given a clearer picture of where AEA is heading although I expect to see a lot more changes before things settle down.’
There was naturally some anxiety over future job security, particularly after 1995 and possible privatisation of the Commercial division affecting terms and conditions of employment.
Although the changes were ‘A bit unsettling,’ there were, he believed, ‘Benefits in being given more freedom to aggressively search for customers and shedding the ‘government bureaucracy’image.’
General Manager of CDs, Industrial Technology, Harwell said it was ‘No surprise and had little immediate effect on CFDSs highly focused business activities.
‘Whilst recognising that staff in other parts of AEA would undoubtedly be more concerned, he and his colleagues in the UK and overseas subsidiaries knew that they had to ‘Keep their eye on the ball, push ahead with product development, sell hard and achieve their demanding targets for growth.’
He thought privatisation was a logical and highly motivating next step; commenting ‘AEA now has to win the hearts and minds of staff if privatisation is to succeed.’
His colleagues had expressed anxiety over pension rights but saw possible benefits in attracting and retaining staff if pay constraints could be freed.
Comments such as‘Its more like cut to the core than pushing the limits’ were heard by , Estates Facilities Services Manager, Winfrith.
The general reaction among his staff was stunned silence, then surprise at the extent of the change and suspicion over what was to come in the future.
Although recognising that AEA needed to be proactive in approaching possible privatisation many thought ‘Why change now, whilst announcing that the BZW report had yet to be considered by DTI.’
He said he welcomed the move to establish Services as a Business, building on commercial arrangements already in place, adding that some staff were nervous of a change into the private sector expressing anxiety over how jobs, terms and conditions and pension rights would be affected.
There was some feeling among his staff that AEAs corporate strategy of ‘All sticking together’ had been undermined by the latest announcement but he believed the best way forward was in maintaining standards of service and keeping customers.
‘The strategy clearly identifies and spearheads our two missions’ said  Manager, Project Executive for Decommissioning and Waste Management.
His staff were anxious to know how the change was likely to affect them and disliked the uncertainty.
‘Our main challenge is to keep staff motivated,’ he said.
One of the questions being asked was ‘Why not announce the change sooner?’
‘Staff would welcome a timetable as to when they will be told how they will be affected, so that they can plan for the future,’ he said.
‘Shell shocked’ was the initial response among some Quality & information Services (QIS) staff.
Corporate Systems Manager for QIS at Risley, added that the feeling now is one of yet another reorganisation but with a nasty sting in the tail, the uncertainty of the future of staff in Services Division.
‘Staff see no future if they are left in Services,’ she said.
Staff understand the reasons for the Government and Commercial split but not the isolation of Services, in general giving rise to ‘Cynicism and demotivation and reducing productivity.’
Reassurances on pay and conditions were needed, particularly after breaking the civil service link.
‘QIS has made a very successful job of forming corporate glue’ across locations between colleagues and now the inevitable fragmentation and the feeling of being up for grabs’is destroying links and making people retreat into defending their own area.
We feel like a patient with a possible terminal illness that no one will tell the results of the tests.
The patient may shoot himself before finding out it is only an ingrowing toenail.’
of Decommissioning and Waste Management at Dounreay
‘Completely surprised.
No sooner do we conquer one set of changes — then the next lot come around,’ he said.
‘More thought should have been given to the announcement,’ added Tom.
‘Perhaps things should have waited until there was more information.’
of Corporate Safety at Windscale
‘If you don't change — you could become a feature like in Jurassic Park.
These are probably the platform for even more changes.’
of Purchasing and Supply at Harwell
‘It's a good idea.
If we'd have gone for plc status first, then it would have given us the chance to work as a proper company.
These changes means that there is no stability.’
He thought that the Businesses needed more time to work together and get a grip of their markets.
‘Instead, they will be thrown into the deep blue sea.’
, Dounreay's local services manager
‘It was clear that there were rumours about and AEA had to make a statement.
The timing was good, I felt.
However, many of my colleagues were a little concerned that they were being told of the final outcome, but nothing on the short term effects.’
of InTec's National Non-destructive Test Centre
‘I'm very supportive of the changes.
If were going to be privatised — we need a saleable chunk,’ he said.
‘But, one year or so for the Services to wind down is pretty drastic.’
Radiation Protection Advice, Windscale
‘The recent announcement did not contain enough information for us to know what will really happen.
Because of this, there is a feeling of vague disquiet.’