

APS takes the US Boffin
AEA Petroleum Services has now established itself in Texas.
The resources of Boffin Inc the Dallas based oil and gas software house have been combined with those of AEA.
The new company will be known as AEA Boffin International Inc and will supply state of the art software and support to the US market and worldwide.
Paul Wood from Petroleum Services at Winfrith handles the link with AEA Technology.
Although small, the company has 2,000 clients in over 70 countries.
Paul says, ‘The long term potential for growth is enormous.
This is an effective foothold in the Texas Oil Arena, one which our business and that of AEA Safety & Reliability can exploit to the full.
Boffin has created very strong ties with a number of major and independent oil companies which we feel sure will benefit our long-term success in the new venture’.
The deal was negotiated by a project team from AEA Petroleum Services.
Chief Executive, Peter Parris believes that the new company combines the strengths of both organisations in what will be an unrivalled package.
He commented ‘Advanced computer software plays an important part in helping oil and gas reservoir engineers both to assess and devise exploitation strategies for oil field reserves.
‘The first product release is likely to be a Windows version of ‘Oilwat/Gaswat’ which is awaited by many existing and potential users of the package.
The company also hopes to have a complete ‘Reservoir Engineers' Toolkit in Windows’ available early in the spring of 1993.
And — in collaboration with AEA Petroleum Services — it is converting some selected microcomputer software to run on multiple workstations.’
The  phrase ‘Boffin’ comes from Charles  Dickens' character who was ‘too generous — possessed of too much clemency — too good to persons’and not because of a back-room researcher image.
Good News for Nuclear Industry in the UK
Britain's Nuclear Industry welcomed the conclusions of the  government's recently published select committee report on trade and industry.
The report's recommendations are in line with the Industry's argument that it does not make economic sense to close Britain's nuclear power plants early and that it is far cheaper to run the stations than to close them.
The report also recognises the importance of completing and operating Sizewell B saying there is ‘no economic case to suspend construction or mothball the station’.
The report recommends that both the fossil fuel levy and the liabilities inherited by Nuclear Electric be taken away from the company and vested in a separate trust fund.
Chairman of Nuclear Electric, John Collier, said: ‘The committee's recommendations open the way for a secure future for coal and nuclear power in the UK.’
Visitors to Winfrith
You may be interested to know that in January 1993, the total number of visitors to Winfrith Technology Centre was 1821.
Excluding Saturdays, Sundays and Bank Holidays, that is an average of about 90 every day.
The majority of these were British but we also had 25 Germans, 10 Spaniards, 9 Americans, 7 French, 5 Chinese, 3 Malaysian, 2 Greek, 1 Canadian, 1 Norwegian and 1 Peruvian.
These facts are easily retrievable from the GATES computerised pass issue system.
We can also provide you with details of individual visitors to your Division/Department and who and where they visited.
You may find this information of some value when assessing trends in your own Division/Department.
Such information comes to you free of charge.
The GATES system is available to anyone with access to the site network and it is available free to All-in-One subscribers.
It is faster than the fax, it is usually cheaper and it is certainly more convenient.
If you are still using the facsimile machine to notify your visitors, why not consider switching to GATES if you can?
If you wish to know more about the system contact Ron Samwayts in the Winfrith Security Office on extn 2038.
SID Sets the Pulse
The Sensors and Instrumentation Department (SID) from RS's Safety and Engineering Systems Division has been awarded a second re-instrumentation contract for Nuclear Electric at Hinkley Point A.
This is the result of an assessment of the nucleonic instrumentation at Hinkley A carried out by SID which highlighted the need for additional instrumentation to ensure adequate reactor protection at shutdown.
Subsequently, Nuclear Electric issued a tender for the design, manufacture, installation and commissioning of a safety grade pulse counting system.
SID won this contract on a competitive basis illustrating that AEA can provide a quality service at competitive prices.
The system design was submitted to Nuclear Electric in December 1992 satisfying the first key date.
Manufacture is now proceeding and the equipment will be ready for installation on Reactor 2 in May 1993.
M&ITS Wins International Calibration Work
The Calibration Laboratory of Winfrith's Measurement and Instrumentation Technology Services (M&ITS) Department recently won a contract to provide a major international measurement and control company, Rosemount, with essential calibration support.
Rosemount's own calibration standard, which is an essential part of their absolute pressure transducer production capability, was sent to the National Institute for Standards Technology (NIST) in America for a period of ten weeks for recertification.
During that time Rosemount were able to maintain their production and repair capability only by virtue of the services of AEA Technology.
M&TIS Calibration laboratory has had a long and successful association with Rosemount providing calibrations of differential pressure transducers, typically to an accuracy of 0.09% at 500mbar differential and 200 bar static pressure.
Laboratory manager, Andy Durrant says: ‘M&ITS's Calibration Laboratory is recognised as being on of the leaders in the field of pressure calibration work both in terms of accuracy and facilities, some of which are unique in the UK.
The laboratory undertakes work for a wide range of external customers, this includes calibrations in the fields of, temperature, pressure, electrical and electronic measurements.
This commercial work assists M&ITS in achieving, as part of a Corporate Service, its goal of delivering a high calibre service to the AEA Business at a very competitive price’.
Differential pressure transducers being calibrated
Keeping up the Standards
In addition to the British Standards updating service which the Library and Information Service have been offering to their customers, they are now in a position to offer an updating service for standards from other National and International Standard Bodies.
For example if you regularly use standards issued by such bodies as ANSI (American National Standards Institute), API (American Petroleum Institute), IEC (International Electrochemical Commission), IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) they will undertake to keep you informed of amendments or new editions as they are published.
For further information including a full list of organisations covered under this arrangement (there are 150 altogether) please call Margaret Wetenhall extn 2653.
Still on the subject of standards, new in the Library is a book entitled ‘Harmonisation of Technical Standards in the EC’ by Sebastian Farr (658.562).
The book examines harmonisation of technical standards and the Community's approach to harmonisation with particular reference not only to existing legislation but also proposed legislation.
Patent Agent
Peter Mansfield, the AEA's Patent Agent responsible for advising staff at Winfrith will be visiting Winfrith on Wednesday, 17 March.
If you wish to discuss anything to do with the protection of inventions, designs, copyright or trademarks, please contact him beforehand at 
 Surprise for John
John Sayers who recently retired as divisional manager of Decommissioning & Radwaste's (D&R) Radwaste Operations & Handling Division is pictured here with his ‘surprise’ retirement gift of a model made by D&R's Remote Handling & Robotics Department.
Alan Neilson
Many of you will have seen the recent press reports concerning the disappearance of a member of Winfrith staff.
Alan Neilson, from RS's Safety Engineering Systems failed to return to work following the Christmas break.
He has now been located and is being cared for by relatives.
Competition Results
The colouring competition we held in the Christmas issue of the Journal proved to be a great success.
Many thanks to  everyone who contributed especially the children for all their artistic efforts!
Our judges found it very hard to choose the winners — the entries were all so good.
The results were:
Up to 5 years — Winner:; Highly Commended: and .
Aged 6–9 years — Winner:; Highly Commended: and .
Aged 10–12 years — Winner:; Highly Commended: and .
All the pictures are currently on display near the coffee lounge in the staff restaurant.
If anyone would like their entries returned they can be collected from the Publicity Office (Room 066, Building A32) from Monday, 1 March.
Goo-go Ga-ga!!
During December 1992 a baby competition was held in A40 to raise money for Cancer Research.
Organisers Karen Stead and Sue Symes badgered twenty-eight people into giving baby and recent photographs.
The competition involved matching the delightful baby photographs to the horrendous (!) recent photographs.
Clues were available for those having difficulties guessing who was who.
Fortuitous Ian Clark took first prize (a bottle of wine), for guessing twenty-four correctly without clues.
A joint effort by Valerie Dennis and Anita Clifford took first prize (box of chocolates) for correctly matching all twenty-eight people using clues.
Losers in both category, Mark Davies and Tony Briggs who scored one and three respectively, were given sugar candy dummies.
Thank you to everyone who took part in the competition and for those who gave donations.
The total money raised was £101.70.
Sue Symes and Karen Stead present the cheque for £101.70 to Mrs Crick and Mrs Leighton from Cancer Research
Does your office make you sick?
It does?
Then you may be a victim of ‘Sick Building Syndrome’(SBS)(honest!).
SBS is a term used to describe a vague, but apparently real, workplace problem, and may be suspected where staff complain of ill-health, headaches or problems with sore eyes, noses and throats.
Usually SBS occurs in modern buildings, but may be associated with older ones, especially following renovation or refurbishment.
Occasionally a single cause may be identified, but SBS is usually ‘multifactorial’, with several factors being involved.
A good starting point in the investigation of SBS is the supply of fresh air.
If air is artificially supplied, the system used needs careful (and regular!) inspection, cleaning and maintenance.
Such procedures should aim to ensure efficient operation and the provision of fresh, clean air.
Micro-organisms growing in ventilation systems must be carefully controlled, since they are well known causes of ill-health, especially in ‘sensitive’ people.
Noise, lighting and heating should be carefully examined and measurements taken if problems are identified.
A common cause of sore throats and eyes is too high a room temperature, causing low relative humidity (dryness of the air).
Such a situation tends to ‘dry out’ the eyes and throat, which then leads to complaints by staff.
A simple cure is to reduce the room temperature (but not too much!) or to provide additional humidification.
Extra humidity can often be provided by the use of well watered pot plants.
Chemicals may be released from materials in buildings or furnishings.
Several substances have been implicated in cases of SBS, and modern chemical methods may detect them, even in very low concentrations (but this is rarely cheap!)
Finally, individual factors, both personal and related to particular operations, may be involved.
Such factors as poorly organised workstations, stress and low motivation, can cause or aggravate feelings of illness or tiredness.
Often such factors will contribute to other, apparently trivial, workplace problems and cause complaints of ill-health.
If you feel your workplace is causing you to suffer ill-health effects, then notify your line management.
Advice, information and visits at Winfrith may be obtained via Occupational Safety Group (extension 2797) or Occupational Health (extn 2162).
Occupational Safety Group 
The Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust
Over 100 donors are matched to leukaemia sufferers each year — could one of these be you?
Every year thousands of people, including many young children, with leukaemia and other bone marrow diseases reach a stage where only a bone marrow transplant can save them.
If YOUR bone marrow type were to match that of any patient not only could you cure their leukaemia you would save their life.
The Occupational Health Department (OHD) have been asked to draw your attention to the continuing need for prospective bone marrow donors to add to their register.
To become registered as a bone marrow donor you must be:—
aged between 18 and 40
in excellent health
weigh at least eight stone
prepared to suffer a little discomfort to save the life of another
What do you need to do?
If you are genuinely interested in being included on the national register of bone marrow donors please contact the Ohd on 
On receipt of the initial application the trust will send a medical questionnaire for completion.
A small sample of blood will be taken here at Winfrith.
This will go to be tissue typed and the results will be kept on the confidential register.
Because there are a great number of possible tissue types it takes an extremely large register of prospective donors to find a matched unrelated donor for every patient and sometimes the search is unsuccessful.
In practice, the chance of being selected as a bone marrow donor is therefore very slim and although on the register you may in fact never match with a patient.
However, this should not deter you from at least being there just in case.
At the moment there are over 135,000 potential bone marrow donors on the register but this figure needs to be even higher to allow more matches to be achieved.
What if a match is made?
When a patient needs a transplant all possible donors will be asked to supply a further blood sample to select the donor who matches the best.
The donor will then be asked to donate bone marrow.
This is usually carried out in a London hospital or other UK hospital specialising in bone marrow transplants.
(Travelling and out-of-pocket expenses will be met in full by the trust.)
The donor is given a thorough medical check-up to ensure absolute fitness for the procedure.
A general anaesthetic is given and the bone marrow is taken usually from the hip bones using a syringe and needle (no cuts, no stitches).
There may be some discomfort in the area for a couple of days but there is no physical harm.
Although donors may be asked to donate for a patient not in the UK the bone marrow is still taken as stated before and the collected marrow sent to the patient.
Please think carefully about registering as a bone marrow donor and remember you can change your mind at any time and have your name removed from the register.
Please contact OHD, for further information.
Incidentally the trust are also asking for financial support from anyone and if you would like to help in this way send cheques/postal orders payable to The Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust to: The Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust, Royal Free Hospital, LONDON NW3 2QG.
OH Team
Run for your Life…
Some of you may have seen Graham Masters from Dosimetry Services running around site and the Wool country lanes at lunch times.
This can prove a very hazardous occupation at times as Graham can vouch for when he recently had an argument with the railway line near A60 and ended up in Weymouth & District Hospital — not a recommended method for getting an afternoon off work!
Graham is a qualified football referee for the Dorset County Football Association which is where his interest in running came from.
He began running at the end of 91/92 season to get fit for the next season and things snowballed from there.
As a result he joined the Royal Manor of Portland Athletics Club and has since run in several races for the club in the Dorset Road Racing League, although he has yet to catch up with his friend Tony Coleman from B40 Workshop!
Now his running ambitions are about to be realised as Graham explains: ‘It is every runner's ambition to run in the London Marathon and just before Christmas I found out I would realise that ambition in April 1993.
My training is going very well apart from the slight hiccup with the railway line.
To make the event more worthwhile I have decided to run the Marathon on behalf of the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust (CLIC).
I thought that this charity would appeal particularly to parents who have seen the effect it can have on family life when their child has to stay in hospital.
I have a particular affinity with CLIC as I have recently lost two members of my family through cancer, one of them was especially young.
CLIC conduct essential research into cancer and leukaemia in children as well as providing accommodation for young children and their families so they can be together while the child is in hospital.
This type of welfare can have immense benefit not only to the child but to the family as a whole.
I am hoping to meet some of the children before the Marathon and when the pain barrier hits me at around 20 miles I will only need to think of the courage and bravery of these young children to give me the extra incentive I need to finish the race.
I will try to enjoy the whole weekend and with everyone's help I have set myself a target to raise 1,000 for CLIC.
Forms will be distributed around site to the Telephone Exchange and Reproduction in A32; D60 Health Physics Lab and A60 MCO.
If anyone would like a form or would like to know more about CLIC they can reach me on extension 2798 and I will be glad to help.’
Graham Masters
Customer Care Club
The Catering staff in A30 like to know that their customers are receiving a friendly, efficient and caring service.
For them to give you the service you want they need to know about your ideas and any suggestions and comments you may have to ensure the best possible service.
So why not go along and give Fiona McVey five minutes of your time while having lunch or join her for coffee in the coffee lounge on the first floor of A30 on 24 February between 12 noon and 1.30pm.
‘Bucharest is an awful long way to go’
In Issue 14 (1992) of the Winfrith Journal, Diane Halliwell from Finance asked Winfrith staff to donate food for her trip to Romania to distribute much needed aid and supplies.
Diane and her husband Geoff have now completed the trip and in this article she recounts their hazardous journey.
Part 2 of this article can be seen in the March issue of the Winfrith Journal.
‘Bucharest is an awful long way to go!’
These were the words Geoff (my husband) said to me as we left Le Havre at 7.30 am on Saturday, 24 October 1992.
Following a very rough crossing from Portsmouth during which I slept very little it dawned on me that we were on our own in a Renault van which was half a ton overweight, had a top speed of 60 mph, an up-hill speed of 40 mph provided you had a run at it, jumped out of fourth gear unless you held it in position and we had 1850 miles to go!
However, despite constant rain, getting lost around Paris and a long delay on the autobahn due to an accident, 16 hours and 640 miles later we arrived at a motel in Germany.
Very tired but excited that we had covered a third of our journey.
After a good  night's sleep, we arrived at breakfast with about 15 minutes to spare, and eventually set off for Hungary where we were due to stay the night with a Weymouth girl married to a Hungarian and is living in Gyor.
Apart from getting arrested in Hungary because we apparently missed out the customs post and had driven about 3 miles from the border before being caught by a car and made to return, we arrived safety at  Gyor at about 10.30 pm.
Monday arrived, as we set out we had two major obstacles to overcome, firstly not getting lost in Budapest (which we achieved for the very first time) and secondly getting through the border between Hungary and Romania.
We arrived at the border and ‘commenced battle’ with the Hungarian border guards who made their inevitable demand for ‘whisky, chocolates, etc etc’.
They eventually got the message after about 30 minutes that we were not prepared to bribe them with anything and let us through to the Romanian side.
The Romanian guards proved much more reasonable this time because we had the foresight to obtain a permit for safe passage from the Romanian embassy in London and so we were on our way to Arad by about 5.30 pm.
The first major place we reached was a city called Oradea where we realised that not much had changed in Romania since our last visit.
We arrived after dark in a major city driving on roads that were tarmacked in places with workers going home from work milling all over the roads with not a street light to be seen!
I imagine that it was a bit like driving through a minefield in the war, the fact that we did not hit anybody was a miracle in itself!
However, having overcome that obstacle we headed down the major road for Arad and despite the large pot holes which had to be avoided and the need to keep your eyes skinned for mobile hayricks (horses and extremely overladen carts with no lights) doing approximately 2 miles per hour, we arrived at our friends' home in Arad at around 8.30 very relieved that we had reached our first destination.
As Geoff parked the van in a safe haven for the night belonging to a garage mechanic, the back offside tyre developed a puncture.
Our plans were to stay in Arad for two nights, deliver food and goods to a gypsy community close by, visit the church with which we have a link with and then continue our journey to Bucharest (the final 380 miles) on Wednesday.
However, it soon became apparent that we had one major problem…fuel.
The fuel situation in western Romania was desperate because a lot was being smuggled into Yugoslavia before it even got to the petrol stations.
Around each station were hundreds of cars, waiting for the next delivery, prepared to stay all night and very often did.
The van actually used diesel which was even more scarce because not many Romanian cars run on it.
This of course meant that we would not be able to carry out our tasks in and around Arad and indeed it looked as if we may not every get to Bucharest.
But, thanks to the kindness of a lady in the petrol depot who agreed to phone our host when a delivery was about to be made and where, we eventually refuelled at about 9.00 am on Thursday we set out on the last leg of our journey.
‘We arrived at the border between Hungary and Romania ‘commenced battle’ with the Hungarian border guards who made their inevitable demand for ‘whisky, chocolates, etc etc’
Out & About
Amendments to Winfrith Telephone Directory
Wine & Wisdom Evening
Anyone interested in enjoying an evening of ‘Wine & Wisdom’?
Intrigued?
For further information contact Maria Pembleton  or Janet Saint .
Blood Donors
The Wessex Regional Transfusion Centre wishes to thank those members of the staff of AEA Technology who gave their blood for the benefit of others on Tuesday, 12 and Wednesday, 13 January 1993.
These donations have been greatly appreciated by hospitals in this region for their treatment of their patients.
Of the 155 people who attended 149 donations were received.
Bop ‘Til You Drop
The FINAL ‘Bop ‘Til You Drop’ in aid of Comic Relief is to take place on Saturday, 13 March in the Winfrith Social Club from 8.00 pm until midnight.
Anyone wishing to support the event — maybe you have a party trick to entertain people with — or perhaps you're a dab hand at organising — should contact Richard Smallcalder extn 2321.
Alternatively you could buy tickets costing 5 (including buffet and entertainment) from the following: