

AEA Technology: the story of change…1954–1993
The history of AEA Technology has been one of continual evolution and development.
This paper tells how AEA has been transformed from its early mission-orientated governmental role to being a commercially motivated, competitive, customer-driven enterprise — and one of the leading scientific and engineering services businesses in the world.
Mission UKAEA
Nuclear technology was born during World War II.
After the war, Britain established three groups (one each for production, research and weapons) under the Ministry of Supply in order to exploit the new technology for military and civil purposes.
In 1954, these groups were converted into the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, operating outside the civil service, but still under government control and funded by the Treasury, with wide-ranging powers to carry the programmes forward.
The UKAEA is still the legal name of AEA and it is still government-owned, but it is now a very different organisation from that created in 1954.
Today, it trades under the name AEA Technology and in the remainder of this text it will be referred to as AEA.
In 1956, shortly after AEA's formation, a major civil milestone was reached when the first commercial reactors in the world were inaugurated at Calder Hall.
They were designed and operated by AEA and are still in use today.
For the first 10 years of its existence, AEA drove forward all aspects of nuclear power in the UK, including the development of weapons and the exploitation of radioisotopes.
As a result, it grew to over 40,000 employees by 1960.
It also co-operated extensively with similar organisations throughout the world, which has given it an international orientation from the outset.
For the first ten years of its existence AEA drove forward all aspect of nuclear power in the UK, and when the Windscale AGR was started up in 1962 it was at the forefront of reactor design.
Those early years were a period of tremendous activity, much of it a pioneering nature, in which the most advanced skills in physics, chemistry, metallurgy and all aspects of engineering were brought to bear on the primary mission — the development of nuclear power for military and civil use.
Ten plutonium production reactors were built and operated and the irradiated fuel reprocessed; various types of thermal reactor were investigated, as well as fast reactors and fusion reactors; and from the mid-1950s AEA was selling electricity to the grid.
The production of nuclear fuel was developed and other aspects of the fuel cycle investigated.
The development of radioisotopes was extended and commercialised.
The methodology of independent probabilistic safety assessment was introduced.
AEA has been working closely with the air transport industry throughout Europe and the US to develop rapid, reliable and cost effective inspection methods to ensure the continued airworthiness of commercial and military aircraft.
To tackle these matters, new establishments were opened in different parts of the country such as Culham, Dounreay, Winfrith and Culcheth and many advanced facilities were created.
To handle all this, methods of matrix management and techno-economic planning were developed and introduced, with each establishment under a director but with programmes running across the line management of the establishments.
As the technical programmes evolved, they gave rise to commercial activities — such as selling fuel elements and graphite to the civil power stations — and as these matured it became the practice to spin them off as separate entities or to transfer the technology and the responsibility to commercial organisations.
From the start, the operation of commercial nuclear power stations was the responsibility of the electricity utilities.
The construction of those stations became the responsibility of various industrial consortia, an aspect of the British programme which has been much criticised.
…it is now a very different organisation from that created in 1954
In 1971, following a period when the activities were managed as a trading fund, British Nuclear Fuels  was created as a separate publicly-owned company to manufacture and reprocess nuclear fuel.
It is now a major international business and one of Britain's biggest yen earners.
In the same year, the Radiochemical Centre also became a separate company and in 1980 was privatised into Amersham International, a successful supplier of radioisotope products worldwide.
From early in its history, therefore, AEA has been active in technology transfer and has come increasingly to operate as a service organisation to the nuclear industry, working through customer-contractor arrangements covered by properly drawn up contracts.
Those programmes still being funded by government also came increasingly to be dealt with under the customer-contractor principle.
In recognition of this growing business orientation, the weapons activities of AEA were transferred to the Ministry of Defence in 1973, at which time AEA staff numbered 16,000.
This dispersive approach is different from that pursued in France where the nuclear industry has been maintained as an integrated entity with mixed government/private ownership but with Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, AEA's equivalent, in a commanding position over a large part of it.
Assessment of the performance of samples of polymer in improving oil recovery from North Sea reservoirs.
The resultant computer models are used in oil field development.
Early diversification
In the late 1960s, a seminal change occurred.
At first, it touched just one or two establishments, and only in a small way, but it spread with time and today it is one of the major driving forces in AEA's business.During the first government of Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson, one of whose election slogans had been that he was going to introduce a white hot technological revolution, AEA was empowered by act of Parliament to undertaken R&D on non-nuclear topics.
This occurred at a time when the future of the Harwell Laboratory, AEA's main research establishment, had come under review.
The great success of AEA's first 10 years suggested that the research requirements of nuclear power would decline.
Harwell's 6000 personnel might not therefore be required.
A study was made of various options for the future of the laboratory and it was decided to diversify into commercial work of both a non-nuclear and an applied nuclear nature.
This star flow cytometer, installed at AEA's Harwell Laboratory, is used for sorting biological cells.
It is being used in research to gain a greater understanding of the effects of radiation on biological tissue, including studies of radiation induced changes in bone marrow.
This was seized upon by Walter Marshall when he became Director of Harwell in 1969 and set about the development of commercial work for industry.
Harwell had superb skills and facilities and it fitted the current zeitgeist that these be applied to the solution of industrial problems on a fee-paying basis.
As part of this new drive, Marshall introduced business centres — that is, profit centres — on the matrix, the managers of which were accountable for commercial success.
To support these managers he established a marketing department, improved the financial system and introduced business planning for the first time to AEA.
Laser beams are used by AEA to investigate aspects of the basic science and technology of the laser isotope separation process for uranium enrichment.
As a result, many of AEA's bright scientists and engineers went out hunting for work.
They learned about selling, pricing, negotiating, licensing, and how hard it is to turn a profit from R&D.
Many of their innovative ideas lost money and failed to win acceptance by customers.
But other ideas gradually succeeded.
For example, they became particularly skilled at developing R&D clubs — that is , multi-sponsor programmes covering some combination of best practice, training, research and information services.
One example of this is the Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow Service (HTFS), founded in 1968, now operated jointly by Atomic Energy of Canada, the National Engineering Laboratory and AEA.
It has 250 members worldwide and a profitable turnover of £3M per annum.
Through such developments, a cadre of AEA managers went up the commercial learning curve.
A power fluidic pump handling processed peas in suspension.
AEA is now selling power fluidic components, or complete processing systems to a range of non-nuclear industries.
Such diversification activities were not confined to Harwell.
They gradually caught on at other establishments, although not on such a substantial scale.
For example, at Risley the National Centre for Tribology became established in 1968.
Currently, this handles £3M of industrial problems concerned with friction, lubrication and wear every year and has operated the European Space Tribology Laboratory since 1972.
At Culham, the very special skills developed for the fusion programme have been transferred to a variety of other applications, including Strategic Defence Initiative (‘Star Wars’) work for the US Government.
At Winfrith, a range of skills developed for nuclear modelling and inspection were adapted for use by the offshore oil industry.
AEA's electromagnetic compatibility chamber in which electrical goods are bombarded with electromagnetic radiation to test susceptibility.
Nevertheless, all these new commercial activities tended to be driven from the bottom up.
AEA's  primary concern was still its civil nuclear programmes and this was the main preoccupation of the top management.
Under Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's administration, increasing pressure was put on AEA to operate on a more commercial basis.
In 1986, all the remaining activities were covered by a trading fund.
Essentially, this meant that it had to operate like a company, with a capital structure and a requirement to deliver a return on capital employed, but with the ownership wholly in the hands of the British Government.
On this basis, the nuclear programmes still accounted for the vast bulk of the capital and turnover and such profits as there were.
Also, under this tightening regime, some of the non-nuclear activities were beginning to look rather shaky.
At this stage, the Government began to retrench on its nuclear programmes.
The Fast Reactor Programme was cut back.
The first exercise to close down a major AEA site took place.
Several significant facilities could no longer be sustained.
The nuclear programme were reducing but the non-nuclear activities were not yet sufficiently robust to replace them.
The drive for diversification now became intense, covering all establishments.
The name ‘AEA Technology’ was introduced but more and more questions seemed to arise about AEA's future.
The time was ripe for major change.
Becoming a business
In 1989, it was suggested by the Government that AEA should employ management consultants to help with the development of a strategy for the future.
The McKinsey company was selected and, working closely with AEA personnel, carried out a critical review of AEA's prospects and how these should be addressed.
McKinsey concluded that there was a potential future for AEA as a business but that the current organisation was not well structured to pursue it.
They proposed that AEA should be re-organised into strategic business units which should be encouraged to prove what they could achieve under a strategy described as ‘pushing the limits’.
The ultimate goal was to have the potential unlocked, but they did not think that AEA was ready for that.
They therefore recommended that AEA should be encouraged to push the government restrictions (for example, AEA is not allowed to manufacture non-nuclear products) to the limits and then, if successful, the restrictions could be removed at a later stage.
All this generated considerable excitement within AEA.
The existing management was organised around establishments, each with its own board of management, its own financial system, its own marketing and commercial organisation, its safety infrastructure, administration and so on, but with business interests which overlapped the other establishments.
If McKinsey were to be taken literally, this structure would have to be taken apart and new structures created around the business units.
This was revolutionary stuff.
Moreover, the proposed business units would span several establishments and would not lend themselves easily to rapid consolidation.
The matrix would have to be turned on its side.
Could this be done without creating chaos?
As can be imagined, there was great debate within AEA.
The three colour laser Doppler Anemometer measures in three dimensions how fast a fluid is travelling past a given point.
In the event, the full thrust of McKinsey's recommendations was accepted.
The radical direction was chosen but the changes were not all made at once.
At the beginning of 1990/91, under the leadership of Brian Eyre, the businesses came into being with nearly half of all the personnel transferring to business units.
The establishments continued to handle much of the internal administration and most of the service functions.
Two years later, the establishments ceased to play a major managerial role.
The primary managerial drive is now through the business units, which have the majority of the staff and are supported by a number of corporate services.
Thus, AEA has been transformed from an establishment structure deriving largely from its nuclear history into a business structure based on product-market combinations, designed to face the future.
In parallel with these structural changes, it was realised that there was more to becoming a business than changing names and lines of reporting.
A change of culture was needed.
In common with many famous companies which have sought to make their culture much more customer orientated in recent years, AEA launched a major campaign with the help of consultants Kinsley Lord.
This was carried out through 1989–1991 and affected virtually everyone in the organisation.
1991 under the leadership of Brian Eyre, the businesses came into being…
Substantial reductions in staff numbers have also been necessary.
For many years, AEA's number of employees hovered around the 14,000 mark.
Since 1988, this number has dropped to 8000 and many well drop further.
This is partly the result of government cutbacks but it also reflects the closure of business activities which were judged not to be viable plus the contracting out of many non-technical services and a  continuing quest to achieve greater efficiency in all aspects of the business.
At the same time, the makeup of the business is undergoing rapid development.
The number of contracts undertaken each year is approaching 10,000 deriving from thousands of customers in 50 countries, but 14 top customers in the UK and Europe still account for 70% of all business sales.
Most of these customers represent traditional nuclear business but their requirements are in decline, so AEA is actively developing new business such as technical services for the oil industry, safety consultancy for the transport industry, environmental research for the water industry and process engineering for the pharmaceutical industry.
Thus, while currently 70% of the business turnover is nuclear and 30% industrial, one of AEA's aims is to expand the latter to 50%.
Severe sparking occurring at bolt heads in joints during the simulation of the ‘direct’ effects of lightning.
AEA's success has always depended on being at the forefront of science and technology.
Today, although great emphasis is placed on competitive pricing and customer service, technical leadership is still considered vital to business success.
In the past, this derived from the massive government R&D programmes which addressed the demanding requirements of nuclear power, and this is still an important part of AEA's inheritance.
To stay at the forefront, however, it is now necessary to invest in corporate research.
Approximately £20M of the business margin is invested in this way but, whereas in the past such research was judged by its technical excellence and general relevance to the nuclear programmes, today it all has to be justified in terms of market requirements and the likely return on investment.
Much of it is therefore being focused on new developments for commercial exploitation in industry.
AEA's radioactive materials handling capabilities are demonstrated by this new store for intermediate level waste.
In order to achieve satisfactory returns from such investments, it is necessary to move ‘downstream’.
This means AEA cannot merely confine itself to research.
It has to win repeat orders.
Hence, it has to become much more involved in the exploitation of that research, either directly or through some form of technology transfer which yields a satisfactory return.
Experience has shown that licensing is not generally a satisfactory approach.
AEA is, therefore, aiming to play a much more direct role in exploitation and this is one of the areas where McKinsey's ‘pushing the limits’ strategy applies.
As a result, various downstream products in the form of consultancy, services and specialised hardware and software are being developed and joint ventures and other exploitation routes explored.
In many of the markets, both nuclear and industrial, it is now necessary to think internationally in order to maximise returns.
Only 10% of current business is international but a major theme of AEA's business plans is to expand this to 30% over five years.
To that end, efforts are being focused not simply on Western Europe, but also on Eastern Europe, where there are major nuclear and environmental requirements; East Asia, particularly Japan and Korea; and of course, the US, which, being still the biggest high technology market, is receiving considerable AEA attention.
There are now two AEA subsidiaries in the US, a subsidiary in the Netherlands and an office in Brussels.
These represent the first steps towards AEA becoming an international business.
Racing car engine crankshafts undergoing implantation to improve wear resistance, inside the world's largest ion implantation machine at AEA.
Finally, it is essential to realise business benefits from the intrinsic coherence which arises from AEA's history.
This manifests itself most obviously at the technical level where the same basic skills can be applied in different markets.
For example, skills in non-destructive testing and inspection are being applied in the nuclear, oil and gas and aerospace industries.
Skills in the modelling of fluid dynamics are being applied in oil and gas, the storage of radioactive waste, environmental pollution and fire safety.
As the business management becomes more sophisticated, analogous synergies are being sought in other areas of business development such as marketing and sales, information technology, downstream exploitation skills, international operations and building the AEA image.
This last, where a new corporate identity has been developed and recently  launched, is particularly important in international markets.
AEA believes, therefore, that there is much to be gained from the coherence of its business units and that an important part of its task is to maintain and develop such coherence in the future.
Looking to the future
From the foregoing, it will be clear that the nature of AEA's business is now far removed from the original nuclear mission.
Indeed, the interests of the business and the interests of the owners, the British Government, will gradually diverge.
AEA will become increasingly commercial, non-nuclear and international.
It will develop operations in other countries; it will seek to develop downstream subsidiaries; it will become increasingly self-reliant and all this will make it less and less relevant to the responsibilities of a government ministry.
Things are seldom simple, however.
Deriving from AEA's nuclear past, it has substantial liabilities.
Its nuclear establishments and their facilities such as the reactors and hot cells cannot be decommissioned to greenfield status in the short term.
The estimated liability associated with this is £4–8 billion.
Moreover, the cost of maintenance and decommissioning provides considerable business, and AEA is in a good position to compete for the bulk of this.
Although government carries the ultimate responsibility, legal liability is currently vested in AEA and furthermore the work provides a significant part of AEA's business turnover.
As a result of these liabilities, it is not practical to think that AEA as a whole could be privatised.
On the other hand, as the business axis becomes increasingly successful, downstream and international, there will be a good case for disentangling the commercial business from the national liabilities and there is every reason to think that the business component could be privatised in some form as a coherent entity.
Several other independent technological businesses provide models on which the future AEA might be based.
With superb R&D facilities and a tradition of excellence in multidisciplinary engineering, AEA is a natural partner for the supply of technology-based products.
Visual inspection of a laser particle monitor and data processing system developed by AEA for measuring the size distribution and dynamics of aerosols and fine particles.
Thus, AEA is now beginning to contemplate a future in which it becomes an independent business, and its management is excited by the prospect.
Quite apart from the political considerations, however, much practical work remains to be done before such a major change could be brought about.
Further changes in the culture are necessary and are being pursued.
The terms of employment, which are still linked to the civil service, are to be changed.
Flexibility and efficiency in the cost structure need to be maximised.
The customer base has to be broadened and internationalised in a profitable manner.
AEA's new identity has to be consolidated and promoted.
The management of investment needs to be optimised so as to deliver a fully commercial return.
All this is in hand.
A recent scrutiny by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission commented favourably on the changes that have already been wrought and the further developments that are under way.
To quote from their report ‘AEA's diverse businesses, with activities ranging from nuclear research to petroleum services, rest uneasily in the public sector where their entrepreneurial activities are inevitably somewhat constrained’.
The time may not, therefore, be too far away when, as McKinsey put it in their 1989 report, the scenario of ‘potential unlocked’ becomes a reality for AEA.
For more information, contact:.