

General Accident — Financial Report
1.0 INTRODUCTION (SEPT 1987)
It hardly needs stating that the great majority of liability claims, whether in respect of personal injuries or otherwise, are handled to conclusion by insurers without the assistance of the formal legal framework of Courts, Solicitors and Counsel.
Nevertheless, the scheme by which claims are made and paid is governed by that framework, and if parties cannot resolve their differences, litigation ensues.
In the handling of claims, whether before or after a Writ is served, the same principles apply, both in relation to matters of law and also on questions of tactics and so forth.
In the investigation of any claim, the insurer must have in mind the possibility of litigation and, in particular, the need for evidence.
Equally, once proceedings are under way, the solicitor must be guided by the all important principle that the litigation is not an exercise on its own but is part of a claims handling system.
It, therefore, follows that if a claim is destined for settlement, the fact that a Summons or Initial Writ is served should not allow the insurer to be deflected from that intention.
Claims which ought to be settled rarely improve with delay, the passage of time leading to awards increased by inflation, interest and expenses.
The principle advantage to the insurer conferred by Court proceedings is that ultimately it provides a final date by which the dilatory pursuer and his advisers have to make up their minds.
There are also opportunities for the insurer to take positive steps in the handling of a claim which may not be open to him before litigation, for example, recovery of his medical records.
Equally the Tender concentrates the mind wonderfully in a way that a final offer by letter from the insurer cannot.
Nevertheless, as has been said previously, the principles by which claims are handled are the same whether a Writ is served or not, and it is, therefore, of paramount importance that the insurer should not feel that he must defer to the advice of his solicitor once proceedings are raised.
The insurer is well entitled to enquire as to the handling of the claim and to discuss its handling throughout.
There is no doubt whatsoever that a close dialogue between the insurer and his solicitor is both the most satisfactory and satisfying method of handling the claim properly.
2.0 CLAIMS HANDLING: PRE LITIGATION (SEPT 1987)
2.1 INVESTIGATION OF THE MERITS
2.1.1 Intimation of Claim
The primary purpose of intimations of claim from third party solicitors is to ensure, insofar as possible, that insured pass on such intimations to their insurers.
Accordingly, one will not be helped by the initial standard intimation of claim which normally gives the briefest of detail with regard to both the merits and QUANTUM.
Equally, in many instances, no great measure of assistance is afforded by a completed Accident Report Form either due to lack of experience in completing same or, alternatively, if the information contained therein has been prepared by someone relying on the comments of others.
Any claim should be settled or repudiated on the basis of a reasoned decision, taking into account concrete evidence obtained first hand rather than relying on purely comment and observations.
Realistic assessment of the relative strengths and weaknesses of a claim can only be made once the relevant evidence has been ingathered.
2.1.2 The Incident
Under normal circumstances, third party solicitors will, in response to intimation of interest, forward a letter detailing fully their clients' contentions in respect of both the circumstances surrounding the accident and the grounds of fault on which the third party intends to rely.
Do not, however, rely on such information as being either completely accurate or exhaustive.
If you feel further clarification is required BEFORE setting investigations in hand obtain it at this stage — otherwise unnecessary investigative duplication may arise.
Once a clear picture has been formulated, then proceed with a Field Investigation.
2.1.3 Field Investigations
These investigations are crucial, given that they form the basis on which decisions are taken which have the potential of involving your Company in not little expense either with regard to extrajudicial settlement or where repudiations are maintained and subsequent legal expense incurred.
The first step must be to visit the LOCUS and familiarize oneself with, for example, road layout in an R.T.A. or operation of machinery relative to a factory accident, where one has access thereto.
Photographs should be taken.
Such photographs serve to refresh ones memory when reviewing a case, and also can be of importance evidentially should Court proceedings subsequently be raised.
They are also of considerable assistance to your solicitors/Counsel who may not otherwise be familiar with the locus, type of machinery involved, etc.
No comment need be made relative to the length of time taken for certain actions to be raised.
It must be remembered that, in the interim, a locus can alter; machinery be discarded, etc.
Photographs can be put to witnesses during the course of examination in and out of Court and can be of the utmost importance in cases where vague descriptions of a locus, machinery, etc. would be detrimental to advancing a strong defence in Court.
Photographs are also of great benefit when a repudiation of liability is being discussed with third party solicitors.
Not all third party solicitors are ‘hell bent’ on pursuing ill-founded claims.
Accordingly, a reasoned repudiation with supportive photographs may serve to convince an otherwise strongly sceptical third party solicitor that his client has no claim.
It must be remembered that, nine times out of ten, the third party solicitor will be relying on descriptions of locus, machinery, etc. provided to him by his client — and will not have had the opportunity of visiting the LOCUS himself.
Once one is familiar with the locus, etc., then statements of eye-witnesses must be obtained.
It must be remembered that a precognition reflects the state of preparedness of the precognoscer.
Study the grounds of fault outlined by the third party solicitor.
Once you have familiarized yourself both with the locus and, for example, operation of particular type of machinery and/or system of work you valuate whether or not the accident happened as a result of fault on the part of your insured not necessarily allied to the ground(s) of fault intimated by the third party solicitor.
If there appear to be other grounds open to the third party, pursue investigation of these with the witnesses.
It must be stressed that one should not rely on the proposition that the grounds of fault contained within third party correspondence are exhaustive.
Once eye-witness statements have been obtained then proceed to obtain statements relative to systems of inspection, complaints procedures, etc.
It is most helpful with regard to such precognitions to state the full name, address and, if relevant, telephone number of the witness in question, together with intimation of the date on which the particular statement was obtained.
Also to be obtained, in all cases, is written documentation viz: — 
1.
Entry in Accident Book.
2.
Serious Accident Report to H.S.E.
3.
Internal Accident Report (if any).
4.
Written statement submitted following on accident (if any).
5.
Safety Committee Minutes, if relevant.
6.
Internal Company Memos prepared prior to or after accident, relative to machinery, working practices, etc., if relevant.
7.
Wage details.
Field Investigations become even more crucial when one considers the new Optional Procedure for Personal Injury in the Court of Session.
Until a Summons is served, one is in blissful ignorance as to whether it will be under the Optional Procedure or not, unless of course the third party correspondents are charitable enough to advise you.
Time limits are imposed and there is also provision for compulsory disclosure of documentation.
Additionally, there is no automatic right to adjust pleadings.
Fourteen days after a Proof has been allowed, each party is required to intimate to his opponents a list of documents which are or have been in his possession relating to the matters in dispute in the action.
Accordingly, one must stress again the importance of obtaining the documentation referred to above in addition to obtaining witness statements.
2.1.4 Repudiation of Liability
It is to be recommended that full reasons are given to the third party solicitor.
A two line repudiation will only harden the third party's resolve.
The benefits of taking such a stance are twofold.
Firstly, the third party solicitor might accept the repudiation and persuade his client that the claim be dropped.
Secondly, the third party solicitor may point out certain errors with regard to the basis on which a claim has been investigated and may also change or expand grounds of fault.
Re-investigation might show liability attaching and avoid unnecessary Court actions being raised.
It will also avoid situations where, on final repudiation, a Writ is served which markedly deviates from the facts and grounds of fault upon which the original investigation is based — thus leaving your solicitors, in essence, to investigate ‘from scratch’.
2.2 INVESTIGATION OF QUANTUM
2.2.1 Medical Reports
If an injury is serious i.e. where marked residual aspects claimed and/or lengthy absence from work involved, it is not advisable to wait for the third party solicitors to produce a Medical Report.
Your own Medical Report should be instructed.
Request your surgeon to comment specifically on likelihood of return to work; continuance in present employment, etc.
One should attempt to avoid the situation where your own surgeon is instructed to prepare an initial Report some 12–24 months after the accident or as has been seen in some cases, up to four years after an accident.
Where a surgeon has been brought in ‘at the last minute’ to prepare a Medical Report then his opinion and Report can always be made the subject of valid criticism in the event of being compared with the Report and opinion of a surgeon who has consistently treated and/or prepared Reports on a claimant over a lengthy period of time.
2.2.2 Wages Details
Full pre and post accident details are to be obtained.
Also obtain details of any wage rises awarded during the third party's absence from work.
If the incapacity is lengthy, or becomes permanent, examine closely the third party's job prospects, if possible, within his present employment and the possibility of obtaining alternative employment.
2.3 NEGOTIATION
2.3.1 Admission of Liability
Liability should not be conceded too early.
One should not be bullied into conceding liability.
In particular, watch for letters intimating to the effect ‘…
Unless we hear from you to the contrary within the next days, you will be held as admitting liability’.
It must also be remembered that a written admission of liability at an early stage could have dire consequences if the third party's medical condition, without warning, drastically deteriorates and such deterioration is not due to a NOVUS ACTUS
2.3.2 Offer in Settlement
An offer in settlement should be put forward, without being generous, on a realistic basis.
A miserly offer is unlikely to be accepted.
It will only serve to annoy the claimants' advisers and will not lead to a  conducive climate for ultimate settlement.
It must be borne in mind that the cost of an action in Court will be significant, especially where the principal sum is relatively insignificant.
To take an action to the door of the Court potentially can cost each side $2,500.
Accordingly, it can be seen that there are economic grounds for settling some cases extrajudicially, albeit slightly ‘above the odds’.
One must have regard to the potential for legal expenses when determining the ultimate extrajudicial settlement figure in any case.
If a decision is taken in any individual case that an attempt is to be made to effect settlement, then negotiations must proceed without delay.
Elongated negotiations may, once again, lead to a hardening of attitude on the part of the third party.
There are many cases which end up being settled at a figure considerably higher than that for which the case might have settled, say, 1–2 years previously.
It should also be borne in mind that the Court will not discount the multiplier with regard to the period between the accident and any ultimate Proof.
Although a slight discount in certain circumstances will be made, this will not reflect arithmetically such passage of time.
2.4 LEGAL AID APPLICATIONS
As from 1st April, 1987, all Legal Aid Applications are made to the Scottish Legal Aid Board.
An applicant will not be entitled to legal aid if representation is available to him from his Trade Union.
This is a departure from the administration of legal aid prior to the new Board coming into force.
Previously, if an applicant preferred the services of his own solicitor to those of his Union's solicitors, then he had freedom of choice.
It must be recommended, however, that files are passed to your solicitors at the stage where Intimation Copy Legal Aid Applications are received.
This enables pertinent Objections to be lodged if it is felt the same are relevant.
The procedure also gives your solicitors the opportunity to peruse your file at an earlier stage.
Accordingly, recommendations with regard to further investigations, etc. can be forwarded to you in order to enhance the state of preparedness in the event of legal aid being granted.
3.0 CLAIMS HANDLING: LITIGATION (SEPT 1987)
It is important to realize that service of the Writ is not a development which requires a major change in the handling of the claim.
In other words, if the claim requires to be settled, then settle it.
There is usually no particular advantage to be gained from allowing delay to occur.
As has already been said, claims rarely, if ever, improve with the passage of time.
It is, therefore, in everyone's interest to avoid delay and to that end, the defenders should if at all possible take and keep the initiative.
It should be appreciated that the law is there to assist BOTH parties in resolving disputes, and the defenders and their insurers should not simply allow the pursuer the initiative.
3.1 THE NORMAL FRAMEWORK
3.1.1 The Summons/Initial Writ
The Summons in the Court of Session or the Initial Writ in the Sheriff Court is simply a statement of the facts upon which the pursuer relies and, on the basis upon which he says that the defenders are liable, coupled with details of the loss suffered.
Although frequently expressed in curious language, it should be regarded as assisting all concerned in providing probably the best statement yet of what the pursuer's case is.
The allegations made in the Summons should, assuming proper investigation, be capable of being commented upon and answered.
In the subsequent investigation of a claim, the proper practice is to check each statement in the Summons for its accuracy and for its relevance to the issues.
A Summons in the Court of Session will ordinarily involve the defender entering appearance within twenty-one days from the date of service (28 days for Optional Procedure).
Entering appearance simply involves writing the name of the defender's solicitors on the principal Summons kept by the Court authorities.
It is not necessary to produce the Service Copy Summons when so doing, but it is usually advisable for the Service Copy to be given to the instructing solicitors so that they can check whether proper service has been effected.
In the Sheriff Court, there are fourteen days to enter appearance, but to do so here it is necessary to produce to the Sheriff Clerk the Service Copy Writ so that he can satisfy himself from when the fourteen days is calculated.
The instructed solicitor must, therefore, be sent the Service Copy Summons.
The Summary Cause Summons applies in respect of claims under $1,000 (soon to be increased to $1,500).
Appearance is entered here simply by returning the second page of the Summons (Form Q) to the appropriate Sheriff Court by the Return Day which is shown on that Form.
This can be done by anyone, including the defender or the insurer in the interest of speed if necessary.
3.1.2 The Defences
These are prepared by Counsel in a Court of Session action or by the solicitors in a Sheriff Court action, on the basis of the evidence on the insurance file.
The logic of Defences is to admit those allegations of the pursuer which are known to be true, to deny those which are untrue (or unknown) and thereafter to provide such further explanation as is necessary by way of defence.
The intention is thus to narrow the matters in dispute between the parties so far as possible and, in theory at least, to give both parties advance notice of what the other case is.
3.1.3 The Adjustment Period
In the Court of Session, the Summons and Defences are reprinted in the document known as the Open Record.
A period for adjustment of the allegations in Summons and Defences is then allowed, usually for twelve weeks.
In the Sheriff Court the adjustment period can range from a few weeks to a few months, depending on the whim of the Sheriff.
It is during this period that any further investigation which is necessary should be carried out, both into new allegations in the Summons/Initial Writ and any further points which are raised by the solicitor following consideration of the insurers' file.
The practicalities of service of the Summons, entering appearance, lodging Defences and so forth, are usually such that consideration of tactics cannot be undertaken until the Adjustment Period is fixed.
It is, however, NOW that the defender should take the initiative in the further handling of the claim.
If it be the case that a decision on the amount to offer can be made now, then the offer should be made, either extrajudicially or by Tender.
If there is insufficient information on quantum then steps should be taken to recover the pursuer's Medical Records, such further wages information as is required and so forth, if necessary by Specification of Documents.
If the answer to the pursuer's case is that the fault for the accident rests wholly or partly with someone else, consideration should be given now to service of a Third Party Notice by which that other party blamed can be brought into the action.
3.1.4 The Closed Record
This is prepared by the pursuer's agents and is a statement of the pursuer's case and the defender's response, now including any alterations known as adjustments, made in course of the Adjustment Period, thus for example, if one has obtained a Medical Report which suggests that the pursuer is exaggerating his injuries and that he should have returned to work earlier than he did, appropriate statement to that effect should have been included in the Adjustment Period and will now be incorporated in the Closed Record.
In theory at least, the Closed Record represents both parties' case in its final form, and the Proof will proceed on the basis of those allegations.
Any alteration to the pleadings thereafter can only be undertaken by Minute of Amendment and whether or not that is  permissible is a matter of discretion for the Court.
In practice, the Court will rarely refuse a Minute of Amendment unless it comes close to the Proof date.
3.1.5 After the Closed Record
At the stage when the Record closes, a decision requires to be made as to how the case is to be treated.
From the defender's point of view, the initial choice is between taking the case to Procedure Roll or agreeing to enquiry.
At Procedure Roll a defender may, very occasionally, succeed in persuading a Court that the pursuer's case is so hopeless that it is not worth allowing evidence to be heard because even if that evidence was heard, it would not make out a case which would entitle the pursuer to succeed.
More usually, Procedure Roll is a tactic employed by defenders to point to weaknesses in the pursuer's case and require amendment to cure the defect.
It is a matter of judgement, in many cases, as to whether it is preferable to allow the pursuer to proceed to enquiry with a bad case or whether it is better to have the problem cured thus improving the defender's understanding of what the pursuer's case is.
In the event that it is felt that enquiry is allowable, the usual choice is between Proof or Jury Trial.
The Proof may be either a simple Proof on the facts or a Proof before Answer which is a Proof on the facts with questions of relevancy reserved until after the evidence has been heard.
Nowadays there is little real distinction between Proof and Proof before Answer and the greatest majority of cases heard are Proofs before Answer.
The Jury
Trial, by contrast, is reserved for cases where the factual issues are straightforward (most often road traffic accidents), and the jury is asked simply to answer the question of fault with a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’answer, going on thereafter to assess damages.
After parties have agreed on the method of enquiry, a time is allowed to them for preparation of the hearing.
Today, with the pressure of business on the Court, there is usually a very lengthy period of at least nine months between allowance of Proof and the Proof itself.
In the event that further investigation was required during the Adjustment Period, now is the appropriate time to assess that evidence and, if appropriate, to take further steps to attempt settlement.
In many cases, the pursuers will have proceeded this far on the basis of evidence ingathered before the Summons was served and if settlement can be achieved now rather than immediately before the Proof, significant savings in costs may be achieved.
Again, the defenders should endeavour to keep the initiative.
It is frequently the case that a pursuer and his advisers will not consider the difficulties which they face until this stage and those difficulties can be maximized by an offer or Tender in settlement now.
In the event that it is apparent that the case will, in fact, be contested, either because liability is to be denied or because the parties are too far apart in their assessment of the issues in dispute, now is the appropriate time to consider what further evidence is required for the Proof and whether the evidence that is available is adequate and sufficient for its purpose.
The up to date Medical Report should be obtained now so as to allow adequate time for a Minute of Amendment or other investigation before the Proof.
3.1.6 The Proof/Jury Trial
Notification of the date for the hearing is usually available two to three months before the actual date.
Unlike England, where one is told simply that the case will be heard sometime in the weeks following the notified date, the case in Scotland will actually proceed on the date notified.
It is at this stage that, if appropriate, consultation should be held with
Counsel as to any final decisions on the case, the amount to be offered and so forth.
By this stage, the pursuer's agents ought to be prepared for Proof and ought, therefore, to be more receptive to arguments concerning actual weaknesses in their case than may have been true at an earlier stage.
The pursuer himself will also require to contemplate the not inconsiderable pressure of having to give evidence and face cross-examination.
The opportunity may, therefore, exist for settlement at this stage and there is no doubt that it is preferable so to proceed than to achieve settlement at the door of the Court.
Pressure on the pursuer to consider an offer can, of course, be maximized by a Tender and for maximum effect the Tender should be lodged between four and two weeks prior to the Proof, assuming that it has not been lodged much earlier.
3.1.7 Appeal
In the unhappy event that the Proof proceeded and the Court or jury found for the pursuer, appeal against the decision requires to be taken within twenty-one days of the final Interlocutor, being that awarding the pursuer his damages and finding him entitled to expenses.
An appeal can be marked without significant cost being incurred at that stage and frequently appeals are marked as a holding operation while advice is taken on the prospects of the appeal succeeding.
In the Sheriff Court the appeal requires to be marked within fourteen days of the final Interlocutor.
3.2 OPTIONAL PROCEDURE CLAIMS
The Optional Procedure introduced on 24th September, 1985, was anticipated as a dramatic departure from the traditional approach whereby a pursuer was compelled to spell out detailed relevant facts upon which he would rely at Proof.
In practice, to date, pursuers' agents by and large have tended to specify their case with as much detail as previously though there have been efforts, to date challenged successfully, to give a briefer outline not much different from the initial letter of claim.
Consequently, the real significance of the Optional Procedure in the handling of claims comes from the time limits imposed on parties, the speed with which a date for Proof is allocated and the obligations of disclosure on both parties.
3.2.1 The Summons
An Optional Procedure claim is identifiable because the conclusion is expressed in a different form from that in a normal action, requiring payment here of a specified sum ‘or such other greater or smaller sums as to the Court shall seem proper’.
The drafters of the new rules anticipated that, in the Condescendence, the pursuer would require to state briefly the facts relied on as causing the accident followed by the fairly bald averment that the accident was caused by fault and negligence of the defender.
As we have already remarked, practice to date seems to be not to follow the restrictive approach, apparently from fear that this will simply invite challenge to the use of the Optional Procedure by the defender.
Procedure after service of the Summons; twenty-eight days are afforded to the defender for entering appearance, with fourteen days thereafter Defences being due.
It is VITAL to appreciate that there is no automatic entitlement to an adjustment period and the defenders and their representatives will, therefore, require all the information necessary to contest the action within four or five weeks of service of the Summons.
Clearly, it may not be possible to ingather that information within the time after service and it, therefore, becomes of critical importance that the insurance file has properly identified the witnesses, has detailed statements from them and has all the documentary back-up relevant.
The difficulty is, of course, that no-one knows whether an action is to be taken under the Optional Procedure until the Summons is served and it must, therefore, be assumed in all claims that there is a possibility that the Optional Procedure will be issued.
In practice to date, it appears to have been deployed in circumstances where the pursuer believes that there is little dispute on the merits.
Following the lodging of Defences, procedure is not massively dissimilar to that in the Sheriff Court.
The case appears on a Diet Roll when both parties appear and the question of further procedure is considered.
The Court may allow an adjustment period, and practice to date suggests that usually both parties wish this.
In the event that the pursuer's case is overly coy, the Court may require one or other party to give further specification of their case.
In the event that the defender contends that the case is not appropriate for the Optional Procedure, argument to that effect can be made, but insofar as the Diet Roll will be heard approximately eight weeks after service of the Summons, a decision as to how to proceed will require to be taken at an early stage.
As we have already said, the practice seems to be to use the Optional Procedure for relatively simple cases, the only known refusal of an Optional Procedure action being an attempt to pursue a claim for asbestosis thereunder.
3.2.2 Exchange of Documents/List of Witnesses
After such period of adjustment as the Court may have allowed, the Record is closed and within fourteen days thereafter, each party is required to provide his opponent with ‘a list of documents which are or have been in his possession or control relating to the matters in dispute in the action’.
This imposes a very onerous obligation on the defenders' agents and their insurers because the list must cover not only those documents in the hands of the solicitor or the insurer, but also those held by the insured.
Clearly, it is not possible to undertake a search within the time allowed and it, therefore, becomes necessary for any relevant information to have been ingathered in course of pre-litigation investigation so that it is available on the insurance file.
Each party is entitled to inspect the documents held by the other unless confidentiality is claimed in respect of them.
While the protection of confidentiality is available to reports prepared in contemplation of litigation, all other documents fall to be produced.
While there is no penalty stated for breach of the rule, it can be assumed that parties will not be allowed to found on any document not mentioned in the list as produced.
List of witnesses for each party must be exchanged within twenty-eight days after allowance of Proof (i.e. within approximately three months of the date of service of the Summons).
The penalty here is stated clearly in that a witness who is not included on the list cannot be led.
Plainly, there is therefore an absolute necessity of early identification of all witnesses upon whom one might rely, even if at that stage statements are not taken from them, thus for example, it would be good practice to identify all those persons who witnessed the accident, who were working in the vicinity of the pursuer at the time of the accident, together with those who have a supervisory function, such as Foreman, Supervisors and Shift Managers.
3.2.3 Exchange of Expert Reports
Within twenty-eight days BEFORE a Proof, parties are obliged to ‘disclose the substance of any evidence of skilled witness…in the form of a written Report’.
In the event that the Report is not agreed, only those witnesses whose Reports have been exchanged can be called.
It is important to appreciate that this rule operates in conjunction with the obligation to produce a list of witnesses and that, in particular, the defender who chooses to instruct an expert either to examine equipment or to examine the pursuer will require to include his name on the list of witnesses as well as exchanging his Report.
The decision as to when to instruct an Expert will, therefore, require to be taken at a much earlier stage than is usual.
Initially, we had interpreted the rule as requiring production of the Report itself.
Curiously pursuers' agents to date have tended to follow the specific wording of the rule, namely disclosing ‘the substance of the evidence’ by which they have simply produced the factual statement by the Expert and excluded his opinion or conclusion.
In our opinion, this operates in favour of defenders insofar as it involves minimal disclosure, the real matters in issue usually being covered by the opinion.
We would, however, say that in our view, taken in the context of the intention that evidence be agreed, if possible, a Court is still likely to consider that the intent of the rule was to produce the Report.
If that were to be established, the defenders would be faced with difficulties in relation to witnesses whom they expected to lead but whose Reports were not as favourable as hoped.
Obviously, this can be avoided if the Report is available at an earlier stage but if for any reason difficulties were anticipated, one method of avoiding the production of a  producible Report would be to ask the expert to give his opinion verbally, to be followed up in writing if asked.
3.2.4 The Proof
Experience to date has shown that dates for Proofs under the Optional Procedure are allocated much quicker than for an ordinary action.
It is by no means unusual to have a date for Proof in an Optional Procedure case within nine months of the service of the Summons.
While this is admittedly still a lengthy period, it is significantly quicker than under the ordinary procedure.
The Proof itself will be conducted in exactly the same way as an ordinary action.
There are obviously technical arguments open to both parties in relation to the admissibility of evidence by virtue of the obligations to produce list of documents and list of witnesses but apart from that there is no real difference.
The appeal provisions are, however, different in that in such an action, leave to appeal is required and must be obtained within seven days of the date of judgement.
3.2.5 Summary
As can be seen from the explanation of the practicalities of the Optional Procedure, it does require a far higher standard of preparation before proceedings are raised.
This is straightforward for pursuers who know whether they are going to use the Optional Procedure or not.
It is by no means so simple for the insurer who is ignorant of that until in some senses it is too late.
While it may be a counsel of perfection it must, nevertheless, be advisable for the insurer to attempt to investigate each claim on the basis that it is likely to be an Optional Procedure action — unless, of course, it is quite obvious from the nature of the action or the injuries that this is not likely to be the case.
3.3 PROVISIONAL DAMAGES CLAIMS
Section 12 of the Administration of Justice Act, 1982, provides for an application by a pursuer for provisional damages in circumstances where:—‘There is proved or admitted to be a risk that at some definite or indefinite time in the future, the injured person will, as a result of the act or omission which gave rise to the cause of the action, develop some serious disease or suffer some serious deterioration in his physical or mental condition’.
The scheme envisages that where the section operates, the Court will award firstly, damages upon the assumption that the deterioration will not develop and, if it should then develop, further damages at some subsequent date.
No restriction as to the scope of the operation of the section is given and we are, therefore, dependent on the wording of the section itself.
The first point to be noted is that the Court may make the award on the application of the injured person.
It follows that even if the defender believes that this is the most appropriate method of proceeding, the pursuer cannot be compelled to use Section 12.
Until recently, it was assumed that the section would operate only where the pursuer had a specific Conclusion in his Summons seeking provisional damages, but a recent opinion of Lord McCluskey is to the effect that the pursuer can make an application that his case be treated as one seeking provisional damages at any stage during the case.
Subsequent action by the pursuer in the case in question made challenge of that decision unnecessary and we are tolerably confident that it is wrong.
Nevertheless, there is a risk that the insurer ought to anticipate if the case seems at all likely to throw up difficulties in relation to quantification of future loss.
The essential restriction on the operation of the section is that it applies only where ‘there is proved or admitted to be a risk that at some definite or indefinite time in the future, the injured person will…develop some serious disease or suffer some serious deterioration in his physical or mental condition’.
The first question which must, therefore, be considered by doctors instructed for either party is whether there is a risk, and secondly, whether that is of SERIOUS deterioration.
Dealing firstly with the question of risk, it is our view that if the balance of medical evidence is that the deterioration will occur, then that is more than a risk and the appropriate course is for the Court to award damages on the basis that it is probable that the deterioration will occur.
Consequently, ‘risk’ must be something more than a remote possibility but less than a probability.
If one has to express it in percentage terms, somewhere between 10% and 49%.
On the question of what amounts to ‘serious deterioration’, it is clear that differing views may be reached.
Perhaps the best illustrations available are of the man who fell into a steel tank which had contained radioactive waste.
The only injury he suffered was minor bruising but there was the risk of his developing cancer in consequence of his exposure to radioactive substances.
On the other hand, pursuers' agents will doubtless maintain that any pursuer who faces the prospect of osteo-arthritis in an injured joint, or degeneration in a back complaint faces serious deterioration and is entitled to take advantage of the provisional damages scheme.
To date, the number of cases taken in this fashion are very few and there has been very little guidance from the Courts as to the ambit of the provision.
The real difficulty for insurers is that settlement of a claim for provisional damages is significantly more difficult than for an ordinary action.
If parties remain in dispute as to whether the risk exists, then settlement of the action is, in our opinion, impossible.
If the defenders were to tender the pursuer a sum in full and final settlement of his claim, the pursuer could not accept that
4.0 NEGOTIATING TOOLS AND TACTICS (SEPT 1987)
4.1 THE SPECIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
It is frequently assumed that the Specification is a device designed to enable the pursuer to make life difficult for the insured, the insurer and the solicitor for both.
In reality, it may be but it is a weapon available to both parties to an action to force production of information which is not being produced voluntarily, or with sufficient speed.
Used properly, it can be of significant assistance in settlement of a claim.
The defender is often faced with a claim of exorbitant amount, an agent for the pursuer who is unprepared or unable to quantify the same properly, and a pursuer who believes that his accident will be sufficient to enable him to retire to a comfortable abode in the sun.
Prompt service on him of a Specification requiring production of wages information held by him, or books of account if he is a sole trader or in partnership, may be the basis of a rude awakening.
Equally, recovery of his medical records may establish that his ability to play golf with a low handicap before the accident is something of an over-statement!
Just as compelling production of incriminating Reports in the hand of the insured may lead to a climate for settlement on the part of the defender, so a Specification properly directed to the pursuer or those to whom he may have entrusted information (other than his solicitors) may assist in compelling him to be more realistic.
4.2 THE INTERIM PAYMENT
Interim Payments have been an option open to pursuers since 1974.
A considerable body of law has developed since then dealing with both the circumstances in which the Court will or will not award interim damages, and the principles which are to be used in assessing what level of award should be made.
It is not proposed to deal with the law on these matters, save to outline the basics, but rather to dwell on whether or not it is in the insurers' interest to make an interim payment in any given case.
Rule of Court 89(a) provides that the Court may make an interim payment if it is satisfied: ‘that, if the action proceeded to Proof, the pursuer would succeed in the action on the question of liability without any substantial finding of contributory negligence on his part…and would obtain decree for damages against the defender or defenders, or where there are two or more of them, against any one of them’.
It can, therefore, be seen that the first test which the pursuer must meet is in relation to liability.
Precisely what is meant by ‘any substantial finding of contributory negligence’ is open to some dispute at present, the view having been expressed by one judge that any contributory negligence greater than a minimal amount, must be substantial and hence prevent any interim payment.
Logically, this would apply even to the passenger in a car whose sole contribution is failure to wear a seat belt, and in fact, we believe in those circumstances an interim payment would be payable.
Much, therefore, depends upon the precise circumstances and, in particular, the quality of the case of contributory negligence as set out in the pleadings.
Assuming that the Court is prepared to make an interim payment, the amount it is empowered to make is:—‘such as it thinks just, not exceeding a reasonable proportion of the damages which in the opinion of the Court are likely to be recovered by the pursuer’.
It is to be noted that need is not referred to albeit that, in practice, many applications for interim payment are made with the specific intent of securing a sum designed to meet a specific need or requirement of the pursuer.
It has been said that the Court should consider an interim sum ‘which would alleviate or mitigate the sufferings or hardships of the pursuer as a result of the injuries during the interim period until the case is finally decided’ but, more recently, some judges have been persuaded that there is no reason why the interim payment should be restricted to the period up to the date of Proof and that if some estimate of the full value of the claim can be made, the pursuer is entitled to receive a significant portion thereof.
In broad terms, it is unlikely that any Court will award the pursuer more than half the total damages which he is likely to recover.
Where liability is admitted, or it is acknowledged that liability is likely to be established, then it may be sensible to try and agree an interim payment because it will probably be possible to secure a lower sum in interim damages than would be awarded by the Court if matters were so to proceed.
While it is important in that costs will be saved, it must also be appreciated that in claims of considerable value there is possibly some advantage to be gained from making a substantial interim payment so that any question of interest on loss accruing between the date of the accident and the date of Proof, does not arise.
At the present, with a judicial interest rate of 15%, it seems possible to argue that unless the funds retained in the hands of the insurer can achieve a better return, the value of the claim is best restricted by meeting some portion of, if not the whole of past loss, particularly past loss of earnings.
On a more general basis, there are matters of judgement as to whether an interim payment should be made.
If it is felt that the right climate for settlement can be achieved by displ 
4.3 THE TENDER
The Tender is the defenders' finest weapon, and is not used as often as it should be.
Its  principal effect is to put the pursuer at risk on the question of expenses in the event that he failed, after Proof, to be awarded the sum previously tendered.
Nothing concentrates the mind of the pursuer's solicitor more than the possibility that he may require to look to his own client for payment of expenses rather than the defender!
An extrajudicial offer, even if backed up with assertions that it will not be improved upon, does not carry the same penalty in expenses and the pursuer and his advisers, confident of success, will not be put at risk on expenses by such an offer.
4.3.1 The Normal Tender
Technically, this is an offer of a specific sum, together with the expenses in full settlement of the claim.
It can be made at any time once an action has been raised.
Insofar as it has force by virtue of the potential penalty in expenses, it follows that the earlier in the action the Tender is lodged, the greater the effect which it may have.
An early Tender may also be useful in forcing the inexperienced pursuer's agent to give rather more consideration to quantification of the claim than has been done previously.
Frequently, one encounters a substantial claim for future loss of earnings with very inadequate vouching of the pursuer's pre or post accident employment history.
It may well be in the defenders' interests to consider a minimum Tender justifiable, with some educated guess work, on the scraps of information available, in the expectation that if the pursuer is not to accept the Tender, further vouching will have to be produced.
Alternatively, the pursuer's advisers may appreciate that being unable to produce better vouching, the claim cannot be proven to be worth more than the Tender which is, consequently, accepted.
If it is not considered appropriate or possible to lodge an early Tender, then once the necessary information or Medical Report is available, the Tender should be lodged as soon as possible thereafter.
The Tender can, of course, be made without an admission of liability and the sum offered may well be designed not merely to reflect the value of the claim on a full liability basis, but discounted to reflect the difficulties which the pursuer faces.
The advantage of a Tender is that it gives the defender the initiative in placing responsibility for further action on the pursuer's agent.
The incentive to settle any claim exists insofar as it takes one file more off the solicitor's desk and from the client's point of view, gives him his damages (or a proportion thereof) sooner than would be the case if he requires to proceed to Proof.
The hesitation which the average individual has in going to Court and giving evidence should not be under-estimated and if there is, therefore, an inclination to avoid that the Tender provides the agent with a basis for persuading the client to accept.
In selecting the sum for Tender it should also be borne in mind that in cases where an argument of contributory negligence is made, the pursuer himself may, in his own mind, be prepared to accept rather more blame for the accident than would probably be established after Proof.
In the event that for whatever reason it has not proved possible to settle a claim either extrajudicially or by Tender well before the Proof, the defender should in any case in which he approaches Proof without wishing to contest on the merits, protect himself against the expenses thereof by Tender.
While it is undoubtedly true that there are advantageous settlements negotiated at the door of the Court, the actual cost to the defender in settling at that stage is significant insofar as in the majority of cases it is the defender who will have to meet the whole cost of preparation for the Proof by both parties, including attendance of witnesses, Counsel's fees and so forth.
Accordingly, particularly in claims which on full liability have very limited value, it is sound economic sense to try and achieve settlement at least two weeks before the Proof and preferably more than that.
The practice of the present Auditor is to accept that a Tender lodged one week before a Proof is good in relation to the expenses of the Proof itself.
That said, a week or less, may not give the pursuer all that long to consider his options and leaves the defender with little time for manoeuvre in the event that the Tender is refused.
There are good reasons, therefore, for making the Tender at least four weeks before the Proof.
In the event that the Tender is not accepted, the defender can reconsider his position, can consult
4.3.2 The Williamson Tender
The Williamson Tender, named after the case in which it was first used, is directed not to the pursuer but to a joint wrongdoer from whom a contribution is hoped for, be that joint wrongdoer another defender or a third party.
The offer made can either involve both parties jointly admitting liability to the pursuer, or to putting the pursuer to Proof but proposing a sharing in the event that he succeeds.
The apportionment, usually expressed in percentage terms, operates with the same penalty as in the normal Tender, viz. that in the event that after Proof the party to whom the Tender has been made is found liable for a greater proportion of the claim than was offered to him, then that party becomes responsible for the Tenderer's expenses from the date when the Tender was lodged.
The same principles as discussed above apply in relation to when is the optimum time for lodging such a Tender.
Just as the ordinary Tender is used insufficiently, so the Williamson Tender is an underused device.
In many cases, the source of delay is not a dispute between the pursuer and the defender but between the defenders.
Unless and until agreements between the defenders on apportionment is reached, it is often difficult to agree on a joint approach to the pursuer.
The pursuer's claim will undoubtedly be increasing in value, if only by virtue of inflation and interest, while the defenders argue amongst themselves.
Many cases could be settled far quicker, and probably far cheaper, if an early Williamson Tender had forced the defenders to consider their respective positions rather earlier in a case.
General Accident Ephemera — edited D.Hardcastle
MARINE PLEASURECRAFT CLAIMS
These Notes should be available to all Branch Staff who will be involved in handling Marine claims.
GENERAL POINTS (MAY 1991)
MARINE INSURANCE LAW
The backbone of law and practice of Marine insurance can be found in the Marine Insurance Act 1906.
It is not proposed to discuss every provision of this large Statute in detail, but the following are the major points which will affect day-to-day claims handling on Marine Pleasurecraft business.
POLICY OF INDEMNITY
The Marine Policy is one of strict indemnity i.e. the Insurer undertakes to indemnify the Policyholder in the manner and to the extent agreed in the Policy and no further.
LEGALITY
The Marine adventure must be lawful.
Therefore claims incurred where, for example, a vessel was being used for drug smuggling would not be covered.
INSURABLE INTEREST
The Policyholder must be interested in the subject matter insured at the time of the loss.
He need not be interested in it at the time when the insurance is effected.
Please contrast this with other classes of insurance e.g. fire business.
UTMOST GOOD FAITH
A contract of Marine insurance is one of utmost good faith — if good faith is not observed by one party then the contract may be avoided by the other party.
Sections 18, 19 and 20 of the Marine Insurance Act 1906 contain the classic insurance law on non-disclosure, mis-representation and Policy voidance.
Please see General SCI 43 for the Corporation's procedure on these matters.
Please also note that the Statement of Insurance Practice para. 2(b) does NOT apply to Marine Insurance — see General SCI 65.
All indemnity queries however will continue to be referred to Head Office Branch Claims for a decision.
NATURE OF POLICY
All Pleasurecraft Policies will be ‘valued Policies’, or ‘agreed value Policies’ i.e. the insured value of the vessel will bind Insurers and in the event of a total loss we would pay the sum insured — not the current market value as in motor insurance.
The only exception to this rule is where the value has been fraudulently inflated by the Policyholder.
WARRANTIES
Anything expressed as a Warranty in a Marine Policy must be strictly complied with — whether material or not.
If there is a Breach of Warranty the Insurer is discharged from liability from the day of breach.
All queries or doubts concerning breaches of Warranty should be referred to Head Office Branch Claims immediately for a decision.
COVERAGE
The liability of the Insurer under a Marine Policy is quite clearly set out in the Marine Insurance Act 1906. — To settle any loss ‘proximately caused by a peril insured against’.
There are a few statutory exceptions contained within the Act, the most notable being that the Insurer will not be liable for the ‘wilful misconduct’ of the Policyholder i.e. the Policyholder deliberately ramming his vessel at speed into a harbour wall.
The other notable exceptions are ‘ordinary wear and tear, ordinary leakage and breakage, inherent vice of the subject matter insured’— although these are normally expressed as specific exclusions on the face of the Policy, it should be borne in mind that we have these defences at law.
TOTAL AND PARTIAL LOSS
Loss under a Marine Policy may be either partial or total.
A separately insured item will be an actual total loss when the subject matter of insurance is destroyed or where the Policyholder is irretrievably deprived of the subject matter of insurance.
In the event of an actual total loss being paid the remains or salvage will be the property of the Corporation.
However it will not normally be worth taking up the salvage, unless it retains substantial value.
If the salvage is not economically worthwhile then it should be made clear to the Policyholder when the actual total loss is paid that the remains are their property and it is up to the Policyholder to dispose of them.
CONSTRUCTIVE TOTAL LOSS
The Policyholder may claim a constructive total loss when the subject matter of insurance is reasonably abandoned to the Insurer on the account of its actual total loss appearing to be unavoidable or because it could not be preserved from such actual total loss without an expenditure that would exceed its value when recovered/repaired.
The value when repaired for these purposes should always be taken to be the insured value.
Example — a vessel insured for $1,500 and following a major casualty it becomes clear that it cannot be repaired for less than $1,700.
In that case the vessel should be deemed to be a constructive total loss.
The proper payment for any such total loss will be the Sum Insured.
If the figures are more marginal then the Policyholder should be offered the possibility of a constructive total loss or the option of having the vessel repaired whereupon we would pay the insured value less the Policy Excess subject to proof being provided that the vessel has in fact been repaired.
If, however, a constructive total loss is paid then the damaged vessel would become the Corporation's property, if we so desire and policy cover would cease.
If the salvage is worthwhile then this should be taken up and disposed of to the highest bidder.
If, however, the salvage is not worthwhile then the remains should not be taken up and the Policyholder should be told that its disposal is again their responsibility.
PARTIAL LOSS
In the case of Partial Loss the measure of indemnity will be, when repairs are involved, the reasonable cost of repairs.
If the vessel is sold unrepaired then the measure of indemnity will be the depreciation in the sale price caused by the unrepaired damage, provided such depreciation would not exceed the reasonable cost of repairs if the vessel had been repaired at the time of loss.
Under a Marine Policy the Insurer will be liable to settle successive partial losses even if the total amount of such losses within one Policy period should exceed the Sum Insured.
There is no reinstatement of the Sum Insured required in Marine insurance as there is in other classes of business e.g. fire.
SUBROGATION
When Insurers settle a total loss they acquire two types of rights — the entitlement to take over the Policyholder's interest in the subject matter insured, and all the Policyholder's rights and remedies in respect of the casualty which caused the loss.
When Insurers settle a partial loss they acquire no proprietary rights in the subject matter insured — but they become subrogated to all the rights and remedies of the Policyholder in so far as the Policyholder has been indemnified under the Policy.
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
It is only proposed to make a very brief reference to this complicated subject as the majority of collision cases will be referred to Head Office Claims — at least initially.
It will suffice, therefore, to say that any Owner, Charterer, Manager or Skipper of a British vessel is able to limit his liability for loss of life, personal injury and property damage to Third Parties.
For this purpose a ‘ship’ is defined as ‘Any structure, whether completed or in the course of completion, launched and intended for use in navigation as a ship or a part of a ship’— Section 12 Merchant Shipping Act 1979.
The right to limit will apply whether the vessel is in non-tidal or coastal waters, as all the vessels insured on our Pleasurecraft fleet will be of less than 300 tons in deadweight.
The limitation figures vary, but as at April 1989, they are approximately as follows: — 
Loss of Life/Personal Injury $253,000 Property Damage etc. $127,000
Thus where the owner or operator of a British vessel is able to claim the benefit of limitation his liability for any incident will not exceed approximately $380,000.
The ship owner will basically only be denied limitation if the casualty was due to‘An act or omission done with intent to cause loss or reckless to such loss occurring’— Merchant Shipping Act 1979.
This will mean that, unless the ship owner is found to have acted deliberately, limitation will be available.
DETAILED CLAIMS HANDLING
Value Added Tax
Amounts representing VAT in a claim are not payable if the Policyholder is registered for VAT and where the vessel is owned by the Policyholder and is being used in connection with the Policyholder's business.
In these cases the Policyholder will be able to reclaim the VAT and, therefore, does not require indemnity from us.
Refer to V.A.T. Manual if necessary.
Hire Purchase/Marine Mortgage
If the vessel is subject to an existing H.P. Agreement or a Mortgage which is noted on the Policy then in the event of any large claim, enquiries should be made with the H.P. Company or Mortgagees concerned as to which party should rightly receive the proceeds of the Policy.
There is no Central Register of H.P. Agreements or Mortgages on Pleasurecraft.
Normally the Finance Company will only be interested where the vessel is a Total Loss.
Use
The vast majority of the Pleasurecraft fleet will be covered for private pleasure use only.
If any vessel is being used for commercial purposes cover will not operate unless the Policy has been extended.
Please check the details on the Claim Form to ensure that the use covered by the Policy is the use to which the vessel is being put.
Any unauthorised use will be a breach of Policy Condition and, therefore, the claim would not be covered.
Cruising Range
On the Small Craft Policy Form the approved cruising range will be the coastal waters of the U.K., R.O.I.
and the Channel Islands — including up to 31 days holiday use in Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, Germany, Italy, Denmark, Spain, Portugal and Yugoslavia.
As all these craft are not to exceed 16 feet 6 inches no cover is given whilst the craft is in international waters.
On the Yacht and Motor Boat Policy the cruising ranges will vary greatly, however, the most common ones will be ‘inland and coastal waters of the U.K. and inland non-tidal waters of the U.K.’.
The underwriting risk and the claims statistics screens on Polisy, detail the cruising range covered under policy.
For the definition of cruising ranges, please refer to the appropriate section of the Accident (Personal) Manual held by the Personal Dept.
For cover to operate on either Policy Form the vessel must have been within the prescribed cruising range when the casualty occurred.
This should be carefully checked on all occasions.
Repairers
No Estimate for repair should be accepted or approved from any Repairer who is not a recognised Marine Repairer.
The only way this can be practically judged is from the letterhead on the quotation or estimate.
If a major repair is involved and some doubt exists over the quality of the repairer please request advice from an approved local Marine Surveyor — see SCI Other Classes, Marine SCI 1.
Excess
Please note that every Marine Pleasurecraft Policy will carry a minimum $25 excess unless incepted over 3 years ago.
On the Yacht Policies the excess may go as high as $1000 so care should be taken to apply the Policy excess to each and every claim to which it is appropriate — refer to the Excess Guide and the underwriting risk screen on the Polisy system for full details.
N.B.
IT IS NOT MARINE PRACTICE TO APPLY THE EXCESS TO ANY CLAIM FOR TOTAL LOSS — within this we would include total loss of any separately insured item i.e. outboard motor, trailer, dinghy or trolley.
In the event of the total loss of one of these separately insured items the proper settlement is the sum insured.
AN EXCESS WILL APPLY TO EACH PARTIAL LOSS
Foreign Claims
In the event of a casualty involving a vessel in a non-EEC country please consult H O Accident (Personal) Claims & Support, for immediate advice on claims handling and the appointment of a Surveyor or Investigator.
Claims involving a vessel in an EEC country are dealt with by the branches in the same manner as other claims involving EEC countries.
Recoveries
Although collision liability cases will be considered by Head Office Branch Claims, there will be several cases when recovery of our outlays may be possible.
The most important example of this will be Bailees for reward i.e. a Marina or Repairer storing a vessel for a fee — if the vessel is damaged whilst in their custody and control there may well be a possibility of recovering our outlay from them.
In all cases the possibility of recovery should be carefully considered and all recovery actions should be vigorously pursued — where it is economically viable to do so.
Duty of Policyholder
As in all classes of insurance it is the common law duty of all Policyholders to act as would a prudent uninsured following a casualty.
This will be very important when, following a major casualty, the Policyholder is seeking immediate help from us.
It will not prejudice his claim in any way if he takes all necessary steps to minimise and contain his loss.
This would include immediately removing any sinking or foundering vessel from the water, and also taking all steps to protect an outboard motor which has been submerged in salt water.
Indeed failure to take such steps will seriously prejudice his potential claim on the Marine Policy.
In this connection we would draw your attention to the General Terms — Emergency and Salvage Charges contained in both the Policy Forms.
This makes it clear that all reasonable expenses incurred in minimising loss and protecting insured property from further loss will be recoverable under the Marine Policy.
Indeed this General Term is seen by the law as a separate Contract of Insurance, and we would, in fact, pay sums recoverable under that General Term in addition to the total loss if this were required.
Refer to General Condition 1 for Small Craft and General Condition 2 for Yacht Policy for the reasonable care conditions.
Reinsurance Protection
The entire Pleasurecraft portfolio is protected by a specific Excess of Loss Reinsurance placed in the Lloyds market on behalf of the Corporation.
Our retention for each year will vary.
Head Office Branch Claims, to whom any claim in excess of the branch handling limit is reported, will advise the appropriate department of any claims where the retention is exceeded.
The definition of ‘occurrence’ for this purpose includes any one storm or period of extreme weather lasting for 72 hours.
We will, therefore, be interested in any local catastrophe which causes damage likely to exceed the branch handling limit in total.
Unexplained Losses
For a claim to be recoverable the Policyholder must satisfy us that on the balance of probabilities the loss or damage sustained was caused by a peril insured against.
Two types of claim must be carefully considered in this context — unexplained sinkings and fire.
The mere fact that a vessel has sunk does not mean that there is a recoverable claim.
The cause of that sinking must be a peril insured i.e. when a vessel is reported sunk by heavy weather and the weather conditions do not indicate severe storm then the claim should be very carefully scrutinised.
In most cases like this an independent Marine Surveyor will be involved and he should be asked to advise on the cause of the sinking and the pre-casualty condition of the vessel.
In the case of fire the usual careful consideration should be given to the cause of the fire to ensure that arson by the policyholder is not suspected.
SMALL CRAFT (MAY 1991)
POLICY WORDING
Proposal Form and Policy have been issued to all Branches.
This Policy will be used for craft not exceeding 16 feet 6 inches (5 metres) in length with a maximum designed speed not exceeding 52 miles per hour (45 knots) The cover is of a ‘Comprehensive’ or ‘All Risks’type.
Under Section One of the Policy we cover all loss or damage caused by EXTERNAL ACCIDENTAL MEANS.
The practical effect of this wording is that for a claim to be covered the casualty must be reasonably attributable to an identifiable accident the source of which is external to the craft — thus the craft filling with water on its moorings over a period of weeks and then foundering would not be covered.
The wording provides a wide comprehensive cover and unless the claim presented is ruled out by one of the Policy Exceptions (discussed below) or is not due to an external accident or fortuity then every consideration should be given for settlement of the claim.
PLEASE NOTE THE FOLLOWING ASPECTS OF THIS POLICY WHICH MERIT SPECIAL MENTION.
SECURITY CLAUSES
These clauses (detailed in paragraph 6 a, b & c of Section 1 -Loss or Damage to the Craft) are attached to ALL POLICIES because of the recent growth in theft claims.
In consideration of any theft claim, it must be ascertained that the clauses have been complied with in every respect.
Deductions —‘New for Old’
In the case of sails, spars, standing and running rigging it will be possible to apply UP TO one-third deduction from the new replacement cost to allow for deterioration due to use.
This provision is inserted in the Policy because these items are moving parts which deteriorate rapidly with use.
To avoid obvious betterment a deduction should be made.
It will normally be reasonable to ask the Policyholder to bear such a proportion as may seem fair up to one-third off the replacement cost when the sails, spars, standing and running rigging are over two years old.
Also it will be possible in the case of a claim for the total loss of an outboard motor, either actual or constructive total loss, to apply a similar deduction of up to one-third from the replacement cost of a new engine.
See Section 1 — Loss or Damage to the Craft — for the precise wording.
Example: Claim presented for total loss of an engine insured for $500.
The current value is ascertained to be $200 by reference to the THREE STOKES GUIDE on Values of Second-hand Motors, and it's new replacement cost is $600.
To provide a settlement that would enable the purchase of a new engine would involve unacceptable betterment and indeed it would exceed the sum insured.
However if a third deduction is applied to the new replacement cost we are left with a settlement figure of $400.
This will equally enable the Policyholder to replace the engine with one of similar type, capacity, age and size to the one lost — and therefore we will have provided him with indemnity under the Policy notwithstanding the fact that he has been paying premium on the value insured.
N.B.
Up to date copies of the THREE STOKES GUIDE together with instructions for its use have been provided to all Personal Depts. — all staff involved in Pleasurecraft claims should be fully instructed in the use of this Guide.
It is not intended in the case of outboard motors that any deduction should be made until the engine is over 3 years old.
Holiday Cover
Section 1, Para. 2, of the Policy provides cover whilst the craft is in most of the countries in Western Europe for a period not exceeding 31 consecutive days during any one period of insurance.
Whenever a claim is presented for damage to the craft occasioned abroad, and the craft has been returned to the U.K. for repair, it must be carefully checked that this period has not been exceeded — and especially that the craft is not being left at a holiday destination for a prolonged period.
Policy Exceptions — Section 1
Exception 1
Where a loss is caused by wear and tear or gradual deterioration no claim will be recoverable under this Policy wording.
All claims should be carefully vetted to ensure that no element of betterment is involved i.e. repairing what is pre-existing damage or mere deterioration due to age and use.
Exception 4
Common claims under this Policy involve loss of or damage to: — 
(i)
moorings, nets, fishing gear, personal effects and consumable stores
(ii)
oars and sculls
(iii)
wet suits, water skis and tow ropes
(iv)
aqualungs, gas bottles and compressors or any other form of diving equipment
Whilst there is no cover for these items under the Policy there may be cover under a Home or Sports Policy held by the Corporation and it is advisable to check wherever such cover exists before finally declining claims on these items.
Third Party Claims Section 2
Queries on Third Party claims can be referred to H O Accident (Personal) Claims & Support for comment, including claims from salvors.
Whilst the craft is being towed and third party damage or injury is caused by the craft or trailer such damage or injury will be dealt with by the Motor Insurers of the towing vehicle.
Such liability is specifically excluded from the Small Craft Policy by Exclusion 5 of Section 2.
P.A. Cover Section 3
The Policy includes cover for certain capital sum benefits for the Policyholder and Spouse.
These only apply whilst Policyholder or Spouse is embarking, disembarking or whilst on board the craft.
In addition, Medical Expenses cover is provided not exceeding $500 each claim where Policyholder and Spouse are injured in an accident involving the craft.
GENERAL EXCLUSIONS
These are mostly self-explanatory, however, two need special mention.
Under General Exclusion 1, no cover will operate if the craft is being used for any purpose other than private pleasure.
The Claim Form should be carefully checked for information that would indicate that any commercial use is taking place.
Please also note General Exclusion 7b — no cover is provided for loss or damage caused by riots or civil commotion.
SPECIAL NOTE ALL CRAFT
Because of their vulnerability to heavy weather all craft have had special restrictions placed upon them.
All claims arising whilst the craft is left afloat unmanned in the water from the 1st September to 31st March inclusive, whilst in the United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland and Channel Islands.
See General Exception 5.
YACHT AND MOTOR BOAT (MAY 1991)
POLICY WORDING
Proposal Form and Policy have been issued.
This policy will be used for all vessels over 16 feet 6 inches in length.
Some smaller craft may be written on this policy if the use is other than private pleasure.
Under Section One of the policy, we cover all loss or damage caused by EXTERNAL ACCIDENTAL MEANS.
The wording provides for deductions in respect of new replacing old, as in the Small Craft Policy Form, for the loss of sails, spars, standing and running rigging — as well as outboard motors.
The wording provides a wide comprehensive cover and unless the claim presented is ruled out by one of the Policy Exceptions (discussed below) or is not due to an external accident or fortuity then every consideration should be given for settlement of the claim.
Security Clauses
These clauses (detailed on page 8, Section 1 — Loss or Damage to the Vessel) are attached to ALL POLICIES because of the recent growth in theft claims.
In consideration of any theft claim, it must be ascertained that the clauses have been complied with in every respect.
Third Party Claims Section 2
Queries on Third Party claims can be referred to H O Accident Personal Claims & Support for comment, including claims from salvors.
Whilst the craft is being towed and third party damage or injury is caused by the craft or trailer such damage or injury will be dealt with by the Motor Insurers of the towing vehicle.
Such liability is specifically excluded from the Yacht and Motor Boat Policy by Exclusion 4 of Section 2.
P.A. Cover Section 3
The Policy includes cover for certain capital sum benefits for the Policyholder and Spouse.
These only apply whilst Policyholder or Spouse is embarking, disembarking or whilst on board the craft.
In addition, Medical Expenses cover is provided not exceeding $500 each claim where Policyholder and Spouse are injured in an accident involving the craft.
General Policy Exclusions
General Exclusion 1
Please note that this Policy does not provide riots and civil commotion cover.
It is worthwhile noting also that there is a General Policy Exception where the vessel is used for purposes other than private pleasure.
However the policy may be extended to provide cover for a variety of uses.
Please see the policy schedule for the permitted use on any particular policy.
General Exclusion 6
The policy does not cover claims arising whilst the vessel remains afloat unmanned in the UK from 1st October to the 31st March inclusive, unless the vessel is placed in a purpose built marina, protected harbour, non-tidal waters or in a sheltered mooring which has been notified to and agreed by the Corporation.
Where claims involve losses in these areas during the winter period stated, they should be carefully checked to see if the clause has been complied with.
Special Clauses attaching to this Policy Form
Depending upon the type of vessel involved, several special clauses may be added to the cover.
A — Speedboat Clause
This is the most common clause and will attach to all vessels with a maximum design speed which exceeds 17 knots (20 mph) whether they are called Speedboats or not.
Because of the increased risk due to the speeds of which these vessels are capable the clause restricts the cover granted substantially.
Basically the clause excludes three important types of claims: — 
1.
Where the vessel is left unattended moored or anchored off an exposed beach or shore no claim will be payable for breaking adrift from the mooring or anchor and the subsequent damage.
In all cases where a vessel which is covered under a Policy which is subject to the Speedboat Clause and such a claim is made very careful consideration should be given to the mooring area.
If the Branch is in doubt about a particular case please refer to a local Marine Surveyor or H O Accident (Personal) Claims & Support for guidance on whether the area involved should be deemed to be ‘an exposed beach or shore’.
Refer to Special Clauses, paragraph 3(a).
2.
The second important effect of the Speedboat Clause is contained within Section 2.
In the case of fire on board a vessel which is fitted with inboard machinery then it should be ascertained if the appropriate automatic fire extinguishing system was fitted to the vessel.
Normally in major fire cases an independent Marine Surveyor will be used and they should be asked to comment upon the system provided.
3.
The major restriction contained within the clause is Section 4.
This excludes loss or damage to the rudder, propeller, strut, shaft, motor, electrical machinery or batteries, and their connections, caused by the vessel striking a submerged object whilst underway.
The consequences of this Exclusion Clause are quite far reaching.
The clause has the effect of excluding the most common claim for Speedboats i.e. striking a submerged object and the resulting machinery damage.
With these vessels the damage to both hull and machinery following the striking of a submerged object can be substantial.
However please note that although machinery damage will be excluded by Section 4 any damage to the actual hull of the vessel itself will be covered.
Repudiation of a claim under this clause can cause serious problems.
However claims must be dealt with strictly in accordance with the wording of the clause and any problems arising must be referred to H O Accident (Personal) Claims & Support for guidance.
In all cases where the Speedboat Clause applies it should be given careful consideration as it does limit the extent of cover appreciably.
No cover is given for racing speedcraft.
If the Claim Form reveals that the vessel was racing then there is no cover.
C — Racing Risks Extension Clause
Please note previous reference to Exclusion 7 to Section 1.
If the above Clause appears on the Schedule of the Policy it means that Exclusion 7 will no longer apply.
The effect of the clause is that full cover is restored for sails, masts, spars, standing and running rigging of the yacht damaged whilst the vessel is involved in racing.
However the cover is subject to the Policyholder retaining a full third of the loss himself.
The intention of the clause is to reflect the increased likelihood of damage to this equipment under the strain of racing.
Removal of Wreck
Following a casualty which results in the total loss of a vessel the remains of which are causing an obstruction or a danger to other shipping, the Policyholder may be requested by a Harbour Master or Receiver of Wrecks to remove the vessel.
The cost of such removal or obstruction would be recoverable under Section 2 (Liabilities) in addition to the total loss settlement provided.
In all cases where it is possible that wrecks may cause a future problem all steps should be taken to ensure that it is properly disposed of to avoid any possible future Third Party claims.
The local Marine Surveyor should be able to assist in this connection.
Laid-up Ashore Periods
The most common provision on the Yacht and Motor Boat Policy Form is the Laid-up Ashore provision.
If the vessel is to be out of the water for a fixed period e.g. between September the 1st and March the 31st annually, then this will be expressed in the Policy Schedule, and will be detailed on the underwriting risk and claims statistics screens on the Polisy system.
If the vessel is damaged afloat when it should be laid-up ashore then no cover will operate.
To be ‘ashore’ the vessel must be out of the reach of the tides completely — see the Laid-up Type on the risk and statistics screens and the Polisy User Manual (Claims), for a description of the type of mooring/location where the vessel should be laid-up.
Theft Claims
When a claim for theft of personal effects or special equipment is presented on the Yacht and Motor Boat Policy the proposal should be checked to ensure that the items claimed have been specifically insured.
The Proposal Form is the basis on which cover is provided and items of this nature must be specifically declared to be covered.
If some item claimed is not covered under the Marine Policy it should be borne in mind that a Home Policy could provide cover — this is especially important if the Corporation holds the Home Policy as well as the Marine Policy.
Items which are purchased with the vessel and which would be sold with it, are normally to be considered as part of the hull and machinery and will be covered even if not specifically declared on the proposal.
INTERIM RESULTS FOR 1993
PRE-TAX PROFIT OF $126.2M AS RECOVERY GATHERS MOMENTUM THROUGH THE SECOND QUARTER
UNDERWRITING PROFIT ACHIEVED IN THE UK AT THE HALF YEAR
Pre-tax profit of $126.2m — an improvement of $141.6m over 1992.
Second quarter pre-tax profit of $84.1m (1992: $13.6m profit).
Worldwide underwriting deficit reduced to $129.0m (1992: $235.2m loss).
UK underwriting profit of $3.5m for the half year (1992: $104.8m loss) following a $7.6m profit in the second quarter (1992: $39.6m loss).
Continuing improvement in the United States.
Excellent results in Canada and the Pacific.
Increased contribution from Life business.
Net investment income up 9.1%.
Interim dividend unchanged at 9.7p per share.
Current solvency margin — 48.9%.
Commenting on the results, Mr. Nelson Robertson, General Accident's Group Chief Executive, said:
‘With an improvement of almost $142m at the pre-tax level, we have achieved a significant recovery in our operating performance at the half year.
‘An outstanding feature of the result is the achievement of an underwriting profit in the UK where the benefits of rating action, more selective underwriting procedures and cost controls produced a substantial and continuing improvement in our performance in the second quarter.
‘We have also made progress in other major markets.
In the US, where we have applied corrective action to unprofitable lines, we continue to benefit from the successful introduction of rating increases.
In Canada, we performed well and reported an excellent profit in the second quarter.
We also produced a good profit in the Pacific at the half year and saw strong premium growth in Asia.
‘Long-term business continues to progress and has made a substantially increased contribution to profits.
‘Net investment income has shown a satisfactory increase during the six months as interest charges continue to fall in line with significantly reduced borrowings.
‘In summary, we have made substantial progress at the half year and we expect this positive trend to be maintained.
further corrective action in those areas which continue to produce an unacceptable underwriting return.
‘The continuing improvement in our asset value and a return to acceptable levels of profitability further enhances our financial strength and our (ability to take full advantage of the opportunities for profitable growth.’
Full details of the results are attached.
For further information please contact: — Nelson Robertson, Group Chief Executive Barrie Holder, General Manager Bob Scott, General Manager (UK).
Who will be available throughout the day on 071–606 1030 10th August 1993
GENERAL ACCIDENT plc RESULTS FOR SIX MONTHS ENDED 30TH JUNE 1993
Notes
The above results of the General Accident Group for the six months ended 30th June 1993, estimated and unaudited, are compared with those for the similar period in 1992, which are restated at 31st December 1992 rates of exchange.
Also shown are the actual results for the full year 1992.
These results do not comprise the statutory accounts for 1992 which have been audited without qualification and filed with the Registrar of Companies.
There are no ‘discontinued operations’ or ‘acquisitions’as defined in FRS3.
It must be emphasised that the results for an interim period do not necessarily provide a reliable indication of those for the full year.
ANALYSIS BY TERRITORY OF GENERAL BUSINESS PREMIUM INCOME AND UNDERWRITING
Results
Dividend
The Directors have declared an interim dividend for the year ending 31st December 1993 of 9.7p per share (1992: 9.7p per share) costing $43.7m (1992: $43.6m) payable on or after 1st January 1994 to ordinary shareholders on the Register of Members at close of business on 29th October 1993.
The Directors propose to offer ordinary shareholders the opportunity to receive fully paid ordinary shares in the Company in lieu of the cash dividend.
Note: The half yearly report will be published in the Financial Times and Times on Thursday, 12th August 1993.
Highlights from the results will also appear in various newspapers on Wednesday, 11th August.
A pre-tax profit for the half year to 30th June 1993 of $126.2m is announced today (August 10) by the Scottish-based insurance group General Accident.
This compares with a loss in the same period last year of $15.4m.
Following a tax charge of $21.0m and a contribution from minorities of $0.3m, the profit attributable to shareholders at the half year was $105.5m (1992: $14.8m loss) equivalent to earnings per share of 21.5p (1992: 3.4p loss per share).
Currency movements had only a marginal impact on the results.
INTERIM DIVIDEND
An unchanged interim dividend of 9.7p per share is declared.
GENERAL BUSINESS PREMIUMS
Net written premiums in sterling terms were up from $1,909.7m to $2,107.0m.
The growth rate in original currencies was 9.4%, reflecting some selective volume growth and the impact of significant rating action.
UNDERWRITING
With a more than halving of losses in the second quarter to $48.7m (1992: $100.2m loss), the worldwide underwriting deficit at the mid year was down by $106.2m from $235.2m (representing 12.3% of premiums) to $129.0m (6.1% of premiums), a reduction due largely to a substantial improvement in the UK result.
INVESTMENT INCOME
There was an encouraging increase in net investment earnings at the half year.
Adjusted to take account of interest paid — which has fallen as a result of significantly reduced borrowings — net investment income in sterling terms increased from $215.1m to $238.8m — a growth rate in original currencies of 9.1%.
This increase partly reflects the benefits derived from the issue of preference capital in September 1992 and March this year, which together totalled $250m, and the acquisition of the Prudential non-life business in Canada.
ESTATE AGENTS
With losses in the second quarter reduced to $0.8m (1992: $5.4m loss), General Accident's property services operation produced a substantially lower deficit at the half year of $4.5m (1992: $9.9m loss) as measures designed to reduce operating costs continued to take effect.
There was some seasonal improvement during the second three months of the year, but firm evidence of sustained recovery in the housing market is yet to appear.
LIFE BUSINESS
There was further progress from General Accident's Life operations.
Long-term business profits are up from $14.6m to $20.9m, despite the continuing impact of development costs in Hong Kong and Ireland during the half year.
Life operations in the UK continued to perform well in a difficult market.
New annual premiums were $26.0m (1992: $30.3m) and single premiums $176.2m (1992: $159.5m).
NET ASSETS PER SHARE/WORLDWIDE SOLVENCY
These calculations do not take account of the value of the long term assurance business.
Current figures are estimated and include an appropriate amount for dividend and trading result up to 6th August 1993.
The solvency margin worldwide includes a full year estimate of premium income in respect of direct general insurance business acquired from Prudential in Canada on 30th November, 1992.
TERRITORIAL ANALYSIS
The following is the analysis of underwriting by territory for the half-year: — 
UNITED KINGDOM
Recovery in the UK gathered momentum during the second quarter as the UK portfolio continued to respond positively to action on rates and operating costs.
A profit of $7.6m in the second quarter (1992: $39.6m loss) produced an overall profit for the half year of $3.5m, which compares with a deficit in the same period in 1992 of $104.8m.
This substantial return to profitability was achieved despite losses arising from flood damage in the Perth and Tayside region in the first quarter which amounted to $13m and the terrorist explosion in the City of London which cost $10m, net of reinsurance.
There was also some additional reserve strengthening during the period.
Written premiums at the half year were up 13.6% from $600.1m to $681.5m reflecting a much higher average premium across the whole account with some selective growth offset by a reduction in large fleet business.
Personal Lines
There was a substantial improvement in the Personal Motor account which continues to benefit from careful risk selection and a lower underlying claims frequency.
A profit in the second quarter of $5.3m (1992: $9.7m loss) produced a profit at the half year of $1.9m against a loss last time of $29.7m.
Written premiums for the period were up nearly 7%.
Rating levels continue to be reviewed in line with changing patterns in claims experience and the decision to negotiate new arrangements to replace the Knock-for-Knock agreement.
The Homeowners account has also responded positively to remedial action and produced a profit at the half year of $16.8m (1992: $4.2m loss) following a profit of $14.7m in the second quarter (1992: $4.1m profit).
Premium income during the half year was up nearly 50% reflecting GA's involvement in a number of new major accounts.
A lower level of subsidence claims was reported and, apart from the Perth floods which cost the Homeowners account $3m in the first quarter, the account continued to benefit from the absence of severe weather losses.
Losses in mortgage indemnity business were in line with expectations at $10m.
This compares with similar losses in the same period of last year of $17m.
In Creditor business, rating action has resulted in an improving trend which continued during the second quarter of the year.
Commercial Lines
The Commercial Motor account produced a profit in the second quarter of $3.1m (1992: $9.1m loss) and a profit at the half year of $3.2m (1992: $21.5m loss).
An improving trend is now evident across the portfolio following the introduction of a more selective approach to the underwriting of Commercial Motor business.
The decision to reduce involvement in large fleet business, announced earlier this year, will continue to affect premiums levels in the account in the second half of the year.
The Commercial Property account produced an unchanged deficit at the half year despite exceptional losses during the period of $20m.
Following a deficit of $8.9m in the second quarter (1992: $7.8m loss) losses at the half year were $9.6m (1992: $9.6m loss) on premium income up 10%.
Losses on the Commercial Property account in connection with the Perth floods amounted to $10m in the first quarter and the terrorist explosion in the City of London at the end of April cost an estimated $10m net, excluding the reinstatement premium.
These latter losses were limited by additional reinsurance covers effected earlier in the year which provided protection for losses above $10m.
The Liability account showed improvement and produced a deficit at the half year down from $10.5m to $4.7m.
UNITED STATES
There was an encouraging improvement in General Accident's performance in the US.
Following losses in the second quarter down from $40.4m to $35.4m, the underwriting deficit at the half year in sterling terms was just over 9% lower at $74.1m (1992: $81.6m loss), representing an overall improvement in the US operating ratio of almost one and three quarter points for the half year.
In the second quarter there was a full 2 points improvement in the operating ratio.
Premium income for the six months was down marginally at [1,011.9m (1992:[1,021.9m) as the impact of rate increases across all classes was again more than offset by a lower policy count.
There was improvement in all the major lines during the half year except Personal Property which was adversely affected by weather claims in the first quarter.
Both property accounts were also affected by a very significant increase in reinsurance premiums.
Catastrophe losses during the period were up by two thirds from $12.5m to almost $21.0m.
There was a marginally better performance in the large Private Auto account at the half year, despite a marked deterioration in involuntary business.
Workers' Compensation reported an increase in premium income on a reduced policy count and achieved an improvement of over 4.6 points in the Operating Ratio.
The following is the operating ratio for the six months:
General Accident are not expecting any additional claims activity as a result of the flooding in the Mid-West, the insurance costs of which are being handled under the US Government's National Flood Insurance Programme.
GA's limited exposure in the area is mainly in the Auto account.
CANADA
In Canada, where premium income rose from $223.4m to $322.5m following the acquisition of the general insurance business of the Prudential Corporation in November 1992, there was another good performance.
Following an excellent profit in the second quarter of $4.5m (1992: $0.5m) the deficit at the half year was $7.1m (1992: $2.4m loss), with all companies — GA, Pilot and Prudential — performing well.
All major accounts produced satisfactory results with the exception of Commercial Property.
The Auto account, which was affected by adverse weather in the first quarter, is now benefiting from successful rating action and produced a good result at the half year.
PACIFIC B
The Pacific produced another excellent performance reporting an underwriting profit at the half year of $2.5m against a loss in the same period last time of $3.1m.
This followed a profit in the second quarter of $0.6m (1992: $1.7m loss).
In Australia, losses at the half year were down from $7.0m to $5.2m following a deficit in the second quarter only marginally better at $3.4m (1992: $3.5m loss).
New Zealand improved on its excellent 1992 performance to produce an underwriting profit for the six months up from $5.4m to $6.2m.
Asia reported strong premium growth and produced an underwriting profit with the improved performance in Hong Kong being particularly pleasing.
EUROPE OTHER THAN UK
There was a less than satisfactory result in Europe, although losses at the half year were marginally lower at $20.2m (1992: $20.6m loss) following a deficit in the second quarter down from $9.4m to $8.2m.
In France, where further remedial action — including a significant redundancy programme — has yet to take effect, there was a deficit of $12.6m (1992: $14.7m loss).
Premium income in currency was up nearly 17% as a result of substantial rate increases and further rating action will come into effect during the third quarter.
Italy and Belgium reported a reduced deficit and Ireland continued to perform satisfactorily in a very competitive market.
Netherlands, on the other hand, reported increased losses for the period.
OTHER OVERSEAS
Following losses in the second quarter of $5.3m (1992: $3.1m loss), the deficit in other overseas markets increased substantially from $6.0m to $11.4m at the half year.
There was a disappointing result in South Africa for the period and further and more severe remedial action will be taken to reduce losses.
Adverse currency movements in Brazil and a worse result in Puerto Rico also contributed to the increased deficit, although the latter showed some improvement in the second quarter when compared to the first three months of the year.
LONDON MARKET INCLUDING INTERNAL REINSURANCE
London Market, including internal reinsurance, produced estimated losses up from $16.7m to $22.2m following a near doubling of the deficit in the second quarter to $12.5m (1992: $6.5m loss).
These losses largely relate to 1991 and prior years and to discontinued business.
Appropriate remedial action has been taken to secure higher premium levels on current business.
An increase in premium income from $77.2m to $78.9m reflects considerably higher average premium in the Marine account, largely offset by GA's withdrawal last year from non-marine treaty business.
QUARTERLY PROGRESSIONS
Quarterly progressions, translated at rates of exchange applying on 30th June 1993 were: — 
CURRENCY FLUCTUATIONS
Currency movements had only a limited impact on the results for the half year.
If 1992 year-end exchange rates had applied:
Premiums would have been $10.8m lower
Net Investment Income would have been $ 0.8m lower
Underwriting Loss would have been $ 0.1m lower
Pre-Tax Profit would have been $ 0.8m lower
SIX MONTHS ENDED 30TH JUNE
Our firm actions to increase premiums to adequate levels and restrain costs are now being reflected more fully in our figures.
I warned a year ago that it would not be until 1992 that substantially better results would be achieved.
Whilst we recognise that conditions favoured us in the first quarter in that weather-related losses were comparatively light, the worldwide nature of the improvement, together with encouraging indications so far in the second quarter, lead us to believe that the worst is behind us and that trends will continue to improve.
In the United Kingdom the Homeowners' account continued to show substantial improvement with a reduced level of subsidence claims.
Motor experience is still unsatisfactory however and the benefits of our more selective underwriting procedures to improve the quality of our portfolio have not yet had their full effect.
There has been some decline in the number of claims, but the cost of claims continues to escalate.
Our estate agency loss has been reduced and we expect to see some improvement in this business as the housing market responds to lower interest rates.
In overseas markets, Canada, the Pacific and Ireland produced very acceptable results while the US result improved, benefiting from auto rating increases in New York and some other states.
Results from Europe outside the UK improved in spite of heavy property losses in France.
Net investment income continued to grow strongly, despite falling interest rates worldwide, and life business made further good progress.
While we can never be satisfied with results showing a pre-tax loss, we are confident that our recovery is well under way and that it is soundly based.
FORECAST IMPROVEMENTS BEGIN TO COME THROUGH AS REMEDIAL ACTIONS TAKE EFFECT
PRE-TAX LOSS IMPROVES BY $45.5M TO $29.2M (1991: $74.7M LOSS)
WORLDWIDE UNDERWRITING LOSS DOWN TO $129.6M FROM $162.2M
REDUCED UK UNDERWRITING LOSSES AS BENEFITS OF HIGHER PREMIUMS AND REDUCED
COSTS BEGIN TO FLOW THROUGH
IMPROVED RESULT IN THE UNITED STATES
OTHER OVERSEAS TERRITORIES PERFORM WELL APART FROM FRANCE, WITH OUTSTANDING
RESULTS IN CANADA, IRELAND AND THE PACIFIC
SUBSTANTIAL FURTHER GROWTH IN LIFE OPERATIONS
STRONG GROWTH IN NET INVESTMENT INCOME
IMPROVING TREND EXPECTED TO CONTINUE
Written premiums up form $780.2m to $853.9m — a growth rate in original currencies of 5.1%
Worldwide underwriting losses down 20% from $162.2m (representing 20.8% of premiums) to $129.6m (15.2% of premiums)
Adjusted to take account of interest paid, net investment income increased from $84.5m to $97.1m, a growth rate in original currencies of 8.6%
General Accident Property Services produced losses down from $5.2m to $4.5m
Long-term business profits were $7.8m (1991: $8.0m)
Current solvency margin worldwide — 42%
IN THE UK
Underlying improvement achieved in all major classes during 1991 continued into Q1 of 1992 which produced losses down by 30% from $92.8m to $65.2m.
Written premiums marginally lower at $282.0m (1991: $286.3m) but reflect higher average premium.
MOTOR
Deficit of $26.5 m compares with losses of $32.0 in Q1 last year and $29.0 in Q4 of 1991.
Market conditions remain difficult.
Whether personal or commercial, business will be terminated where their is little or no likelihood of profit.
HOMEOWNERS'
Substantial improvement with losses down from $20.9m to $7.8m.
Subsidence claims showed marked decline, but theft claims continue to rise.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY
Substantial improvement despite continuing impact of arson and crime related claims.
Deficit of $9.7m compares with losses of $21.7m in Q1 last year and $22.2m in Q4 of 1991.
Losses in connection with the terrorist explosions in London in April are estimated at around $6m, net of reinsurance, which will be fully reserved in the second quarter.
OTHER CLASSES
Losses in mortgage indemnity business much in line with expectations at $7.8m.
Work continues with Building Society clients to contain losses.
Creditor business continues to be affected by the poor economic climate.
GA LIFE
Further substantial progress in UK life operations.
New annual premiums up from $11.6m to $14.5m and single premiums from $21.5m, to $73.5m.
Low cost endowment business up by 37% despite slowdown in UK mortgage market.
UNITED STATES
A full three point improvement in the operating ratio produced an underwriting deficit down from $36.9m to $35.7m on premiums 13% higher at [498.9m (1991:[442.8m)
Personal lines reported reduced losses, but commercial business deteriorated.
Losses in connection with the Los Angeles riots in April are estimated to be around [5m, net of reinsurance.
CANADA
An outstanding result with losses for Q1 down significantly from $4.5m to $2.7m.
PACIFIC
Losses for Q1 down substantially from $9.5m to $1.3m.
Australia halved its underwriting deficit and New Zealand produced a profit.
EUROPE (EXCLUDING UK)
Deficit down from $10.7m to $9.8m losses in France of $6.7m.
Ireland reported a very strong performance and there were improved results from Belgium and Italy.
OTHER OVERSEAS
Losses increased despite a welcome improvement in South Africa.
LONDON MARKET
Q1 provision of $10.2m (1991: $4.9m loss) for London Market Business, including internal reinsurance, following losses of $14.6m in Q4 1991.
INTERIM RESULTS 1992
DETAILS OF THE CORPORATION'S INTERIM RESULTS FOR 1992 WERE RELEASED EARLIER TODAY (11/8/92).
THE RESULTS REFLECT A CONTINUATION IN THE IMPROVING TREND WITH A PROFIT OF $9.5 MILLION IN THE SECOND QUARTER.
Commenting on the results, Mr Nelson Robertson, General Accident's Chief General Manager said:
‘A year ago we stated that a return to an acceptable level of profitability was our major and urgent objective.
Our second quarter profit is a significant step towards the achievement of this aim and confirms that the remedial action we have taken is proving effective.
‘In the United Kingdom action on expenses and more selective underwriting procedures have resulted in a substantial reduction in underwriting losses at the half year, even after additional reserve strengthening.
‘Canada continued its strong performance, with an underwriting profit in the second quarter, whilst the US produced satisfactory results in what remains a difficult market.
The Pacific also produced a very good result.
‘Our life operations made further good progress particularly in the UK where increases in both single and annual premiums resulted in increased market share.
‘Net investment income showed a strong increase, partly as a result of lower interest costs arising from our continuing commitment to reduce overall borrowings.
‘While the remedial action we have taken in all our major territories is proving effective, the need to contain costs and to underwrite selectively will remain the basis on which we will continue to develop our business worldwide’.
INTERIM RESULTS FOR 1992
PROFIT OF $9.5M IN Q2 AS TREND OF QUARTERLY IMPROVEMENTS CONTINUES
PRE-TAX LOSS AT THE HALF YEAR OF $21.2M REPRESENTS IMPROVEMENT OF $84.0M ($105.2M LOSS)
INTERIM  DIVIDEND UNCHANGED AT 9.7p PER SHARE
UK UNDERWRITING LOSSES FURTHER REDUCED AS BENEFITS OF RATING ACTION & COSTb1
CONTROL SHOW THROUGH M
US RESULT SATISFACTORY IN A DIFFICULT MARKET
GOOD RESULTS IN CANADA & PACIFIC
LIFE OPERATIONS MAKE STRONG PROGRESS
NET INVESTMENT INCOME INCREASES BY 7.9%
General premiums up from $1,617.5m to $1,690.9m — a growth rate in original currencies of 5.5% — reflect the impact of successful rating action in all major markets
Worldwide underwriting losses $36.3m lower in Q2 at $90.4m produce deficit at the mid year down by a quarter from $288.9m (17.9% of premiums) to $216.3m (12.8% of premiums)
Net investment earnings up from $176.1m to $190.4m — a growth rate in original currencies of 7.9%
GA Property Services deficit up from $8.4m to $9.9m as conditions in the housing market show little sign of improvement.
Long-term profits of $14.6m compare with $15.5m in the first half of last year, but UK life operations make further strong progress
Current solvency margin worldwide — 37.6%
This takes no account of the long-term assurance business
The Board to see shareholder approval for the creation of preference shares at a special egm on August 27
IN THE UK
Underwriting losses in Q2 down just over a half from $85.6m to $39.6m produced deficit $73.6m lower at $104.8m.
Written premiums virtually unchanged at $600.1m reflect a significantly higher average premium across the portfolio.
Recovery continued in all major classes.
Motor
Q2 losses $9.5m lower at $15.4m produced deficit down just over a quarter from $56.9m to $41.9m.
Market conditions remain difficult and rating increases continue to be applied on both the private and commercial accounts where justified.
Homeowners
Q2 profit of $4.3m reflected improvement of $15.3m to produce losses down sharply from $31.9m to $3.5m.
Marked decline in subsidence claims down from $20.0m to $11.0m.
Portfolio also benefited from differential premium rating introduced last December.
Commercial Property
Produced Q2 losses up from $10.2m to $14.0m following estimated loss of $6.0m, net of reinsurance, in connection with the terrorist explosions in London during April.
At the half-year, however, deficit down by a quarter from $31.9m to $23.7m reflecting sharp reduction in Q1 losses.
Arson and fraud-related claims continue to impact on the account.
Other Classes
Losses on mortgage indemnity business in line with expectations at $17.0m ($22.4m).
We continue to work with Building Society customers to contain losses.
Creditor business continues to be affected by the poor economic climate but rating action has resulted in some improvement in Q2.
GA Life
New annual premiums up from $25.3m to $30.3m and single premiums from $62.5m to $159.5m.
Low cost endowment business through building society and estate agency connections up 19% despite reduced mortgage lending.
WORLDWIDE
United States
Q2 deficit up from $22.9m to $32.1m produced deficit at the half year $5.0m higher at $64.8m on written premiums — including recent acquisition Hawkeye — 13.6% higher in currency.
Catastrophe losses in Q2 of [15m, of which [4m relate to the Los Angeles riots, compare with [9.5m in Q2 last year.
Operating ratio at the half year virtually unchanged at 112.25%.
D
Canada
Our Canadian companies again outperformed the market to produce a deficit of $2.0m ($0.4m profit), following profit of $0.4m in Q2 ($4.9m profit).
Pacific
Q2 losses $4.6m lower at $1.4m produced deficit at the half year down from $15.5m to $2.6m.
Good performances from Australia and New Zealand.
Europe (excluding UK)
Further small improvement in Q2 produced deficit down from $20.2m to $17.9m, despite substantially higher losses in France.
Other Overseas
Q2 deficit doubled to $3.2m produced losses up from $4.5m to $7.7m, largely reflecting adverse currency movements in Brazil.
London Market, including internal reinsurance Deficit at the half year up from $10.9m to $16.5m, despite Q2 losses only marginally higher at $6.3m
Third quarter results 1992
‘Although we have reported an improvement in our performance in the third quarter the results for the period are dominated by the impact of losses on Hurricane Andrew’, which are now estimated at $38m net, including losses of more than $7m incurred through our London Market reinsurance operations.
Those exceptional losses mask an acceleration in our underlying recovery during the third quarter.
But for Hurricane Andrew' we would have reported a profit of almost $22m in the third quarter and a return to profitability in for the nine months.
In the UK, the substantial improvement reported at the half year has continued as the benefit of rating action, more selective underwriting procedures and cost controls prove increasingly effective across the whole portfolio.
In the US, commercial lines have deteriorated, but with a good performance in the Private Auto account the underlying improvement in personal lines continued into the third quarter.
In Canada, we have again produced an excellent result given difficult market conditions.
The Pacific has also produced an excellent performance, but conditions in Europe remain very competitive and real progress is difficult to sustain.
Net investment income has shown a very satisfactory advance as interest costs continue to fall in line with reduced borrowing.
Our life operations also continue to perform strongly.
We are naturally disappointed that substantial catastrophe losses have come at a time when the pace of our underlying recovery is accelerating, but we are confident that the improvement in our performance is soundly based and will continue to show through as strong management action proves increasingly effective.’
General premiums up from $2,435m to $2,629m — a growth rate in original currencies of 5.2% — again reflecting the impact of successful rating action in all major markets.
Worldwide underwriting losses in Q3 down from $131m to $124.9m — despite losses on Hurricane Andrew' — produced deficit at the nine months down $71.4m from $419.9m (representing 17.2% of premiums) to $348.5m (13.3% of premiums).
Net investment earnings up from $276m to $301.5m — a growth rate in original currencies of 5.3%.
GA Property Services produced deficit only marginally higher at $12.1m ($11.9m loss) after reporting reduced losses in Q3.
Long-term profits virtually unchanged at $22.4m ($22.2m).
PRE-TAX LOSS OF $36.7M ($133.1M LOSS) INCLUDES LOSSES ON HURRICANE ANDREW OF $38M NET
UNDERLYING RECOVERY CONTINUES IN Q3, PARTICULARLY IN THE UK WHICH SHOWS
FURTHER MARKED IMPROVEMENT AS REMEDIAL ACTION PROVES INCREASINGLY EFFECTIVE
US RESULTS DISTORTED BY LOSSES ON HURRICANE ANDREW'
EXCELLENT RESULTS IN CANADA AND THE PACIFIC
LIFE OPERATIONS CONTINUE TO MAKE GOOD PROGRESS
NET INVESTMENT INCOME INCREASED BY 5.3%
NET ASSETS PER SHARE 335p
In the UK
Q3 underwriting loss $53m lower at $28.3m produced deficit down almost a half from $259.7m to $133.1m as remedial action proved increasingly effective.
Written premiums marginally higher at $920.1m reflected significantly higher average premium across the portfolio.
While personal lines remain very competitive, the commercial market is now more stable although business failures and cutbacks are reducing available business.
Motor
Q3 losses just over two thirds lower at $8.6m produced deficit down $34.4m to $50.5m as claims frequency, but not average claims costs, improved.
Rating increases continue to be applied where justified.
Homeowners
Q3 profit of $2.2m reflected improvement of $4.8m to produce losses down substantially from $34.5m to $1.3m.
Further marked decline in subsidence claims — down from $30m to $17.3m.
Closer links with building societies being developed.
In October we acquired additional 216,000 new home policies through Cheltenham and Gloucester.
Commercial Property
Q3 profit of $0.6 compared with a loss of $21.5m in the same period last time and produced a deficit down sharply from $$53.4m to $23.1m.
Arson and crime-related claims continue to make impact on the account.
Other classes
Losses on mortgage indemnity business were $32m ($35m) including $15m ($12.6m) in Q3.
Creditor business improved in Q3 following firm rating action.
Liability
Reported some improvement.
GA Life
Increased market share as new annual premiums rose from $39m to $45.8m and single premiums from $126m to $241.6m.
Worldwide
United States
Deficit up just over a half from $89.6m to $136.6m following losses on Hurricane Andrew' of US[55m — equivalent to 4 points on the Operating Ratio, which was up from 112.42% to 116.23% at the three-quarter stage.
Canada
An excellent result.
Our Canadian companies again outperformed the market to produce a deficit of $5.4m ($0.7m loss).
With the acquisition of Prudential's general business, GA is set to become Canada's largest general insurer.
Pacific
Q3 losses down by almost a half at $2.4m produced a deficit $14.8m lower at $5.2m.
Very good results in both Australia and New Zealand — which produced a profit.
Europe (excluding UK)
Losses $4.2m higher at $27.5m largely due to experience in France.
Ireland continued to improve and produced a good profit.
Other overseas
Deficit up from $6.3m to $10.5m, reflecting adverse currency movements in Brazil and Q3 deterioration Puerto Rico.
London Market, including internal reinsurance
Estimated deficit at the nine months up from $20.3m to $30.2m, following losses of $7.4m from Hurricane Andrew' in Q3.
RESULTS FOR 1992
PRE-TAX LOSS FOR THE YEAR OF $29.3M AFTER LOSSES OF $65M NET ON HURRICANE ‘ANDREW’
PROFIT OF $5.8M IN THE FOURTH QUARTER MAINTAINS POSITIVE TREND OF UNDERLYING RECOVERY
Pre-tax loss at the full year of $29.3m represents an improvement of $142.3m (1991: loss of $171.6m).
Fourth quarter pre-tax profit of $5.8m (1991: $38.5m loss) is after charging additional Hurricane ‘Andrew’ losses of $20m net.
UK underwriting losses reduced substantially.
US results distorted by Hurricane ‘Andrew’.
Good performance in Canada and the Pacific.
Outstanding progress in Life operations.
Net investment income increases by 6% to $464.8m.
Final dividend unchanged at 17.05p per share.
Second issue of Preference Shares to raise $110m.
Commenting on the results, Mr Nelson Robertson, General Accident's Chief General Manager, said:
‘Action taken to contain operating costs and introduce more selective underwriting procedures has proved increasingly effective and we have reported a substantial recovery in our operating performance for 1992.
An improvement of almost $143m at the pre-tax level has been achieved even after incurring substantial losses on Hurricane ‘Andrew’.
‘In the fourth quarter there was a profit of $6m despite additional claims on Hurricane ‘Andrew’ of $20m which were partly due to $9m of losses through our now discontinued treaty reinsurance operations in the London Market.
Total losses on Hurricane ‘Andrew’— which is the largest insurance loss ever recorded — are now estimated at $65m and but for this factor we would have reported a welcome and significant return to profitability in 1992.
‘In the UK, an accelerating trend of quarterly improvement has produced a substantial reduction in underwriting losses.
‘In the US, losses on Hurricane ‘Andrew’ have masked some encouraging signs of underlying improvement as successful rating action begins to impact on Commercial as well as Personal lines.
‘In Canada, where we have significantly increased our premium income following an important acquisition, we have continued to outperform the market.
The Pacific also produced an excellent result, but conditions in Europe, where further remedial action has been taken, are not encouraging.
‘Net investment income has shown a very satisfactory advance and our borrowings have been reduced.
Our Life operations have made outstanding progress during the year and Life premium increases in the UK are encouraging, particularly when compared with the rest of the market.
‘Underlying trends are now in the right direction and as conditions in the insurance market improve we are well placed to take advantage of opportunities for profitable growth where this can be achieved while maintaining the quality of our portfolio.
’ With this in mind, we believe conditions are now right to make a second issue of preference shares to raise a further $110m, which will again enable us to repay some short term debt and provide the flexibility we need to benefit from available opportunities.
Positive underwriting trends have continued in the early part of the current year despite losses in connection with flood damage in the Perth and Tayside region which are estimated at $15m.
‘A separate announcement is being issued giving full details of the preference issue.’
Full details of the results are attached.
For further information:— Nelson Robertson, Chief General Manager Barrie Holder, General Manager Bob Scott, General Manager (UK) will be available throughout the day on 071 606 1030 
2nd March 1993
GENERAL ACCIDENT plc RESULTS FOR YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 1992
Notes
(1) This statement does not comprise the audited statutory accounts for the year ended 31st December 1992, which will be published on 5th April 1993.
The results for the full year 1991 are also shown.
These results do not comprise the statutory accounts for 1991 which have been audited without qualification and filed with the Registrar of Companies.
(2) Following the previously reported closure of NZI Bank, no separate result is reported in respect of 1992.
ANALYSIS BY TERRITORY OF GENERAL BUSINESS PREMIUM INCOME AND UNDERWRITING
RESULT
LIFE BUSINESS
UK new business production was as follows:
FINAL DIVIDEND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 1992
The Directors have decided to recommend to the ordinary shareholders at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 28th April 1993, a final dividend of 17.05p per share (1991 equivalent 17.05p), payable on or after 1st July 1993, to shareholders on the Register of Members at close of business on 7th May 1993.
The total dividend for the year of 26.75p per share (1991 equivalent 26.75p per share) will cost $120.2m (1991 $116.4m).
The Directors propose to offer shareholders the opportunity to receive fully paid ordinary shares in the Company in lieu of the cash dividend.
ET ASSETS PER ORDINARY SHARE/WORLDWIDE SOLVENCY
These calculations take no account of the value of the long term assurance business.
Current figures are estimated and include an appropriate amount for dividend and trading result up to 26th February 1993.
Solvency margin worldwide at 31st December 1992 and 26th February 1993 includes a full year estimate of premium income in respect of direct general insurance business acquired from Prudential in Canada on 30th November 1992.
The net asset value of the group at the year end was $1,629m (1991 $1,373m).
A substantial reduction in pre-tax losses for the year to 31st December 1992 — down $142.3m from $171.6m to $29.3m — is announced today (March 2) by the Scottish-based insurance group General Accident.
This follows continued improvement in the final quarter of the year which produced a profit of $5.8m (1991: $38.5m loss).
At the attributable level, the deficit for the full year was $26.9m (1991: $139.4m loss) equivalent to a loss per ordinary share of 7.0p (1991: 32.1p loss per share).
Currency movements had only a limited impact on the results.
FINAL DIVIDEND
Final dividend maintained at 17.05p per share making an unchanged total for the year of 26.75p per share.
GENERAL BUSINESS PREMIUMS
Net written premiums in sterling terms were up from $3,219m to $3,831m.
The growth rate in original currencies was 6.9%, reflecting the impact of successful rating action in all major markets as well as the inclusion of a full year's premiums from the US-based Hawkeye-Security Group, acquired in July 1991.
UNDERWRITING
With Worldwide underwriting losses in the fourth quarter $13.5m lower at $135.7m (1991: $149.2m loss), the deficit at the full year was down from $569.1m (representing 17.7% of premiums) to $510.1m (13.3% of premiums).
This improvement was achieved despite losses on Hurricane ‘Andrew’ totalling $65m net of external reinsurance, $20m of which came in the final quarter.
Other major storm losses amounted to $47m during the year (1991: $32m loss).
INVESTMENT INCOME
There was a further encouraging increase in net investment earnings in the fourth quarter despite a reduction in worldwide interest rates and equity dividends.
Adjusted to take account of interest paid, net investment income in sterling terms at the full year was up from $389.1m to $464.8m — a growth rate in original currencies of 6.0%, partly reflecting the benefits derived from the issue of $140m of preference capital in September last year.
ESTATE AGENTS
Following losses in the fourth quarter of $6.7m (1991: $5.9m loss), General Accident's property services operation produced a deficit for the year which was marginally higher at $18.8m (1991: $17.8m loss).
Levels of enquiries are beginning to show some early signs of improvement, but any benefit from this will not begin to flow through until the second quarter of 1993 at the earliest.
The group's estate-agency outlets, which now number 390, continue to make a contribution to new life business production.
LIFE BUSINESS
There was an outstanding performance from General Accident's Life operations in 1992.
Long-term business profits are up from $27.0m to $34.8m, despite the continuing impact of development costs in Hong Kong and Ireland.
During the year General Accident's French-based life company, General Accident Vie SA, has been transferred to GA Life.
This follows the transfer of 49% of the New Zealand business of NZI Life to GA Life in the early part of last year.
There was substantial progress in UK life operations with a very encouraging increase in market share being achieved.
New annual premiums were up from $51.6m to $57.2m and single premiums from $189.3m to $334.4m.
Low-cost endowment business through independent financial advisers, building society connections and estate agents was up by 21% at the year end despite the reduced level of UK mortgage lending.
GA Life's with-profit past performance results compare very favourably to other companies in the UK market, while its free asset ratio has strengthened further at the end of 1992.
TERRITORIAL ANALYSIS
The following is the analysis of underwriting by territory for the year: — 
UNITED KINGDOM
With losses in the fourth quarter of $40.1m lower at $42.1m (1991: $82.2m loss) the UK underwriting deficit at the full year was reduced by almost a half from $341.9m to $175.2m as action on rates and operating costs proved increasingly effective.
Written premiums for the full year were up from $1,172.0m to $1,251.2m, largely as a result of a significantly higher average premium across the portfolio.
Motor
The Motor account continued to show improvement in the fourth quarter which produced a deficit $11.0m lower at $18.0m (1991: $29.0m loss) as claims frequency, but not average claims costs, continue to fall.
At the full year, losses were down by 40% from $113.9m to $68.5m, despite some additional reserve strengthening on the account.
Private motor business remains very competitive but it has been necessary to apply further selective premium increases.
A more selective approach to underwriting Commercial motor business has also been adopted following adverse experience on major fleets.
Homeowners
There was an excellent performance in the Homeowner's account which produced a profit of $10.6m in the fourth quarter, against a loss in the same period last year of $3.3m.
At the year end there was a profit of $9.3m, compared with a deficit in 1991 of $37.9m, as the account benefited from favourable weather and remedial action on rates across the whole portfolio.
There was a marked reduction in subsidence claims at the full year — down from $35.7m to $17.5m.
The portfolio also benefited from differential premium ratings, introduced in December 1991.
Commercial Property
The Commercial Property account also performed strongly.
Losses during the final quarter were substantially lower at $2.3m (1991: $22.2m loss) and produced a deficit at the year end down by two thirds from $75.6m to $25.4m, reflecting a reduced level of major fire damage during the second half of the year.
Arson and fraud-related claims continue to make an impact on the account.
Liability
Losses in the Liability account for the year were down by almost a third at $15.5m (1991: $22.6m loss).
Other Classes
Losses during the full year in mortgage indemnity business, where GA has only a 4% market share, were again in line with expectations at $53.1m, including $20.9m in the fourth quarter.
This compares with $46.2m in the same period of 1991, of which $11.5m was in the final quarter.
While the level of repossessions has stabilised, GA remain concerned about the escalation of mortgage arrears in excess of 12 months.
The company continues to work with its building society clients to contain losses.
Creditor business continues to be affected by the poor economic climate but the rating action taken in response to current levels of unemployment is resulting in an improving trend particularly in the second half of the year.
UNITED STATES
Losses in the fourth quarter were nearly two thirds higher in sterling terms at $49.4m (1991: $30.6m loss) following the impact of the New York snow storms in December which cost $8m and additional claims costs in connection with Hurricane ‘Andrew’ which amounted to just over $11m in the quarter, including assumed reinsurance and the cost of the reinstatement premium.
For the year as a whole, the deficit in sterling terms was up by three quarters from $120.2m to $210.5m.
Total losses on the US account relating to Hurricane ‘Andrew’ are now estimated at $48m, including assumed reinsurance and reinstatement premium — equivalent to 3.7 points on the Operating Ratio in the fourth quarter and 3.75 points at the full year.
Total catastrophe losses in the US during the year amounted to $78m net which compares with $20m in 1991.
The following shows the operating ratios for the period: — 
Written premiums, including a full twelve month contribution from Hawkeye, were up 8.4% in currency at US[1,990m (1991: US[1,836m).
Premium growth in the US reflected the significant impact of rating action in Private Auto and Workers' Compensation.
Although the Private Auto account produced a good result at the year end with an Operating Ratio more than 7 points better at 108.52 Personal Property reported increased losses for the period following some deterioration in the fourth quarter.
Losses on Commercial lines for the year were more than double 1991, reflecting the difficult market conditions.
All property classes were adversely affected by Hurricane ‘Andrew’ and reported increased losses.
CANADA
Despite very competitive market conditions another good performance was reported by GA's Canadian companies.
At the full year there was a deficit of $18.7m (1991: $9.3m loss) following losses in the fourth quarter of $12.5m (1991: $8.6m loss).
The property classes reported reduced losses following a good profit in Commercial Property in the fourth quarter.
Auto business also continued to perform satisfactorily and again produced a profit for the year, despite the heavy cost of Facility business in the final quarter.
Commercial Liability suffered from a number of large losses during the year.
In the final quarter of 1992, General Accident acquired the Canadian direct general insurance operations of the Prudential Corporation for $65m.
The acquisition increased GA's Canadian premium income by just over a third, lifting its market share to just over 8%.
PACIFIC
With losses in the fourth quarter $3.3m lower at $2.7m (1991: $6.0m loss) the deficit at the full year was down by over two thirds from $26.0m to $8.5m.
Losses in Australia, where there was some reserve strengthening during the year, were down from $22.1m to $12.9m following another good result in the fourth quarter.
New Zealand produced an outstanding performance and an excellent underwriting profit for the full year.
Trends in Asia are also very positive with Hong Kong producing a much reduced deficit for the year.
EUROPE OTHER THAN UK
Following a doubling of losses in the fourth quarter to $8.8m (1991: $4.4m loss), the deficit in European territories at the full year was up by almost a third from $27.7m to $36.7m.
While there was some improvement in the second half of the year, losses in France were substantially higher at $23.8m (1991: $10.9m loss) following a sharp market-wide increase in motor and large property claims, substantial costs in developing a direct marketing operation and some reserve strengthening.
Netherlands also produced increased losses.
Ireland, on the other hand, again reported an improvement and produced a good underwriting profit for the year.
OTHER OVERSEAS
Despite losses in the fourth quarter marginally lower at $2.7m (1991: $2.8m loss) the deficit at the full year was up from $9.1m to $12.5m, largely reflecting adverse currency movements in Brazil.
Puerto Rico produced an increased deficit for the year despite a good profit in the fourth quarter.
South Africa reported increased losses.
LONDON MARKET INCLUDING INTERNAL REINSURANCE
London Market, including internal reinsurance, produced estimated losses $13.1m higher at $48.0m (1991: $34.9m loss), following a deficit in the fourth quarter up from $14.6m to $17.5m, which includes additional treaty reinsurance losses in connection with Hurricane ‘Andrew’ of $9.0m.
As notified at the nine months, however, General Accident has now withdrawn from non-marine treaty business having significantly reduced its exposure to that section of the London Market earlier in the year.
The Marine account reported substantial premium growth following rating action.
QUARTERLY PROGRESSIONS
Quarterly progressions, translated at rates of exchange applying on 31st December 1992 were: — 
CURRENCY FLUCTUATIONS
Currency movements had only a limited impact on the results.
If 1991 year end exchange rates had applied:
FIRST QUARTER RESULTS FOR 1993
PRE-TAX PROFIT OF $41.9M AS THE PACE OF IMPROVEMENT ACCELERATES INTO 1993
SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN UK UNDERWRITING LOSSES
Pre-tax profit of $41.9m represents an improvement of $70.9m (1992: $29.0m loss).
Worldwide underwriting loss down by $54.5m to $80.5m (1992: $135.0m loss).
Substantial improvement in the UK across all major classes.
Encouraging results from the United States.
Satisfactory performance in Canada.
Excellent results throughout the Pacific.
3
Further good progress in Life operations.
Net investment income up 9.3%.
Commenting on the results, Mr. Nelson Robertson, General Accident's Chief General Manager said: — 
‘The substantial improvement we reported for 1992 has continued in the first three months of 1993 following a further sharp reduction in our worldwide underwriting deficit.
A pre-tax profit of nearly $42m for the quarter represents an improvement of almost $71m in what is traditionally a difficult winter quarter.
‘In the UK, the trend of quarterly improvement has accelerated across all classes as we begin to reap the full benefit of the actions we have taken — and continue to take — on rates and operating costs.
An underwriting deficit for the period of $4m compares with losses of $65m in the same quarter last year and $42m in the final quarter of 1992.
‘In the United States, where we also produced an improved result, there are now some encouraging signs of recovery as rate increases in both Commercial and Personal lines begin to take effect.
‘In Canada, where we are now the largest general insurer, we produced a satisfactory result in a quarter which was affected by adverse weather conditions.
‘The Pacific also reported a good profit and performed up to our expectations.
Europe, on the other hand, is continuing to produce unacceptable losses, despite remedial action.
‘Long-term business continues to make good progress and the performance of our UK life operation is encouraging.
Net investment income increased during the quarter as borrowings continue to reduce.
‘We have made a strong start to 1993 and we expect this positive trend to continue.
Our financial strength and our determination to accept only profitable business will enable us to take full advantage of the opportunities that are now emerging, particularly in the UK.’
Full details of the results are attached.
For further information:— Nelson Robertson, Chief General Manager Barrie Holder, General Manager Bob Scott, General Manager (UK) will be available throughout the day on 071 606 1030 
11th May 1993
GENERAL ACCIDENT plc RESULTS FOR THREE MONTHS ENDED 31ST MARCH 1993
Notes
The above results of the General Accident Group for the three months ended 31st March 1993, estimated and unaudited, are compared with those for the similar period in 1992, which are restated at 31st December 1992 rates of exchange.
Also shown are the actual results for the full year 1992.
These results do not comprise the statutory accounts for 1992 which have been audited without qualification and filed with the Registrar of Companies.
There are no ‘discontinued operations’ or ‘acquisitions’as defined in FRS3.
It must be emphasised that the results for an interim period do not usually provide a reliable indication of those for the full year.
A pre-tax profit for the three months to 31st March 1993 of $41.9m is announced today (May 11) by the Scottish-based insurance group General Accident.
This compares with a loss in the same period last year of $29.0m.
At the attributable level the profit for the quarter was $31.7m (1992: $23.3m loss) equivalent to earnings per share of 6.2p (1992: 5.4p loss per share).
Currency movements had only a marginal impact on the results.
GENERAL BUSINESS PREMIUMS
Net written premiums in sterling terms were up from $914.7m to $1,019.8m.
The growth rate in original currencies was 10.4%, largely reflecting the impact of rating action as well as some selective volume growth, particularly in the UK.
UNDERWRITING
Worldwide underwriting loss for the quarter was $80.5m — representing 7.9% of premiums (1992: $135.0m loss — 14.8% of premiums), an improvement of $54.5m due largely to a sharp reduction in the UK underwriting deficit.
INVESTMENT INCOME
There was an encouraging increase in net investment earnings during the quarter.
Adjusted to take account of interest paid, net investment income in sterling terms increased from $102.7m to $115.6m — a growth rate in original currencies of 9.3%, partly reflecting the benefits derived from the issue of preference capital in September 1992 and March this year, which together totalled $250m.
ESTATE AGENTS
Losses in connection with General Accident's property services operation were down from $4.5m to $3.7m, as measures designed to reduce operating costs began to take effect.
There was a marked increase in enquiries during the quarter as signs of a recovery begin to appear in the UK housing market.
However, any benefit from this will not flow through until later in the year.
LIFE BUSINESS
General Accident's Life operations continued to make good progress.
Long-term business profits are up from $7.8m to $10.5m, despite the continuing impact of development costs in Hong Kong and Ireland.
UK Life operations continued to perform well in the first three months of the year.
New annual premiums were $12.1m (1992: $14.5m) and single premiums $112.2m — up from $73.5m in 1992.
Low-cost endowment business through independent financial advisers, building society connections and estate agents was up by 25% in the quarter as GA Life benefited from its strong performance record in with-profits business.
NET ASSETS PER ORDINARY SHARE/WORLDWIDE SOLVENCY
These calculations take no account of the value of the long term assurance business.
Current figures are estimated and include an appropriate amount for dividend and trading result up to 7th May, 1993.
The solvency margin worldwide includes a full year estimate of premium income in respect of direct general insurance business acquired from Prudential in Canada on 30th November, 1992.
TERRITORIAL ANALYSIS
The following is the analysis of general business premium income and underwriting by territory during the quarter:
UNITED KINGDOM
The improvement achieved in all major classes during 1992 continued into the first quarter of 1993 as the portfolio benefited increasingly from action on rates and operating costs.
The deficit for the quarter was substantially lower at $4.1m, despite losses in connection with serious flood damage in the Perth and Tayside region amounting to $13m.
This compares with a deficit of $65.2m in the first quarter last year and $42.1m in the final quarter of 1992.
Written premiums for the quarter were up from $282.0m to $333.6m reflecting some volume growth and a significantly higher average premium across the whole account.
Losses in connection with the terrorist explosion in London at the end of April will be charged in the second quarter.
Additional reinsurance covers effected earlier in the year provide protection above $10m, excluding the reinstatement premium.
(Note: To conform with its practice in all other major territories, General Accident has changed the basis on which it reports class results within its UK account.
These results are now being presented to show a breakdown between Personal and Commercial lines within the portfolio.
Full details of the results for the three months to 31st March 1993 with comparisons for the first quarter of 1992 are included in the Statistical Information attached to this press release.
On this occasion the information is shown on both the old and the new basis.)
Personal Lines
The deficit in the Personal Motor account was substantially reduced from $20.0m to $3.4m reflecting higher premium levels and lower claims frequency on a better quality portfolio.
Rating levels continue to be adjusted to reflect changing patterns in claims experience.
There was a profit of $2.1m in the Homeowners account which compared with a loss in the same period last year of $8.3m.
A lower level of subsidence claims was reported and, as in the previous year, the account benefited from the absence of severe weather losses, apart from the Perth floods which cost the Homeowners account $3m.
Losses in mortgage indemnity business, where General Accident has only a 4% share, were in line with expectations at $4.4m.
This compares with losses of $7.8m in the same quarter of last year.
Creditor business continues to be influenced by high levels of unemployment but rating action taken has resulted in an improving trend and this has been confirmed by our experience in the first quarter of 1993.
Commercial Lines
While an improving trend in the Commercial Motor portfolio is now evident with a small profit of $0.1m compared with a loss of $12.4m last year, a more selective approach to writing Commercial Motor business is being adopted.
The decision to reduce involvement in large fleet business will affect premium levels during the remainder of the year.
The Commercial Property loss of $0.7m was an improvement on the previous year's loss of $1.8m although this year the Perth floods resulted in several large claims which produced losses of $10m for this account.
The Liability account showed substantial improvement and produced a small profit for the quarter of $0.7m against a loss last time of $4.1m.
UNITED STATES
There was a satisfactory first quarter result in the US where the underwriting deficit for the period was down from $41.2m in sterling terms to $38.2m, with an overall improvement in the operating ratio of just over one point.
Compared with the fourth quarter of 1992, the improvement is more than 3.5 points.
Premium income for the quarter was down marginally at [491.1m (1992:[498.9m) as the significant impact of rate increases across all classes was offset by a lower policy count.
Even with the reduced policy exposure, Workers' Compensation reported a marked increase in premium income, which was up 10.3% at [82.3m.
There was improvement in all Commercial lines when compared with both the first and the final quarters of 1992.
Personal lines, which also benefited from rate increases, showed some overall deterioration during the quarter.
The Homeowners' account was adversely affected by weather claims, including the East Coast snow storms.
However there was a better performance in the large Private Auto account despite a [10m deterioration in involuntary business.
General Accident had negligible exposure to terrorist action which damaged the World Trade Centre in New York.
The following is the operating ratio for the quarter:
CANADA
In Canada, where premium income rose from $96.1m to $139.8m following the acquisition of the general insurance business of the Prudential Corporation, the deficit for the quarter was up from $2.9m to $11.8m — a relatively satisfactory performance in difficult market conditions.
The Auto and Property accounts were affected by adverse weather, including the East Coast snow storms in March which affected Personal Auto particularly, but both accounts benefited from rating action.
PACIFIC
There was another very good performance in the Pacific which produced a profit of $1.8m against a loss in the same period last year of $1.4m.
The deficit in Australia was down by almost a half following a reduction in claims costs and New Zealand maintained its excellent 1992 performance to produce an underwriting profit for the quarter.
Asia produced a breakeven result with Hong Kong and a number of smaller territories producing an underwriting profit.
EUROPE OTHER THAN UK
There was another disappointing result in Europe with the deficit for the quarter up from $11.2m to $12.4m.
In France, where substantial remedial action has still to take effect, there was a deficit of $7.4m (1992: $7.8m loss) on premium income up 20% as a result of substantial rate increases in a market which is now much more receptive to rating action.
The Netherlands and Italy produced a worse result as did Ireland, although the latter performed satisfactorily.
Belgium, on the other hand, showed some improvement.
OTHER OVERSEAS
In other overseas markets the deficit increased from $2.9m to $6.1m due largely to adverse currency movements in Brazil and a poor result in Puerto Rico which reported an increased deficit.
In South Africa there was a substantial reduction in exposure following remedial action.
LONDON MARKET INCLUDING INTERNAL REINSURANCE
London Market including internal reinsurance, produced estimated losses down from $10.2m to $9.7m.
The Marine account continued to benefit from rating action and again reported substantial premium growth.
CURRENCY FLUCTUATIONS
Currency fluctuations had only a marginal impact on the results.
If 1992 year-end exchange rates had applied:
THREE MONTHS ENDED 31 MARCH
HOME CLAIMS CAUSE CODES
These codes are input at the time of each Claims Intimation and are recorded on the ‘Claims Screen’ of the Home Record.
Accidental Damage ACD
Accidental Loss ACL
Accidental Damage — Sanitary Ware ACS
Accidental Damage — Glass ACG
Accidental Damage — Underground Service AUS
Burst Pipes — Freezing BPS
Burst Pipes — Not Freezing BPO
Death of Insured DTH
Explosion EXP
Fire — Arson FRA
Fire — Other (Including Smoke Damage) FRO
Flood — Snow FLS
Flood — Other FLO
Impact IMP
Liability LBY
Lightning LNG
Malicious Damage MAL
Oil Leakage LKG
Other — Falling Trees, Aerials REM
Riot and Civil Commotion RCC
Storm — Winter Related (Snow & Blizzard) STS
Storm — Not Winter Related STO
Subsidence — Change in Soil SCS
Subsidence — Made up Ground SMG
Subsidence — Mine Workings SMW
Subsidence — Erosion SRE
Subsidence — Tree Roots STR
Subsidence — Other Causes SRC
Theft — Forcible Entry THV
Theft — Other THO
Bordereaux BOR
PRE PRINTED ENDORSEMENTS
The Home endorsements are now printed in ‘groups’ on separate forms.
The pre-printed endorsements are listed below showing the form on which they appear.
If an endorsement is to be added to a policy, e.g. H21, this should be entered into the 8100 system and a form P111 sent to the policyholder.
A guide is also included to indicate when each endorsement should be applied.
NOTE -Policy endorsement forms (showing Endorsement wordings) are separately recorded on Host — File — Home Policy Endorsement Forms
‘H’ PREFIX ENDORSEMENTS
DESCRIPTION
H02 Non-Index Linked/Under-Insurance
We would strongly state that requests for non-index linked policies should be declined.
If we have no alternative — because of the connection — then this endorsement should be applied.
The effect of this endorsement is that in the event of a claim where the sum insured is inadequate, any payment would be limited to the same proportion which the sum insured bears to the value of the property at the time of the loss.
H03 Forcible and Violent Entry
This endorsement should be applied where the policyholder also runs a business from the premises or the policyholder does not have sole occupancy of the building.
Examples of this would be shared accommodation, accommodation which freely communicate with public houses or shops, students in halls of residence, furnished accommodation.
This should not be applied to 5 Star Maxplan or 4 Star policies, as this cover should not be provided where any of the aforementioned situations arise.
H04 Insurance for more than one home
This endorsement should be added when more than one dwelling is insured under the policy.
This provides each property with equal limits, terms and conditions, as would apply if separate policies were issued.
H05 Farm Clause
This endorsement should be added where the building to be insured is a Farm House.
Any farm outbuildings or their contents or any liability for domestic employees engaged for farm work are excluded.
H08 Musical Instrument Exclusions
It is no longer necessary to apply this endorsement.
We are making arrangements to delete it from existing policies.
H09 Lessor's Liability
This endorsement should be applied to policies covering properties which are leased out but where only the Contents are covered.
This restricts cover for contents to furniture, furnishings and household appliances.
The Liability cover is also restricted.
In some cases it may also be necessary to apply endorsement H03.
Again 5 Star Maxplan and 4 Star cover should not be provided for this type of risk.
H10 Stamp Collection (Accidental Loss or Damage)
This endorsement should be applied where a stamp collection is insured as a specified item under the policy.
This details certain restrictions on the cover for the collection.
This cover is not available on 1 Star Budget policies.
H11 Restriction to Furniture and Furnishing
This endorsement should be applied where it is necessary to restrict the cover to furniture, furnishings and household appliances.
e.g. a second or holiday home, when endorsement H21 may also have to be applied.
H12 Coin Collection (Accidental Loss or Damage)
This endorsement should be applied where a coin collection is insured as a specified item under the policy.
This details certain restrictions on the cover for the collection.
This cover is not available on 1 Star Budget policies.
H13 Interior Decorations
This endorsement should be added to policies covering contents only, occupied by a tenant, who wishes cover for interior decorations and tenant's improvements.
e.g. tenant has installed a fitted kitchen — this would be covered for the perils listed under the ‘Insurance for your liability as a tenant’ section of the policy.
H14 Compensation for Death of Insured
This endorsement should be added to policies issued in joint names, other than husband and wife or ‘common-law’ situations, covering contents.
This restricts the amount payable under the ‘Insurance for Fatal Accidents’ section in proportion to the number of policyholders.
This cover is not available on 1 Star Budget policies.
H15 Other Insurers Endorsement
This endorsement should be added when the buildings are covered by more than one insurer.
This restricts the amount payable under our policy to the proportion our amount insured bears to the total rebuilding cost of the building.
H16 Alarm Warranty
This endorsement should be added when we have insisted that an alarm should be fitted to improve security at the home.
It is not necessary to add this endorsement where the policyholder has installed an alarm to improve the security without us insisting on it.
H17 Safe Warranty
This endorsement should be added when we have insisted that a safe be installed at the home to improve security, usually when the policy covers a lot of valuable jewellery.
It is not necessary to apply this endorsement if the policyholder has installed the safe to improve security without us insisting on it.
H18 P.L. for Doctors and Dentists
This endorsement should be applied where the policyholder is a doctor or dentist and has a surgery in his home.
This endorsement provides liability cover for persons visiting the home in connection with the policyholder's work.
It does not cover professional negligence, etc.
H21 Unoccupancy Clause
This endorsement should be added where a holiday home is insured under the policy.
In other cases where the home is unoccupied for long periods, it may be appropriate to apply this endorsement or a similar wording (see Appendix 5 — Specimen 21).
Normally this should not be applied to 5 Star Maxplan and 4 Star policies, as this cover is not available for holiday homes.
H22 Window and Door Locks
This endorsement should be applied where we have insisted that certain door and window locks should be fitted to improve security.
This endorsement should not be applied where the policyholder has fitted the locks without us insisting on them.
H29 Mortgagees Interest Clause
This endorsement should be added when we are specifically requested to note the interest of a mortgagee. (but see contents of Appendix 7)
‘N’ PREFIX ENDORSEMENTS
It is necessary for some details to be typed on each of the following endorsements.
N01 Business Premises Warranty
This endorsement should be added when the home forms part of a building which is used for business purposes.
The business carried out should be typed in.
The policy excludes any part of the premises used for business purposes.
Normally this should not be applied to 5 Star Maxplan or 4 Star policies, as this cover should not be provided where a business is run from the same building and the public have access.
N03 Stamp Collection (Part B of 1 Star/2 Star/3 Star)
This endorsement should be added to 1 Star, 2 Star & 3 Star policies where a stamp collection is covered under Part B — Household Contents.
The value of the stamp collection should be typed in.
The endorsement details certain restrictions in the cover.
This should not be applied to 5 Star Maxplan or 4 Star policies.
N04 Non-Standard Construction Clause
This endorsement should be added where the home is one of non-standard construction.
The details of the construction should be typed in.
There may be additional rating to charged (see Section B —‘NON-STANDARD CONSTRUCTION’).
N05 Coin Collection (Part B of 1 Star/2 Star/3 Star)
This endorsement should be added to 1 Star, 2 Star & 3 Star policies where a coin collection is covered under Part B — Household Contents.
The value of the coin collection should be typed in.
The endorsement details certain restrictions in the cover.
This should not be applied to 5 Star Maxplan or 4 Star policies.
N08 Variable Cover
This endorsement should be added to policies covering contents only, where the policyholder wishes to cover an item which is should be covered under the buildings section.
e.g. council house tenant has a garden shed.
This cannot be covered under the contents section.
Details of the ‘variable property’ should be typed in, along with the appropriate paragraphs of the Buildings section: — 
o 1 Star, 2 Star & 3 Star — paragraphs 1 to 15 o 4 Star & 5 Star — paragraphs 1 to 17
SPECIMEN SKELETON WORDINGS
Contains some of the more commonly used draft endorsement wordings.
Each ‘specimen’ is referred to in Section 1 of this Guide.
Please note these wordings are only guidelines and can be adapted for each individual case.
As from the effective date shown on your attached renewal notice or policy schedule the following amendments have been made to the wording of your policy.
DEFINITIONS
IF YOU HAVE CHOSEN 4 STAR COVER and ‘4 Star Cover’ appears on your latest schedule General Accident will pay for loss or total destruction of items as follows:
(a)
items less than five years old — cost of replacement as new
(b)
items more than five years old — cost of replacement as new less an adjustment for wear and tear
Claims for damage will be paid on the basis of the cost of repair.
An adjustment for wear and tear will also be made, where applicable, in the settlement of your claim if
(a)
the amount insured for household contents and valuables and portable possessions are inadequate at the time of any loss or damage or
(b)
you do not intend to replace or repair.
IF YOU HAVE CHOSEN 5 STAR COVER and ‘5 Star Cover’ appears on your latest schedule General Accident will pay for loss or total destruction of items on the basis of cost of replacement as new.
Claims for damage will be paid on the basis of the cost of repair.
An adjustment of wear and tear will also be made, where applicable, in the settlement of your claim if
(a)
the amount insured for household contents and valuables and portable possessions are inadequate at the time of any loss or damage or
(b)
you do not intend to replace or repair.
INSURANCE FOR HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS AND VALUABLES AND PORTABLE POSSESSIONS
This Section is amended as follows: General Accident will pay the cost of replacing or repairing your household contents and valuables and portable possessions or, at our option, we will replace them if they are lost or damaged in any of the following circumstances, whilst
(i)
in your home or within the boundaries of your home
(ii)
temporarily removed to anywhere in the United Kingdom or the rest of the world
(iii)
in transit from your home for permanent removal to a new home anywhere in the United Kingdom by professional contractors
BUT NOT
(i)
during removals other than(iii) above
(ii)
while in a furniture store, saleroom or exhibition.
Theft or attempted theft — following exclusion is added:
(c) any pedal cycle which is left both unlocked and unattended away from home.
Breakage or collapse of television and radio aerials, satellite dish aerials, aerial fittings and masts — exclusion (b) is deleted.
All other accidental loss or damage — exclusion (d) is amended to read as follows:
(d) loss or damage to
(i)
contact lenses
(ii)
sub-aqua equipment, parachutes, surfboards and sailboards whilst in use.
Limits of Amounts payable under this Section 2(a) is amended to read as follows: all items not listed individually on your latest schedule-maximum amount payable for each item will not exceed $1,000.
INSURANCE FOR LOCKS AND KEYS
This section is amended as follows: General Accident will pay the cost of replacing keys and locks for external doors, safes and alarms where the keys of such locks have been lost or stolen No Special Exclusions (But see General Exclusions on Page 30) The Limit of the amount payable under this section is $500.
INSURANCE FOR PERSONAL MONEY AND CREDIT, CHEQUE OR CASH CARDS
Section A — Personal Money
Item (ii) is amended to read — temporarily removed to anywhere in the United Kingdom or the rest of the world Item (iii) is deleted
The Limit of amount payable under this Section is amended as follows:
A
Money — $500
B
Credit, Debit, Charge, Cheque or Cash Cards — $10,000
INSURANCE FOR ALTERNATIVE ACCOMMODATION AND/OR LOSS OF RENT
The limit of amount payable under this Section is increased to 25% of the totals of the amounts insured for household contents and valuables and portable possessions.
Period of time state in line 2 is increased from 30 days to 60 days.
The Policy has been extended to include the following cover:
1
Deeds and Documents
The cost of re-instating Deeds and Documents Limit of amount payable under this section — $500.
2
Metered Water
The General Accident will insure you for all sums which you become legally liable to pay for loss of metered water resulting directly from accidental damage to water pipes and apparatus providing service to the buildings described in the schedule.
It is a condition of this cover that you maintain a record of meter readings and that you report any unusual fluctuations to the Water Authority and to us.
Limit of amount payable: $1,000 during any one period of insurance.
SPECIAL EXCLUSION
The combined amount of any excess(es) which apply.
ENDORSEMENT NUMBER H51
POLICY ENDORSEMENT
THIS ENDORSEMENT ONLY APPLIES IF THE RELEVANT ENDORSEMENT NUMBER APPEARS AT THE FOOT OF YOUR LATEST SCHEDULE.
THIS ENDORSEMENT IS SUBJECT OTHERWISE TO ALL EXISTING POLICY CONDITIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
As from the effective date shown on your attached policy schedule the following alteration applies to the wording of your policy.
INSURANCE FOR BUILDINGS
Page 11 — Special Exclusion (a) of paragraph 12 — Subsidence or heave of the site on which your buildings stand, or landslip — is amended to read:
(a) the first $1,000 of each incident
ENDORSEMENT NUMBER H52
POLICY ENDORSEMENT
THIS ENDORSEMENT ONLY APPLIES IF THE RELEVANT ENDORSEMENT NUMBER APPEARS AT THE FOOT OF YOUR LATEST SCHEDULE.
THIS ENDORSEMENT IS SUBJECT OTHERWISE TO ALL EXISTING POLICY CONDITIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
As from the effective date shown on your attached policy schedule the following alteration applies to the wording of your policy.
INSURANCE FOR BUILDINGS
Page 16 — Special Exclusion (i) of the paragraph — Subsidence or heave of the site on which your buildings stand, or landslip — is amended to read:
(a) the first $1,000 of each incident
TABLE OF ‘REHABILITATION PERIODS’
Contains details of ‘rehabilitation periods ‘under the terms of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.
(Refer to notes under ‘Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974’).
PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
REHABILITATION OF OFFENDERS ACT 1974
REHABILITATION PERIODS (reckoned from the date of the conviction in respect of which the sentence was imposed).
a) FIXED REHABILITATION PERIODS
b) VARIABLE REHABILITATION PERIODS
Section 5 and 6 of the Act refer.
NB: A sentence imposed by a court outside Great Britain shall betreated as a sentence most nearly corresponding with a Great Britain sentence.
ABI/BSA MODEL FORM OF AGREEMENT
Contains model indemnity wording agreed between the ABI and BSA in 1982.
(Refer ‘INTERESTS OF OTHERS’).
MODEL INDEMNITY
Agreement between (the Insurers) and (the Society) in relation to policies of insurance issued by the Insurers in the joint names of the Society and any of its borrowers on properties mortgaged to the Society and for which the Society does not act as the Insurers' agent for the collection of premiums.
THE INSURERS AGREE
1.
That they will not reduce or permit to be reduced the amount or scope of any such policy without notifying the Society in writing.
In the event of a change in the standard terms applying to the Insurers' usual forms of Household Buildings insurances the Society will be notified and this notice will be deemed to be sufficient notification in respect of all such policies as may be subject to this Agreement.
2.
That in the event of the cancellation or lapsing of any such policy, whether at the request of a joint policyholder or for non-payment of premium, or for any other reason, the Insurers will give the Society written notice of the cessation of cover.
3.
In the event of circumstances arising under 1 or 2 above which require the Insurers to notify the Society of the reduction or cancellation of cover the Insurers shall during the period from such reduction or cancellation until ten days after notification of the Society indemnify the Society against losses to the same extent as if cover had not been reduced or cancelled and if the Society shall within seven days of notification by the Insurers inform the Insurers that it wishes cover to continue on the same terms as if it had not been reduced or cancelled the Insurers shall indemnify the Society against losses on such terms for such period not exceeding six months as the Society shall specify and the Society shall be responsible for the payment of premium for such cover.
4.
That they will, in dealing with any claim arising under a policy to which this Agreement applies which is to be settled for more than $500, draw the cheque or cheques in the joint names of the Society and its borrower.
5.
That they will take all reasonable steps to advise the Society whenever they are notified of a claim arising under a policy to which this Agreement applies to which the cost of settlement is likely to exceed $1,000.
IN THE EVENT of the Insurers failing to comply with any of the above provisions the Insurers will indemnify the Society to the limit of its interest for any loss which would otherwise have been covered by a policy to which this Agreement applies, including legal and other fees incurred by the Society as a direct consequence of such failure.
THE SOCIETY AGREES
That it will not require the Insurers to provide duplicate policies or confirmation of cover except that, in the event of the borrower failing to produce evidence of cover satisfactory to the Society at the time a policy is taken out, the Society may as an exception request the Insurers to confirm cover.
NOTES
1.
Notification arising under Items 1 or 2 shall be to the Head Office of the Society and shall be by Post Office Registered or Recorded Delivery or shall be delivered by hand.
2.
The Agreement does not apply to:
a)
policies on property other than private dwellings.
b)
policies arranges other than in the joint names of the Society and an individual borrower.
c)
policies with sums insured of more than $100,000.
Signed on behalf of In the presence of
UNDERTAKING BETWEEN ABI AND CERTAIN BANKS
The Committee of London & Scottish Bankers (CLSB) has been merged with with the British Banker's Association (BBA)(which has hitherto existed side by side with the CLSB).
This merger has not affected the  Committee of Scottish Clearing Banks (CSLB) which continues to enjoy a separate  existence .
ABI approached the BBA asking whether the name of the CLSB should be changed to BBA in the agreement.
This was not possible as BBA has some 325 member banks in all and most of these are not party to the agreement.
As the name of participating Banks and their subsidiaries are included as an Appendix to the Agreement th ABI have suggested that the heading should just be ‘ABI/Banks Agreement’.
As far as we are aware, at present, this title has been agreed by all interested parties.
There follows:— ABI/Banks Agreement List of Insurance Companies and those of their subsidiaries to which the  Agreement applies List of Banks and other Organisations and those of their subsidiaries to which the Agreement applies.
AGREEMENT REGARDING NOTIFICATION OF INTEREST ON MORTGAGED PROPERTIES (OR PROPERTIES IN SCOTLAND OVER WHICH A HERITABLE SECURITY HAS BEEN GRANTED)
1.
THE ‘UNDERTAKING’
The insurance companies listed in Appendix A, undertake in respect of any policy in which any of the banks/organisations listed in Appendix B has notified an interest, using the prescribed form in Appendix C, that they will instead of endorsing the policy with the bank's/organisation's interest — 
(a)
advise the bank/organisation if the policy is not renewed as soon as practicable after such non-renewal has come to their knowledge;
(b)
advise the bank/organisation if the cover in which the bank/organisation is interested is reduced or if any risk previously covered is restricted or cancelled;
(c)
pending the receipt of prompt instructions from the bank/organisation keep its interest in the policy in force up to the full sum insured and for the same risks as were covered when the bank's/organisation's interest was notified (subject to the insurance not having been replaced elsewhere with the consent of consent of the bank/organisation).
In the event that the bank/organisation instructions under paragraph (c) are to continue the insurance, or part of it, the bank/organisation undertakes to pay the premium upon demand.
2.
LIMITATIONS
(a)
This Agreement is restricted to insurances on the structure/ fabric of:
(i)
mortgaged properties in England, Wales, Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands; and
(ii)
properties in Scotland over which a Heritable Security has been granted.
(b)
The Agreement does not apply to: — 
(i)
policies or marine, aviation, motor vehicle or life insurance;
(ii)
insurances of privately occupied properties including houses, flats and maisonettes where the sum insured is $200,000 or less.K7
(iii)
short period policies or to Contractors All Risks insurances.
Explanatory Notes to limitation (b)(ii)
The threshold figure is taken from the policy not the bank/ organisation advance.
Where doubt arises as to whether the property is a private dwellinghouse, enquiries should be made and relevant information passed to the insurers when notification is being given.
For example, where a residential property has been purchased for investment purposes the bank/organisation may wish to notify its interest to the insurer.
Where a farmhouse or other building is regarded as being a private dwellinghouse a bank/organisation will only be required to notify its interest to an insurer where the sum insured exceeds the threshold.
In the case of such a property not being regarded as a private dwellinghouse, a bank/organisation should notify its interest to an insurer irrespective of the sum insured.
3.
OPERATING PROCEDURES ‘
(a)
Banks/organisations should notify their interest and cessation of interest on the advice form shown in Appendix C.
(b)
Appendices A and B will be kept up-to-date regularly by an exchange of letters between the Secretariat of ABI with various other parties to the Agreement.
(c)
In the event of an insurance company which is a party to the Agreement withdrawing therefrom or ceasing to transact business, it will under the terms of the Agreement, notify individual bank branches/organisations branches from whom they hold notices of interest where that insurance cover has been terminated.
4.
‘BLOCK’ POLICIES — BUILDING SOCIETY ARRANGEMENTS
Full protection within the terms of the Agreement is enjoyed by a bank/ organisation which has notified an interest in a property to a building society operating a block policy with insurers listed in Appendix A.
Thus, an insurer has no reason to expect to have such enquiries addressed to him regardless of the sum insured.:
5.
‘PRIVATE DWELLINGHOUSES’ OUTSIDE THE AGREEMENT
Under the contingency insurance arrangements available in the market, but which do not form an integral part of the Agreement, insurance protection can be made available where the sum insured on private dwellinghouses does not exceed the threshold.
In such cases the bank/organisation has to be satisfied that a policy of insurance on the private dwelling, adequate to cater for the bank's/organisation's interest, has been effected by the mortgagor on the buildings on the security of which the mortgage is granted.
In the event of the insured (the bank/organisation, under the contingency cover) learning that a  mortgagor's original policy is cancelled, reduced or not renewed, the insured shall arrange insurance separately.
It follows, therefore, that this contingency insurance will, subject to its terms and conditions, indemnify the bank/organisation in the event of a claim arising from an insured peril in respect of such properties where the original policy is found for some reason not to be sufficient to protect the bank's/organisation's interest and so long as the bank/organisation took the initial step, inter alia, reasonably to satisfy itself that adequate insurance arrangements had been made by the mortgagor.
Thus, the most a house insurer can be expected to provide in respect of an insurance below the Agreement threshold is confirmation that insurance arrangements were extant when the security was taken.
APPENDIX ‘A’
LIST OF COMPANIES AND THOSE OF THEIR SUBSIDIARIES TO WHICH THE AGREEMENT APPLIES
APPENDIX ‘B’
LIST OF BANKS AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS AND THOSE OF THEIR SUBSIDIARIES TO WHICH THE AGREEMENT APPLIES
N.B. The agreement with the Allied Irish Banks plc and Bank of Ireland only applies to mortgaged properties through their branches in England, Wales, Scotland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands.
MEMBERS OF THE BRITISH OVERSEAS AND COMMONWEALTH BANKS ASSOCIATION (BOCBA)
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Rural Development Commission incorporating Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas
APPENDIX ‘C’
SPECIMEN FORM OF ADVICE OF INTEREST AND CESSATION OF INTEREST
This form to be prepared in duplicate and one copy completed and returned by the insurance company
…
Bank plc/Organisation
…
Full Postal Address including postcode
To…
(Date)…199…
Sir,
Policy No:
Covering…in the name of…(has been charged…) to this Bank/Organisation
Please note that this property (is no longer charged…)
Yours faithfully
Manager —
Acknowledgement
To the Manager
…
Bank
We have noted this information.
For the Company
Dated…199…