

Wedgwood has been an international business for over 230 years.
Founded in 1759 upon the highest standards of design, craftsmanship and quality, the company continues to uphold these essential factors in maintaining its leading position throughout the markets of the world.
The last 25 years have certainly been an era of growth unparalleled in the company's long history, and in this period Wedgwood's formation and development has involved the acquisition of long-established and leading names in the British ceramic tableware and ornamental ware industry.
From a family firm with some 2,000 employees in 1966, the group has grown to become a public company comprising nine factories employing around 6,000 people at home and overseas.
It accounts for 25% of the British ceramic tableware industry's output and for 25% of its exports.
The strength of Wedgwood's marketing operations today is very much centred upon the breadth of its wares — in style, type and price range — varying from the luxurious in fine bone china tableware to the inexpensive in earthenware and oven-to-tableware.
Wedgwood firmly believes that its wide choice of merchandise gives the right marketing mix and enables the Group to provide products that appeal to a broad section of the world public.
Today, Wedgwood — a division of Waterford Wedgwood plc following the merger in November 1986 — comprises many famous names whose products have been prominent in home and export markets for many years and has gained eleven Queen's Awards to industry for export achievement.
The high sales volume overseas, around 60% of total output, continues at an encouraging rate.
The major overseas markets of the United States, Canada and Australia have traditionally led the way in our export league, but since Britain was admitted to EEC membership, Wedgwood has further strengthened its business with member countries in Europe.
Since 1983, Wedgwood has considerably developed its sales to Japan, which has now virtually drawn level with the United States as one of Wedgwood's leading export markets for fine bone china tableware.
Design of course remains an essential factor contributing to future growth, and is another strength of Wedgwood and its associated companies, all of which are served by a large, highly qualified and experienced team of designers and modellers, with the added contributions of eminent contemporary artists.
Therefore, the Wedgwood formula for continued success can be summed up briefly as: skilled craftsmanship allied to advanced technology with imaginative design supported by energetic marketing.
The founder, Josiah Wedgwood was born in Burslem, Staffordshire in 1730, the youngest of the 13 children of Thomas and Mary Wedgwood of the Churchyard Pottery.
After serving his apprenticeship as a potter, Josiah Wedgwood was taken into partnership in 1754 by Thomas Whieldon of Fenton, the greatest English potter of his time.
After five years, Josiah was ready to set up in business on his own account, and in 1759 he established his own enterprise.
He started to produce in large quantities the distinctive and original cream ware finished with a brilliant green glaze to decorate leaf and vegetable shapes; in 1762, he first produced cream coloured earthenware later to be known as Queen's Ware by royal consent of Queen Charlotte.
This new, inexpensive and beautiful tableware was, without question, Josiah Wedgwood's greatest achievement and contribution to the British pottery industry.
He put fine earthenware within the reach of all and his success was immediate and worldwide.
In 1762, Josiah Wedgwood met Thomas Bentley, a Liverpool merchant, with whom he formed an intimate and lasting friendship; and after several years of negotiation they signed, in 1769, a partnership which ended only on Bentley's death in 1780.
Bentley's tastes, knowledge of the arts, and social contacts were of inestimable value to Josiah Wedgwood and his influence was paramount in the international success of the firm.
By 1766, Josiah Wedgwood had prospered sufficiently to buy, for £3,000, the Ridge House Estate between Hanley and Newcastle-under-Lyme.
There he built a splendid new factory which he named Etruria.
It was formally opened on 13 June 1769, and six First Day's Vases were made by Josiah and his friend and partner Bentley to commemorate the event.
Until 1764, Josiah had concentrated successfully upon the manufacture of what he called ‘useful wares’, but he had carried out many experiments to improve the rather crude ‘Egyptian black’ wares already made by a number of Staffordshire potters.
The new Black Basalt developed by Wedgwood was fine-grained, smooth, and richer in hue, and he used it for relief plaques, busts, medallions and cameos, as well as‘useful wares’ for table and fine vases.
In 1773 he forecast correctly: ‘The Black is sterling and will last forever’.
It is still one of the company's best known products.
The most famous of all Josiah Wedgwood's inventions, however, was his Jasper ware, an unglazed vitreous fine stoneware which could be stained blue, green, lilac, yellow, maroon or black to provide a suitable background for white classical reliefs or portraits in the same material.
The triumphant outcome of several thousand recorded experiments, Jasper ware was prized by Josiah above all his productions and provides today one of the most valued and sought-after ranges of ornamental ware in the world.
Josiah Wedgwood died in 1795 and is remembered as the ‘Father of English Potters’, but it was not only as a pottery manufacturer that he was renowned and respected in his time.
His insatiable curiosity and desire for experiment had led to his election as a Fellow of the Royal Society.
He had contributed time and money freely to causes in which he believed, and his energy was a vital factor in the completion of the Trent and Mersey canal, which opened up the continental trade and reduced transport costs through its connection with Hull and Liverpool.
In the nineteenth century the company survived periods of economic difficulty; important progress was made in the use of new machinery, the introduction of the first coloured earthenware bodies and the manufacture of bone china which now accounts for the most valuable part of the company's export trade.
In the 1930's, at a time when many potteries closed down to wait for more favourable conditions to return, the fifth Josiah Wedgwood decided to build a new factory.
Etruria had been the world's most up-to-date factory in the eighteenth century and mining subsidence and the encroachment of other industry had made it unsuitable for modern development.
A country estate of 382 acres (now around 500 acres) near the village of Barlaston was purchased and a new expansive, modern, all-electric Wedgwood factory was built.
Plans for a garden village with houses for key workers were also implemented.
Production at the old Etruria works came to  an end in the 1950's.
Progress in production methods at Barlaston has been matched by far-sighted management and a vigorous design policy.
The factory has expanded to four times its original size and has become a showpiece of British industry.
A new development in 1975 was the construction of a visitor centre which was specially designed to provide extensive and improved facilities for the ever-increasing number of visitors from home and abroad to see in greater comfort and convenience the museum collection — rehoused in 1985 in a new ‘living’ museum — and the traditional skills of craftsmen and women at work, which the company continues to regard as an important part of its continuing success.