

Wedgwood Group ‘Green Rules’
Our commitment to improving the environment and helping to maintain it for future generations can be summarised by these ‘Green Rules’
1
To meet and as far as possible, improve upon, all relevant legal requirements concerning environmental issues.
2
To use raw materials that have minimum impact on the environment.
3
To create products with minimum impact on the environment during production, use and disposal.
4
To use highly efficient processes requiring minimum energy consumption.
5
To encourage our work force to be committed to environmental issues.
6
To eliminate or minimise waste streams.
7
To segregate different types of waste produced in factories and offices.
8
To reclaim or recycle waste at source.
9
To use the best available techniques to eliminate or make harmless any waste produced.
10
To dispose of any remaining waste by approved routes.
We intend to apply the ‘Green Rules’ to all aspects of our operations wherever reasonably and economically practicable to do so.
Environmental Policy Statement
The Wedgwood Group is committed to ensuring a high standard of environmental management within its factories and also in relation to its operation and existence within the local and wider community, recognising this as an integral part of its Total Quality Management programme.
For some time the Company has recognised the need for a policy to increase awareness, to deal with environmental issues and to implement systems which ensure the Company complies with all relevant legislation and manages the essential attitudinal and behavioural changes that are likely to affect its business operations.
This policy sets out the Company's objectives to control the impact its activities have on the environment and shows its commitment to being an industry leader in its awareness of and approach to environmental issues.
I urge you to read this important document and let any member of the Environmental Policy team or the Environmental Department know if you have any comments or suggestions for a ‘greener’ environment within the Wedgwood Group.
Note: Where reference is made in this policy to ‘the Company’ or ‘the Group’, it refers to Josiah Wedgwood & Sons Limited and its associated UK companies.
What You Can Do To Help
To be successful, a corporate environmental programme must include and involve all employees.
You are encouraged to participate in any Group or ‘local’ schemes such as recycling initiatives, since, without involvement from everyone, and a general recognition that we are all responsible for protection of the environment, we cannot achieve our Group objective.
Here are some ways you can help: — 
Turn down heating when not required.
Use natural light whenever possible.
Turn off unwanted lights.
Turn off machinery when not in use.
Report leaking taps to maintenance departments.
Photocopy on to both sides of the paper.
Use both sides of every piece of paper.
Write replies to internal memos on the same piece of paper.
Help reduce the amount of waste of all kinds produced during your work.
Separate different types of waste to aid recycling eg. cans, paper, moulds and pitchers, etc. where recycling facilities are available.
Suggest ways to improve your work place for benefit of the environment.
Group Environmental Policy Committee
The Group Environmental Policy Committee had its first meeting on 21 May 1990 and now meets regularly every 3 months.
The Committee is comprised of senior management representing the following disciplines:
Environmental
Engineering
Production
Insurance
Public Relations
Legal
Technical
Research & Development
The Human Resources Director chairs meetings biannually and the Company Secretary chairs other meetings.
The Group Occupational Hygienist acts as the Secretary.
The function of the Committee is to:
anticipate areas of future concern to enable the Company to decide how it will comply with any regulations well in advance.
monitor compliance with existing regulations to ensure consistency of application across the Group and to confirm that compliance is taking place.
make recommendations to the Board for Corporate policies governing environmental matters.
keep the Board advised of future areas of concern and current compliance with legislation to ensure that a sufficient degree of high level attention is given to this most important subject.
identify best practice befitting progressive management in areas not covered by legislation.
Minutes of the meetings are recorded and maintained within the Environmental Department.
As and when the need arises, sub-committees will be established to consider specific environmental issues.
Group Environmental Organisation
The Directors of Waterford Wedgwood UK plc are committed to managing the Group's operations so as to minimise any adverse environmental impact.
Responsibility for the Group's activities in this area remains with the Board.
The Group Environmental Policy Committee whose composition and objectivities are described below, is responsible for making recommendations to the Board regarding the Group's activities as they impact on the environment and for implementation of approved courses of action.
The Human Resources Director has responsibility to the Board of Directors for the implementation and continuity of all matters relating to environmental issues.
He will be advised on such issues by the Company Secretary.
The Company Secretary is responsible for keeping the Human Resources Director informed on all environmental issues as and when necessary, and for providing any legal input required by the Committee.
The Group Insurance Executive is responsible for assessing environmental risk and where appropriate obtaining and monitoring suitable and sufficient insurance cover with respect to the Group's environmental liability.
The Group Transport Manager is responsible for co-ordinating the disposal of waste produced by the Group.
He will implement procedures laid down to comply with the Company's duty of care and will liaise with the Group Environmental Manager on such issues.
The Group Environmental Manager has responsibility for ensuring that the Company complies with all relevant legislation concerning environmental issues.
He will advise management on such issues, and maintain the Environmental Department in order to monitor and record compliance with the Group's Environmental policy objectives.
The Group Occupational Hygienist has responsibility for monitoring the environment and policing systems to comply with the policy objectives.
The Environmental Assistant will assist the Group Occupational Hygienist.
The Group Purchasing Director is responsible for ensuring that the Group's purchasing requirements are met, taking into account environmental issues wherever possible.
The Group Technical Director has responsibility for the research and development of new raw materials and products that will reduce the impact of the Company's activities on the environment.
He will liaise with the Group Environmental Manager on such issues.
The Group Chief Engineer has responsibility for ensuring the design, construction, installation and maintenance of buildings, plant and machinery in accordance with environmental standards to comply with the Company's environmental policy objectives.
He will liaise closely with the Group Environmental Manager on such issues.
The Electrical Engineering Manager is responsible for maintaining the Company's energy conservation programme.
The Group Research Technologist will liaise with the Group Environmental Manager on issues concerning the monitoring and analysis of environmental samples and the development of recording systems for such data.
Group Environmental Policy Objectives
As outlined in the policy statement, we are committed to safeguarding the environment in which we operate.
This will be achieved by ensuring compliance with the following objectives:
1.
Environmental Legislation As well as complying with current European and UK legislation we will anticipate legislative changes and work towards ‘best practice’ wherever possible.
We presently enjoy good professional working relationships with the various authorities and bodies responsible for enforcing the legislation and aim to maintain and where possible improve these.
2.
Supplies and Contractors Assessments will be made of our suppliers and contractors in order to identify their attitude to environmental issues.
For suppliers and contractors of equal standing, the one giving greater consideration to environmental issues will be preferred.
In the long term, this will help ensure our ‘cradle to grave’ approach to environmental awareness.
3.
Energy Efficiency Since February 1989 we have operated an energy conservation programme through our own management team and contractors.
The programme uses various monitoring and target setting techniques to use energy efficiently throughout the Group.
We won the 1990 Category 2, Power for Efficiency and Productivity Award, sponsored by the Midlands Electricity Board for the installation of fast fire tunnel kilns.
Further awards will be sought in the future.
4.
Engineering We will continually strive to reduce our impact on the environment by ensuring that environmental issues are considered and the best practicable option is adopted during the design, construction, installation and maintenance of buildings, plant and machinery.
5.
Research and Development We will continue to seek suitable alternative raw materials that have a reduced impact on the environment throughout their life cycle.
New technology will be investigated where a reduced impact on the environment can be demonstrated.
6.
Emissions to Land, Air and Water We recognise that, during the Company's operations, there will be emissions to land, air and water.
It is therefore our aim to monitor and eliminate/render harmless all emissions thus minimising the impact on the environment.
This will be achieved by improved working practices and the use of the best available technology whenever and wherever it is reasonably practicable to do so.
7.
Waste Reduction, Reclaiming and Recycling We recognise the benefits both financially and environmentally that can be gained from reducing waste streams at source and from recycling and reclaiming any waste generated.
Ways of reducing, reclaiming and recycling waste streams are high on our list of priorities.
Employees are encouraged to suggest areas where recycling and reclaiming may be feasible.
8.
Spillages and Emergency Response It is our policy to minimise the likelihood of emergencies by safe systems of work and engineering controls.
In the unlikely event of an incident occurring, contact will be made through the Environmental Department to the relevant authority or enforcement body and the necessary corrective action will be taken immediately.
9.
Training and Education The Group Training Department ensures that training requirements are met for all employees.
Such training includes environmental awareness carried out in conjunction with the Environmental Department.
Employees are encouraged to participate actively in environmentally related projects as part of the training package.
The Environmental Department also trains management on specific environmental issues in order to implement procedures to comply with other policy objectives.
Environmental awareness is also encouraged through regular articles in the Group newspaper ‘Newsline’.
10.
Noise and Other Statutory Nuisances We have had a good relationship with our neighbours in the past and will endeavour to continue to maintain these.
This has been achieved by due consideration of the surrounding community whenever new development projects are considered and by planned maintenance of existing plant and machinery.
We also provide an immediate response if a complaint is received and, whenever reasonably practicable, ensure the necessary corrective action is implemented to eliminate the cause of the complaint to the satisfaction of the complainant.
11.
Contractors Contractors must abide by all relevant Company rules and statutory regulations concerning environmental issues so as to comply with our environmental policy objectives.
12.
Environmental Audits Environmental audits are carried out at our operating sites to ensure compliance with all statutory requirements and operation in accordance with this policy's objectives.
Audits are carried out by members of the Environmental Department in such a way as to actively involve departmental management and shop floor employees.
13.
Targets To help us achieve our objectives for waste reduction, reclamation and recycling, energy efficiency, training etc, we will set and communicate targets in these areas at least annually.
Environmentally friendly paper
This booklet is printed on environmentally friendly paper which has been produced from 30% virgin wood fibre and 70% sugar cane.
The wood fibre is made from saw mill residue and forest thinnings in a sustainable South African forest.
To achieve a fine white printing quality, the paper is oxygen bleached, thereby having none of the detrimental effects on the environment which are inherent in the conventional chlorine bleaching process.
For the kind of printing processes required to produce booklets of this nature, such papers are considerably more environmentally friendly than recycled papers.