

Significant new business in tableware and giftware adds up to a…
SHOW OF SUCCESS
Major support from UK trade customers
THE largest ever new product offering was on show at the ‘Wedgwood 1993’ annual trade fair at Barlaston.
The show continues to be an international event attracting visitors from the USA, Japan, Turkey, Israel, the Bahamas and Europe.
Wedgwood sales director Paul Hutchinson said: ‘Our focus also remained firmly on the UK because the home market is our largest single market.
‘This year we have welcomed hundreds of customers during the two week period.’
Four new bone china tableware patterns were launched at the exhibition and all were favourably received.
‘The Wedgwood share of this market is increasing — we now command 40 per cent of the formal tableware bridal market and we are continuing to offer exciting bridal promotions to help support our leading position,’ added Paul.
In giftware, a number of new designs, plus extensions to existing ranges have been introduced and in Jasper a stunning museum piece from the 18 century — the Rum Kettle — has been reproduced in a limited edition of 100.
Centenary
The success of the portland blue Jasper range, which was launched last year, has lead to the addition of the Brewster tea set to the collection.
This year sees the centenary of Peter Rabbit and since Wedgwood already dominates this characterware market segment the company has added a special range of items to celebrate the first appearance of Beatrix Potter's famous character.
A new video featuring ‘The Tale of Peter Rabbit and Benjamin Bunny’— the first time Peter Rabbit has been animated — is included in two gift sets.
The extensive range of Wedgwood jewellery has been complemented by the addition of fine bone china cameos and the collectability of Coalport figurines continues to go from strength to strength.
This year 31 new studies in fine bone china and porcelain have been introduced.
The new Coalport range has been further enhanced with a wide selection of new collector's plates, giftware, cottages and florals.
Several important new initiatives from Mason's Ironstone have been launched including an exciting series of contemporary collector's items produced in conjunction with the Royal Academy of Art.
Intensive
‘Decoupage’ giftware, a Victorian-inspired design embodying the rich heritage of Mason's, also received lots of attention from buyers as has a new tableware pattern, ‘Spring Blossom’.
John Mohin, UK sales manager said: ‘Wedgwood 1993, the annual trade event, came to a successful conclusion after two intensive weeks of selling activity.
The show generated very worthwhile attendance and we were delighted to receive such overwhelming support from trade customers.
‘Wedgwood 1993 offered us the opportunity to welcome customers to out factory and headquarters and to talk them through our various new products and promotional initiatives.
‘We have been rewarded with significant new business in tableware and giftware and, in particular, the response to our bridal tableware marketing strategy has been very encouraging indeed.
‘Judging by the great interest in all our new products, there is a cautious mood of optimism among our customers, built upon continued confidence in our major brands.’
LADIES from Bon Marche in France discussing tableware at the Wedgwood 1993 trade fair.
Pictured, left to right, are Madame Charmes, Mademoiselle Courtade and Mademoiselle Haverbecke.
Hopscotch at the Fair
DIRECTOR of Johnson Brothers' UK sales division, Tom Bloor pictured left with Hopscotch, one of nine new patterns introduced at this year's NEC trade fair in Birmingham.
‘The new pattern introductions for Autumn 1993 created a great deal of excitement at the show, especially Hopscotch, Aquabatic, and Hyde Park in the new fine china collection,’ said Tom.
Johnson Brothers is currently undergoing a complete review which incorporates a new company logo, new company colours and new packaging to support and reflect its revised brand positioning.
‘The whole purpose of the repositioning of Johnson Brothers’ products is to develop our business in all markets around the world’, explained international brand director Robin Jamieson.
‘At the NEC, we received lots of trade interest in the new branding and positioning for the range and also widespread international approval for the new merchandising, including commitment from Au Printemps, one of the leading French retailers,’ he added.
Icing on the cake
A hobby has become the icing on the cake for Jackie Wintle of Barlaston's planning department.
Vintage Spring
COMMISSIONAIRE Gordon Smith will have his vintage car on the road again this Spring.
Marathon on menu
BARLASTON chef Mark Williamson is turning up the heat on his marathon training programme.
Paris in the Spring, London in Autumn
TWO special offer trips — to Paris and to London — are available to employees on application to the Barlaston personnel department.
Paris in the Spring for a weekend is priced at £65, inclusive of return coach travel, one night in a hotel with bed and breakfast, and an escorted coach tour of the city.
Departure is on Friday, 30 April, when pick-up points are scheduled for Hanley bus station, Tower Square, Tunstall, School Street, Newcastle.
and the Visitor Centre reception at Wedgwood.
Return will be on Sunday, 2 May, late evening or in the early hours of Monday morning.
The trip to London, scheduled for a weekend in November, provides the opportunity to see the highly acclaimed ‘Phantom of the Opera’.
One hundred theatre seats have been reserved — the price per person and the date of the trip have yet to be confirmed, subject to initial response.
Both of these trips are also available to the company's pensioners.
Jackie has cakes for all occasions
JACKIE Wintle, pictured above, from Barlaston's planning department, has a hobby she can really get her teeth into.
In her spare time she makes and decorates cakes of different shapes and sizes for all occasions.
From Thomas The Tank Engine to a hunky Chippendale, Jackie can create confectionery master-pieces with coloured dyes.
She took up the pastime after impressing friends and family when she made an engagement cake for her brother-in-law.
Since then, orders have flooded in and Jackie, of Newcastle, works on as many as 25 cakes at any one time.
She said: ‘I make the cakes from scratch — everything from initial design and backing to finished artwork.
‘The funniest request I have had so far is for a birthday cake which is made to look like a plate of steak and chips with cutlery on a tabletop setting.’
Change of posts in reshuffle
TWO further moves have been announced as part of the re-organisation of the Wedgwood Group manufacturing operations.
Roger Davies (below left), formerly production director at Royal Tuscan, takes over as production director at Coalport.
Former Coalport production director Mike Harley (below right) takes over where Roger left off as production director at Tuscan.
TAKING CARE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Pilot scheme to recycle waste paper
A trial system to recycle waste paper has been introduced at the Barlaston site.
The success of the system depends essentially on the segregation of waste paper for separate collection.
Accumulations of waste paper are being collected and put into red polythene liners which are collected by the cleaners.
The liners are then deposited in a recycling cage to await collection by a waste contractor who, in turn, empties the liners, bales the paper and sells it on to a pulp manufacturer.
Group environmental manager Jon Lawrence emphasised: ‘The recycling of waste paper is a very important contribution to good environmental practice.
But the system relies entirely on successful waste segregation.’
‘Plastic and other contaminants, if mixed with the paper, can foul up the recycling process leading to the rejection of the waste by the pulp manufacturer,’ he explained.
‘We look forward to the commitment and co-operation of everyone involved in the system.’
Ambitious fund-raising target for Macmillan Home is nearly doubled
DOUGLAS Macmillan Home administrator Paul Bishop, centre, receives a cheque for £100 from Alexandra Pottery's Lisa Spruce (now at Barlaston) and Mark Bagguley.
The money was raised during the Group's It's A Knockout event which Alexandra won.
A fund-raising target of £3,000 initiated on 30 November to buy a specialised bed for the Douglas Macmillan Home was reached before the end of last year — and has since been significantly exceeded with money still coming in.
Project engineer Dennis Frost and his wife, Joan, launched the ambitious fund-raising effort to buy a Pegasus air bed, a specialised type which had so much helped their friend, Dottie Forrester, who was a patient at the home.
Joan formed a ladies' committee at Trentham Park Golf Club dedicated to achieving the target.
Contributions to their efforts snowballed and they were handsomely supported by donations of superb prizes for fund-raising events, including a holiday for four in Tenerife, a cricket bat autographed by the England team and a 1-iron from top professional golfer David Gilford which he used in winning the Dunhill World Cup.
‘The generous responses by so many people was amazing and by New Year's Eve we had raised £4,181,’ said Joan.
‘And we're delighted to report that there is still more than £1,200 due to come in.’
‘We shall be contributing as much as we possibly can to the home, which is actually in need of 28 new beds,’ she added.
Regretfully, there is a sad note to report — unfortunately, Dorothy has since died.
Grateful
Her husband, Norman, who works in the flatshop at Royal Tuscan, said: ‘Dottie had been so much comforted by one of these special beds in her last weeks.
Everyone is so grateful to the fund raisers and all their supporters for their remarkable efforts.
Tickets are on sale via the personnel department at Barlaston for three performances by Gandy's Circus to raise funds for the Douglas Macmillan Home.
The shows will take place at Stoke City F.C.
car park at 4.45pm and 7.45pm on 25 February and at 4.45pm the next day.
Reunion planned for ceramic graduates
A Staffordshire University graduate is organising a reunion for ceramics students who studied at the centre in 1965 when it was North Staffordshire College of Technology.
Alan Hey, who graduated in that year and now works in Sheffield, is planning a party for students who studied for a Diploma in Ceramics or a Manager's Diploma in Ceramics.
The reunion is being arranged with the help of the Staffordshire University Association — a club for former students — and anyone wanting further information should contact  
Museum day in Holland
UNPERTURBED by a visitor's forthright ‘cross examination’, museum information officer Lynn Miller (left) is pictured identifying early Wedgwood ware at a museum in the Netherlands, the company's oldest export market dating back to 1763.
At a joint one-day Wedgwood and Sotheby's identification and valuation event at the Westfries Museum, in Hoorn, Lynn encountered many Dutch visitors who brought in a variety of heirlooms or pieces they had collected.
‘As expected in such a long-established market noted for its love of Queen's Ware, I examined a good deal of cream coloured earthenware of 19th and early 20th century origin,’ said Lynn.
‘There were quite a few interesting pieces, notably miniatures from children's sets, which seem to have been popular in Holland in those earlier periods.’
In the picture, accompanied by Astrid Muller (second left) of Waterford Wedgwood Holland, Lynn is identifying items of Rosso Antico teaware dated around 1912.
Vintage tourer on the road again in Spring
VINTAGE car enthusiast Gordon Smith, a commissionaire at Barlaston, is eagerly looking forward to running is 1920 Humber Tourer out on the roads again this spring.
‘It's been laid up for a while with a problem in the starting mechanism, but a friend is now completing a repair job for me, and we hope to be up and running again soon,’ explained Gordon, pictured with the vehicle's log-book.
Lovingly restored over many years, involving many hours of devoted workmanship, the four-seater soft-top Humber is one of only two other known survivors of this model.
‘They only made 500 of this model and all were made to order,’ said Gordon.
‘It looked pretty derelict when I bought it but the quality of materials and craftsmanship in those days was superb and I was able to restore it back to its original condition, apart from a few new components.’
Gordon's interest in vintage cars began during the time he was a traffic division police officer.
‘I spotted the old Humber while I was on duty and at first thought it would take me a couple of years to restore — but eventually it took seven!
‘It's a time-consuming but very satisfying pastime and I've won a couple of rally trophies which have added to the pleasure,’ he said.
His previous vehicles have included a 1930 Austin Swallow Mark I and a 1964 Daimler Jaguar Mark II.
His wife Doreen runs a 1965 Morris 1100, and he now has a 1962 M.G. 1100 Mark I ready for restoration.
‘It's a very rare model, but while I can't get fired up to restoring it at the moment, I just cannot bring myself to sell it,’ is Gordon's dilemma.
COMMISSIONAIRE Gordon Smith, above, shows one of his vintage car manuals, and, right, his lovingly-restored 1920 Humber Tourer ready for the road again this Spring.
Sticky bits…
Janet scoops top catering award
CATERING services manager at Barlaston, Janet Broadbent, who is employed by The Catering Guild — under contract for the Wedgwood canteen — has recently been awarded the Guild's Marketing Award for 1992.
Janet has worked at Barlaston for the past 18 months and the award she gained has marked the completion of a year-long programme designed to help the Guild's managers to develop further their marketing and merchandising skills.
Janet's notable successes at Barlaston have included an extended menu to offer a wide variety of healthy food options and the introduction of a take-away service.
Additionally, she has launched a range of specialty products known as ‘Sticky Bits’.
The canteen staff have all worked together in this project, making home-made sweets, cakes, jams and chutneys.
‘The staff have really shown their skills in producing this range of foods,’ said Janet, ‘and on special occasions, such as Christmas and Easter, they have excelled themselves with superb cakes and eggs.’
‘Such has been their success that a couple of the staff are taking evening classes to extend and improve their skills at cake decorating,’ she added.
Theme days have also been introduced at the canteen with favourable response.
Last Hallowe'en the canteen was decked out in scary style, as were the staff, and a ‘ghostly’ menu was enjoyed in a candlelit setting.
Janet has other exciting ideas for her theme cuisine — so keep an eye on the canteen notice board for forthcoming events.
JANET Broadbent with the marketing award certificate presented to her by The Catering Guild.
Dog appeal thank you
QUALITY control checker Kerrie Ratcliffe would like to say a big thank you to employees at Tuscan who donated hundreds of tins of dog food for a Stoke-on—trent dogs home.
She put out an appeal for donations for the City Dogs Home, Bucknall, over the festive season and was inundated with tins, biscuits and chews.
Sales operations restructured to elevate services to customers
IN a restructure of the Group's sales operations in the UK, the retail and wholesale divisions have merged to form one sales division and sales territories have been reorganised.
The new sales division is headed by Paul Hutchinson as director of sales (David Marten is due to retire in the near future) and John Mohin has been appointed sales manager, responsible for UK sales operations, assisted by Diane Best and Michael Trotter as regional sales managers.
Trade marketing and customer service have been combined and have become the responsibility of Nicholas Frankish as director of trade marketing.
Martin Devaney has been appointed customer service manager for the UK, responsible for the wholesale, retail and corporate customer service functions which have been brought together at Barlaston.
He will also be responsible for Johnson Brothers' customer service when it is fully integrated later in the year.
Michael Coward has become trade marketing manager for the same divisions and will eventually be responsible for Johnson Brothers' similar activities.
Rhon Willingham has been appointed systems development executive, working closely with Martin and Michael in establishing and maintaining effective systems support for the customer service and trade marketing departments.
‘All these changes have been made to elevate the level of service and support we provide for all out customers in the UK and Ireland,’ said Group sales director Roger Little.
Craftsman Mike rubs shoulders with the stars at tourism show
CRAFTSMAN Mike Hughes rubbed shoulders with TV stars at an international tourism show in London.
He met Bread star Jean Boht, funnyman Ernie Wise and weatherman Ian McGaskill when he represented Wedgwood alongside decorators, gilders and master potters on the Stoke-on-Trent stand of the exhibition in London.
Mike, who works at the Visitor Centre, demonstrated on the potter's wheel to promote ‘Centuries of Ceramics’ at the BBC Holiday Live show.
Dozens of popular tourist spots across the world were represented at the exhibition which ran for five days.
Visitors to the Stoke-on-Trent stand picked up a Passport to the Potteries leaflet which allows them a discount when visiting sites of interest such as the Wedgwood Visitor Centre.
Mike said: ‘I really enjoyed the show which was very informative and I was also lucky enough to meet many celebrities.’
Studying rewarded with degree
COUNTLESS hours of studying over the past six years have paid off for a Barlaston engineering technician — in the form of an Open University degree.
Brian Evans, of the development engineering department, devoted every available hour of every day to studying, even during his worktime lunch and tea breaks at the factory, to achieve his academic goal.
When he received news of his success a couple of months ago, Brian was elated…and he breathed a big sigh of relief that he could relax from his schedule of intensive studies.
‘It was a very demanding programme and very rewarding, but I'm looking forward to keeping my head out of books for some time now,’ he commented.
He first embarked on an Open University degree in the technology faculty some ten years ago, but gave it a rest for a few years before starting in earnest in 1986, in his second year at Wedgwood.
Rugby prints
WIN yourself one of 200 limited edition prints signed by five famous faces from the world of international rugby in a special raffle offer.
The picture depicts stars Will Carling, Brian Moore, Rory Underwood, Wade Dooley and Mike Teague from England's Grand Slam team.
Five hundred tickets priced at £1 each will be sold through the Barlaston Public Relations Department 
The winner will be presented with a 30″ by 26″ print by former Stoke City and England international footballer Dave Watson who is organising the raffle through his company to raise money for Arthritis and Rheumatism Research.
Where are you?
DOES anyone know the whereabouts of Harry Clive Rogers, who was works manager at Midwinter Pottery during the 1970s.
Bill Hadley, who worked in the sales department alongside Clive would like to get in touch with him.
Anyone with any information should contact Bill, who now lives in Cumbria, on  
Robert Johnson retires
FOLLOWING the completion of his assignment to co-ordinate the integration of Johnson Brothers into the Wedgwood Group management structure, managing director Robert Johnson, has decided to take early retirement from the Company.
He also retires from the Board of Waterford Wedgwood UK plc., of which he is a director.
Robert, who has worked for the Group for 34 years, will leave at the end of March.
He was appointed managing director of the Wedgwood Group Earthenware division in 1977 and joined the Wedgwood Board in 1979.
Special clinic
EMPLOYEES are reminded that they have the chance to take part in a special bone marrow register clinic.
Wedgwood is giving employees the chance to show they care by holding an Anthony Nolan bone marrow register clinic at the Barlaston pavilion on 1 March and in the Group the next day.
The only criteria are that applicants must be aged between 18 and 40 and weigh over eight stones.
Personnel departments will inform employees as soon as possible of the venue in the Group.
A doctor will be on hand at both occasions to answer any queries about transplants and the work of the Anthony Nolan Trust.
Make a date
IT is estimated that all employees who originally applied to participate in Heartwatch will have undertaken an appointment by the middle of this year.
Co-ordinator Andrew Smart has set the following schedule to the end of April:
In the second half of this year everyone will be invited to take part again in a new and updated programme — keep a look out for details.
Pensioners' new pay-slips
NEW look pensioners' pay slips — a prototype is revealed, left, by assistant pensions manager Margaret Shaw — will be issued from April.
Pensions and insurance manager, Alan Goodwin, said: ‘This follows on the changes made to employee pay slips, providing greater security and confidentiality of personal information.’
The new pay slips, mailed to some 2,300 pensioners, come in two parts as opposed to three, and are more  environmentally friendly, too.
Calling all pensioners…with a message from welfare officer Sheila Redmond: ‘If any retired employees are in need of advice or help that they think I could offer, they only have to ‘phone me on .’
‘It's not just in cases of illness that I can offer to help pensioners,’ said Sheila, ‘but also where there may financial, social or domestic problems.’
Stop smoking courses are success at Coalport
A sequel to the announcement last September of the Group's new policy on smoking was Heartwatch co-ordinator Andrew Smart's series of ‘smoke-stop’ courses.
He was particularly pleased with the 25 per cent success rate of the initial sessions at Coalport, which started in November.
Four women took part in the one-hour sessions — Susan Woch and Viv Cumbley of the warehouse, Jacqueline Ward from sponging, and Jill Bailey, of the glazing department.
Jill quit the habit shortly before Christmas.
Ten weeks later, Jill told Newsline: ‘I picked a date to stop smoking and finished completely.
It hasn't been as difficult as I thought it would be, so far…but I'm determined not to have another smoke.
‘Those who took part in the sessions found it enjoyable and good fun,’ commented Andrew, ‘and although everyone has not yet managed to pack it in, the early feedback is encouraging.’
There is a course presently running at Barlaston which, in Andrew's words, is ‘successful in a peculiar way, as they are continuing to meet without me present’.
For those employees who may need some encouragement in the privacy of their home to help them stop smoking, Andrew has a video which is available on loan.
And, finally, there's advice by phone — the national registered charity Q.U.I.T.
has a help-line you can call on .
A time for celebration….
Left to right are Viv Cumbley, Jacqueline Ward, and Susan Woch applauding colleague Jill Bailey who is pictured crushing a packet of cigarettes after kicking the habit.
An opportune time to shed those extra festive pounds
THE immediate post-Christmas and New Year period is an opportune time to check your weight and count the excess pounds put on after the festive holiday — and a time to count the cost to your health and make a serious attempt to reduce the surplus.
There are numerous risks to being overweight.
‘It puts an extra strain on your entire body,’ points out Heartwatch co-ordinator Andrew Smart, ‘causing damage to joints and increasing the chances of illnesses that may lead to heart attacks or strokes or diabetes.’
Energy
Andrew quotes a simple example as a note of warning: ‘Anyone who is two stones overweight — and one in three people fall into this category — has to put in the extra effort equivalent to carrying seven bags of sugar in each hand — all the time!’
For many people it is all too easy to put on weight, and for the vast majority the problem is caused by a simple energy imbalance — too much food is consumed and too little energy expended by exercise or work.
Hence, the surplus is laid down as fat.
In many cases, being overweight is caused by eating too much of the ‘wrong’ type of foods, such as those with high sugar and fat content.
For example, one ounce of butter or margarine contains as many calories as half a pound of potatoes.
Fibre
Alcohol is also very high in calories and can contribute a great deal to a person's weight.
What can be done to keep weight down?
The best ways are to:
cut down on fatty foods
eat smaller portions at mealtimes
eat nothing between meals
reduce alcohol consumption
eat more high fibre foods
eat leaner cuts of meat
use skimmed or semi-skimmed milk
substitute low-fat spread for butter or margarine
eat fewer cakes and pastries
Cutting down the intake is a very good start, but regular exercise is very important too.
In simple terms, by being more active you can increase the amount of calories you use.
If you are not one that likes to participate in active sports, then school yourself to take the stairs instead of the lift, walk to the newspaper shop instead of driving…indeed, take a vigorous walk whenever you can.
‘All of the above advice makes good sense if you want to improve your health and gain the benefits that will improve your lifestyle,’ contends Andrew.
‘But, do remember that moderation is the keyword — diets and exercise programmes are no exception,’ he adds.
Flab
‘Fight the flab and feel fitter and at the same time reduce your risk of developing heart disease,’ is his emphatic message to employees.
Employees wishing to burn off some calories in energetic style are welcome to take part in aerobics classes run by Joyce Edwards, Q.C.
facilitator, every Tuesday and Thursday in the QC rooms at Barlaston, and from April, Andrea Leech, of the retail division, will be holding her Thursday night class in the Wedgwood canteen.
Bridal contest winners
LOVE was in the air when two lucky Canadians scooped first prize in a special bridal competition.
Wendy Blogg and Lloyd Patterson, left, are pictured with ornamenter Paul Harper during their trip to Barlaston.
The couple won a trip to the UK in a contest run by Wedgwood Canada which included a visit to the company headquarters.
They were given a tour of the craft demonstration area, and a chance to try the technique of ornamenting a Jasper sweet dish before enjoying lunch.
TOP IN TECHNOLOGY
Project Engineering play a vital role in £4m investment
GLAZING machine supervisor Steve Wilmore starts up the new glazing machine.
DISCUSSING final details of the layout for the newly installed dust-press dishmaking machine, illustrated on computerised graphic display, are Phil Richens, right, and Keith Lander.
THE new dust press machine at Eagle Pottery features a VDU monitor and is computer controlled.
Left to right are Peter Stanfield, Alan Brown, Reg Booth and John Quinn.
THIS year the Wedgwood Group will be moving ahead towards the implementation of new ceramic technology and the introduction of more mechanical aids to support the workforce in achieving increased productivity — and, therefore, profitability — in key areas of manufacture.
Playing a leading role in all aspects of new production developments — from conception through to commissioning and post-operational servicing — is the project engineering department, which will this year dedicate much of its time and expertise to the installation of capital plant and equipment.
‘A £4 million manufacturing investment programme is under way for 1993 and the project engineering team is actively involved with production management and methods engineering in ensuring that the Group has the best available machines and equipment, all operating at maximum efficiency and quality of output,’ said Phil Richens, department manager.
Technical advancement around the Group currently involves four major installations, either in the early stages of operation or undergoing test runs.
At the Barlaston factory there are two new technological advances — one of the first dust-presses for the manufacture of bone china dishes, and the latest model in unleaded glazing machines.
Instrumental
Recently up and running at the Minerva factory is a figurine casting machine and at the Eagle factory a new computer-controlled dust-press is in the initial stages of producing earthenware flatware.
Phil  Richens' project engineering team —— has been instrumental in devising and overseeing every phase of this technical development programme, from initial planning and purchasing through to installation logistics, commissioning and testing.
They are now busily engaged in scheduling the introduction of more new plant and equipment (and, of course, the disposal of old and obsolete machinery) which will include a more sophisticated dust-press at Barlaston, dust-press machines at Eagle and the eventual move to leadless glazing processes.
As well as aiming to achieve greater efficiency in manufacturing, the capital investment programme is targeted towards greater flexibility in product planning and processing.
‘Putting all this new plant and equipment into operation will provide much more flexible manufacturing systems and thereby bring about significantly reduced stock-holding,’ explained Phil.
Maximising the use of new mechanisation and technology calls for all-round teamwork in every area of production.
‘As well as our involvement in the introduction of new machinery, we shall continue to work as a support team helping and advising wherever we can to the greater achievement of our colleagues responsible for TNT, quality assurance, work study, health and safety…indeed, any aspect of the Group's business,’ added Phil.
The project engineering department's own efficiency has been closely examined and, consequently, notably improved over the past year.
We have taken on board some new technologies, a computer simulation package and a CAD system, which have significantly improved efficiency in the department,’ said Phil.
Graphic
Computer simulation provides project engineers with graphic descriptions of the principal elements of plant in action at factory sites allowing them to study manufacturing process operations in detail.
‘This facility is considerably time-saving for the team as it enables us to make experimental changes on screen, before on-site implementation, which is clearly more cost effective at the planning stages,’ explained Phil.
The CAD system gives touch-of-the-button access to hundreds of detailed plans of every major factory floor and office site in the Group.
‘Gone are the days of large blueprints, maps and drawings as all of this information is now computerised and the originals have been translated to microfilm to keep on record for posterity,’ said Phil.
LEFT, Examining the efficiency and quality of output by dust-press dishmaking are, left to right, Clive Bourne, Dave Riley, Simon Lovatt and Mike Shufflebotham.
RIGHT, Project engineer Cliff Brown, left, is pictured with caster John Durber, centre, and casting machine operative Bill Mainwood.
Advancements and greater efficiency in mill and sliphouse operations around the Group
Quality initiatives improve clay processing
JOHNSON Brothers mill manager Roy Rowley, who supervises the mixing and blending processes, measures the liquid clay in a vat which is 16 feet deep and holds 60 tons.
BRENDAN McNally drives the Bobcat to collect china clay which will be fed into a blunger to be processed into ‘slop’.
ANDREW Mycock at the controls on the blending platform where the correct proportion of each ingredient is pumped into a tank which accurately measures the volume and weight of liquid before being mixed in the blending tank.
RICHARD Leake, left, Sam Davies and Karen Rowley examine sieves and magnets as part of quality control checks in the Mason's sliphouse.
DISCUSSING quality improvement progress charts are Barlaston sliphouse manager Paul Bentley (right) and quality assurance manager Mike Brindley.
THE very mention of the word ‘speck’ sends waves of concern through any sliphouse in the Wedgwood Group.
The contamination of clay bodies by minute metallic elements has long been a recurring nightmare for potters despite stringent efforts to eradicate the ‘disease’.
Some ceramic experts used to say: ‘You'd have to run factories like sterile wards of a hospital to be totally rid of specking.’
However, in recent years, improvements in sliphouse processing have come very close to eliminating the problem.
Sliphouse manager at Barlaston, Paul Bentley, claims: ‘A number of developments — notably the introduction of high intensity magnets and finer, stronger sieves — have enabled us to reduce the incidence of specking very significantly.’
Quality Assurance initiatives have also led to considerable advancements in both efficiency and quality.
‘For some time now we have operated on a customer-led basis,’ explained Paul.
‘For example, the blender regards the pressman as his customer, the pressman's customer is the pugman and he has got the potter has his customer.’
The Barlaston sliphouse also has a recently restructured team — the only all-male department in the factory — of 28 men operating the principal processes of blending, pressing and pugging.
Demand
‘One foreman oversees all operations to ensure that every order receives full and proper attention and the workforce is kept well informed of all requirements, so that we fulfill demand accurately and on time,’ said Paul.
The days of milling raw materials are long gone, as the main ingredients — bone, stone, sand, felspar and flint — are supplied in ‘slip’(mixed with water) form.
China clays and ball clays are blunged separately in the department.
Eighteen different clay bodies are produced, either in the form of soft clay, press cakes for converting to casting slip, or clay slip for spray-drying into granules.
The department also services the needs of the Royal Tuscan, Minerva and Alexandra factories.
Weekly output comprises over 160 tons for bone china production and over 50 tons of other bodies such as Jasper, earthenware and ivory china.
In the interests of quality assurance, some 120 samples of all raw and processed materials are tested to stringent standards every day.
The department is actively involved in Quality Circles, constantly studying possibilities for further improvements.
Among recent successes was a link with Sandon High School students who worked on a project to achieve greater accuracy in testing the texture of clay press cakes.
KELVIN Pearson with a pug mill which drives air bubbles from the filter, pugs clay and kneads it to make it malleable.
EDDIE Jones, left, and Mike Harding with a filter press.
Once the liquid slip leaves the blending tank it is passed through fine sieves and over an electro-magnet to remove any particles of iron.
The mixture is then pumped through a filter press which is lined with nylon filter cloths to extract excess water from the slabs of clay.
A foreground setting of raw flintstones at Johnson Brothers provides a nostalgic view of two remaining bottle kilns, formerly used in the traditional coal firing process of calcining flints.
JOHN Vernon tests the stiffness of the clay using the digital pig-sticker’.
STEVE Hancock monitors one of the Group's three slip tankers as it is fuelled to transport slip clay around factories.
JOHNSON Brothers' mill manager Graham Jones inspects the milling drums.
Fourteen drums of crushed flint and water are ground at the same time.
‘The students came up with a sound idea for an instrument that would give digital readings, which was developed by our technicians,’ commented Paul.
Traditional
‘The result is that we now have a more sensitive version of the traditional pig-sticker, which is ten times more accurate than the old tool in testing and calculating the hardness or softness of clay.’
Over at Hanley, Johnson Brothers' mill and sliphouse is a factory in itself.
Its extensive milling operation is unique in the Group, probably in the industry.
The ‘island site’, located within the manufacturing area of Shires sanitaryware (formerly a Johnson Brothers unit), processes some 600 tins of raw materials a week and delivers hundreds of tins of essential ingredients, ranging from ground flint to felspar, earthenware slip to sanitaryware body, to several factors — Eagle, Mason's, Barlaston, Johnson Brothers and the adjacent Shires.
Huge mounds of raw flintstones, imported from Kent and Norfolk, are constantly being fed into the giant automatic milling unit for calcination and grinding.
Through a 24-hours every-day operation, about 150 tons of flint are processed each week.
Similarly, hundreds of tons of china clay, ball clay and stone-flux are prepared, blended and supplied in slip form.
‘Although the calcinating plant has been in operation for some years now, it is the most modern of its type in the industry,’ commented senior mill manager Graham Jones, ‘and while it may not be attractive to the eye, it does produce beautiful materials.’
On his daily visit to the laboratory to look at quality control tests on raw and processed materials, Graham added: ‘Mills and sliphouses have never been the favourite areas of pottery factories — you either love or hate them — but for the likes of me they are a way of life.’
Trials
A recent development at Mason's sliphouse is the transfer from Eagle of the processing of the Franciscan clay body.
‘This move is now in progress and we are running production trials,’ said Richard Leake, manager of the department.
Mason's processes three bodies — ivory and white earthenware for its own production, and white slip for Alexandra.
A team of four men, a blender, a pressman, and two pugmen, operate the department which produces 50 tons of body and 12,000 gallons of slip a week.
Total Quality
Sweet smell of success as flowermaking team lines up to its name as quite Simply the Best
A Quality Circle team of Coalport flower makers, ‘Simply the Best’, has brought new thinking to the making of bone china floral studies, which has given the marketing team a sweet smell of success.
It is hoped to launch a selection in the summer.
QC facilitator Ann George said: ‘The craftswomen —— have researched the styles of floral arrangements produced by Coalport over the years.
‘They came to the conclusion that fresh introductions were needed, based on the traditional styles and techniques, but with a new, contemporary appeal.’
‘It is a very exciting project, and the QC team is delighted with the very favourable reaction from sales and marketing teams,’ said Ann.
The 24 prototype models comprise a range of assembled flowers, hand-enamelled in four colourways — peach, blue, pink and yellow.
As the craftswomen are already familiar with the floral studies under development, production of the new pieces should not involve any new training, or new allowances to be made for learning curves.
Exciting
Development should therefore be quick and relatively straight forward.
Coalport international brand director, David Butler, said after the presentation: ‘This is a most exciting development, put across in an informative and enjoyable way.
‘Much work will now be needed on market positioning, timing and support activity.
It is particularly pleasing that so much thought and work by the QC team should generate such enthusiasm from all who saw the results.
‘We look forward to launching the product in the near future, and anticipate great success.’
Maximising action of new machine
THE newly-installed figurine casting machine at Coalport's Minerva factory has been subjected to a detailed study by an action improvement team.
As a new system of manufacturing, the machine and its method of processing — and, importantly, its quality of output — has been exhaustively examined by a three-woman action team, casting area manager  with  and .
‘We have now been able to establish the most efficient operational procedure to be followed,’ said Natasha, ‘and this has been set up to ensure the highest standards of quality and productivity.’
Casters
The new machine went into full production around mid-February, operated by a team of five casters.
‘The operatives have been fully involved in the A.I.T. project and their suggestions and recommendations have been taken into account in arriving at the most efficient process flow,’ said Natasha.
‘The prime objectives of our project have been to maximise the machine's productive capacity and at the same time to minimise possible losses,’ she added.
Advice on setting up a staff QC
TO extend Quality Circle activities in various administration functions, a steering committee has been set up to study the requirements of staff and to advise them on how best to go about setting up effective Q.C.
teams and to guide and support their future development.
Group chief facilitator  said: ‘Initially we have been successful in helping to establish teams in the personnel, training, public relations, sales and distribution departments at Barlaston, while Johnson Brothers have had five teams indifferent areas of the offices for some time now.’
‘We are being asked by staff from numerous other office areas for information and guidance on Q.C.
activities and the steering committee will be examining the full extent of requirements and advising on participation wherever appropriate,’ he added.
Imperial and Alex top the TNT table
TABLE-topping Imperial Pottery and Alexandra Pottery came out joint winners in the latest bi-annual TNT awards.
Both factories were tested in the six TNT principles and were found to have achieved the most improvements in a six month period.
Two employees from the factories were each presented with £1,000 holiday vouchers as winners of a special prize draw.
of the Alexandra glost warehouse and  of the Imperial banding department can choose a holiday anywhere in the world.
Manufacturing systems manager Phil Knapper said: ‘Congratulations to both factories for setting such high standards and also to Mason's Ironstone who were beaten into second place by just one point.
‘The points collation system is very detailed and focuses individually on each TNT principle.
The league is the benchmark for standards which all factories are battling to attain and the competition is continuous and always very fierce.’
To generate even more interest in TNT the best departments from each factory are given £250 Argos gift vouchers to offer in a prize draw.
The winners of these were:
Improved
One employee from the most improved department on each factory also received a £100 Argos gift voucher.
The winners were:
Group sales director Roger Little presented production directors  (Alexandra) and  (Imperial) with specially-inscribed Black Basalt items at the presentation ceremony.
He stressed the importance of TNT and its effect on customer service but said that he would like to see it developed more in sales as well as manufacturing.
Roger said: ‘Having heard so much about TNT while I was in Australia I am pleased to see it working so successfully and in particular I am glad to see a continuation of product supply into the sales organisation as a direct result of TNT principles.’
Manufacturing support executive Mark Shingler said: ‘Alexandra came first because of their very high standards and Imperial ran out joint winners because of their great improvement in standards.’
Strapping lads cast away a problem
IMPROVED safety and more healthy and efficient working procedures are the main benefits of a new strap to be used in the Mason's casting department.
The Castaways Quality Circle, comprising , looked at the method of strapping moulds together with the use of elastic bands.
The former system involved the operative having to attach more than 20 bands at a time to hold a mould in position.
Q.C.
facilitator Sandra Wootton said: ‘Not only was the process time consuming, it also led to an unhealthy creation of excess dust and posed the possible hazard of a band snapping.’
The circle members identified the problems and began talks with a local company, Consolidated Holdings which could supply a re-usable strap to do the job of a batch of bands.
They negotiated a special discount rate for a batch of 50 straps before making a submission for the new equipment to Group manufacturing and technical director Chris Johnson.
Sandra said: ‘It has been a very worthwhile project from the health and safety aspect by a very successful QC team which has been together for almost three years.’
Pensioners' Parties
Seasonal gesture to retired employees
MORE than 100 retired employees enjoyed a slice of festive cheer at the Royal Tuscan and Mason's Ironstone pensioners' Christmas parties.
Tuscan's annual party was arranged by the works committee and took place in the company canteen.
Around 50 retired employees attended the party and were treated to a three course dinner served up by committee volunteers.
Charity
The money for the dinner is raised from charity fundraising events held on the factory throughout the year.
Senior personnel officer Liz Tait said: ‘People who come to the party always say they have the time of their lives because they can mix with their former workmates and also have the opportunity to participate in a ware sale.’
‘We always end up losing some of the group during the factory tour because they are off chatting to old friends.’
Mason's party also took place in the canteen and attracted more than 60 former employees.
As well as a cooked meal, each partygoer was invited to tour the factory and visit their former workplaces and old friends.
Senior personnel officer Mal Bradshaw, who helped to organise the event, said: ‘Everyone had a wonderful time and there was only one hitch.
‘I was held up and was forced to give the traditional welcome speech after everyone had eaten their lunches.’
‘As soon as I stood up to speak everyone began putting their coats on and getting ready to leave,’ joked Mal.
Quiz King Tim is Top of the Boffs
QUIZ king Tim Brownsett came top of the boffs once again when he scooped the Brain of North Staffordshire title for the second time.
The analyst programmer based at the Barlaston computer department, who compiles all of the quizzes for Newsline, came top from 32 teams of four.
The contest, organised by North Staffordshire Hospital Radio, took the top 16 players — picked on points scored — into four semi-final eliminators.
Margin
Tim, who has never been out of the top two in the competition in the last six years, then went on to clinch an exciting final by a narrow margin.
He said: ‘I  practise four nights a week in league matches and one-off quiz competitions and I am very pleased to have won the prize again.
‘I enjoy both compiling all sorts of quizzes and taking part in competitions and league events.
‘Many people tend to specialise in a certain topic such as sport or pop music but I concentrate on general knowledge.’
Comic relief
MASTER potter Michael Hughes hopes to raise more than just a few laughs when he takes part in a marathon charity event.
Michael, who works at the Visitor Centre, Barlaston, is taking part in a 24 hour demonstration of his skills in aid of Comic Relief between noon on 11 and 12 March and is appealing for sponsors.
Sport
Competition team hooked on success
WEDGWOOD Angling Society's A Team landed an impressive fifth spot at the end of the Five  Towns Winter League season.
The side's Paul Harper also claimed the top aggregate score out of 80 competitors.
The A Team beat 11 other sides in the league which fished sites all over the country and Angling Society secretary Peter Kelly said he was pleased with the position.
He said: ‘The problem this season has been that many of the sites have not fished very well at all.
‘In one particular event, only two out of 80 competitors caught anything.’
Peter said that although fifth was a respectable position he felt the team was capable of pushing for the top spot and added the society was eager for new blood.
He said: ‘The new season does not start until October but we will be holding our own practice matches before then, starting with the first event on 17 June at the big pool at Barlaston.
Charity games night
FUNDRAISERS from Alexandra Pottery have challenged Mason's Ironstone to a games night in aid of their adopted charity for 1993 at the Cockney Club.
Eight teams of four from each factory will battle it out on 17 March in a knockout pool, darts, dominoes and crib competition with all proceeds going to Children In Need.
Event organiser Dave Sargeant said: ‘This is the first major fundraising event on our calendar in what we hope will be a bumper year.
‘We are confident we can hit our target of £10,000 and are appealing for employees across the Group to support us.’
A quiz night has also been lined up in April at Mitchell's Social Club, Tunstall, by the charity committee.
Teams of four will pay £2.50 per person to enter the competition which is open to all-comers.
Rambling plans
WEDGWOOD Rambling Club has planned two walks for March and April.
On 7 March, club members will meet on the car park of Trentham Hotel at 9.30am for a seven mile walk at Loggerheads while on 18 April the group will tackle an eight mile route through Audley.
Transport can be arranged for both events.
There will be no pub lunch stop on 7 March so ramblers should be sure to pack some sandwiches.
Club organiser Sue Burrows of Barlaston logistics department () said: ‘Both walks are moderate and everyone is welcome to join us.’
Wembley Way day
SIX of Barlaston's best are heading down Wembley Way aiming to bring home a national aerobics competition.
A team of ladies led by qualified aerobics instructor Andrea Leech from the retail division are taking part in the Minolta Business Equipment Aerobics Challenge.
The contest, to be staged at Wembley Grand Hall on 20 March, is open to male and female enthusiasts of all ages and levels of fitness from all over the country.
Each team has to create its own routine which has to include mandatory starburst, jumping jacks, domino sequence and freezing techniques.
The winning team will receive prizes of office equipment worth thousands of pounds to be used by its respective company.
The Wedgwood squad comprises .
They began training for the finals in January involving twice-weekly practice sessions in the Barlaston canteen after work.
Sue Burrows said: ‘We do not know what to expect or how many teams will be taking part but we are going there with a positive attitude.
‘At the moment we are confident but I should imagine we shall be nervous on the day.’
Flying company flag on the fells
A hard core of nine fell walkers has been keeping the Company flag flying across the country.
In September they travelled to Scafell in the Lake District and followed that walk with a trip to Carneddeu in North Wales.
The Yorkshire Dales was the crew's next destination as they headed off to Pen-y-Ghent in November before ending the year off in style with another Dales walk in Malham-dale before enjoying Christmas lunch at a local hotel.
Weather
Fell walkers organiser Dave Griffiths said: ‘Each walk is governed by weather conditions on the day which is why we have four planned routes.
‘Walk A is the longest and hardest option covering eight miles and a 3,000 feet ascent while at the other end of the scale a D class walk would cover the same distance but ascend just 1,500 feet.’
He added that fell walkers and ramblers may be teaming up for weekend excursions into the great outdoors.
The clubs would join forces for trips to venues such as the Lake District and incorporate both fell walking and rambling into the agenda.
Development technician Dave said: ‘At the moment the proposals are very much up in the air but we are hoping to plan mixed weekend trips which both groups would enjoy.’
Chef turns up the racing heat
CHEF Mark Williamson hopes to cook up his best ever time when he runs in the London Marathon.
Mark, who works in the Barlaston canteen, was the lucky winner of a Wedgwood Running Club draw to race as the Company's representative
The 28-year-old, whose interest in running began when he represented his school as a teenage athlete, has competed in three Potteries Marathons clocking up his best time of three hours and two minutes.
His training schedule includes at least a two to three mile run every night, when he pounds the streets around his home in Penkull
Mark said: ‘It is important to keep in rhythm when you are training for a race.
‘I am hopeful of a good time but there are a lot of factors which influence the outcome of a marathon including the weather and, most importantly, how a runner feels on the day.
‘I am proud to be representing the company and being able to wear the Wedgwood vest.’