

WHAT THE REGIONAL MD SAYS
FOOTE NOTES
Hard Times?
A Noel Coward lyric goes ‘Bad times are just around the corner’(‘There are black clouds over the dark cliffs of Dover’) and many homes this Christmas will be Dickensian in a depressing rather than a jolly sense.
Undoubtedly the past year has produced difficult trading conditions for many of our clients.
We are not totally recession proof but are certainly better insulated than most companies against its worst effects.
The spread of our contracts across a wide range of businesses, but with emphasis on essential businesses such as food and catering, also spreads the risk.
The average price of our contracts is affordable by the great majority of those businesses and the nature of our service is seen by them as essential to keep them out of trouble.
The perceived benefits of indoor green plants are becoming more apparent and our service to ensure healthy air and water in buildings help to meet increasingly strict legislation.
We shall not only survive but continue to grow so long as we give value for money, retain our record of innovation and flexibility, keep the confidence and goodwill of our clients and ensure that we have the best possible range of materials, methods and people in the industry.
It has been said that a person is judged by the company he keeps.
It's also true that a company is judged by the people it keeps.
Environmental Services are keeping and still recruiting the best people and the result is still reflected by our peers and the country's opinion formers.
In my last message I listed the impressive accolades won by you for Rentokil in the past year.
Elsewhere in this issue you will read of the latest Economist survey of Britain's survey of Britain's Most Admired Companies in which we were placed third overall; top in our business sector; top in quality of management; and second in our quality of marketing.
Not a bad record!
Those of you who have acquired shares through the profit sharing scheme will note with pleasure that Rentokil shares have performed the best of all the FTSE 100 over the past five year period, with an almost fourfold increase since 1987.
However, having won our laurels we must not be tempted to rest on them.
We cannot afford to be complacent, but I do not believe complacency is in the vocabulary of any one of you.
I wish every one of you and your families a truly Happy Christmas and a very prosperous New Year.
WHAT THE MDs SAY
Investing in the Future
Despite the tougher trading conditions I am pleased to report that Healthcare has yet again had a profitable year, and we are poised for further expansion of our business in the coming year.
The creation of two new branches in Manchester and Birmingham will further strengthen our portfolios in these areas, and with very successful sales and service teams already in place I'm sure in 1993 we'll see a large portfolio growth.
We have also invested for the future in two new depots.
Glasgow Healthcare will have a purpose built depot as will the Cardiff area.
The Cardiff depot will strengthen our presence in South Wales and will eliminate the need to drive service vehicles backwards and forwards from the Bristol branch to that area.
Not only are we investing in capital equipment and premises, we are also building for the future by investing in people.
A greater number of branches means more jobs, and more opportunities for promotion of existing staff.
Remember people promote themselves, we're growing fast as a division, make sure each and every one of you grow with us.
The new chrome sanitizer is progressing well, sales are up and clients much prefer the new designer version.
A third of all sanitizer sales are now going into ladies' washrooms, a previously untapped market but a huge one that is out there for the taking.
Make sure potential clients appreciate the range of our services for both the ladies' and gentlemen's facilities.
Coupled with the development of the sanitizer we have significantly improved the internal workings of the airfresh unit.
The whole of the circuitry system is now enclosed thus ensuring our airfresh is the premier product on the market.
The new service route planning systems are currently being tested in the Tonbridge branch and will be implemented throughout the division in the second quarter of next year.
Route planning and detailed control of the customer servicing represent a big development in our division, and one that will significantly streamline our operations.
A new year is almost upon us.
Let's make 1993 a year of outstanding achievement with super sales, service and administration standards, then we can increase turnover and break all previous profit records for Healthcare.
Merry Christmas and a prosperous and healthy New Year to you all.
Planning for the New Year
As we arrive at the end of the year it is, perhaps, a time to look back at what has been achieved and to look forward to what lies ahead.
This year has been a tough one for industry and commerce.
It has challenged and tested us in many ways.
It is easy to be successful when the world is booming, but not so easy when things tighten up.
The mark of a good organisation is that it responds positively when things get tough.
One that shows resilience, and that takes people of quality with determination.
This year Pest Control has prospered once again and moved forward on all fronts.
It has many tough, determined people who have been tested and not found wanting and I thank you for it.
Looking to the future, 1993 promises to be a year of opportunity.
We are making two major changes designed to offer improved service to our clients and simultaneously to offer the chance for both the business, and the people in it, to reap substantial rewards.
The first is Tamper Resistant bait boxes.
All new Pest Prevention contracts will include these boxes in future.
The really big opportunity is, however, switching over the 85% of our portfolio not currently enjoying this safer, greener system of baiting.
Millions of pounds in jobs and portfolio are available to us with substantial opportunities for leads and sales commission.
Go for it and use this as an opportunity for a very significant earnings boost next year.
The next change is, of course, Service Consultancy.
The Food Safety Act demands that the service we provide demonstrates ‘due diligence’ under the law.
The Service Consultancy initiative is a major benefit to clients in this area and I have already received many letters from customers, advised by the circular in their invoicing, thanking us for this additional feature.
It will help fight terminations and generate additional business.
It offers promotion opportunities to the service technicians and underpins our growth objective which in turn is good for everyone in Pest Control.
Staff need to co-operate with each other to make it work — but that is what we do best.
The benefits will be very substantial and I believe this initiative could be as significant to us in the future as was SRS when it was introduced all those years ago.
Let's work together on this one and make it the success it deserves to be.
I thank you once again for all that you have done in 1992 and wish you and your families a happy and restful Christmas.
If we work as well together in 1993 as we did in ‘92 Pest Control and the people in it will continue to prosper and this coming year will be another success story.
Good luck to you all.
Beat the 1990s with SSG and FQS — the 30% factor
From the beginning of 1993, we shall be introducing two new products that will benefit Medical Services, Water and Ventilation and Tropical Plants.
These unique products will see us through the rest of the 1990s, will beat the recession and competitors [who?], as well as all targets known to mankind in the years ahead.
Every Rentokil person in Water and Ventilation, Tropical Plants and Medical Services has spent much time and energy developing SSG & FQS this year and now they will really shoot us way into the lead.
Super Sales Grit — SSG — is a miracle ingredient that has been trained into every Rentokil sales consultant from the very first day out with a sales manager to the final night of introductory sales consultants courses.
So how does SSG work?
Quite simply it is the refusal to accept anything other than the best.
It is the refusal to accept an excuse that the recession is biting hard — clients need to buy to comply with the law, and most importantly to show their competitors that they are not just surviving but thriving.
Super Sales Grit is the determination not to accept pipeline figures that are too small to convert into a sound sales figure.
Every sales consultant has covered the basics; they have been given the tools for success; the Super Sales Grit ingredient takes you to where no sales-person has previously thought to go.
Work more effectively and close harder than the average sales person.
Remember, if you have this will to win and unrelenting persistence to achieve, then you will be at least 30% better than your contemporaries: Super Sales Grit.
Our second new product has been introduced specifically for the service and administration departments.
Once again, every branch in the country has FQS but some use it much more effectively.
Fast Questioning Service,where service costs and techniques are scrutinised and planned; they are executed quickly and efficiently with no call backs; they provide a fast response to clients’ requests; and FQS always anticipates the customer's needs.
Put yourselves in the client's position: what would you judge as a quality, desirable service?
The 1990s will call for all of us at all levels to be 30% [not 20%]more skilful in our selling, servicing and administration practices.
We have the backing, we have the training — most importantly we have the people.
So let's see SSG and FQS being used to the full in 1993.
Let's reap the benefits of a service that is at least 30% better.
I wish you and your families a peaceful and prosperous New Year.
WHAT THE GENERAL MANAGERS SAY
Successful and Set to Go
Well it's been quite a year overall, hasn't it?
The recession, which we expected to fade away through the year, has hit us full on, and as I write there is little sign of light at the end of the proverbial tunnel.
Both our customers and our prospects are feeling the squeeze, and we generally seem to be at the painful end of it.
You might be surprised, therefore, and certainly more than a little proud, that we have come through 1992 in remarkably good shape, and are well placed for the New Year.
Although it's a little early to count numbers, let alone chickens, I think I can confidently predict that we will exceed our principal target, profit growth budget, comfortably, and there are many other businesses around who would be cock-a-hoop [to mix my poultry metaphors]at such a result in 1992.
Our best profit growth has come yet again in Retail, where Peter and his team have built the portfolio up in true recession-beating style and generated good profit growth whilst servicing a thoroughly depressed High Street.
Office Cleaning has held on to its portfolio in the face of the fiercest price-competition I have known, and as the year has progressed our strengthening sales team has begun to make good headway.
With the managers and service staff continuing to deliver a quality service whilst at the same time containing costs, profits will be ahead.
Our Hi-Tech business continues to progress well, with growth in both portfolio and profits, and this is a great tribute to the all round skills of the two managers, Sylvia Hume and Jan Brien.
In the mid-year we began the preparation for offering a specialist service to food premises, and with the groundwork now complete we can look forward to exciting prospects there next year.
On the acquisition front we retained David, Barry and all the staff at Argyll Services on board in September and now that they've got used to our paperwork they'll be looking forward to showing us what they can do in 1993.
Last but not least, we ventured into another area completely in October, when Mark and his team joined us with their Compliance Testing Service.
This is a tremendously exciting area for development, and I'm confident we can look forward to great things there.
So there you have it — how can we be anything but proud of our achievements in ORCS in 1992, and excited about the prospects for 1993?
You might be tempted to say —‘If the ORCS are that good in a recession, watch our in a boom!’.
Finally, I can't let this time of year go by without thanking each and every one of our staff for their important contribution in 1992.
Without that we wouldn't be ++ well we wouldn't be anywhere.
And a special thanks to all the families of our staff, who know provide an awful lot of support and encouragement.
You are very understanding and tolerant, and we are grateful.
With best wishes for Christmas, and a happy and healthy '93.
LIGHT AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL
In my last comments I mentioned how everyone can influence our performance in the Division.
Your job is vital whatever you do whether you are part of service, sales, administration or management.
The first half of 1992 was very hard with most of us putting in considerable effort to achieve as much as possible.
With the economic climate showing only very slow signs of improvement, I know many of you feel the strain of battling against the tide.
But I also said that provided we put the effort in and ensure that all aspects of our business are in good order, we will see the benefits shine through.
Indeed that is the case.
The enormous push we have seen in Hygiene over recent months, has indeed had an influence on our results.
In the second half of the year our service cost percentage has reduced, our sales productivity has increased and our termination rate has significantly reduced.
Certainly a much better picture than the one we had in the first half of the year.
All this has resulted in our profit for the Division being significantly higher in the second half compared with the first half of the year.
One aspect of this year that does particularly please me, is the continued success of our washroom hygiene service, where sales for contracts and jobs have hardly been affected by the economic climate.
The termination rate for this service is also no worse than other years and is indeed better than our other services.
This is the total opposite to that experienced in the recession of the early 80s when our washroom service suffered badly.
Nowadays this service has a high technical profile and far superior image, which has provided a good degree of protection in the market place.
It is this quality and image that we must continue to build for all our services.
The introduction of new services will always be part of our strategy and as I said last time the water saving service has moved well in the year.
Another new development for the division for 1993, will be the introduction of electrostatic filters for industry used for the removal of fumes, dust, oil mist and micro-organisms from the atmosphere.
This together with an improved factory deep cleaning service will provide us with a factory hygiene service, that I am sure will develop into a major business for the division in future years.
So things are moving better for us which I am sure has provided some light at the end of the tunnel.
But don't be fooled, because 1993 will also be a tough year but with the experience gained in 1992, I am sure we are better equipped to deal with it and make it a very successful year for Hygiene.
So here we are at the end of 1992 and I should like to thank you all for the tremendous hard work you have put into it.
Please be sure to have a good Christmas with your families and I wish you all a very happy and successful New Year.
Continuous Improvements Continuously!
As one of the company's newer businesses we have to work much harder to establish the working methods and systems that get the job right for the customer.
Most of the older divisions have developed their systems over many years and new initiatives, new treatment methods and new paperwork have all been evolving.
At the moment we are working very hard to get all of our systems right, but of course it is not a once and for all process.
Improvements have to be continuous.
One input to this we can consider is the use of customer comment cards.
We have been using these for only a number of weeks now, but the response has been very encouraging.
Some of us were concerned about speaking to customers and asking them for their observations.
However, most of what they say has been very constructive and it is taking on board these improvements where possible that give us a better service to our customers.
I am delighted to see that lots of improvements are happening within the business and that people are not waiting for ‘Felcourt’ to make things happen — the best initiatives start in the field and are developed by enthusiastic individuals and long may this continue.
To everyone within the division who has worked particularly hard this year to establish and improve our business, I would like to pass on my thanks and best wishes for Christmas and the New Year.
Onwards and Upwards
At the end of what has not been the easiest of years for trading conditions, I am pleased to say that we are just about on target and set fair for 1993.
It was only three years ago that we split our business from Healthcare and we really are a stand-alone Division now, particularly with the advent of M.S.I.L. [Medical Services Incineration Limited].
I am delighted to welcome John Clist who joins us from Water & Ventilation to manage this new area of our business.
Increasing numbers of press reports on needlestick injuries and discarded clinical waste can only serve to focus attention on our core business, and to remind customers of not only their legal requirements but the social responsibility that they have to ensure that all medical waste is efficiently, correctly and discreetly handled.
Stricter legislation has helped the Division and will continue to do so throughout the future in both the sales and service environment.
Medical Services Division is an extremely professional service operating strictly to all guidelines and directives, do not forget to tell your prospects.
So onwards and upwards into 1993, the first full year of M.S.I.L, which will work hand in hand with our division.
My thanks must go to all staff, particularly the service and administration teams without whom the business would not run.
One other thing I nearly forgot to mention, just to please the administration staff, ‘COMPUTERS’, they are all ordered and will be in place early in the New Year, isn't that something to look forward to?
I wish you all a peaceful Christmas and prosperous New Year.
Go for…
Growth
Better performance in 1993 must be everybody's objective and despite the wailing and gnashing of teeth that surrounds us there has been plenty happening in our Division in 1992 to put us in good shape for the challenge of 1993.
The branch management computer system will go ‘live’ in the East in January and be introduced across the whole Division during the year.
Not only will this give us contract details at the push of a button but also allow us to manage service runs more effectively and so keep costs down.
Martyn Williams, who joined us in August as Financial Controller, is already making a big contribution with the rest of the ‘backroom’ accounts team.
The efficient running of the management and financial accounts plus the effective control of cash are important parts of a successful Division and our team at Cheshunt is doing a great job for us.
Christine Mills [you may have heard her]has produced a definite catalogue of replica displays which we can sell into the market place.
From the plethora of material available Christine has assembled displays made from the best material at the best price.
Our range is unique in the contract industry and gives us a sales aid second to none.
Keeping costs under control, managing our finances well and maintaining innovation in our sales approach are just three examples from a number that illustrate how, as a Division, we have been preparing for 1993.
So I wish you and your family a particularly enjoyable festive season and look forward to working with you for a successful 1993 and making it a year that will bring real growth.
Now Britain's Third Most Admired Company
The Economist has published in October its third survey of 1,900 British businessmen and financial analysts, conducted by Loughborough University Business School, of Britain's Most Admired Companies .
In the overall Top 20,Rentokil is now ranked No. 3 [after Glaxo and Unilever], Marks & Spencer is No.  6 .
In the Business Support Services, Rentokil is No. 1 [Inchcape is No. 2, Hays No. 3].
Under Quality of Management,Rentokil is No. 1.
Under Quality of Marketing,Rentokil is No. 2 [after Unilever].
Under Quality of Products and Services , Rentokil is No. 6.
Under Capacity to Innovate,Rentokil is No. 3 = with Reuters.
Under Use of Corporate Assets,Rentokil is No. 5 = with Redland and Tomkins.
In the previous survey in January 1991 Rentokil was placed 11th overall.
Those polled in the survey were asked to give firms marks out of ten under each of nine headings and the scores added to produce business sector rankings, national leaders in each heading, and an overall Top Twenty.
Rentokil's total score was 71.33 out of a possible 90 points.
Anglia Admin Team Reach for the Sky
The Pest Control Administration incentive for 1992 is entitled ‘It's Magic!’ and the admin team from Anglia certainly waved their magic wand earlier this year.
They won a choice of either High Street store vouchers or a flying or gliding lesson.
They took no time at all to decide, three of them, Elizabeth Everett, Natalie Deegan and Diane Reeve opted for adventure and a new experience.
They each received an introductory flightpack containing an audio cassette, log book, clipboard and information brochure plus a certificate to be completed after their successful takeoff and landing.
It took them a little while to pluck up courage to go along and when they did, they chose the Norfolk Gliding Club at Longstratton near Norwich.
On the day they were accompanied by their area manager, James Burford and his secretary, Cherry.
I'm sure he wanted to join in the fun but maybe he did just want to make sure they all got down safely.
With butterflies in their tummies [for extra lift], they each in turn took their position in the red and white striped glider to be winched gently high into the air.
Then the moment came when the tow line was released and they savoured the eerie feeling of riding the rising thermals.
Gliding silently through the air with the spooky thought that there was no engine to assist the descent and the craft is completely at the mercy of the air currents.
Well, perhaps not quite; the well qualified pilot sitting behind put the little craft through its paces.
Each of them had the chance to take the controls and fly the glider 8010 — just for a while, before the pilot brought the plane gently back to earth.
The end of a memorable experience for Elizabeth, Natalie and Diane.
Our Biggest Contract Yet
£1.5 Million Landscape for Medical Centre
Congratulations to Tropical Plants in Lanark for winning a massive project to exterior landscape the new International Centre for Advanced Medical Care in Clydebank, Scotland worth nearly £1.5 million.
The construction work is being undertaken by John Laing Ltd on behalf of Health Care International [Scotland]Ltd.
The area of the site extends to over fifty acres, on what used to be an asbestos factory on the banks of the river Clyde.
Prior to any work starting, the whole site has been capped with one metre of stone, as a precautionary measure against contamination because of its previous use.
John Hamilton, landscapes project manager, won the contract after 18 months of negotiation.
John was called in initially in an advisory capacity with Laings and the architects.
They then reached a tender situation where they were up against five other contractors.
After months of waiting, Rentokil were finally awarded the contract at the end of October.
The work comprises two parts, hard and soft exterior landscaping.
The hard consists of ornamental paviours in the formal garden areas, and cascading water features and lily ponds in the internal courtyards.
It also includes the forming of a helipad and extensive ornamental walls.
The soft part of the contract includes low maintenance grass areas, high quality formal rolling lawns backing onto the buildings, putting greens for use by both patients and staff and also a children's green.
The planting aspect takes the form of avenues of trees of which approximately 560 will be planted, and over 57,000 shrubs will be placed through the grounds.
For example 23,118 Hedera helix [English Ivy]; 6,400 Vinca minors [Periwinkles]; 11,465 Pachysandra terminalis [Japanese Spurge]and 4,600 Buxus sempervirene [Common Boxwood]and all the trees have to be sourced, ordered and installed.
The work commenced at the beginning of November and it will run through until May 1994.
The photo shows John Hamilton [left]with Walter Gillen, exterior supervisor, discussing the positioning of the 57,000 m3 of sub soil and 20,000 m3 of top soil.
The 16 tonne lorry depositing a load is one of the 7,500 that are needed to make up the specified contours.
The soil is supplied locally by a company in Bishopbriggs, Glasgow, near one of our Pest Control offices.
As John Hamilton said, ‘It was imperative to estimate extremely accurately as the materials and labour had to be quantified in the original bid.
All items of the total landscaping package had to be measured in order to submit realistic costs.
The job was initially priced over two years ago for a different scheme but incorporating the same layout.
We are delighted to have been awarded the contract.’
We have just heard that Bob Miller [currently number one is the Chief Executive's award scheme], has gained further business to provide plants to the surveyors' temporary offices.
Research has shown that patients benefit from looking at green plants and gardens.
This contract does our heart good too!
We will be watching this one grow and grow in future issues.
Tweaking the Replicas
Christine Mills purchasing and dispatch manager, can be seen here with nursery technician Sylvia Hume ‘tweaking’ various plants.
This took place when Chris was having the final photographs taken of the new replica range.
Rentokil now have a bespoke range of over forty different species and displays all illustrated in a brochure, all of which are replicas.
Sales consultants are now able to advise clients using photographs, on a range of sizes, colours and planters.
Up high
The Water & Ventilation services division recently held a service management meeting during quarter three in the Lake District.
Having discussed planning, state of service and efficiency of the service, the team were then challenged with standing on the highest ‘High Street’ in the UK.
Nearly the Finnish of Robinson Crowso
The grandmaster, Graham Crowe [UK senior field technical manager]recently went to Finland to run a training session in Esbo.
After the business side was completed Sten Dahlstom offered to take Graham and the technical manager and several technicians out in his boat.
He took the first four out from the quay and dropped them off, after having had trouble starting the boat.
They set up camp on the uninhabited island; and started a barbecue.
Unfortunately Sten couldn't get back, the light was going down and our fearless pest controllers were left stranded.
[The grandmaster issued strict instructions not to leave any traces of habitation on the deserted island, although of course they could be there for sometime].
Several hours later Sten found a warden who sailed out to the island and dropped the guys off on the nearest bit of mainland.
They then had to hitch a lift back to the cars.
So Robinson Crowso survived, and lives to go on spreading the Pest Control word throughout the highlands and islands.
Northern Area Workshop
This year's northern area Hygiene workshop was held in the Crest hotel Brighouse at the end of October, the theme of the day being ‘Knowledge Is Power’.
It was very much a day for getting back to basics and also for sharing knowledge, skills and experience to help each other.
Guest speaker, Bill Cook from Bass plc let us into what a buyer expects from a hygiene service and answered loads of questions that sales people don't normally get the opportunity to ask.
Area manager, Terry Gee recognised and awarded some exceptional achievements including; Best all round sales performer — Morag Weir, East Kilbride, followed by Susan Rogers from Birmingham and Gillian Hilton from Preston.
Val Pinder who has been away for some months due to illness achieves a fantastic level of sales and came in fourth.
All in the division welcome you back Val.
The most promising newcomer was John Durward who is very interested in Scottish history, so Terry presented him with a book on it and a shield.
After lots of hard work during the day, Terry invited everyone to a special ‘Black & White’ evening which produced some wonderful sights.
The Birmingham team dressed as clowns, were led by a proper Charlie [Chaplin]Billy Allan.
the Leeds team turned out in St. Trinian's uniforms including branch manager, Ian Davies.
Consultant Ian Parry who is 6 ′ 7 ″ tall looked gorgeous in his gymslip!
The East Kilbride team adopted a religious theme coming dressed as priests and nuns and some nuns of a rather dubious order!
The competitive spirit that had the branches trying to out-do each other 's fancy dress outfits carried over into a Karaoke competition.
All in all, a great day and night was had by all and the hygiene northern area sales teams returned to their branches fully motivated and ready to make 1992/3 their best sales year ever.
NEW BUSINESS — COMPLIANCE TESTING
In October Rentokil acquired Rowland Compliance Testing Limited, a Colchester-based company specialising in carrying out regular testing of portable electrical appliances and building circuits which facilitates compliance for employers with the Electricity at Work Regulations 1989.
All employers and those responsible for buildings are now required to ensure such safety measures are taken and to be able to demonstrate they have done so.
Rowland Compliance Testing [which was formerly known as Power Certification Limited]has established a substantial portfolio of quality blue-chip customers throughout the country, and is poised for substantial growth.
Several new contracts are already being negotiated with Rentokil's financial backing and branch network offering further benefits to prospects.
Mark Robinson, formerly Managing Director of Rowland Compliance Testing joins the company to head up the new Compliance Testing Division, with David Robinson, formerly technical director.
The company personnel additionally comprises administration and logistics staff along with team leaders and testing technicians.
The business will continue to operate from its Colchester base, shown below, and will report as a stand-alone division to David Howroyd, divisional general manager Office and Retail Cleaning Service.
We are delighted to welcome Mark and his team to Rentokil, and he looks forward to the many leads which will no doubt be forthcoming.
Grandmaster Big ‘Down Under’
Graham Crowe recently went to Australia to run a series of training courses and client seminars.
He met up with old colleagues such as Mike Evans and Graham Knight who gave him a typically ex-London welcome.
In the seminars he went through the latest developments in Pest Control in the UK.
He introduced existing and potential clients to Mouse Alert, pheromone detectors, tamper resistant bait boxes, the use of EFK's and Pestguard.
The seminars all went well and the Australian branches have received a number of enquiries as a result.
Rentokil Golf Society
The annual meeting of the Rentokil Golf Society hosted by Chief Executive Clive Thompson took place at the Royal Ashdown Forest Golf Club at the beginning of October.
The morning round was a matchplay between Simon Ness, financial controller at Kirkby and branch manager of Pest Control Glasgow South, John Gordon [this is the second year that John has reached the final.]
Simon Ness won.
The remainder of the qualifiers played Stableford for the Rentokil Cup, and once again the winners were from Environmental Services, Richard Wooding from Pest Control, Mike Bayley from Medical Services and Sal Akram from Pest Control Newcastle.
Another winner from Newcastle was for the best overall score from the two rounds of golf which Steve Ridley, surveyor won.
Steve also won the President's Putter in the afternoon round.
Tropical Plants R & D section head Mike Lothian won the longest drive whilst Transport and Property general manager Bryn Hodson won the Veteran's prize.
The wooden spoon award went to Mike Tunnell for the third year running.
The standard of golf was excellent again and all participants enjoyed themselves, both during the matches and in the evening.
John Evans, who has been Captain of the golf society since it started, stood down as he will be retiring next year.
All in the golf society wish to thank John for his tireless efforts in his support and promotion of the society.
John will particularly be remembered for his infamous gaffes made during presentations.
Stuart Wilson, previously honorary secretary was voted in to take the office of captain and Gordon Keith, previously treasurer, was voted in as honorary secretary.
This caused some concern to all present as the top two positions were now held by Scots.
Ken Bowman was then democratically voted into the treasurer's position.
This resulted in howls of protest, particularly from the winner of the Veteran's cup — however, order was restored and the evening closed relatively peacefully.
Medal for Veteran Bill
Billy Hamilton, who retired from Rentokil several years ago,[formerly working with Pest Control in Belfast and still collecting debts for the company]has become one of the first people in Northern Ireland to be presented with a commemorative medal from the Soviet authorities.
Bill received the medal to mark the 40th anniversary of the ending of the second world war.
The Soviet authorities presented it to those in the Royal Navy and merchant service who operated in Russian waters during the war.
The former pest controller who attained the rank of Chief Petty Officer served on a destroyer which escorted merchant ships into Russian ports.
Bill survived three German ‘U’ boat attacks and is the holder of the 1939–45 Star, the Atlantic Star, the France and Germany Bar and the Burma Star.
HAIR TODAY
The photo shows Healthcare's branch manager at Bristol having his moustache shaved off by three of his sales consultants, Allyson Glover, Angela Rowlands and Lea Collins.
The girls gave him a challenge that they would achieve £81k worth of sales by the end of the third quarter, and they did!
So far the final quarter's sales have continued to roll in and his moustache has stayed off.
Any other challenges?
Lounge Lizards in Hull
Simon Fallis, branch manager at Pest Control Hull recently spent hours posting notices through letter-boxes in his neighbourhood asking if householders had seen any unusual animals.
Apparently he wasn't touting for more Pest Control business, rather his tropical iguana had escaped and made off through the undergrowth.
Luckily he managed to retrieve his pet named Kiwi.
Kiwi is now safely back at home enjoying his usual vegetarian diet of oranges, apples and of course kiwi fruit.
Simon used to have a Tokay gekko named Wizard.
However a fellow gekko breeder wanted a male for his females to breed from.
Simon then had the agonising decision as to whether Wizard should stay or go off to pastures new.
He choose the latter.
As well as Kiwi, the Fallis household is home to anols, which are small lizards which change colour like American chameleons.
He claims these reptiles make superb pets as they sit incredibly still for hours and then go on the rampage — very much like Pest Control staff!
Driven Round the Bend
Gavin Miller, service manager at Healthcare Belfast as well as ensuring all the vehicles run properly and complete the necessary services, maintains and races a variety of other vehicles.
In his spare time Gavin competes in various rallies.
He currently has a Triumph which came from the U.S.A. and is used for ‘gentle’ classic car rallying.
He has competed in the Middle East Challenge events for several years and for over two decades has raced both cars and off road vehicles.
His longest journey so far was when his faithful Toyota was driven overland from Saudi Arabia to Northern Ireland in 1990.
His journey took him via Saudi, Kuwait, Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia [that was], Austria and onwards through Europe.
This wasn't the toughest trip though as in 1989 Gavin completed the Camel Trophy rally in Brazil.
This involved two weeks of solid driving through the Amazon rainforest in appalling conditions — there were continual problems with mud, water and basically the lack of any discernible road!
At one point they met up with a lorry laden with Coke which had been stuck for over three weeks in knee deep mud.
[Obviously you can beat the Coke feeling!].
Sheffield Marauders' Teamwork
When we asked all the branches in Environmental Services if they had anything we should know about and put into print for the next Environmental Issues, such as had they done anything exciting or out of the ordinary recently, Branch manager from Pest Control Sheffield, Henri Amiss was quick to point out that everything their branch did set them apart from other branches.
So why couldn't he just have a photograph of his sales team portraying the kind of team spirit that runs throughout the branch?
I thought that was fair enough, so here we see Andy, Phil, Henri, Mike and Paul who have battled it out on the skirmish field and are ready for action in the sales field.
New Transport Manager
John Padmore joined the company earlier on in the year as U.K. fleet manager.
John takes over the running of a fleet which currently comprises over 2,800 vehicles.
He joined Rentokil from Brooke Bond in Croydon and reports to general manager Bryn Hodson.
John runs the transport department with the help of his assistant Angela Pelling [she of the friendly voice who used to answer all calls on the Felcourt switchboard].
London Gets Stuck In
At the end of August, London's Pest Control area manager Paul Stearn arranged a fun day at the Wyboston Watersports Centre for all the London surveyors, supervisors, field biologists and managers.
The multi-event day was preceded by a meeting in which each of the five London branches gave a presentation — no holds were barred.
Many a humorous, cutting and satirical sketch was witnessed.
After Paul Stearn gave a brief introduction to the day, the group split up, half attempted to ‘mud race’ and the others tackled the watersports.
After lunch the teams swopped round.
Even though everyone ended up dirty, wet and muddy they all thoroughly enjoyed themselves and were eager to get on to the next event.
‘How do you top that?’ said a surveyor.
‘I'll take you all dragon boat racing in Hong Kong harbour if you pay for the flights!’ replied Paul.
All in the London area wish Paul the very best for his new job out in Hong Kong, as General Manager Hong Kong and Area Director of Asia North.
Successful Servicing
Congratulations to Steve Impey and George McDonald, service technicians from Nottingham Water & Ventilation for winning the Service Cup in September.
They won it for the outstanding service that they had given two clients, Comfort Cooling and PSA.
The first was for a private hospital and the area for cleaning was not made available for some time.
However, Steve and George worked extremely efficiently and still managed to complete the job on time enabling the contractors to hand over the ductwork on time.
The second commendation came from the site agent at the PSA who was particularly impressed with the organisation of the work and the way in which everything was cleared up afterwards.
As a result another order has been forthcoming and more will follow.
New Office in Newcastle
Newcastle Healthcare were proud to officially open their own sales office earlier in the year.
After a buffet for all the sales and administration staff, Lawrence Rudden, branch manager, performed the ribbon cutting ceremony.
On the first of August advanced technician Karen Swan took delivery of her brand new Harley Davidson motor bike.
This joins the Harley she already has along with her Kawasaki!
Lights, Cameras, Take Three…
Busmen
When it was first mooted that maybe a team of Tropical Plants staff would make for good television on Busman's Holiday, several folk were keen to take part.
When would-be television stars realised that just to get through the first round involved completing a detailed questionnaire their enthusiasm waned somewhat.
Then there was the reality that yes our three tropical experts had flown through the questionnaire stage and impressed the producer more than sufficiently at the interview stage and they would now be appearing in front of 14 million viewers, battling it out with another team, unknown until the actual day.
The first day's filming took place at Meadowhall in Sheffield, a prestigious site maintained by the York branch.
What will be a few minutes of footage on the screen took all day to film.
The public were curious to know what was going on, often trying to get their reflection in the mirror in order to appear on television, and then there was the problem of health and safety and too much camera equipment in a confined space, and then the light wasn't quite right…
Our three would=be Busmen, James Gilchrist, Paul Sturgess [he of Blue Peter fame]and Roland Huggett, took it all in their stride, whilst the researcher danced around telling them all just ‘how wonderful you are’.
The Tropical Plants experts as the team was to be called were all seen tending the plants throughout the shopping centre.
Then it was on to a local botanical gardens to record the ‘sound bites’.
This also facilitated close up shots to be taken without the world and his wife looking on.
Problem — the wonderful Victorian glasshouses were empty, no plants!
The researcher flitted around with a note of regret in his voice that maybe they should have gone to Rentokil's greenhouses as was originally offered and planned.
‘But this is television, that's why I'm paid so much, to come up with solutions,’ he proffered.
So the clapperboard clapped, the cameras rolled and the sound was recorded.
After a long day filming, our three Busmen went off with notes on everything from the capital of Grand Cayman to the flag of Ougodogoland.
They had to revise everything on worldwide currencies, capitals, flags, rivers, national monuments etc.
Their specialist round was confirmed as being palms.
End of October, and the day of filming the actual show at Granada's Manchester studios becomes reality.
They find out that they'll be competing against three local councillors from Kent, one from each of the main political parties — everyone crosses their fingers that they won't be able to agree on an answer.
All day in the studios, fitting for costumes, watching another team being put through its paces, a visit to make-up, last minute revisions, briefing on what is to happen, more make-up [they needed it!]and on to the set.
The programme was filmed in front of a live audience who had to clap, laugh and commiserate in all the appropriate places.
The team got off to a good start on the general knowledge round, they then had to answer questions connected with local councillors' work.
It was the simple questions that proved troublesome, and none of them will now forget who was the local councillor and is now MP for Huntingdon.
Full marks on their specialist round on palms — lots of long unpronounceable latin names, and then on to the quick fire round where they could blow it all by answering incorrectly.
They didn't falter and they were told a European holiday was theirs.
This could be converted into a worldwide trip, so Roland went on to the ‘Hot Spot’ to try and get around the world in 80 seconds answering as many questions as possible.
The prize was announced, a retake had to be done to ask them all to look pleased and surprised not just surprised!
So the team flew out at the end of November for their Busman's Holiday, where they'll see tropical plants grown in hot springs.
The programme hasn't been allocated a slot yet, but late January looks likely — your branches will be informed.
You'll then find out where they went to — a few clues: it will be -2.2° C, only one thousandth of the country is cultivated, only a third of the population have radios and there are 15 hotels in the country.
Intrigued?
Watch this space.
Spaghetti Star to Sales Manager
So you saw the cowboy in the spaghetti western on the cover of the last magazine, well it seems that the only way was up for Steve Perry from Pest Control, Birmingham South.
Steve has become the first sales manager in the branch.
We're not sure if this photo of him was taken during his sales training, or because he had won the half year professional sails guild award last year.
the Rank Hovis Challenge
Paul Hudson, field biologist from Pest Control Sheffield was approached late one Friday afternoon by Rank Hovis to put together a five-a-side football team.
The following Sunday a group of pest control technicians took to the field, all kitted out ready to ‘show Rank Hovis how to play football’.
[Well that's what Phil Shaw, surveyor from Sheffield said].
In goal was Paul ‘the cat’ Simmons, at the back was Jim ‘nothing will get past me’Farmery, Phil ‘I will run forever’Shaw, and up front was Paul ‘I may be small but I'm good’Beck, Darren ‘flog it’Clegg, Tony ‘the tiger’Register and Paul ‘let me shoot’Hudson, not forgetting the manager, ‘the singing service technician himself’Ken Nightingale and all singing, all dancing rocketeers, Josie and Eileen.
The first two games proved conclusive 5-O victories for the pest controllers.
Straight after that they played the main Mill team, and again turned out comfortable winners with a 3.
O win.
Rank Hovis were now realising that the cup could be going out of their cabinet and straight into Rentokil's, they decided to keep us playing and on came the warehouse lads, and Rentokil promptly achieved a 6-O victory.
Then came the cleaning department and yet another sound performance a 4–1 victory.
Finally came Rank Hovis management team.
Despite calls of if Rentokil won, Rank would terminate the contract, Rentokil went on to a 7-O victory.
The team were then treated to a meal and the mill manager presented them with the Challenge Trophy [through gritted teeth]and before the lads could get the lens caps off their cameras, they took it back, saying that the cup would stay at Rank's but Rentokil's name would be put on.
As the sun set on a great day, they all made their way home, awaiting the next challenge, so if anybody out there fancies their chances, just ring the Sheffield Pest Control branch.
TEESSIDE TOUGH GUY
You are probably aware that the Marauders hold the most physical area sales meetings in the UK, if not on Planet Earth: the reason for this is that they are then able to carry out the most professional and demanding surveys to get the sale.
This hard work recently paid off for Marauder John Elliott from the Teesside branch, when he beat thirteen other pest control companies to gain a prestigious contract with the army at Catterick.
The sale was worth over £15,500.
Our picture shows John in full training before surveying the camp obstacle course.
Safety first
Oxford Pest Control's newest technician John Rilby had only been with the company four days but had already made his mark.
He attended the Health and Safety Module 1 of the Technicians' Initial technical Course.
He came first in the test at the end of the day with a mere 100%.
Sales Mastermind
Jacci Pagliaruio from Healthcare Edinburgh, while surveying the gents' toilet in Scottish Natural Heritage in Edinburgh bumped into Magnus Magnusson.
He was very surprised to see her in the gents and asked ‘What are you doing here?’ to which she replied ‘PASS’.
There's No Flies on Us
Chelmsford Pest Control service technicians Ron Long and Danny O'Mara were recently asked to carry out a fly treatment at a water treatment plant.
Not just any water treatment plant but 12 beds of fermenting sewage, each ½ kilometre long.
‘I don't think our one gallon sprayers are the answer’ was the polite way to describe the response!
Chris Barnes branch manager at Chelmsford realised that there was only one thing to do, send for surveyor Bruce Jones-Walker.
Bruce joined Rentokil two years ago after leaving his native Australia.
Who else to solve our fly problem?
After numerous site visits and discussions with agricultural machinery specialists, a machine was designed and built capable of dispensing Actellic M20 evenly across each sludge bed at a rate of 2,000 litres per hour.
The client was so impressed with Bruce's presentation that they bought the sprayer at a cost of £22,500 from the agricultural machinery specialist and agreed a contract with Rentokil to supply the labour to use the sprayer to carry out fortnightly treatments over the summer months for £12,000 a year.
In addition, a consultation fee of £4,000 was agreed between the agricultural machinery supplier for introducing the client and closing the sale.
The biggest challenge was convincing Bruce that there are other ways than corks on strings, but once over that there was no stopping him!
An excellent example of ‘THINK BIG’.
DEBTS PAY FOR CLIFF
Last year during the second quarter's administration incentive for Pest Control, the team at Sheffield were discussing going to see Cliff Richard.
Henri Amiss, the branch manager [in one of his moments of madness], promised them that if they won the debtor day part of the competition he would pay for their tickets.
The result speaks for itself.
Here you see the Sheffield ladies, Pauline [branch secretary], Diane [sales controller], Joan [service controller]and Sue [receptionist]still talking about the fantastic time they had.
Henri had to agree that the ladies were worth every penny of their prize.
SIGN HERE OR ELSE
Jayni Bradbury from Healthcare Birmingham despite being injured and on crutches is still managing to sign contracts.
Maybe it's the threat of her crutches that is helping the decision makers sign.
EHOs in Scotland
Despite a European football cup match clashing with it, the northern area for Hygiene managed to get 35 Environmental Health Officers to attend their seminar.
The meeting was held at the Strathallan Hotel in Scotland and an overview of the Hygiene division and it services were discussed.
The EHOs were particularly interested in the new Water Saving device and the electrostatic air filters, the latter of which was very relevant in view of the current office passive smoking controversy.
Jill McFarlane, Alison Hewitt and Billy Allen all spoke at the meeting, and as Billy said ‘Thankfully our result was better than England's European football’.
PRAISE INDEED
This is what some of our customers have been saying about environmental Service staff recently:
‘I write to express my own and other residents thanks for the fine work carried out by Mr Martin James [Pest Control London North].
Martin carefully and skilfully sprayed both occupied and empty flats.
Blame for shoddy work is frequent.
I believe credit for excellent work should also be given.
I'm sure Martin must be a valued member of your firm.’
From a home owner in a residential complex.
‘It is a delight to see Andy Baker and Les Brigham [Pest Control Hull]every time they visit our premises.
Their quality of work is excellent and they offer good, sound advice.
They are always cheerful and it is a pleasure to work with them.’
From a technical manager of a good company
‘I wish to place on record the excellent service received from your operatives during the installation of equipment at MAFF buildings.
The people involved are:[all from Healthcare London West]Dick Francis, Gary Stuart, Dave Burridge and Tracy James.
If the remainder of Rentokil staff are as helpful, pleasant and co-operative then the contract should run very smoothly indeed.’
From a location service manager of a large construction company.
‘I feel I should write and thank you for the smooth transition and vast improvement to the standard of cleaning at our premises.
I have been very impressed with the efficiency and friendliness of all the Rentokil staff I have encountered.
However, there are two people I would particularly like to thank; Fiona Stead for her professionalism, understanding and support, from our initial meeting to the handover period, and Laura Goodwin [both from Office Cleaning Thornton Heath], who with her team has successfully brought these premises up to standard, their efforts have not gone unnoticed!’
From a facilities manager at a large electronics company.
‘I have been requested by the Governors of the school to express our thanks to Rosemary Parkes and David Burns [from Hygiene Preston]for the competent, efficient and courteous manner in which they have conducted business.
In this day and age it is very satisfying to know that there are firms who shine to give service.
Your two employees and the service technicians certainly have proved to be excellent ambassadors for your company.’
From a teacher governor in a Liverpool School.
We have a monthly cooling tower water treatment with your company, the service consultant is John Norris.
I am writing to express our complete satisfaction with everything that he does.
John always explains what he has done and has a very pleasant personality.
In my opinion the qualities mentioned are sadly lacking today and it is very refreshing to meet somebody like John who is so conscientious.
From an office manager in an accounting firm.
I appreciate the excellent service you and your staff give to this [Kingston M & S]and the Tolworth store.
From a general manager at M & S regarding the Retail Cleaning.
I would like to take this opportunity to inform you of the high standard achieved by your service engineer, Dick Churcher [Healthcare Atherstone]for his attitude and appearance whilst working at our depots.
From a safety officer at a storage and haulage firm.
We have recently undergone a hygiene scrutiny by a member of our Health and Safety Department at head office.
As part of this exercise random checking of pest baits and the completion of records are checked.
I was happy to be informed that the standard of our store in respect of the service your representative carried out, was high compared to other units.
I have consequently thanked Michael Jackson [technician at Pest Control Baldock]for the work he carried out for me.
From an operations district manager from a large retail chain.
I would like to write to you to say what excellent service we are receiving with our sanitary unit collection.
Your Maria Cork [Healthcare, Beckton]is so helpful, charming and comes to the bank promptly and early.
It is such a pleasant change to have such a loyal employee.
From a manager in a foreign bank.
I have decided that Rentokil should be given the contract on the basis outlined in your very comprehensive proposal document.
Thank you for the prompt and efficient service given so far and I hope this is an indication of the quality of supervision that we can expect.
Taken from a letter to Office Cleaning branch manager in Leeds, Chris McKay, from a bank manager .
Pedal for the Planet
Area manager for Pest Control south east James Burford, recently pedalled for the planet in the London to Cambridge bike ride.
James completed over sixty miles to raise funds for the Worldwide Fund for Nature.
[Would all who've sponsored him please forward the monies on to him at Baldock, and if you didn't, you still can!]
Disney Magic
The Baldock Administration team jetted into Paris at the end of October.
They were on their way to celebrate winning the 1992 Pest Control ‘It's Magic’ Administration incentive at EuroDisney.
The victorious team comprising Sarah Curtis, Sarah Barratt and Samantha Woods spent their first afternoon exploring Paris's well known landmarks on board a luxury coach.
They even managed to cram in a visit to Notre Dame and the delightful pet shops along Quai de la Megisserie.
Next day it was up early for the short trip to EuroDisney.
The team sampled just about all of the fantastic rides on offer.
They were not even deterred by some afternoon rain but carried on enjoying themselves kitted out in colourful Mickey Mouse ponchos.
The highlight of the afternoon was the parade of Disney characters, after which there was just enough time to buy some souvenirs and have one last ride, before rejoining the coach back to Paris.
Geoff Whalley, managing director and Bob Wood, general manager were on hand as unofficial tour guides and to help the ladies sample the renowned French cuisine.
Although this did not always turn out to be quite what was expected, it was at least memorable.
There was still time on the last day for window shopping along Boulevard Haussmann and for buying last minute presents, not to mention filling various orders from home at the airport duty free shop.
It was a packed three days but the team returned still in high spirits and gave the pilot a round of applause for a nice gentle landing at Gatwick.
[The fourth member of Baldock's winning team, Natalie Deegan was unfortunately unwell and not able to join the others for the trip.
However she was part of the team effort for which she is also congratulated].
Now in Pantomime
Ralph McFarlane from Pest control Leeds North has been with the company for over 21 years.
His present job is that of service supervisor.
However when he's not sorting out pest problems in Leeds he is treading the floorboards in many amateur theatrical productions.
Ralph has been an actor, stage director, set designer and in control of all the sound and lighting effects.
On the acting side Ralph has appeared in Calamity Jane, Me and My Girl, Camelot, Fiddler on the Roof, Gigi and many others.
For most of these productions Ralph has designed the sets and painted backcloths.
He is also a founder member and stage manager of the Calder Valley Junior theatre Society.
This Society has appeared twice on Radio Leeds and their next aim is to get on local television.
Ralph is currently in rehearsals for another production of Fiddler, and is preparing sound effects for a play of ‘Wuthering Heights’.
Paintballing
Steve Perry, sales manager at Birmingham South has recently launched an incentive at which all the service staff can aim.
The service team that generates the most leads for job work in the branch will win a day out in the Worcester countryside paintballing [apparently the losers go twice!].
Also participants have the opportunity to win an evening out in a local restaurant with their partner.
The administration team [the office lovelies, Liz, Val and Sue]also have the chance of being splattered with paint.
Queen's Garden Party
Margaret Croall from Healthcare in Glasgow attended the Queen's Garden Party in the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh.
Margaret was commended for her work in the community and her invitation was in recognition of this.
Margaret and her husband thoroughly enjoyed the day and would recommend it to anyone!
Wedding Bells on the Beach
Brenda Bennett, branch manager Healthcare Beckton, decided the time and place was right to change her name to Bol by marrying Pete.
This however was no ordinary wedding as it took place on the Healthcare annual incentive to Mexico.
The wedding started with a simple service in City Hall with just a few witnesses, but once the hotel heard that Brenda and Pete wished to get married on the beach, they were swept off their feet.
They were escorted around town to all the shops in a courtesy car, the clothes were bought, the flowers ordered, and the champagne was put on ice.
Most of the Healthcare group asked if they could attend, and as Brenda says ‘We ended up with the most romantic wedding you could wish for.
We were on a cliff called the Rock of Love, twenty feet above the beach with a group of guitarists playing.’
They even had a bridesmaid, Janice MacMillan's daughter, who helped to make it a real white wedding.
Since this article was written, Brenda has been promoted to area manager, Healthcare.
Aiming for Crufts
For nearly 30 years Mike Hooper from Water & Ventilation, Salisbury was a rally navigator, but 5 years ago he stopped when a large tree jumped out in front of the car.
To fill the space at weekends Mike and his wife Anne bought a dog, a white standard poodle.
Two years later they bought another one, this time a brown standard poodle so they were company for each other.
September 1991 saw their first entry into a small local dog show and they parked next to a couple with two Dobermans who knew what dog showing was all about.
Being ‘dog people’ they were interested in the poodles' performance and commented on what lovely dogs, ‘Pity you don't know how to show them to their best advantage.’
The following week saw Mike and Anne at their first dog training lesson.
In March of this year they entered their first dog show at Ardingly and Tammy [the brown one]did quite well, and Mike and Anne were hooked.
Since March the dogs have competed in a mixture of open and championship shows as far afield as Leeds, Doncaster and Stafford and the occasional show close to home.
Mike and Anne are having a ball and the dogs are obviously enjoying themselves, especially Angie [the older white poodle]who is a natural show off but Tammy still keeps beating her.
At championship shows there may well be over 10,000 entries over 4 days with up to 25,000 at Crufts.
Their current goal is to win an entry into Crufts, but maybe this will take a couple of years.
Their second objective is to qualify their own champion which they aim to do with the black pup they plan for late 1993.
The Hooper clan plan to be a 3 poodle family by 1994 and when they are successful, they will let us know.
Life Insurance
Well done to Sandra Clark from Healthcare, Tonbridge, who has signed up Rentokil's insurers, Willis Corroon for a range of Healthcare services.
Also congratulations on the engagement of Sandra to Pest Control's Maidstone branch manager, Mel Brown.
Spit & Polish Brigade
Office Cleaning in Edinburgh were recently called upon to mobilise their best regiment to impress the Ministry of Defence.
The Dreghorn barracks in Edinburgh has just undergone a major refurbishment programme as well as having a new wing built.
So every day for two months a group of cleaners managed by contracts manager Pat Kemp, went in to clean completely as and when the premises became available.
Initially Rentokil were awarded half the site with the rest going to another company.
However, Rentokil were called back in to go and re-clean the work undertaken by their competitors!
The MoD were very pleased on the handover with the quality of work achieved.
Apparently some Rentokil staff are considering enlisting as the barracks are now so luxurious.
Incineration Hots Up
Our first incinerator which gives us control of our own medical waste disposal has been commissioned and is now operated by a separate Rentokil company Medical Services Incineration Ltd.
It is installed at Mount Vernon, Northwood, Middlesex, a 400-bed hospital within the Hillingdon Health Authority.
The incinerator used is a Basic Energy Model 1850 with a capacity of 10 million BTU/hr.
It burns on average 12–16 tonnes of waste per day and generates a maximum of 5600lbs of steam per hour at 200 psi, which is pressure reduced and recycled back into the hospital's own system.
The variable steam demand of the hospital is met by carefully regulating the load-using condensers.
A trim SAS dry baghouse filter permits cleaning of the exit gases to conform to the latest and most stringent pollution control legislation and EC environmental protection directives.
Unlike some wet systems which cause acid-gas corrosion and disposal difficulties, this installation utilises dry slaked lime and premium Gore-Tex on fibreglass bags.
Thus there are no effluent problems for the operator, the local EHO or Estates Manager, and maintenance costs are reduced.
The Mount Vernon project is indicative of new levels of cooperation between Regional Health Authorities and the private sector.
The result is a simple, self-contained operation that protects the environment efficiently, and brings benefits to all parties involved not least those in the community who have been at risk from inadequate or illegal disposal of used hypodermic needles and other hazardous waste.
IT'S MAGIC
The summer, part of Pest Control's administration scheme involved a review of debt collection.
All the Pest Control administration teams produced projects on how to illustrate the debt collection procedure, judged on accuracy, clarity workmanship, presentation and adaptability.
The highest scoring branch was Chelmsford.
As Sandra Hannington said their idea was deceptively simple, but cunningly designed with a revolving window revealing the various debt collection stages in order.
The scores from the returns were added together and Chelmsford still remained on top, led by Katie and her colleagues Annie Marie, Kate and Karon.
[Karon incidentally recently decided to leave the office and train as a service technician].
The other area winners were London East, Oxford, Glasgow North, Sheffield and Merseyside.
All winners will be receiving Givenchy silk scarves.
JULIE QUEEN OF THE JOBS
Julie Smith, district manager with Retail cleaning, based at the Southall branch, is known as the ‘job queen’.
Any whiff of a job and Julie is out there fighting for it.
A common weekend would include job work in a range of Marks and Spencer stores stretching from Reading to Kingston to Brent Cross.
Executive controller for M & S Morrison Cherrie said ‘Julie jumps at the drop of a hat as far as a job is concerned.
It's great to have her on our team.’
£2 Million Offer
Stephanie Turner from Office Cleaning in Reading recently broke all records when a Tunisian offered £2 million worth of camels for her.
Despite the tempting offer, Stephanie decided that working in Northampton House for Rentokil, which she's been doing since August 1991, was definitely preferable to Tunisia.
Down Under
From our correspondent ‘down under’ we have just received this photograph of Australian senior management.
Have they just received their ‘93 budgets or have they seen ‘92s?
We are assured by Dave McCoy, general manager Calmic, and Graham Knight area manager Pest Control that life isn't always this hectic in the colonies.
Argyll Services join Retail Cleaning
Retail Cleaning recently welcomed the staff of Argyll Services to their division, having acquired their port-folio and assets.
The two directors of the company David Phillpot and Barry Fitzgerald remain with the business as executive controllers, and they both report to general manager Peter Lloyd.
Argyll Services is based in The City of London and has a wide customer base ranging from recruitment consultancies to shopping centres and cinemas.
Famous name clients include British Rail and The Oval cricket ground.
Commenting on the acquisition which forms part of the Retail Cleaning division, Peter Lloyd said ‘It's good to see our portfolio growing so significantly both organically and through acquisition.
the eight hundred or so staff have all been retained and I'm sure it will help us to continue our penetration into the leisure and retail sectors.’
Telecanvassing
In October, Water & Ventilation in Salisbury ventured into the unknown world of telecanvassing.
Interviewing prospective candidates was quite an eye opener for people who haven't a clue on what that job entails.
We advertised for people who had previous experience so they could set the system up from scratch.
Happily, we found somebody with all the qualities and experience we needed and welcomed Paul Smith on board.
[On board seems quite appropriate as he was once a steward on the QE11!].
On Paul's first day he arranged four appointments for our consultants with prospective clients, and has since gone from strength to strength.
Telecanvassing is now up and running very efficiently in Salisbury and will continue to flourish and we will soon reap the rewards.
Leeds South Marauders Ride the Flume
Carl Hunter, surveyor for Pest Control Leeds South, loves to scare his admin team.
So he promised them if they could shift over 30 electronic flykillers on the phone he would take them to Alton Towers for the day.
No problem — they replied.
So the girls set about phoning potential and existing clients and wrapping up the business.
The hard work payed off with a total of 36 units being sold.
So for all their efforts they got their just reward.
Here we see Joanne, Christine and Dorothy on the dreaded Log Flume.
Well done Leeds South.
It's all about High Standards
The Healthcare branch at Atherstone recently signed a contract with the British Standards Institute in Milton Keynes.
This confirms that Rentokil Healthcare come up to the high standard expected and specified by BSI.
Atherstone branch have also just renewed their contract with The Institute of Waste Management in Northampton, which again confirms our ability to provide the highest standard of service.
Sign or I'll Sing
Alison Scrivens, Healthcare consultant from Birmingham was recently offered a singing contract.
Managing director Nigel says no, because she's too good at signing contracts.
Jill Sweeps In
Jill Hayward from Healthcare who recently sold a large order for Guide Dogs for the Blind has moved across to join the Office Cleaning division.
Jill is the sales consultant based at the Reading branch and is ‘already bringing in sizable contracts,’ says branch manager Annie Rogers.
Welcome You All!
Welcome to new readers who have joined us with the recent acquisitions of Argyll Services a London-based office and retail cleaning company, Wessex Hygiene Services who specialise in kitchen ventilation and convector cleaning in Bristol, Wiltshire and Somerset, and Rowland Compliance testing who take us into a new realm of contract servicing in circuit testing and maintenance of electrical appliances.
STOP PRESS
Rentokil welcomes Plantation to Environmental Services UK
More news next issue
International Relations I
The hand of Anglo-Ukrainian friendship was recently firmly grasped by Pest Control Bournemouth.
The 13,000 tonne Azekrbayzhan ship sailed sedately into Southampton water.
Unfortunately it bought with it a heavy infestation of ‘Bundesbank’ cockroaches, sponsored by the cockroach travel company.
Rising to the challenge, with a mere three men left behind to guard Hampshire, Dorset and South Wiltshire, the service team swarmed aboard.
The Rentokil convoy of vehicles was a sight to behold.
Once on board Plan A was rapidly abandoned, carefully prepared by supervisor Dick Hewett and fumigator Denis Dowle.
It was sabotaged by an unforeseen fire drill.
Plan B sprang to life as technicians, supervisors and even branch manager, Neil Gibson got stuck in.
The Russians and Ukrainians couldn't have been more friendly or helpful, but after having treated the galleys, on a democratic vote, the entire branch defected to the Deep Pan Pizza restaurant for dinner.
Suitably fed and watered, battle was commenced again.
After 136 man hours the final score was Cockroaches O-Bournemouth 15,000.
New W & V Mobile
The new Water & Ventilation supervisors' company vehicle being tried out by supervisor Andy MacDonald.
Andy was supervising a chlorination at a large tape manufacturers in  Middlesbrough when the opportunity came for him to test drive the vehicle.
Into the Laser Drome
The fog swirled, and hushed commands were passed, as the Glasgow Central Pest Control service team entered the Laser Drome in Glasgow for a fairly normal day's work.
Laser guns were charged, power packs were fitted [the right way round].
Psions logged in, and battle commenced.
The occasion was the launch of the Glasgow Central profit plan by branch manager, George Houston at the service meeting held at the former home of the Maxwell family [not Robert's relations]at Pollock House.
The success of the laser battle can be judged by the fact that the branch manager ultimately scored an incredible -25, perhaps indicating that the service team can co-operate well in achieving a joint goal.
‘The co-operation of all the technicians and supervisors in achieving the objectives of the profit plan will be just as possible!’ says George.
Children in Need
Simon Grant, branch manager at Retail Cleaning in Bristol was recently asked to help out the annual Children in Need appeal by one of his customers, the manager at the East Gate Centre in Gloucester.
‘The most effective and useful way to help the appeal would be to provide cleaners free of charge’, said Simon.
Which is just what he did on the actual day.
This has since had a spin-off effect as the BBC will be filming the centre and will give credit to Rentokil Retail Cleaning at Bristol.
Hat-Trick for Tropical Plants Scotland
The Aberdeen Tropical Plants branch recently swept the board at their local Britain in Bloom competition.
The branch, run by Charlie Black, managed to secure the first four places, winning with the BP landscaping scheme at Dyce.
Another oil company Conoco won them second place, AOC International third and Marathon Oils fourth.
The photo shows Adam Shand and Tony Ross tending the BP logo in the prize winning grounds outside their head offices.
Aberdeen Tropical Plants also came third in the category for premises with open fronting for their Grampian Television Installation.
Showing that their displays are appropriate for all types of buildings they picked up the third prize for their display at the Marriott Hotel also in Dyce.
An Inside Job
A local authority was called out to a feral cat problem at the local prison.
A cat trap was laid, with fresh bait.
After they had returned to the office there was a phone call to say that the trap had been sprung, the bait removed and a note left in the empty trap: ‘Thanks for the tasty morsels — Top Cat!’
On Site Training
Over the course of the year Steve Thurgood, sales manager for the water treatment section of Water & Ventilation, has been conducting on-site training in water treatment services to clients and prospects.
These courses are designed to give operatives a basic insight into water treatment, knowledge of the Codes of Practice and guidelines issued by the Health and Safety Executive and of course, they all offer good opportunities to promote the company.
Some very prestigious names have already received instruction from Water & Ventilation.
British Gas personnel recently attended a two day course in London.
Steve Thurgood and Roy Stansbury [from Water & Ventilation, Nottingham]ran on-site training for Porsche Cars G.B. Limited.
Other well known names who have come to us for instruction are British Telecom, Hewlett Packard, Lucas Aerospace and John Lewis at Milton Keynes.
This is definitely a growth area and with more of Water & Ventilation staff running and selling training the list will undoubtedly grow, it also acts as a great training exercise for the presenter.
Watch this space for future developments.
International Relations II
Not content with treating ships in Southampton, Pest Control Bournemouth now offer a ‘come to you service’.
Technicians Denis Dowle and Ted Critchett recently flew out to Gibraltar to have a working cruise back to Britain.
Our client, who prefers to remain anonymous, is considering incorporating cruises into his contract.
Service controller Joanne Edwards is also keen to see life on board, as are the other sixteen volunteer technicians.
Our thanks to Rentokil Gibraltar for their co-operation in supplying preparations.
Viva Espana!
Judith Milner, a Healthcare consultant from Leeds pulls out all the stops when it comes to selling the range of services.
Whilst out selling with sales manager Anne King [and sold £1,500 in two days], they had an appointment with a certain Mr Gomez who couldn't speak more than a couple of words of English.
So as naturally as anything, Judith switched to Spanish and greatly impressed the customer as well as pressing upon him the need to provide proper facilities for his ladies.
Coast to Coast
Ken Gilbert, area manager Water & Ventilation was challenged by a friend to walk from the Irish Sea to the North Sea last winter.
Having only done a few short walks before in true Water & Ventilation style he decided to ‘test the water’ first by walking the Ridgeway in Wiltshire, 85 miles and five days later he completed it.
The Wainwright walk was made famous by the author of the same name who pioneered the first coast to coast walk in 1972.
So Ken set off this summer to walk from St. Bees Head in Cumbria and finished at Robin Hood Bay.
The route was tremendous and very spectacular, crossing the Lake District, the Pennines, the Cleveland Hills, and the North Yorkshire Moors, in fact it links three national parks.
Ken was delighted to have completed the walk, despite inclement weather conditions he said he saw some of the best scenery in the British Isles.
The photo shows Ken at the finish at Robin Hood Bay.
[He just can't get away from air and water!]
The Sheriffs of Nottingham
The Nottingham Pest Control branch have had a spate of vehicle thefts over recent months.
Astra estates have been disappearing from the car park outside the office in broad daylight.
On the most recent occasion, supervisor Melvyn Relly had his vehicle stolen within minutes of arriving at the office, and with faint hope of success, Nick Graham, surveyor, drove Melvyn out to where the last car was recovered along streets neighbouring the Nottingham office.
To their surprise, a rather familiar looking vehicle passed them on the road.
With a quick hand-brake turn they followed in hot pursuit, anticipating some ‘lethal weapon’ style action.
The culprit parked, unaware of their surveillance, and proceeded to offload a number of items from the rear of the estate, including a clearly labelled Rentokil bag.
Nick, the ever-ready surveyor, whipped out his loaded camera and reeled off a few shots of the thief.
The flash alerted the criminal, and with a few choice words exchanged, the car chase resumed.
As our men did not wish to write-off two company cars, the youth escaped.
Needless to say, the police were already familiar with the thief and absolutely delighted upon the production of such unambiguous evidence.
The crook was arrested recently, confessed, and awaits trial.
Fortunately the car was discovered without significant damage.
Nick Graham and Melvyn Relly are now applying for the Sheriff of Nottingham's job!
Invasion of the Bubbles
Pest Control Brighton have recently undertaken a multiple bubble job for the new Conquest Hospital in Hastings.
The old hospital in the area had severe cockroach infestations and some of the medical records and files had been damaged, so before they were moved to the new Conquest Hospital they were all fumigated.
It was quite an eerie sight when all the bubbles were erected in an engineers yard.
However, the job was successfully completed and the new medical records department is bug free.
LEEDS TO FELCOURT
At the end of October, Leeds Healthcare branch manager Paul Backx decided to hold a branch meeting with a difference.
All the sales, service and administration staff came down by coach to Felcourt, and the service meeting was held on the journey one way and sales the other.
Their visit to Felcourt included a talk on the company at Yew Lodge, a tour of the main house and a trip around the laboratories.
It certainly was a meeting with a difference and despite having to negotiate the national car park [M25], all enjoyed it.
Forensic Science Signs up
What started off as a local sale ended up to prove very beneficial for all the Medical Services branches.
Caroline Rigby, a consultant from Manchester, spent a long time introducing the features and benefits of the various services to the Home Office forensic science laboratories in Wetherby.
Due to her professional presentation and the geographic spread of the Medical branches the Home Office awarded a contract for all the forensic science laboratories in the U.K.
So the laboratories from Aldermaston to Chepstow to Wetherby and many others now have the Rentokil service for all sharps, clinical and theatre waste.
Factory Hygiene Services
Bryan Bishop has been appointed development manager factory hygiene services.
Bryan, prior to joining Rentokil, worked in design engineering and sales which obviously will be advantageous when dealing with factory managers.
This role will involve further service development of the factory deep cleaning service with the aim of promoting and selling it on a nationwide basis.
Bryan will also ensure that the current daily cleaning activity for factories, operated by the Office Cleaning division works together with Hygiene's services.
Another area of development is that of air cleaners for factories.
This is a new market for hygiene and one that has significant potential for the future with increasing demands being made in safety and hygiene.
Food Premises Cleaning Service
A new and exciting development in environmental Services is the establishment of a Food Premises Cleaning Service.
The new Food Safety Act has concentrated attention upon all aspects of cleanliness and hygiene in establishments where food is manufactured and processed, and employers now have to demonstrate positively what action they have taken.
Thorough cleaning and disinfection of all surfaces to a very high standard is essential, and Rentokil is now able to offer a specialist service to meet this need.
Currently it is usual to find that a contract cleaning company may be used to look after the offices and toilets, but production areas are generally ‘out of bounds’, because they are considered too sensitive.
These are looked after by teams of directly employed cleaners, under the control of a hygiene officer.
The new Rentokil Food Premises Cleaning Service is targeted at relieving customers of those concerns by offering a very carefully scheduled and monitored cleaning programme, under the control of a site manager.
Cleaning staff would be employed for that site only, and usually on a full time basis, working to extremely rigorous standards.
A very detailed specification is drawn up, and a tight system of checking and auditing ensures that it is closely adhered to.
The site manager acts as the focal point of the operation, and gives the customer a single point of contact not only for all aspects of the cleaning programme, but also for other Rentokil services.
The service has been developed by Peter Heys, formerly of Pest Control, whose considerable experience of the food industry will be combined with the tight operational skills of the Office cleaning division.
Peter has spent several months fine tuning the features of the service, and is now marketing it directly.
Divisional general manager David Howroyd commented: ‘We are tremendously excited about this venture, which we have been considering for some time.
We already have some experience of this type of work, and the opportunity is vast.
It's a service which only Rentokil could offer and supply, with our broad range of experience and skills across a number of hygiene and cleaning activities.’
Peter Heys is based at the Manchester office, and would be delighted to hear of any of your existing clients who would benefit from this kind of service.
The service can be offered nationwide and leads will attract introductory commission in the normal way.
Guild of Master Technicians
This year's Guild of Master Technicians members were invited by the Grand Master [a.k.a.
Graham Crowe]to celebrate their achievements in style.
The group stayed at the Stafford Moat House Hotel and spent the afternoon at an outdoor saloon stock car racing circuit [Graham promised that heated cover would be provided!]
The stock car racing proved to be a huge success with the top nine fighting it out in the final.
The drivers roared round tight corners and skilfully navigated a twisty, bendy and muddy course.
Robert Beard from Manchester South Pest Control, achieved an incredible time and beat everyone else in 31.36 seconds, Jonathon Hume from Birmingham South won the whole event.
The evening event was thoroughly enjoyable with several awards being made, whilst Graham Crowe delivered one of his ‘unaccustomed as I am to making short speeches’.
Ken Brown from Glasgow North and Tony Killeen from Manchester North were both made up to Fellows of the Guild having won the award for three consecutive years.
The top award went to Brian Miller from Merseyside who was not only top in his branch for generating leads, but top in his area and in the whole country.
Brian produced nearly £50k worth of business through leads.
Unfortunately Brian couldn't attend the celebrations so the number two in the UK, Peter Youngman from Chester took the engraved tankard on his behalf.
As Graham Crowe said ‘If all the 710 technicians sold as well as Brian Miller, then £34.5 million extra business would have been generated for Pest Control’.
This year's results will hopefully smash all previous records and break through the £50k barrier.
So congratulations to all present on superb selling achievements.
How many will be back to become fellows of the Guild next year?.
The first photo shows the whole group of Master Technicians with the Grand Master and managing director Geoff Whalley.
The second photo shows all the stock car winners
On the Waves of Success
Congratulations to Barry White, area sales manager in the North East, for coming first in the Cayton Bay Surfing Challenge.
Barry won the wave ski section despite thick fog.
Because he was too modest to send a photo of himself we hope this will  surf  ice !
Transported into Retirement
Hazel Thorpe passed her last milestone with the Company when she retired at the end of July.
Hazel joined the Company in March 1970 and after a few months took over the role of transport manager, in which capacity she has been responsible for keeping the Company on the move ever since.
During her service, Hazel dealt with all managers throughout the Group, and was well known and admired for her cheerful efficiency and careful interpretation of the company vehicle policy.
Soon after her arrival, the Company began replacing its Hillman Imps and Austin 1100s with the new Vauxhall Viva and managers then driving A60s, Avengers and Austin 1300s were able to change to the Hillman Hunter and the Austin Countryman.
All cars were of course, white.
Under her watchful eye the size of the Rentokil fleet grew substantially to almost 3000 vehicles.
In her last year with the Company, aided by just one assistant, she raised orders for some £12,000,000 worth of new vehicles.
Many of Hazel's friends gathered at Yew Lodge to wish her a long and happy retirement, and regional managing director Graham Foote presented her with a microwave oven, a transistor radio, and numerous other gifts on behalf of her many friends and colleagues.
Dick's 25th Anniversary
Supervisor Dick Hewett from Pest Control Bournemouth celebrated 25 years service with the company at the end of September.
Just two weeks before starting work at Rentokil Dick married his wife Pat, so really he had 50 years to celebrate!
50 Years of Service
On Thursday 23rd July 1992 Gwilym Pritchard and Harold Postles, service technicians based at Pest Control Manchester South celebrated their 25 years with the company.
Along with members of their families and work colleagues Gwilym and Harold attended a dinner held in their honour at the Belfry Hotel, Stockport.
During the evening they were presented with their gold watches and a cheque each from the company by the then general manager, Martin Cooke.
Following this presentation, branch manager Alan Marsden presented both technicians with a pair of binoculars each purchased from contributions made by branch colleagues.
Several ‘ratty’ stories and ‘cocky’yarns were exchanged.
Supervisors Malcolm Wray and Steven Cere presented their wives with bouquets.
50 Years with Rentokil
Pest Control Leeds North recently held a joint celebration for Malcolm Morrell and Sandra Holbert who had both completed twenty five years with the Company.
Malcolm is a surveyor and a very successful one.
He is currently top of the jobs league in the north east.
Whenever a potential client is saying no to signing an order he just taps his hearing aid and feigns ignorance.
Sandra was presented with a gold wrist watch and Malcolm with a pocket watch by general manager Ken Burkinshaw.
Between them they invited twenty seven guests.
Jack, Sandra's husband and Mary, Malcolm's wife both received flowers from the area, and they were presented by Pat Sheldrake the area secretary.
25 Years On
Keith Davies from Pest Control Brighton completed 25 years with the Company on the 18th September.
A celebration was held at Yew Lodge in October where he was presented with his watch by the south east area manager James Burford.
Keith is known to his colleagues as a quiet man, however he has hidden talents in that he writes poems and has penned many about his time with Rentokil.
He also has a collection of Rentokil news letters going back to his early days which made for fascinating reading after dinner.
APPOINTMENTS
Hygiene
Nigel Armstrong has been promoted from Bakery Service quality control manager to branch manager at Bristol.
Nigel reports to area manager Tony Waite.
Roy Holloway is promoted from supervisor to service manager at Hygiene Bristol.
Colin Scragg moves back to the London West branch [formerly known as Hayes]as service manager.
Chris Miller is the operations supervisor for Fast Drains.
He is based at West Hoathly and reports to branch manager Steve Ward.
Wessex Hygiene , the new acquisition is now part of the Bristol Hygiene branch.
Andy Hunt is the operations manager and reports to branch manager Nigel Armstrong.
Worldwide Moves
Steve McAree , area manager UK Healthcare will become general manager Healthcare Australia reporting directly to Bill Crosby , managing director Australia.
Paul Stearn , area manager Pest Control London will become general manager Hong Kong and area director Asia North responsible for our businesses in Hong Kong, Philippines, Taiwan and Korea.
John Gordon , branch manager Pest Control Edinburgh will become divisional manager Pest Control New Zealand reporting directly to Michael Salter , managing director New Zealand.
Eric Hamilton , branch manager Medical Services London will become area manager Calmic Australia reporting directly to David McCoy , general manager Calmic Australia.
Water & Ventilation
Keith Morgan has been promoted to sales manager north for the water treatment section of the division.
Keith currently has a team of two with plans for further expansion in the new year.
Keith's team covers the entire northern part of the UK from the north of Birmingham up to Hadrian's Wall and ‘beyond to the wild country!’
Pest Control
Andrew Lawrence , previously sales manager at Pest Control London South has been appointed national accounts executive.
Andrew is based at Garland Road and reports to UK sales manager national accounts Ray Reeves.
Office & Retail Cleaning
George Matthews joins Edinburgh as branch manager.
George has spent several years working for one of Office Cleaning's main suppliers prior to joining Rentokil.
George reports to area manager Tom Easson.
Office Cleaning welcomed back Lawrence Wearmouth to the division.
Lawrence is now branch manager of Newcastle, prior to which he was a successful sales manager with the Healthcare division.
Maureen Hornsby has joined the Bristol branch as district manager.
Maureen covers an area which stretches from Swansea to Wootton Bassett and across to Birmingham.
Maureen comes from a cleaning background and has a wide contract range from BhS stores to large shopping centres.
Obituary
Peter Skinner , regional general manager, Asia and East Africa, died peacefully on Wednesday October 14th after a long illness which both he and his family had fought against with great courage.
Peter, who was 44, had joined Rentokil in 1966 and during 26 years with the company had worked in the laboratory, been appointed the youngest ever pest control surveyor in London and been seconded to the Bahamas where he and Lynn spent seven years.
On their return to the UK, Peter became branch manager Pest Control in central London and in 1985 was promoted to area manager London where he achieved considerable success in developing all aspects of the business.
In 1988 he was appointed regional co-ordinator for Asia, Caribbean and East Africa when once again his knowledge of the business, determination to succeed and his ability to persuade people at all levels to do what was necessary, produced excellent results.
Peter was not only a very able manager but a real friend and trusted colleague who will be most sadly missed by all who knew him and who all join together in sending Lynn, Neil and Joanne their deepest sympathy and support for the future.