

what the regional Md says
quality CHRISTMAS
‘Company of The Year’, the premier title won by Rentokil in the CBI's Business Enterprise Award, it is not easily come by.
It does not come up with the rations.
It is earned by you and your colleagues and perhaps to an even greater extent by your colleagues overseas.
Such that we have now achieved public recognition as a shining example of British enterprise.
It is a Christmas present in which we can all take pride.
Something that our Hygiene Division wanted for Christmas was BS5750 accreditation.
They have got it.
This also adds a further significant ‘battle honour’ to the Rentokil colours of Red, White and Quality.
Although this British and international standard does not of itself guarantee quality, it does ensure consistency of performance and a consistent system of delivering that performance.
The quality element is that which you put into the system.
Our level of consistent performance is known to be the highest achievable.
That is what will keep us head and shoulders above any of our competitors even if they do wave a BS5750 certificate around as though it guarantees them a divine right to business success.
This same British Standard is now held by Hygiene, by W & V, by R & D and by Production both at Kirkby and Sturminster Newton and by our Timber Preserving Division.
Pest Control Anglia has passed the assessment and qualified and we are now evaluating the extent to which we apply for all other branches to be considered.
It is an expensive exercise but one that many of our customers and prospective customers expect us to undertake, even though they may not fully understand its limitations.
Many of our clients now embrace the concept of Total Quality Management which simply formalises something else that we have been doing for years.
No piece of paper or set of documents can guarantee quality of service;you provide that every day by your dedication, enthusiasm, skill, knowledge and positive attitude.
Your job satisfaction ensures your customer satisfaction;— and it shows.
Quality service is what sets us aside and under-pins the company's place among the FTSE top 100 British companies, the second best company in Europe in a Financial Times survey, the eleventh most admired company in the UK according to the Economist, and now first place in the Business Enterprise Award of the Confederation of British Industries, as Company of The Year.
We must not however, become complacent.
We are not, nor ever shall be infallible.
There are still too many preventable terminations.
There are also too many vehicle accidents, the costs of which now amount to over £1 million a year.
For your own sake and for your family's sake this Christmas — and always — drive carefully, courteously, safely and sensibly.
Quality people don't ‘cut corners’ at work — don't be tempted to ‘cut corners’on the road.
I thank you again for a successful year in Environmental Services despite the difficult trading circumstances.
Some of you will ask ‘where do we go next?’
We go on being as good, or better so that in our customers' eyes we are always their Company of the Year — every year.
Remember, we're only as good as our last service.
May you and your families enjoy in every way, the true qualities of Christmas.
You have deserved them.
what the MDs say
CHANGE starts with you
The only constant is change, and this is particularly true for those of us in the new emerging divisions.
1991 has seen many changes both external and internal; some placed upon us by legislative bodies and the fluctuating state of the economy, others initiated from within in order to improve the working environment for all employees.
However, the lowest common denominator throughout our business streams is the individual, which is why I have headed my article ‘Change Starts With You’.
Rentokil would not have won the coveted Business Enterprise Award as company of the year had it not been for individuals playing their part, as our Chief Executive Clive Thompson reiterated ‘this award is for the Rentokil people and the contribution this Company has made to improving the environment’.
So let's take a look at the four divisions.
Medical Services are steaming ahead having had a great year.
We are again one step ahead of the legislators and are conforming to the Environment Protection Act's ‘Duty of care’ by installing our own purpose built incinerators throughout the country.
Water and Ventilation has recently undergone a period of consolidation and the branch structure has been altered in order to meet our needs for 1992, this is already bearing fruit as the most recent quarter produced some great sales.
Tropical Plants have a new sales team to take them into 1992, marketing activities have been increased and there is a greater awareness amongst clients of the need for green foliage.
Business Support Services Management is a term that people throughout the company are becoming familiar with.
The service has developed significantly and is at an important stage whereby several major clients are considering adopting the Rentokil approach to facilities management.
A new exhibition stand and literature will help to spread the word in 1992.
1991 was a tough year, but the divisions showed their grit and determination.
So its onwards and upwards into the year of the Single European Market, a year where our hard work, professionalism and dedication will bring the success that these virtues have always produced.
Enjoy your own and your Company's successes, after all change starts with you and individuals determine their career paths and this is nowhere more evident than in our businesses.
I know we have the right team for 1992 so let's reap the harvest that is due to us.
I wish you and your families an enjoyable Christmas and a prosperous New Year.
RENTOKIL NAMED ‘COMPANY OF THE YEAR’
And this is how the Confederation of British Industry released the news to the press…
Rentokil, the international environmental group, was today (Thursday, 28 November) named ‘COMPANY OF THE YEAR ’ and winner of THE BUSINESS ENTERPRISE AWARD.
The award was received by Mr Clive Thompson, the 48-year-old chief executive of the Rentokil Group, at a charity lunch in London, in aid of the Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults — MENCAP.
Under this leadership over the past decade the company has grown from being an essentially UK woodworm and pest control company, to an international enterprise with a broad base of environmental services in every major world economy.
The Company is dedicated to achieving growth of at least 20 per cent a year in profits and earnings and this has seen its capitalisation soar from around £100 million to £1,450 million over the past 10 years.
Rentokil joined the FT/SE 100 Index in July this year.
The Group has expanded its operations in the UK and into three geographical regions — Continental Europe, North America, and Asia-Pacific.
Rentokil today has operating subsidiaries in every single country in Europe.
The success it as achieved, and continues to achieve, highlights the remarkable contribution being made by the company in the protection of the environment.
•EXAMPLE: Its water and ventilation service helps counter the incidence of legionnaires' disease and ‘sick building syndrome’.
•EXAMPLE: Its medical services, born of the increasing concern about AIDS and hepatitis B, are of growing importance to hospitals, doctors and dentists.
•EXAMPLE: Its tropical plants service — the largest in the world — enhances the environment of many hotels, showrooms, offices and shopping malls.
•EXAMPLE: With changing temperatures and concern over global warming there is a new anxiety about the increase in pests.
Rentokil has invented new ‘green’ techniques to meet those problems.
These are just a few of the 12 Rentokil services, all provided by specialist teams of highly-trained and motivated people.
The company has been completely transformed in the last few years so that its environmental service now represents more than 80 per cent of its turnover.
Today Rentokil vans are familiar worldwide from Amsterdam to Adelaide and Miami to Malaysia.
With increased services the company has virtually doubled its employees from 6,500 a decade ago to more than 13,000 today.
Introducing Mr John Redwood MP, Minister of Corporate Affairs, who presented the award, Sir Brian Corby, President of the Confederation of British Industry, said: ‘Rentokil's achievements are remarkable on two counts.
Firstly, in the last decade it has consistently met it aim of improving profits and earnings per share by at least 20 per cent a year.
‘In 1981 profits were £14.2 million, and in 1990 £74.7 million, with earnings per share in the same period rising from 1.85p to 12.22p.
In parallel it has made an increasing contribution to the economy for, besides more employment, it has multiplied its overseas earnings nine-fold, from £3.7 million to £34.6 million.
More than half the company's turnover is now derived from overseas.
‘Secondly, there is no doubt that Rentokil has pioneered, and is pioneering, new services that are contributing towards the environment in which we all live and work.
It has been cited by one analyst as ‘the green stock par excellence’.
‘In that context it has — like all good marketing-oriented companies — anticipated needs in world markets, and devised services to meet them.
Those needs are the needs of all of us.
‘Beyond that the company is introducing, and indeed educating people to the better standards it is creating, not only in the UK, but world-wide.
This award will, I trust, help dispel the old perception of Rentokil as merely a woodworm and pest control company, and to help to give it the recognition it deserves — for what it is today — a major multi-national company with a broad base of services of wide-ranging benefits’.
Concentration on environmental issues in the major economies of the world, and an aggressive management style, are the basis of Rentokil's success.
Direction on those issues comes from group headquarters at Felcourt in West Sussex.
The company was chosen from six finalists for the 1991 Business Enterprise Award.
The others were Glaxo, Guinness, Mercury Communications, Pentos and Wace.
The award is sponsored by Barclays Bank, Henley — the Management College, and The Sunday Telegraph, and is supported by the CBI.
John Redwood MP, Minister of Corporate Affairs (right), hands the award to Chief Executive Clive Thompson
what the MDs say
Pest Control Division did not have a great start to 1991.
We were not alone.
The Pest Control industry suffered as the recession really took hold and at the British Pest Control Association there was a great wailing and a gnashing of teeth.
One of the largest amongst the ‘others’ cut their staff in half and, as most of you will know, West Care went out of business.
There were lots of other stories.
Whilst they  whinged , we did what we do best.
We worked at it in a positive and determined manner.
Recession?
What recession?
Record sales and record results were all achieved whilst maintaining the job security of the people in this Division.
The year may have started a bit show but it finished with a flourish and we have achieved a tremendous recovery along the way.
Did I say we?
I really mean…
You!
It is the managers, sales, service and admin people who achieved this success.
The strength of this Division has always been in the determination and ability of the people working within it.
This last year those resources were put to the test and not found wanting.
That same strength will ensure that 1992 is another successful year for us collectively and individually as we all take maximum benefit from the opportunity offered by an improved economic climate.
I wish to thank each and every one of you for the part you played during 1991.
I hope that you very much enjoy your well earned rest and that Christmas is a happy time for you and your family.
As for 1992 — bring it on — WE'RE READY!
G H Whalley
Managing Director
Pest Control Services
A very Merry Christmas and Happy New Year to you all.
May 1992 be a year of quality for our Division.
Quality means different things to different people depending on either your job or your view of it.
Whatever happens in 1992 we must all work to make our customers appreciate that they receive a first class service.
To do that we must improve the quality of our service, and this means that all of us; especially those of you in our Service Department; must work to provide the Healthcare services our customers contract for, on time and at regular service intervals.
I do expect all of you in our Service teams to drive clean vehicles, to wear the Healthcare uniform, and to discharge your duties in a courteous, friendly manner.
In sales training we quote ‘that people buy people and that the first impression is often the most important’.
All of you in our Service teams create the first impression after the contract has been signed.
You see the customer more often than anybody else in our Division.
You are the frontline in our battle to win and keep customers.
I repeat again in 1992 our major aim as a business is to improve the service we sell so well; that we provide to our customers.
Whilst my message this time has mainly been to our Service team, we all have a part to play in improving the quality of our business.
Make that aim your New Year resolution, in the meantime — Have a Merry Christmas.
Nigel Howse
Managing Director
Healthcare Services 
what the General Managers say
an excellent year FOR HYGIENE
By the time you read this article 1991 will be virtually behind us.
This time last year we were very apprehensive about entering a year when so much doom and gloom was being talked about.
We knew we had a tough target to go for.
Whilst I was convinced that Hygiene Services as they are today were recession resistant we still had to prove it!
We approached 1991 with a very positive attitude and I am delighted to say, that most aspects of our business moved forward extremely well after a lot of hard work and determination to succeed.
1991 in many respects has been one of the toughest years in Hygiene but despite that we will have achieved our budgeted target and increased our profit by 40% over 1990 — a truly excellent performance!
Not only did profit move well.
Another very pleasing result was our performance with the Washroom Hygiene Service.
In the recession of the early 1980s this service suffered immensely through poor sales and ultra high terminations — in those days it was said that washroom would be the hardest hit in any recession because it was not seen as an essential service; much confidence was, then lost in the service.
About 6 years ago we therefore set out to raise the image of Washroom with the hope of protecting our customer base in difficult times and to generally increase sales.
Up until this year it clearly hadn't been fully put to the test although you are all aware of its success over recent years.
So how did it fair?
Well in a word excellent!
Our sales will actually be slightly ahead of last year, which in itself was a record year, and the termination rate will be no higher than last year.
In fact Washroom Hygiene now has the lowest termination rate of all services in the Division!
So all in all an excellent result for Washroom which now looks to be a good stable portfolio increasing at a respectable rate.
Other services that have sold well include Catering Hygiene and Electrostatic Filters.
Once again sales have moved well and terminations actually showing a slight improvement over last year!
Our service staff have also been working hard to ensure the highest standards in difficult times and to help retain our customers.
Health and Safety and COSHH have been very active in the year and I am delighted to see the way all of our service staff have responded to this.
So an excellent story for Hygiene in 1991 and I am totally confident, that with the tremendous display of determination and dedication we have throughout the Division, that 1992 is going to be equally successful.
It will not however be easy — in fact we need to assume it's going to be as difficult as this year,— but we can do it!
In the early part of 1992 you will learn of some exciting developments that will take place to help us through the year and indeed the future.
One you are all aware of is that we will be nationally approved to BS5750 standard.
Preston and London East are already there (CONGRATULATIONS!) and I know you have all been working hard to ensure the National Assessment goes well at the end of November.
This qualification will put us a further jump ahead of competition and will  reinforce our position as market leader in quality Hygiene Services.
So it just leaves me to say well done and thank you most sincerely for 1991 and I wish you all the success and happiness for the New Year!
David J Lynch
General Manager
Hygiene
DUTY OF CARE
As we leave 1991 and go forward into 1992 ‘Duty of Care’ is an expression you will hear more and more.
Parliament have passed new regulations stipulating that every commercial premise every hospital, every surgery will have a duty of care as to where waste material generated by their premises is finally disposed of.
Ted Brown in his article has touched upon the fact that our waste transfer stations and incinerators are fully licensed to deal with clinical waste.
Rentokil Medical Services are approved handlers of clinical waste, and it is to a reputable established company such as Rentokil that waste generators will turn.
Clients are realising the benefits that we can offer and this has been reflected in the substantial growth that we have seen recently in sales performance, backed up of course by a dedicated service structure to ensure that customers stay with us.
So thank you for 1991, and go for it in 1992.
Have a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.
a year OF CHANGE
1991 has been a year of change, adapting ourselves to what our customers want from us, and, of course how we make strong profit from that.
We have come through that transition, tough as it was with that unbeatable combination of enthusiasm, commitment, ability and unwavering desire for success.
And our customers have said so, not with promises, but with orders substantially in excess of those in any previous period one might care to look at.
The Divisional objectives are twofold, one to establish ourselves in a market that only two years ago was completely new to Rentokil, and the other to help our customers and prospects through the current minefield of legislation related to water and air systems.
September saw the introduction of two important legislative documents relating to Legionellossi (Legionnaires disease), one is the update of EH48, now called HS(G)70, and the other is L8.
The first deals with the technical aspects of the problem and the other is the Approved Code of Practice, and this becomes the law in January 1992.
We are fully equipped to deal with our customers and prospects' needs in this area by utilising our ‘WATERSAFE’ system launched in 1990.
This ensured that our customers not only complied with, but had taken positive preventative action to implement procedures and controls in advance of these new regulations, saving them both time and money today.
The team effort involved in achieving that goal has been mammoth, with sales, service, administration and management all now pulling together to ensure that our customers' needs have been met, in spite of the tremendous upheaval involved.
As we move into the Festive Season, our message to you and your partners is ‘Thank You’ you've helped to turn an ordinary business into one filled with opportunity for us all to reap in the New Year.
Enjoy your Christmas heartily, and here's to a truly tremendous 1992.
David McCoy
Mike Hooper
General Managers
Water & Ventilation 
TOP LINE NEXT TIME
Well as we approach the end of 1991, I'm sure I don't need to remind you that it has been a very difficult year.
The recession has hit us full on, and many of our customers have been feeling the pinch, and passing it on to us.
We didn't expect it to last as long as it has, and were hoping for some relief by the end of the year.
All that said, I am pleased to be able to report that our Division will be announcing some excellent results in the New Year.
Our sales of new business have help up remarkably well in the circumstances, and what I call ‘controllable terminations’ have been well contained.
By that I mean that substantially fewer customers have terminated contracts citing reasons of dissatisfaction or failure to deliver.
That is a great credit to the improved quality of our service, and to the commitment of all our staff, and I pay tribute to everyone for that.
As I've said before, when the going gets tough, the ORCS get going.
Most significantly we will showing good profit progression on 1990 and that means we are making our contribution towards the Group meeting its objectives.
Our catchphrase for 1992 is going to be ‘Top Line This Time’, reflecting our determination to push sales of new contracts forward strongly.
Our sales force has received some excellent sales training input this, and next year we are adding three more to the numbers.
With the economy moving out of recession we expect to see fewer clients cutting back and this should help reduce our terminations.
A strong improvement in top line will then enable the profits to flow through smoothly, leading to another successful year.
So, in anticipation of both this year's result and next year's plan, may I take this end of year opportunity to thank each and every one of you for all your contributions in 1991, and to wish you and your families an enjoyable Christmas and a prosperous and happy New Year.
David Howard
General Manager
Office and Retail and Hi-tech
Cleaning Services
simply THE BEST
Twelve months ago in my last Christmas contribution I anticipated a difficult 1991 and that has proved to be the case.
Nevertheless, we can look back on the year with pride and feel confident that our achievements stand us in good stead for 1992.
Our sales team achieved its budgeted contract sales requirement and in Roland Huggett (and possibly one other?) a Chief Prize winner.
With expansion being the sales keynote for 1992 then even better performances lie ahead.
Customer care must always be uppermost in our minds and the improved Divisional standards were exemplified by our ‘Be Proud’ winners; Laura Westgate, Lesley Ketley, the unique team from the North, Tina Lawson, Philip Anderson and Mary Wright.
Customer care also provides opportunities for business development.
Margaret Brightwell (twice), Alan Baxter and Jo Cassell all showed that their service teams are aware of this by winning our Top Team competitions in 1991.
This latter award reminds me of a key feature of being the best and that is teamwork.
RTP North has demonstrated clearly the benefits of teamwork by winning our Branch Cup on four consecutive occasions.
Unsung heroes in such teams are generally administrative staff so I want to offer my congratulations here to June Stabler and Amanda Freeman.
A roll call of just some of our people who have achieved something special.
I know there are many more whom I have not mentioned.
Let's continue this in 1992 so that we in Rentokil Tropical Plants can proudly claim that we are:
‘Simply the Best’
With all my good wishes for a merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year.
Ken Myers
General Manager
Tropical Plants 
HIGH FLYERS
As part of the Pest Control High Flyers campaign, winners of quarter three's incentive were given the chance to fly.
The national winner was Phil Shaw from Sheffield, who together with his wife had the opportunity of a lifetime to fly on Concorde.
The two were greeted with a champagne reception in a VIP lounge and then taken out to board Concorde.
Within seconds of hurtling down the runway the great plane was airborne.
The ground quickly vanished as the speed was increased to Mach 2 — twice the speed of sound.
Phil and his wife were flying ten miles high at 1,340 miles per hour.
After a while more champagne and a delicious lunch was served.
There was then the opportunity to meet the captain and crew and to find out a little bit more as to how the plane was able to fly at such a phenomenal speed.
Phil said how much he enjoyed the day, and how breaking his own sales barriers allowed him to break the sound barrier.
Other winners in Q3's incentive were also treated to a flying experience, the first part of which was entirely land based.
The winners were picked on a draw basis, and they were; Alan Maynard from Plymouth, Bob Smith from Brighton, Ron Wilkie from Dundee, John Elliott from  Teesside , Neil Shead from London East, and Dil Jones from Chester.
All assembled at Luton airport to fly with ‘Escapade and Britannia’.
Escapade basically provides the experience of taking off and landing a commercial airliner, aboard Britannia's 737 flight simulator.
After initial instruction, familiarisation and a detailed briefing, all were given a mock simulator practice.
Then it was for real, and each of the surveyors were totally in control and flying solo through a flight, two landings and a take off!
The computer generated imagery and the reproduction of the various different airport locations, really did create an atmosphere of being behind the controls of a 737.
The surveyors said they really did see, hear and feel all the exhilarating sensations of flying.
After flying on land, the group were then whisked off in an airborne plane to Robert Carrier's restaurant in Suffolk for a sumptuous lunch.
All the flying winners thoroughly enjoyed their experiences.
They were ‘up where they belonged!’
HALE AND NOT-SO HEARTY
The two pest control marketeers were recently a sorrowful sight.
Rod Hale and Grant Parrott both sustained injuries which incapacitated them in various ways.
Rod was hit with a bit of flying cigarette that unfortunately damaged his eye, and Grant pulled ‘every conceivable muscle’ whilst on the Professional Sales Guild's day on the Solent.
Imagine the comical scene when Grant goes to visit Rod who is convalescing at home.
Grant pulls up in his car but realises that due to the camber he is unable to get out of his door, so he drives up the road does a three point turn and positions his vehicle to aid his extraction from the car seat to the pavement.
Rod, after managing to find the front door with his unpatched eye is greeted by his colleague who is bent double clutching a bottle of wine.
So you now know just marketing entails!
Fortunately both have recovered sufficiently to dream up more weird and wonderful schemes for 1992.
ALL SAILING, DRIVING, TRAINING PAUL
A new position has been created for Paul ‘animal’ Doroszczuk from Pest Control Cardiff.
Paul has been appointed areas sales trainer, and he will be developing the South West's training in order to promote greater sales.
Paul has an enviable record in both his sales and sales training performance, and he is endeavouring to become the  fourth Fellow of the Professional Sales Guild.
This is no mean achievement as it means achieving Guild membership consistently for five successive years.
Out of hours Paul is a keen motor racer (see last edition of Environmental Issues) as well as regularly crewing a J-24 yacht in various races around the Welsh coast.
SAIL ON
Andrew Lawrence, sales manager from Pest Control London South, obviously has a liking for water.
He ensured that he made direct contact with both the Seine in Paris during the managers conference, and the Solent during the Professional Sales Guild sailing day.
PROFESSIONAL SAILS GUILD
The invitation stipulated that warm clothing and trainers should be brought along, meet at the Holiday Inn in Portsmouth and be prepared for some fun.
This was the half year Professional Sales Guild event, or should that be Sails Guild?
Upon arrival at the hotel the proximity to the Solent and the banding around of such terms as ‘leigh-ho’ and ‘ready about’began to strike a chord with some of the surveyors.
It then dawned on them that maybe sea legs were required for the following morning.
Some folk did not really connect (until the next day) that a late night and a rolling sea were not really ideal partners.
However all assembled at Sunsail's headquarters at Port Solent.
The sun was up, the skies were blue and the water looked inviting, Even more appealing however was the pontoon with nine Beneteau 35 yachts moored and ready for their crews of novice sailors.
The plan was to have a briefing, sail around the Solent, moor up at Osborne Bay on the Isle of Wight for lunch and then race back.
Several would-be sailors scoffed at the idea of a race until they actually set sail.
The wind was in their hair and they were determined to win, ever known a successful non-competitive surveyor?!
Wagers were also agreed between senior managers.
The crews were split up by branches and areas, and whilst some nonchalantly lolled against the boom others were learning the intricacies of gybing, tacking, hoisting the sails, cleating the halliards, winching the sheets and playing the mainsail.
A whole new language, but one that translated meant enormous fun.
The yachts tacked back and forth across the Solent, and then moored up for a sumptuous lunch.
A floating pontoon of surveying sailors.
Several folk jumped ship and upped their stakes convinced that they were competent enough to tackle the Whitbread Round the World Race, so a swift sail across the Solent should not prove too troublesome.
The ten minute gun, the five minute gun and they were off.
A look of determination spread over several faces as they hurtled from side to side, and several comical scenes were witnessed as spinnakers were flown on the downwind run.
At the end of the day was the guys from the heart of the city who found their sea legs and won.
Westminster were presented with champagne and a trophy, Grant Parrott discovered muscles he never knew existed, Geoff Whalley paid up his bet to James Burford.
Simon Gale emerged from his day down below deck, Rod Hale nursed a whack on the head and a blow to his ego by being told he was a ‘stupid boy’ by the skipper, and surveyors returned to their cars tired and tanned.
OXFORD'S motley crew Rentokil '91
The Oxford Pest Control surveyors, as depicted by a non-Rentokil person!
Left to right, top row: Garry ‘gaza’ Evans, James Henry, Tony ‘smoothie’Perry, Martin ‘matchstick’Souster, Andy ‘vulture’Helm, Mark ‘snakebite’Williams.
We hear that during September, Pest Control Westminster found itself in an embarrassing situation of having under spent on its petty cash budget by 10%.
However there is no truth in the rumour that in order to utilise funds in some charitable way they purchased Pest Control London North in its entirety.
HIGH JUMP
Della Grice, a service controller at Hygiene Bristol recently wanted to jump out of an aeroplane, a strange idea, thought other branch members particularly as now she is only 4′ 6″!
The idea of training hard for the jump was soon shelved and the day of reckoning drew nearer.
Investing in a jump suit and hard hat Della turned up at the aerodrome and took to the skies in a plane
Della managed to survive the jump and says it was a great experience 
Westminster winners who know when to winch and when to wind.
Neil Shead really adding muscle to the team effort.
JETTING for THE JETS
If you were at Gatwick recently and wondered why all the planes were taking off and landing on the taxi-way, well it was all because of Rentokil Hygiene.
One of the jobs the new drains operation was recently called on to do was to clear the rubber from the runway at Gatwick Airport.
Every year the runway is closed for eight nights and the excess rubber is blasted clear.
John Ross, formerly from Fast Drains, and Kevin Stone from the Hygiene branch at West Hoathly braved the bitterly cold and freezing rain to operate the high pressure Rota blast jetter which has a rotating head that produces 10,000 lb per square inch of water pressure.
In fact the force is so great that a concentrated jet from the water is capable of cutting straight through concrete.
The Hygiene supervisors felt as though the planes would land on their heads, but this did not stop them carrying out a thorough and hygienic job.
AILSA CRAIG SUCCESS
Rentokil in the shape of George Houston and technician Jim Clarke assisted in the laying of 3 tonnes of warfarin bait on the island of Ailsa Craig in the Firth of Clyde to control a severe rat problem early in 1991.
The Secretary of the Ailsa Craig Working Group has just announced the results.
Puffins were seen on the island for the first time in years.
A marked increase in the survival rate for many nesting birds.
Wild plants growing well where never before seen, and growing very well where only found in small clumps.
Their overall impression is of a richer, lusher environment and proves that controlling pests is a green thing to do when managed correctly.
The hope of the Working party, which consists of the Nature Conservancy Council and Glasgow University representatives as well as some Rentokil involvement is to continue into 1992 and will complete the job of ridding the island of rats.
FRAGRANT APPEAL
Healthcare consultants and their customers know that fragrances enhance any atmosphere.
The range of airfresh units help to create a distinctive fresh, clean atmosphere that is appreciated by today's executives, company staff, customers and guests.
This is not a new phenomenon, however, as the secret of Napoleon's animal magnetism and his legendary ability to command troops may have discovered by a team of perfume scientists.
They have identified and recreated the lost recipe for the French emperor's personal cologne.
Rather like Henry Cooper, he would splash it on all over before and after battles or liaisons.
(Napoleon also wrote to Josephine ‘Coming to Paris in two days — Don't wash!’)
Healthcare and Medical airfresh customers are afforded the luxury of having a fragrance in the atmosphere twenty four hours a day.
Who knows just what the perfumes are doing for our customers?
WEST YORKSHIRE in retirement
As many retired Rentokil folk are probably aware there is now a Rentokilonians society based in East Grinstead.
However, the West Yorkshire branch can boast a longer established society that has been up and running for over nine years.
(Well, staggering a little, sometimes).
The society was formed in October 1982 with nine members who, between them have 257 years of service!
Since then the group, s members have risen to nineteen retired pest controllers with over 380 years of service.
As Clive Moxon, the Secretary says ‘we could almost start a branch of our own, with an area, branch, service and district managers, two inspectors, three surveyors, a fumigation manager, a branch secretary, three service controllers and six technicians.’
Meeting every month, with an annual event, enables the former pest controllers to enjoy trips and each other 's company.
The full day trip this year was to Whitby, stopping en route at Malton and Laughton.
A very pleasant day was had by all, and Clive Moxon said that ‘we would particularly like to express our thanks and appreciation to Area Manager Ken Burkinshaw for the help and assistance given to our retired association’.
Any more out of work societies or regular gatherings?
Let us know!
inmates
Angie Mellor, a Hygiene consultant from West Hoathly, was carrying out a survey at Broadmoor when someone asked ‘What are you doing then?’
Angie turned round to see an inmate bedecked with gold chains, bracelets and  tattoos .
He was a very large guy, and it was then she clicked that she was conversing with Ronnie Kray of the infamous Kray twins.
After completing her survey she ensured that she left without the concrete socks.
LEADS PAY!
Pete Youngman from Pest Control Chester has during the last three years generated over £100,000 worth of business purely through submitting D5 leads.
TAKING the plunge
Theresa ‘Yummo’ Lacy of Hygiene London East at long last took the plunge and married James Buckley,(who is now also a Hygiene consultant), at the end of August.
The church service was unusual to say the least, the bride arrived fifteen minutes late to Elvis Presley's rendition of the Hawaiian Wedding Song.
The church ceremony ended with the bride and groom going out to Tina Turner's ‘Simply the Best’.
The guard of honour was provided by colleagues from Hygiene London East and London West armed with decorated toilet brushes and sink plungers.
After a yummo reception and disco Theresa and James flew off to Las Vegas and Waikiki Beach for their honeymoon.
GOING LIVE
All pest control technicians are now well and truly plugged into the system, as all now operate the hand held PSIONS.
The use of these computers enables service technicians to record all service treatments, the preparations used, the time spent at each site, and the treatment cycles completed.
Training all technicians throughout the country was an onerous task, but Sandra Hannington, Caroline Mytton and Anthony Dracott ensured that everyone received personal tuition, and the day that the various branches ‘went live’ the skills were all put to use.
The data packs in the PSIONS are off loaded on to the mainbranch computer ensuring that records are kept up to date.
The first branch to ‘go live’ was Maidstone over a year ago, and the PSIONS are now well and truly part of the technicians' armoury for pest prevention.
the GREAT RACE
Bewl Bridge Reservoir near Wadhurst, East Sussex provided the battle ground for an unusual inter-divisional challenge.
The protagonists in this unique event were Ian Wright, Financial Controller of Office and Retail Cleaning Services on his trusty mountain bike (punctured at the start), and Sally Greenfield, UK Systems Co-Ordinator with Rentokil Group, on her trusty mount, a 16.1hh grey thoroughbred called ‘Boy’(newly shod'.
Each reckoned that off-road, they could beat the other over a suitably undulating course.
Early on an August Saturday morning they set off at a great pace on the west side of the reservoir with the intention of following the ten mile bridleway right round the reservoir to a pub, where they planned to arrive two hours after opening time.
Ian soon learned how to dodge the flying hooves of Boy and remain in control of his bike, but what he hadn't expected was the clinging weight and depth of wet Wadhurst clay — somersaulting with a squelch into one of the deepest bogs which appeared regularly between the level stretches of good galloping ground where both could make good speed.
Neck and spoke they raced for mile after mile, the horse only drawing breath to ensure Ian was there to open the gates along the way, and to use Ian as a guide when Sally got lost in the maze of the Clubhouse car park!
However, only Sally knew where the bridleway left the reservoir and headed to the pub, so she ensured she was in the lead at that point, and then promptly declared her race over as she would not risk galloping the remaining mile of road.
Off Ian pedalled, to arrive at the pub a few seconds before Sally, but having been companions in adversity throughout the whole way, neither was going to claim outright victory, so agreed to declare a draw.
The thing that delighted both of them was the time they had achieved — 54 minutes to complete 10 miles of very tricky going.
The downside of being so quick was that it was an hour before the pub was supposed to open and the support vehicle to arrive.
However, the landlord took pity and Sally was the one not too mud bespattered to go in and fetch the drinks — meanwhile the horse trod on Ian's toe…
Watch this space for a re-match.
BOWMAN
For quite some time, west Yorkshire Sales Manager Bob Walder has been known for his claim continually to hit targets.
At a recent day out at Ripley Castle he had the chance the prove that he was the King of the Bull.
So with his trusty bow and a quiver full of arrows he set out to prove everyone else wrong.
Apparently there is no truth in the rumour that Bob played ‘The Moor’ alongside Rohin Hood in the ‘Prince of Thieves’film, although he is a good shot.
…woodlice INVASION
Headlines such as‘No hiding place for Woodlice’ signalled the start of a major operation to attempt to control woodlice in a series of blocks of flats in Ardrossan, Ayrshire.
The Local Authority Housing Development had been plagued every nigh with complaints from these distant relatives of the lobster.
The Environmental Health Department were unable to control the situation and finally Rentokil were called in.
After some detailed survey work members of the Glasgow South branch; Bill McMath and George Houston (also assisted by QAI Jonathan Simmons) including a night visit in the pouring rain which involved peering at cracks in the outer wall with a torch, a detailed proposal was submitted to the Council.
The go-ahead was given subject to a ‘weather window’ to treat one block as a trail because, to the surprise of all involved the largest concentration of woodlice were in the roof under the roof tiles.
Specialised access equipment was required and the tiles were sprayed and the spaces dusted.
Service Supervisor John Taggart reports thousands of woodlice were flushed out of their harbourages and were falling off the roof during treatment.
Other parts of the treatment involved the cavity wall ducts under the building and some internal work in the flats.
Initial indications are that the treatment has had a marked effect, but a close eye will be kept on the situation, and regular reports made to the council.
Glasgow South hopes that having proven the professionalism of Sales and Service operation all the blocks will be treated in early 1992.
RENTOKIL golf society
The 1991 Rentokil Golf Society Annual Meeting took place again this year in September at the Royal Ashdown Forest Golf Club.
Participants included qualifiers and guests from throughout the UK and overseas, and there were several first time entrants.
There was a new cup to play for this year, donated by the President of the Golf Society, Clive Thompson.
This was the Mashers Cup, the top prize for the day for the overall winner of the two rounds.
General Manager David Howroyd, managed to win this  coveted award.
The Rentokil Cup was awarded to David Plim, and the best scratch score to Archie Wylie, Hygiene East Kilbride.
The match play winner was Gordon Keith, and the longest drive went to John Hall, OMM and ex-Pest Control.
Steve Ridley from Pest Control Newcastle managed to get nearest the pin.
Mike Tunnell walked off with the prized possession of a wooden spoon.
The evening gala dinner was held at Yew Lodge, and after Club Secretary Stewart Wilson read out some dubious ‘alternative’ golf rules, all settled back to enjoy the good food, and good company, washed down with many a long winded golfing yarn.
NO FLIES ON TAGGART
Watch out for the New Year's Eve episode of ‘Taggart’.
Pest Control's Glasgow Central branch supplied the producers with EFK's and a number of bait boxes.
It goes without saying that professional programme makers turn to the experts when it comes to obtaining authentic props.
taxing TRIVIA
On which river are the Victoria Falls?
In which part of the body would you find the oval window?
In which war was the balaclava first worn?
These were just some of the questions poised by quiz master Nigel Harvey at a recent Rentokil quiz night.
Over two hundred people from Garland Road and Felcourt formed themselves into teams of ten to pit their wits against each other in a trivial pursuits type quiz night.
A visiting team from East Grinstead Crown Court also took part.
Margaret Harvey kindly acted as adjudicator, and her jurisdiction was often needed to keep erring teams in order.
Wagers of chocolate biscuits were signed before the event:— would the Treasury beat the Felcourt girls?
The atmosphere was tense and all realised it was heads down for a full house.
As the scores were read out like a football draw it became clear that it would be a close contest.
The eventual winners were the ever-so knowledgeable team from R & D (well, you'd expect them to be bright wouldn't you?)
Everyone enjoyed themselves and looked forward to the next battle of the brains.
Incidentally the Victoria Falls are on the Zambezi, the oval window is actually located in the ear (despite many other spurious suggestions) and the balaclava was first worn during a very cold war, and yes the Felcourt girls beat the Treasury Department and are now busy munching biscuits.
massaging A SALE
We hear that Chester Pest Control have extended their ‘Customer type’ list in order to cater for a new customer who classifies his business as a massage parlour!
Evidently the customer has received exemplary service.
Technician Billy Marshall has only visited the premises ninety three times this year!
A MINER improvement
Not only does Tony Porter, Service Technician with Hygiene Leeds, renovate old motorcycles (see the last edition of Environmental Issues) he also carries out his job above and beyond the call of duty.
Whilst cleaning the pithead baths at the Stillingfleet Colliery Tony was asked to wash the back of a bathing miner.
Having obliged, Tony told his Branch Manager that this was just another satisfied customer, and one with a clean back.
what a PERFORMANCE
Penny Spearpoint from Healthcare London East recently signed a large contract at the Palace Theatre in London.
Whilst there, the Manager was so impressed by the superior service Rentokil offered that he gave her free tickets for ‘Les Miserables’.
A prehistoric problem
photo call
Just after 7am and the early morning October haze lifts to reveal over a hundred staff from Pest Control London.
By 8am they have been joined by over 50 more, and at least 80 vehicles.
So why did this vast crew descend upon Regents Park Zoo in London?
Area Manager for London Paul Stearn explains; ‘the reason for the photo session was to show potential and existing clients the extensive nature of Rentokil's London Pest Control facilities, and the resources that can be called upon to deal with any size of pest problem.’
The London branches have recently all cooperated to provide extra manpower throughout the capital to deal with the large council jobs that have been undertaken.
As Paul Stearn also remarked ‘the assembled London staff most likely represents greater manpower than all our competitors’ total UK force.’
(There is no truth in the rumour that certain London Branch Managers were in ‘make-up’ for two hours prior to the shot.)
LARGE SCALE operation
Alex Thompson and George McMillan from Pest Control Glasgow Central were recently faced with an unusually large pest problem.
The two had been part of the Rentokil team on ‘operation cleanout’.
This was to rid Glasgow's Arches of rats and mice and any other pests that were lurking there.
The pest controllers however, were confronted with an even bigger menace, in the form of a sealy dinosaur.
The Arches exhibition organisers had placed a dinosaur around a corner and asked them to deal with it.
George and Alex soon realised the joke was on them.
However they played along and phoned R & D for their help and advice on prehistoric monsters.
We're not known as the first in Pest Control for nothing.
The Arches were subsequently cleared of infestation and the public were allowed in to view the prehistoric relics.
thank you SUPERVISORS & BIOLOGISTS
In recognition of the tremendous effort that the London Area Supervisory team had put into achieving the best State of Service  in the U.K. in 1990 and the best so far in 1991, and as thanks for their contribution to the servicing of the local authority work over the summer, Paul Stearn Area Manager for Pest Control London organised a meeting with a difference.
At the end of October they all met at the Daytona Raceway, opposite the B.B.C. Television Centre in West London, and spent the morning watching and acting in  humorous scenarios presented by each of the branch teams.
These were loosely based on aspects of service management and 
D6 × 8
Bournemouth pest controllers have set themselves a target of only hiring out D6 EFK's in groups of eight.
Surveyors Paul Mundy and Glen Harrison have both achieved this remarkable result.
Can any other branch beat this?
All Bournemouth surveyors are in the 100 Club, with Barrie Allen recently joining Glen and Paul in the top five places in the South West.
flowers IN THE CITY CAMPAIGN
The aim of this campaign is to promote the expansion of floral displays of all types (however small) in the City of London.
The campaign has been running since 1963 and the object has been to encourage private or business premises to install some form of floral display.
Prizes are for window boxes, gardens, courtyards, hanging baskets, atria and the best new garden.
Service technician Debbie Avis from Tropical Plants East managed to win the atrium award for her maintenance work at the Amro Bank in Moorgate.
Judging was carried out by twenty four liverymen in the Worshipful Company of Gardeners, and it took place throughout the year at the various area locations.
Debbie Avis and a representative from the Amro Bank attended a lavish function at the Guildhall and were presented to the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress.
The photograph shows the extent of the planting with Debbie installing a new plant into the display.
Debbie is hoping to win the award again next year.
Yet another first from Rentokil Tropical plants.
PEST CONTROL APPOINTMENTS
BOB HALFPENNY, formerly Area Manager for Pest Control, Scotland and Northern Ireland has been appointed General Manager and President of Rentokil's Canadian operations.
Bob will take up his post at the beginning of January 1992 and will be based at Canada's head office in Toronto.
JIM COWAN is promoted to Area Manager, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
He will be based at the Edinburgh branch and reports to General Manager Martin Cooke.
JOHN BELL, formerly with Pest Control Oxford has been appointed Branch Manger at the Dundee branch.
John will report to Area Manager Jim Cowan.
GEORGE HOUSTON is promoted to Branch Manager of Glasgow Central.
RODDY McDONALD moves across from Glasgow Central to manage the Edinburgh branch.
JOHN GORDON moves to manage John Lindquist's former branch of Glasgow South based at East Kilbride.
MARITAL BLISS at Leeds
In Environment Issues we don't usually have room to record every birth, marriage and death (hatches, matches and despatches), however, Hygiene Leeds warrants a mention for the five marriages that have taken place over the last three months.
As Branch Manager Ian Davies said (speaking as a confirming bachelor)‘five good men have bitten the dust; normally men of sound judgement but I will forgive them this one mistake!’
However, congratulations must go to Paul Sykes, Aaron Parker, Service Technician Ian Parry, Consultant Paul Cooper, Supervisor  and team leader John Fox, and their respective better halves Jane, Sarah, Karen, Helen and Tania.
LEECHES
Following a frantic phone call from the Hygiene Manager of a major food producing client near York to come and identify a ‘slug’, surveyor Bob Harris from Hull was presented with a leech which had mysteriously appeared right in the middle of the factory.
After an extensive survey, the infestation was traced to flooding below the concrete floor of the factory.
Bob carried out immediate treatment and reassured the client that the infestation would not recur because the drainage system had been replaced.
Is this the first job ever conducted against leeches in the food manufacturing premises?
Any other unusual jobs let us know for the next edition of Environmental Issues.
Housework
What has a dilapidated old barn got to do with Rentokil Office and Retail Cleaning?
Well for the Birmingham branch it meant a reasonable sized job in cleaning up the ‘bungalow’.
Everything had to be thoroughly washed down, cleaned and returned to its former glory.
Although unusual it certainly did not prove too challenging for the team from Birmingham.
the bees SEIZED
Police are to confiscate more than 12,000 hives and their millions of bees that have been illegally placed on the North Yorkshire moors by beekeepers from the South.
Forestry Commission and National Park chiefs said that many beekeepers were travelling 200 miles to leave hives on the moors around Scarborough because of the fine quality of honey and heather produces.
Do we have competition for our Pest Control Services?
ROD'S PROUD
Congratulations to Rod Stening, a Service Technician at Pest Control London West.
He recently won a Be Proud Award, and the accolades he  received from customers were quite outstanding.
‘Rod Stening is exceptionally different from most.
He is always cheerful, helpful, willing and efficient.’
‘He is very reliable and always most willing to help.’
‘If Mr Stening reflects the standard of your employees, I totally understand why Rentokil is so successful.’
Well done, Rod, we hope you enjoy your award.
Anyone can nominate a colleague for the Be Proud scheme, but only those who consistently maintain the very highest standards will be rewarded.
FOOD and PESTICIDES
A recent edition of Priorities, a publication of the American Council on Science and Health, reported that a Food and Drug Administration study showed that in 7,394 samples of domestic food, 65 percent contained no pesticide residues and 34 percent had residue levels below the legal tolerance level.
The National Food Processors Association (NFPA) reported similar findings in its own studies.
The NFPA study tested 7,000 samples and found that 79.8 percent contained no residues, 18.7 percent contained residues within the legal tolerance limit and 1.8 percent had residues above the legal limit.
In an ironic twist, the FDA estimates that 98 percent of carcinogens found in food are naturally occurring.
CHALLENGING all fit men
The last edition of Environmental Issues contained an item on the Bristol versus Atherstone net ball match, and this caught the attention of the staff at Glasgow's Healthcare branch.
The ‘men’ of the branch were belittling the game saying how simple it was, and there was no great feat in winning it.
At this point Morag Harkness, Sales Manager threw down the gauntlet and challenged the guys to a netball match.
The preparations were then put into full swing.
The court was booked, teams picked, outfits were organised and training for the big game began in earnest.
This was to be the sporting event of the year!
The emphasis being on ‘was’, needless to say the game still hasn't materialised, the macho ‘men’ keep finding excuses and adopting delaying tactics.
Therefore Morag would like to know if there are any other male netball teams out there willing to challenge the Glasgow girls ‘You pay the expenses, we'll travel anywhere’ says Morag.
Phone her on , and also let the editor know of the outcome.
water and ventilation DIVISION
The Water and Ventilation Division has been rationalised and restructured following the two major acquisitions made in the Chemical Water Treatment field over the past two years.
The division is now operating in two distinct business streams;
Chemical Water Treatment which is the provision of chemicals and dosing equipment into industrial and commercial systems.
Water Hygiene and Ventilation — the specialised cleaning service for industrial and commercial ventilation systems, water tanks and cooling towers.
The Division is now operating from one branch centre for each business stream-required: water treatment at Salisbury, and water hygiene and ventilation at Nottingham.
As General Managers, Dave McCoy and Mike Hooper said ‘We are confident that this move will contribute greatly in terms of future growth, profitability, security and promotion opportunity within the Division.’
25 YEARS ON
Six years in the Bournemouth branch and nineteen elsewhere, add up to a quarter century at Rentokil, for Martin Loftus.
This was celebrated at the Anvil Hotel in Dorset with his colleagues and wife Giselle.
Martin was presented with a gold watch from the Company and six crystal glasses from his branch colleagues.
The photograph shows Martin receiving his watch from Branch Manager Neil Gibson.
As Neil says ‘after 25 years Martin's enthusiasm and enjoyment of his work is undimmed and he well deserves the respect and applause of his colleagues.’
supervising LADY
Adele Graham from Pest Control South West has become the first female supervisor.
She will now be based in the Oxford branch and will report to branch manager Peter Caswell.
As Area Manager Martin Ellis said ‘Adele has accomplished a great deal in her current position of Area Field Biologist, not least in her QA work carried out in the last two years, her Mouse-Alert sales and the careful co-ordination of Sentinel contracts’.
Hopefully, Adele will be the first of many female supervisors throughout Pest Control.
All in the South West wish Adele good luck in her new role.
ALL AT SEA WITH FREDDY
Stella Clayton, Office Administrator at Hygiene Leeds has been informing staff and clients for months that she was going swimming with Freddy.
Freddy, for the uninitiated is a dolphin who swims daily off the Northumberland coast at Amble.
One cold and bleak November day, Stella donned a wet suit and jumped from a boat into the North Sea and frolicked with Freddy for ten minutes.
As Branch Manager Ian Davies said ‘the excitement must have been terrific because only at this point did anyone realise that Stella couldn't swim and it was only Freddy and the wet suit that were keeping her afloat!’
Stella however, survived to tell the tale and is now taking swimming lessons in 
winning SHOT
Pest Control London West were recently treated to a night out ten pin bowling by Managing Director Geoff Whalley for winning the ‘Wanted’ campaign.
The photo shows supervisor Jim Cassie about to shoot anyone who didn't get a strike.
(Jim is now looking for a completely new team, applications to London West )
Geoff Fear, Supervisor from Pest Control in Chester has succeeded where others failed by securing a significant price increase from a large bakery in Northwich.
The client liked and trusted Geoff (which says a lot for the Chester surveyors and manager!).
We hear that Geoff is to be used as Chester's own UN negotiator for all clients with potential problems from now on.
The photograph shows one of CHESTER'S servicing teams helping star performer PETER WHITEHOUSE out of the window as a warning to what happens to those who under-perform.
the MARAUDERS IN BATTLE
After another good quarter, Ken ‘Godfather’ Burkinshaw, Area Manager for Pest Control North East instructed his hit man Barry White to organise a day to remember for his sales team.
So Barry greased a few palms and set up a day at the Foss Island Waterpark in Brandsburton, North Yorkshire.
The morning was taken up with sales presentations, but all were itching to be allowed out on the water.
After lunch it was time to don the wet suits and to ‘run the gauntlet’.
Teams competed on Jet skis, go-karts, quad bikes, aqua sausages and an assault course.
After duelling had been done, everyone relaxed around a barbecue, which apparently is what being a marauder is all about.
THE MARAUDERS drench Gill Ward as she climbs the wall.
RADIO TRANSCRIPT
Transmitted on: BBC Radio 4 — Financial Week
Title: Company of the Year
Extract
Nigel Cassidy:
Well, the ducking and diving award this week must surely go the Chancellor, Norman Lamont; before the Treasury Committee he fielded a battery of awkward questions about the recovery, or should that be alleged recovery.
Rentokil were voted Company of the Year The Jibes about tackling dry rot in the Cabinet came thick and fast.
North East Professionals
And now for something completely different we go over to our roving reporter in the North East of England who is interviewing a member of The Marauders.
‘Well I don't know, I am still trying to work this one out.
First it was the Birmingham Conference with axes, swords, knives and anything else with a sharpened edge to boldly go where no pest controller has gone before.
Then it was Blackpool's turn with tommy guns, silly string, molls and a bunch of gruesome gangsters.
Finally this year at the Edinburgh conference with samurai, swords, high powered water pistols, thunder flashes and sand bags the Marauders made their mark.
Now they want to invite us to a football match at the next sales conference at Brighton in January.
Are they kidding?
The Marauders going south to play football?
Do the South know how to play football?
Oh well, be it upon their own heads.
For those of you that don't know The Marauders are the North East Pest Control team members.
No finer sales, administration or service team will you find in the U.K.
The Marauders would just like to take this opportunity to wish all areas and divisions a very Happy Christmas.
Please take the break to have a good rest, because you never know when The Marauders will be coming to visit you’.
THE GRANDMASTER ‘down’ under studying a termite mound.
Even the sight of ‘Graham Crowe, man in the know’ sporting a Rentokil Tee shirt didn't bother these industrious termites.
Seen outside a department store near one of our branch offices: ‘Christmas lunch £2.99, Special Offer closes November 2nd.’
bubbly CLARE
The winner of the last edition of Environmental Issues' competition to spot where they all are now was Clare Stevens.
Clare is one of the friendly voices on the end of the Felcourt telephone; ‘Rentokil, good morning how can I help you?’
She was delighted with her bottle of champagne and admits to having to hazard a guess at a couple of the ‘young managers’.
Clare has worked for Rentokil at Felcourt in departments such as the post room, the canteen and industrial products, but says she most enjoys her switchboard work with her colleague Dawn Lucas.
Handling between 800 to 900 calls a day involves a lot of patience, and Clare says she always remembers to smile which helps.
Frequent callers to Felcourt knew the girls' voices and the girls often instantly recognise callers not only from the U.K. but throughout the world.
Callers sometimes misdial and think they have got through to the local barracks or Lingfield garage.
A recent caller rang in a panic as she had put Tri-Spot (mould killer) instead of washing liquid in her dishwasher, and why wasn't the cutlery sparkling?
Visitors often pop into reception, one caller recently brought in a vole wrapped up in paper and asked the girls advice as to what to do with it.
Couriers are regularly in and out of Felcourt and one guy from DHL, Pete, plucked up the courage to ask Clare what she was doing that weekend.
Apart from dog sitting, she was free and a year later the two are still together!
Clare and Dawn, and former receptionist Angela Pelling (who now works in the Transport Department with Hazel Thorpe) were all previously hairdressers, but are agreed that they much prefer their work at Rentokil.
Clare's ambitions are to jump out of a plane (with a parachute) and, she says, to be in a Rentokil publication!
SERVISALES at Harrogate
The National Health Service Training Centre at Harrogate was recently the venue for the first Northern Pest Control Servisales Course.
Candidates from all over the north east descended on this once quiet spa town, to be introduced to the delights of Sales.
Headed by Barry White, Area Sales Manager and aided and abetted by Sales Managers Colin Harrison and Bob Harris, the brief was to take these sales-hungry technicians and introduce them into the intricacies involved in a sales career.
Throughout the course which was run into two parts, six weeks apart, role play and presentations abounded, with everybody taking part, including the tutors.
During one practical session when the kitchens were used for survey purposes, booklice were actually found in the flour storage bins.
This of course resulted in an addition to the existing contract!
Social highlights of the course were the evening five-a-side football matches, closely followed by the ‘Freddy Kruger’ look-alike competition.
Each successful candidate was awarded a Course Certificate, along with various other presentations for merit.
The training centre staff complimented Rentokil on being a refreshing change from the usual delegates that attend the centre!
Riding on the back of this successful ‘First’, plans are now being made for further courses in 1992.
BABY BOOM
Glasgow Central, the baby branch is booming yet again.
There have been six additional babies added to their number and two new grandmothers (Is it something they drink up there?).
BRIEF MENTIONS
Phil Allman, Service Manager at Pest Control London North, never sees his name in print although he contributes regularly to this publication.
He also deserves an honourable mention for working with Graham Knight and Carlton Brown, and retaining a sense of humour.
Another Pest Control technician who hasn't graced these pages is Ted Critchett who covers the Portsmouth area, and as his Branch Manager Neil Gibson says, ‘after 15 years of hard effort he more than deserves it.’
Chris Bulman from Plymouth says he deserves a mention as well, as he usually shies away from publicity!
sweet SMELLING BUBBLES
Pest Control Baldock recently carried out a large bubble fumigation job in Peterborough, and came out smelling of roses.
For a week six bubbles were filled with boxes full of potpourri which had become infested with moths.
The pallets were under gas for 12–18 hours at a time, and a careful system of rotating the stock was implemented.
The job depended upon careful organisation as it had to be come at only a few days' notice.
The photograph shows Bob Bence, Service Technician, Roy Everett, Surveyor and Mick Graves the Supervisor in the warehouse.
BALI WIN
Tropical Plants East have won an Award of Merit for their maintenance of the atrium planting at Avebury, the Milton Keynes headquarters of Argos Plc.
The planting consists of pairs of Ficus benjamina (one 6m and the other 7.5m) in each in situ planter feature in each wing of the atrium, a reception backdrop of ballheaded Ficus nitida ; and repeated ballheaded Ficus on the office walkways on every level.
The care of these specimens together with that of the various under-storey plantings, and the adding of seasonal colour, have been of the highest standard in order to gain this Award.
‘This atrium is being looked after very well,’ commented the visiting adjudicator, ‘and the overall impression is very pleasing.
The lighting is particularly good and is unobtrusive.’
The Tropical Plant team were particularly proud of this win as it is a six year old installation which is maintained to this very high standard by technician Jackie Odboy.
Jackie has been with the Company for the last four years and the Argos Service Manager Gwynne Davis can't speak highly enough of her work.
Stewart Wilson, Branch Manager, collected the award on behalf of his team from the well known TV personality and garden designer David Stevens, at the awards luncheon held at the Crest Hotel, Bristol.
The photograph shows Jean Brent, Chairperson of BALI, Stewart Wilson and David Stevens.
CAR WASH
Mark Williams and John Austin from Pest Control Oxford have a competition running between them for sales up until the year end.
The surveyor with the lowest value of sales has to wash the winner's car, wearing a pair of swimming trunks on a cold January morning.
Branch Manager Peter Caswell has promised Environmental Issues a photo of the result.
SEE HOW THEY RUN
Congratulation to the other ‘Mousetrap’ which celebrates 40 years on the West End stage in 1992.
Originally written by Agatha Christie as a 30 minute radio play at the request of Queen Mary, it is the longest running show ever, anywhere in the world.
MOTOR-MOTHS
Bob Forrest, Fumigation Manager for Scotni recently called on the Conservation Scientist for Glasgow Art Galleries and Museums, to discuss the range of fumigation services Rentokil Pest Control could offer.
He learned that staff at the Museum of Transport had discovered Common Clothes Moths inside one of the cars on display.
The Museum of Transport is housed in the Kelvin Hall and subsequent investigation revealed that 3 cars were infested.
The worst affected was a 1935 Lagonda tourer which had been stored in a barn for some years before passing into the Museum's hands.
The carpets showed considerable evidence of damage and the infestation has spread to two other cars, a 1935 Humber 12 saloon and a 1938 Talbot saloon.
It was decided that the three cars would be fumigated with Methyl Bromide to eradicate the infestation, and that this work would be carried out using the fumigation bubble.
Joe Mallon, Fumigation Technician assisted by Dougie Gray both from the Glasgow Central branch, ensured that the vehicles were correctly fumigated, and to accommodate the length of the cars a double size bubble (7m x 3.5m x 2.5m) was used.
The Museum of Transport was pleased with the result and now knows where to come to drive out other pests and steer clear of further trouble.
fast DRAINS
Hygiene took a new acquisition under its wing at the beginning of August.
This is Fast Drain Services Ltd which is based in Woking, Surrey.
The Company provides a service similar to that already operated by Hygiene as well as covering larger drainage systems and dealing with other problems associated with liquid waste.
In addition to providing a regular preventative maintenance service they are also well set up for dealing with emergency work on a 24 hour basis.
As General Manager David Lynch said, ‘this acquisition is clearly an important step forward in developing our drains business for the future and has significantly increased our expertise in this service.
The Fast Drains operation will continue to operate from Woking and most of the staff have been retained.
Steve Ward, Branch Manager of West Hoathly has been managing the business since the acquisition and has been introducing the ‘Rentokil way of doing things’ into the new business.
alternative ADVERTISING
A 1901 flycatcher invented by Louise Nicola could also be arranged as a calendar in such a manner that each sheet represents a day of the week so that the person using the flycatcher, after having torn off the sheets for a week, is compelled to read the advertisements printed therein.
(The original fly poster).
FLIES save WORLD
Flies from Mexico have saved much of the world from a deadly worm that had established a beachhead in North Africa, says UN Food and Agriculture Organisation.
The New World screw-worm has been eradicated from North Africa by shipping 40 million sterilised flies from Mexico to Libya every week for six months.
FAO says the screw-worm would have spread throughout Africa, the Middle East, Southern Europe and eventually Asia, causing ‘incalculable’ damage to humans and wildlife.
(Maybe and opportunity to recycle our flies?!)
alternative articles
A bottle of bubbly will be awarded to the best article written using one of the headlines adopted in this edition of Environment Issues.
The ensuring article doesn't have to be Rentokil related.
Entries by Friday January 31st, to the Editor at Felcourt.
BT woodworm FREE
A call recently came through to Pest Control London East branch office, from British Telecom ‘we've got woodworm in one of our vans!’
Paul Mitchell, Area Supervisor and Graham Limer, Surveyor were sent to investigate.
The van turned out to be a 1938 vintage vehicle which was due to enter the London to Brighton rally.
The British Telecom mechanic was intending to re-paint the van ready for the Rally, when he discovered woodworm in the wooden panels and structure.
It was decided to use the fumigation ‘bubble’ as this was the only way to treat the vehicle because the extend of the infestation.
Pest Control branches were scoured for a bubble big enough to get the van into, and the London East fumigators — Brian Bacon, Ian Buchan and Terry Hart carried out a successful fumigation.
British Telecom was delighted with the work carried out, and the vehicle is now safe for the annual London to Brighton run.
rigged COCKROACHES
Ronnie Wilkie from Pest Control Dundee recently proved that cockroaches are anywhere and everywhere when he signed up for a sizeable job to rid an oil rig off the Aberdeen coast of them.
The cockroaches probably boarded the rig from the supply tender.
W & V bowl them over
Never mind the West Indies, have you heard of the Wet & Windies?
No?
Then read on…
There's rotund John ‘Capel’ Ablett, steady Mike ‘Steadman’Bealing, Alan ‘Fiery Fred’Greaves, laid back Dave ‘Russell’Allen, Wideman Steve ‘Lewis’Edwards and ringer Sean ‘Botham’Robinson.
These men will live forever in the legends of Rentokil cricket, for on a Sunday at the beginning of September at Felcourt Cricket Ground, they took on and conquered the best teams that Rentokil could offer.
The day was hot and humid, the field of play rippled with a heat haze as the draw was made to split the six teams into two leagues.
Water and Ventilation were drawn with Head Office, Healthcare and Hygiene against Pest Control and Metropolitan (Office Machine Maintenance).
Fiery Fred and Steady Steadman caused quite a stir when they took the field for Hygiene as well.
There were cries of ringers' when Steady Steadman took two wickets in his first cover.
The day progressed and temperatures and humidity rose along with the fiercely contested matches.
Water and Ventilation won the toss for the final match and put Healthcare into bat and with a good team effort, limited Healthcare to 48 runs off 40 balls.
Capel Ablett and Fiery Fred opened the batting for W & V Capel missed the first three balls and played on to his stumps with the fourth ball.
In came Steady Steadman and out he went after facing only two balls!
The scoreboard read one over gone, two wickets down and no runs scored.
From the pavilion in fading light came Ringer Botham.
The crowd erupted with great excitement and anticipation.
They were not disappointed for over a mere twenty-six balls Healthcare total was equalled.
The crowd went mad with excitement.
The bowler approached and grunted with effort as he released the ball.
Botham stood there with bat poised and with casual ease lifted the ball back over the bowler's head for six runs.
What a way to end a great day.
Congratulations to all wet and windy cricketers.
CALMIC
A recent laboratory report produced by the Research and Development Division on the bacterial contamination of washrooms and toilets has underlined how the use of Calmic sanitizers can reduce the risk of cross infection.
The laboratory report gives details of a bacteriological survey of 130 male and female washrooms.
These areas are particularly prone to contamination and have often been the breeding ground for diseases such as dysentery or salmonellosis.
Calmic sanitizers can raise hygiene standards in several ways.
The fluid produced by the sanitizer contains a scale inhibitor to prevent the build up of encrusted deposits, a cleaning agent to help keep surfaces clean (thus helping to prevent bacterial adhesion), and the regular dosing of the fluid ensures the maintenance of sanitary conditions, even in areas of heavy use.
The report concludes ‘the use of Calmic sanitizers reduces the risk of disease and raises hygiene standards in these important areas’.
So now you know, make sure of our customers are aware of the features and benefits.
HYGIENE APPOINTMENTS
BARRY BAGGE from Hygiene London East has recently been promoted to supervisor.
Barry has been with the division since 1976.
Doug Tannock, who was the former UK Champion metal detector has been promoted to Service Manager at London East.
TASTE BUGS
Take one cockroach, marinate in wine for a day, fry it in beef fat and smother with chocolate — it tastes delicious, says China's Yangcheng Daily newspaper.
Other delicacies include fried cockroach and cockroach-studded pancakes.
This may start a fashion for entomological food.
Locusts and wild honey again?
Termites, more  nutritious than rump steak!
What marketing zealot will be the first to package the ‘chocroach’(free range from the biggest London housing estates).
EURO service
Healthcare Birmingham have recently gained the contract to service the new Birmingham Eurohub at Birmingham's International Airport.
The opening of the Eurohub in July marks the first purpose built hub terminal in Europe and offers fast and comprehensive service to all European destinations.
So it is imperative that the quality of service is extended into the washroom facilities, which is why the Facilities Manager specified Rentokil Healthcare Services.
The photograph shows Service Driver Lindy Wellings outside the new Eurohub.
return of the RED BACKS
The last edition of Environmental Issues carried an item on red-back spiders and the work carried out by what was then PCS Norwich (new PCS Anglia).
The item should have mentioned the sterling work of the fumigation team which consisted of Steve Bishops, supervisor and technicians Jeff Crawle, Jeremy Barraclough and Norman Hall.
The photograph shows the team preparing the consignment for fumigation.
A STAR PERFORMER
A recent study carried out by Management Today of the top 250 performing companies, highlights Rentokil at No. 46.
A performance which beats  Sainsburys , Unilever and Lonrho.
BOUNCING GIRLS
These are the girls from Garland Road who bounced for charity.
As part of the Children in Need fund raising day they took part in a sponsored bounce, whilst others from the Legal Department dressed as Anthony and Cleopatra persuaded East Grinstead shoppers to part with their money.
DON'T LET IT HAPPEN
‘If you don't want it published, don't let it happen’, has to be this month's reminder.
Too many incidents of neglect, carelessness or thoughtlessness are leaving us vulnerable to opportunist crime or possible prosecution by Health and Safety authorities.
In one week recently a fumigation trailer and two pest control vans were stolen, a Healthcare side-loader was broken into, there was an alleged poisoning of a dog by a Rentokil product, and a threat to contaminate cans of food with a Rentokil rodenticide.
Some of these were not foreseeable or preventable but they all represent threats to our reputation, and all were reported to the media (although we managed to stop two of them being used by the media).
It is vital that we minimise such risks by paying strict attention to security, especially of vehicles and stores.
It is also vital that any incident or accident involving the emergency services (police, fire or ambulance) is notified to Peter Bateman at Felcourt as soon as possible so that he is briefed to dal with consequent media enquiries.
GENTLEMEN, start your engines
On August 6th 1991, 11 winners from W & V arrived on a dull drizzly morning at Mallory Park, Leicestershire.
Full of anticipation they were fitted out with very chic driving overalls, registered for the day (or did they sign their lives away?) and listened very intently to the briefing.
After being instructed on the circuit, racing lines, warning flags, etc, the condemned men were given a hearty meal.
Times to go down to the pits and the sun came out.
Was this a good omen?
First event, Golf GTi Saloon Car instruction and assessment.
Three budding Nigel Mansells and an instructor in each car, went progressively faster around the circuit on the racing line until all were familiar with what was expected of them.
One by one, they were taken out by the instructor so he could assess their skill and how much of the tuition we had taken in.
Single seater racing in Formula FF1 600's was the next event.
Having watched a video as a reminder of the earlier briefing, we donned helmets and squeezed into these very narrow cars.
Some people were a bit more ‘squeezed’ than others!!
Right hand gear change, non-synchromesh gearbox and in a very odd posture for driving, they set off for 5 laps in these amazing cars.
Next up, two Sports 2000 car were waiting to take unsuspecting victims on two laps with a professional driver.
140 mph down the back straight!
Brilliant car handling!
An experience of a lifetime in itself.
They then moved away from the main circuit, onto a piece of rough ground for the ‘Formula Finesse Auto Test’.
They were to drive around a marked circuit whilst keeping a ball in a dish on the bonnet.
The main problem was that we had to do it with a RELIANT ROBIN three wheeler car, looking remarkably similar to Del Boy's.
First a practice circuit, then a timed circuit it.
If the ball was dislodged from the dish, you had to stop the car, retrieve the ball and continue.
This was an amazing competition and everybody enjoyed it so much Mike has promised to give them Reliant Robins for their next company cars.
John ‘Closet’ Clist won the competitions with a time of 21.9 seconds.
The final event and off to the kart racing.
Everybody did 10 laps with the winners of each race going through to the next heat.
It was very close racing and an excellent spectator event too.
At the end of the day though, Billy ‘Slick’ Smith won the final.
The top scorer was Mike ‘Won't this go any faster’ Hooper and with 148 points and, and he received a prize for his driving prowess.
We were all given our assessment cards and a certificate as a memento of a truly magic day.
One of the best incentives ever.
NEW ANGLIA PEST CONTROL and HEALTH CARE CENTRE
A new purpose-built Pest Control and commercial Healthcare centre to accommodate two Rentokil branches in these specialist areas, was opened at Howletts Way on the Fisons Industrial Estate, Thetford in November by the Mayor and Mayoress of Thetford.
The Company's Pest Control service covering Norfolk and Suffolk has moved from Norwich where it operated for over 30 years.
The Healthcare branch and depot is a new one, created to cope with the increasing demand for our hygiene services in washroom and toilet facilities in all types of commercial, industrial and public buildings.
Regional Managing Director of Environmental Services, Graham Foote, Area Manager Pest Control James Burford, and Area Manager Healthcare, Steve McAree, hosted the occasion which was attended by Breckland District Council officials and local businessmen.
The move to Thetford will provide a central location with easy access to the Company's contract customers throughout East Anglia, from a modern well-equipped centre.
The Pest Control service covers Norfolk and Suffolk.
The Healthcare service also extends to North Essex, Cambridgeshire and parts of South Lincolnshire.
The land adjacent to the site is also owned by Audley Square Properties and is now available for the construction of other purpose-built commercial buildings.
Just beyond the boundary is the site of an Iceni camp used by Queen Boadicea and her army close to what is now the All road.
WHO'S WHO AT THE ZOO
All five London Pest Control branches have recently been involved in intensive council flat cockroach and pharaohs ant treatments.
(See ‘High Rise Roaches’ in previous publications).
At times this has involved over a hundred Rentokil staff on site at one time.
Area Manager, Paul Stearn saw the opportunity of bringing together contented councillors who had used our services with local authority personnel who held the keys to future business.
So mid October saw many of the councillors and officials at London Zoo.
The seminar took place in The Zoological Society's Regency Suite and the morning session covered the various pest problems and the techniques that Rentokil employ to solve them.
The talks were given by Colin Dicker, Paul Bates, Russell Baldwin, Mark Poole, and Phil Allman.
Graham Knight chaired a lively question and answer session.
During lunch the Rentokil managers were heartened by the fact that in such a short space of time the seminar had paid for itself four times over by the amount of business gained.
After lunch all delegates were able to visit the Zoo where Rentokil have the job of getting rid of unwelcome insects and animals without harming the ones they want to keep!
Paul Stearn and his team are hopeful that greater public awareness and increased pressure on councils to resolve pest problems will mean further local authority work in the future.
NOT ONLY…
BUT ALSO
1992 will see the launch of a new campaign by Pest Control's South West area to stem the tide of terminations and to promote prospects for new business.
Under the watchful eye of Area Manager, Martin Ellis, the campaign call ‘NOT ONLY…
BUT ALSO…’ is being spearheaded by Derek Bird and Peter Caswell, Branch Manager PCS Oxford and Jerry Wright, Customer Liaison Executive.
The campaign will be a co-ordinated programme running throughout 1992 and will involve service, sales and administration.
It will make sure that everyone not only tells our customers what we do for them but also why we do it.
Greater customer awareness of our total service will undoubtedly lead to a greater appreciation of the real benefits of financial savings and peace of mind for all our customers.
The campaign will be launched in January and reinforced at the Area Service Conference in February.
This is a natural progression from the work carried out in the area during 1991 on the Food Safety Act.
Dear Readers
Thank you for all your contributions over the last year, and please accept my apologies if I haven't been able to use an article that you've sent, hopefully the next issue will contain those for which due to lack of space I was unable to include this time.
Environmental Issues is your magazine, and anything and everything is considered for inclusion, so do ring, write, fax or grab me at a conference (well not literally!) with your information.
I hope you all have a great Christmas and I look forward to hearing from you!
Alison Couper
Editor