

NEWS Hunterston
4 NOVEMBER– 19 NOVEMBER 1992
OUTPUT
Hunterston Power Station has operated continuously throughout the period generating 317.7 GWHrs of electricity.
OPERATIONS
Reactor 3 operated at full power throughout the period until 15 November when the Reactor shut down automatically.
By the end of the period the Reactor was generating 570 MW of electricity.
Three new channels were successfully refuelled.
Reactor 4 generated 615 MW of electricity during the period after returning from its biennial shutdown for maintenance work.
The output was restricted due to work being done on the Main Boiler Pump Feed.
A STATION
The defuelling programme on the A Station continues to programme.
INCIDENTS
Two incidents were recorded in the Incident Register during the period under review.
The first occurred on 12 November following the return to service of an essential supplies motor generating set, which resulted in both 3A and 3B units tripping with consequential loss of essential supplies.
A second shutdown of the 3B unit occurred but following investigation the unit was successfully returned to services.
The second incident occurred when Reactor 3 shut down automatically on November 15.
The cause of the shut down is still being investigated.
Both incidents were classified as Level 1 on the International Nuclear Events Scale indicating minor safety significance.
VISITS
Groups visiting the Station throughout the period have included groups from Inverclyde Business School, Largs Women's Business Club, Motherwell Probus, IBM Retirees, Glasgow University and Strathclyde University.
GENERAL
A group of Scottish Nuclear employees have recently returned from a trip to Khmelnitsky Nuclear Power Station in the Ukraine.
It is hoped that a visit to Hunterston by staff of the Ukraine Station will be arranged early in 1993.
INFORMATION COMMUNICATION
TORNESS
The statutory outage on Reactor 1 was completed three days ahead of schedule in a total time of 6 weeks, 4 days…an excellent performance by everyone concerned.
Advantage was taken of a double reactor shutdown to install some common carbon dioxide system modifications.
Both reactors are now operating at full load.
HUNTERSTON B
Reactor 3 is now in the fifth week of a 14-week outage, with work on schedule.
Vessel entries began on Sunday, 15 August, for essential electrical work.
The dual reactor shutdown commenced on 8 August for essential electrical work.
The opportunity will be taken to conduct investigations into the recent boiler tube leak in C Quadrant of Reactor 4.
Details of Fairlie Community Council's request for facilities for a summer fete in the station car park beside the Visitor Centre are awaited…
HUNTERSTON A
Good progress continues to be made on defuelling Hunterston A. The safety case for simplifying plant surveillance has been submitted to the Safety Committee.
NUCLEAR ELECTRIC
Nuclear Electric's reduction of their unit cost during 1992–93 to 2.88 pence per unit compares favourably with our own 2.98 ppu and provides Scottish Nuclear with a challenge to improve performance.
ENGINEERING
John Dynan has been seconded from Torness to lead the project for the installation of the GOMIS system at Smolensk Nuclear Power Plant in Russia.
This is a commercial contract for Scottish Nuclear and our partners ESB International, and will make a profit for the Company.
DRY STORE
The Reporter to the Public Inquiry is now preparing his Part 2 Report to the Secretary of State…his confidential recommendations on the Dry Store.
The Secretary of State's decision is expected late September/early October.
Comments made by all parties consulted have now been incorporated into the Environmental Statement for the Hunterston Dry Store.
SAFETY
A contractor at Hunterston B was saved from serious injury by his helmet when a scaffolding clip fell on him.
The incident is being investigated.
FINANCE
The invoice section from Contracts & purchasing and estimates and cost control from Engineering have been absorbed into the accounts group of the Finance Department at Peel Park.
CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS
Preparations are in hand to communicate to staff the details of the Government's Review of the nuclear industry, of which terms of reference are now expected at the end of September.
Staff should watch Microvitec for updates on the situation.
An invitation has been extended to all staff to take their families or clubs and organisations on Come & See tours of the power stations: details from  tel; at Peel Park or Training, Visits & welfare offices at the power stations.
CUSTOMERS
Working in conjunction with ScottishPower, we have been changing the plant at Hunterston which provides the excitation for the turbine generators.
This is necessary to improve the stability of the Scottish grid system when operating in the high export conditions likely to be experienced when exporting large amounts of electricity to England.
This will allow the Scottish electricity supply industry to take maximum benefit from the new upgraded interconnector.
Recently there have been a number of instances when our generation was turned down mainly because of restriction imposed by the National Grid Co. in England for construction and upgrading work.
No. 54…
FUEL CONTRACTS DEPARTMENT PUBLISH FIRST PROCEDURE MANUAL
The Fuel Contracts Department at Peel Park has just issued a comprehensive Departmental Procedures Manual, covering everything from the booking-in of mail to the department to the ordering of new AGR fuel for Hunterston and Torness.
The Manual was compiled by a team who applied TOP processes to the task over a period of six months.
It brings together existing procedures and develops completely new ones within a single document which complements the Company's Green Book of financial procedures.
Fuel Contracts Manager David Scobie said, ‘We were looking at our inter-relationships with our internal customers, the services we provide.
We recognised there was a need to ensure quality and consistency in everything we did, to be able to point out to our customers how we do things, and where necessary to be audited on these procedures.
‘Also, we were aware of the activities of the formal Working Groups on the site and the need for all departments to produce procedure documents in conformance with BS5750.
‘As a small team, we were able to move relatively quickly.’
Gavin Tosh, who had previous experience of introducing such a document in GEC led on the task.
He said, ‘We started with a brainstorming session where all members of the Department threw in their ideas on the areas which needed written procedures.
‘This sounds easy but in fact proved how difficult it can be to stand back and identify every activity carried out in your own workplace (and those that maybe aren't but should be!) where standard procedures should be employed.
‘The next step was to split the project into manageable categories where individuals could take specific responsibility for producing and getting acceptance for a group of procedures.’
The Fuel Contracts Team acknowledge the document will continue to be developed.
An important feature is the QA-approved amendment mechanism to allow changes or additions to be made in the light of experience.
Liaison has been maintained with the QA Department to ensure overall compatibility for BS5750.
It is expected some of the Manual will be suitable to be offered to the Contracts and Purchasing Working Group charged with producing their own procedures document for BS5750.
The Fuel contracts Department has a second team operating within the TOP Programme developing a computerised fuel cycle market intelligence system.
Torness Bulletin
Annual Results Show Steady Progress
Continuing teamwork and real commitment from the staff has brought improvement on all fronts, said Scottish Nuclear Chairman James Hann in his statement in the Annual Report & accounts for 1992–93.
On sales of £524 million (an increase of £47m on last year), Scottish Nuclear's net profit increased to £66 million, almost five times the 1991–92 figure of £14 million.
‘Good news,’ says Chairman James Hann, ‘but still not really good enough bearing in mind the level of investment in our company — but we are getting there.
PROFIT
‘This profit has been partly achieved by increasing output and meeting tight expenditure budgets,’ said Mr Hann.
‘Lower inflation and interest rates also contributed to this year's increase in profit.
‘The reduction of our cost base combined with an increased output of 14.34 Terawatt hours resulted in an operating cost of 2.98 pence per unit, compared with 3.21 ppu last year.
‘We intend to continue to increase output and drive our unit costs down to a level at which they are competitive with other sources of electricity generations.’
As part of the periodic review of company assets, the company has accepted the results of an engineering study on extending the life of Torness from 30 to 35 years, resulting in a rescheduling of depreciation charges.
A similar study is under way at Hunterston B.
The dry store at Torness, on which a decision is awaited from the Secretary of State for Scotland, should also help reduce costs.
An environmental statement for a similar store at Hunterston has been circulated to interested parties for comment.
On the Government Review of the nuclear industry, Mr Hann said, ‘We are focussing on key issues, in conjunction with the Nuclear Utilities Chairmen's Group, to ensure our industry is well prepared for the review.
‘Reactor design, future finance for replacement stations, and public acceptability are among the topics being studied for a report to provide the basis for the industry's case that nuclear is a vital part of the UK's energy mix.
‘It should not only be retained but given the go-ahead for further development, involving new advanced PWRs to replace the aging Magnoxes.
‘Nuclear will be needed if we are to sustain our quality of life whilst ensuring we do not damage planet earth beyond repair.’
After thanking all Scottish Nuclear staff for their ‘quite exceptional’ efforts over the year, the Chairman ended, ‘I remain confident Scottish Nuclear can continue to improve its competitiveness and maintain its first class record of safety.
‘We are determined to ensure that nuclear generation has a significant future within an integrated and balanced energy policy.’
Stars of the Scottish AGM of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution were Torness health physics monitor, Johnnie Johnstone,(pictured above) who is coxswain of the Eyemouth lifeboat, and his crew.
Johnnie was presented with the RNLI's Thanks on Vellum for rescuing the Tyne pilot launch Norman Foster in a force 9 gale.
His fellow crew members — cox'n/mechanic , crewman , emergency mechanics  and , crewman  ex-cox'n and launching authority , and former crewman  all received Vellum Service Certificates.
The presentations were made by the RNLI President, the Duke of Atholl and , wife of the RNLI's Director.
INVESTMENT PAYS OFF
The value of the company's investment of several million pounds in a stock of strategic spares was dramatically justified earlier this year.
The 400 Kv winding in Generator Transformer 1 at Torness failed, causing the reactor to trip.
‘Examination of the transformer by our own staff and specialists from Parsons Peebles showed detailed examination at PP's Edinburgh plant would be necessary,’ said Robin Preece, Acting Principal Maintenance Engineer at Torness.
‘Without a replacement, the plant could have been out of action for months, reducing Torness's productive capacity by half and costing the company a fortune in lost revenue.
‘However, a spare transformer was being held at Hunterston for just the eventuality.’
The spare was originally part of the national stock held by the three electricity boards before privatisation and came to Scottish Nuclear during dispersal of that stock in 1990.
Though manufactured by a different company from those at Torness, it could be adapted and fitted to bring Reactor 1 back into operation.
The next problem was how to move the 160 tonne load across Scotland.
‘Government regulations make it extremely difficult to move it by road,’ said Allister Anderson, of Nuclear Services at Peel Park, who became involved at this stage.
‘Bridges would have had to be checked for strength, police escorts arranged, heavy-lift vehicles hired, local authorities notified.
‘A second problem was that the Aberthaw Fisher, the heavy-lift ship best suited for the job, was already involved in another charter.
‘We negotiated with her owners and were able to secure her movement to Ardrossan.
‘Hunterston pulled out all the stops to get the spare transformer readied for shipment, a section of the fence was removed to give easy access for the low-loader, and the transformer was moved to the docks at Ardrossan and loaded on to the Fisher.
‘After a voyage round the north of Scotland, she docked at the Torness ro-ro berth, where the transformer was unloaded and moved into position.
Robin Preece went on ‘The disruption has been minimised by the tremendous co-operation of everyone involved, at all three Scottish Nuclear locations and our contractors.
WORLD REACTOR TOTAL NEARS 500
Six new reactors began to generate electricity during 1992, bringing the world total of nuclear power units in operation or under construction to 496 worldwide.
Canada and France both switched on one each, while India and Japan had two each.
The International Atomic Energy Agency reports there are now 72 plants being built including two in Japan on which work started during the year.
Sizewell B continues to be Britain's only entry to the construction list.
Scotland, on it's own, would fall into sixth place.
Hunterston and Torness together produced almost 50% of all the electricity consumed in Scotland during the year.
NEW DISMANTLING CELL
Work has begun fitting the new irradiated fuel dismantling cell at Torness which will provide greatly increased flexibility in the fuel route and allow production to continue if problems are experienced in either cell.
The £21 million contract is being undertaken by Thompson Nuclear Engineering, a subsidiary of Rolls Royce Nuclear Engineering Services, and is scheduled to be completed by October 1994.
Confusingly perhaps, the new cell is IFD 1.
When Torness was built, the unit installed and put into operation was IFD 2, with space provided in the civil structure of the reactor to accommodate a second cell if required.
The first irradiated fuel will be dismantled in the new cell in January 1995 and from then on it will be available for alternative use with IFD 2.
SAFETY AWARD
Scottish Nuclear has been presented with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) silver award for Health and Safety.
Director of Safety and Quality Richard Killick received the award on behalf of the Chief Executive at the RoSPA International Safety and Health Exhibition in Birmingham.
The award is a recognition of Scottish Nuclear's significantly improved accident rate since the formation of the Company just over three years ago, and the policies, procedures and organisation to support these improvements.
The improvements in the accident rate have come about largely as a result of increased awareness about safety matters and a developing safety culture.
NEW CENTRE FOR PORT SETON
Director of Safety & quality Richard Killick (left) recently handed over a cheque for £200,000 to East Lothian District Council chief executive Malcolm Duncan (centre) and council chairman George Wanless to help finance the construction of a new community sports centre in Port Seton.
The centre will be equipped for use by Scottish Nuclear as a media briefing centre linked to the Torness Off-site Centre nearby at Cockenzie Power Station.
TRAINING TO BE SAFE
The exercise held at Cockenzie early in June to test the preparedness of Torness to deal with an emergency incident is just one of a series held regularly to test Scottish Nuclear's arrangements.
At each power station, five full exercises, involving all the local emergency services, are held annually to ensure everyone working at the power station is fully trained to deal with accidents involving any possible hazards.
In addition, a flask exercise is held in conjunction with British Rail, when a crash involving a spent fuel transport flask is simulated and a full programme of safety measures and recovery tested.
For each station, Off Site Centres have been set up — at Cockenzie for Torness, and at the company's head office at Peel Park for Hunterston — from where any incident can be controlled.
A new Media Briefing Centre for Torness Power Station is being incorporated in the new community centre being built at Port Seton.
Control of emergency operations is now held by the police, advised by Scottish Nuclear and with input from various Government departments, local authorities, health authorities, fire and ambulance services, and others.
‘There has been considerable interest in our emergency procedures from major oil companies and several other industrial organisations,’ said Emergency Planning Engineer Bill Burgoyne.
‘Following the Piper Alpha disaster and other incidents they have become aware that we can all learn from each other.’
TORNESS GETS READY TO WELCOME LIFEBOAT
Following investigations by the Royal Lifeboat Institution Torness Harbour is to be the new base for one of Scotland's key lifeboats.
It's hoped that by the end of July a Waveney class lifeboat from the reserve fleet will be based at Torness provisionally for one year to assess its viability as a mooring and operational base for Dunbar's all-weather lifeboat.
If Torness proves to be operationally viable, it is likely that one of the new fast lifeboats will be allocated to the Station, ensuring the future of Dunbar's role key station.
A lifeboat was based at Skateraw between 1907 and 1943, manned by the Dunbar crew, to overcome launching difficulties at Dunbar Harbour at certain states of tide and weather.
The RNLB Sarah Hay, a 35 ft Liverpool class pulling and sailing boat was launched in 18 occasions and saved 57 lives.
When the station was finally closed, the Sarah Hay was the last pulling and sailing boat service in Scotland.
Since the opening of the power station, Torness Harbour has been used only rarely but offers the best permanent, deep-water facility on the south-east coast between Leith and the Border.
The mooring is more stable and less vulnerable to weather than that at Dunbar.
There is no tidal limitation and a lifeboat could respond at any time day or night.
The breakwater and pier provide protection from the worst weather and sea conditions, dissipating the high seas and swell caused by gales from the north, east and south.
The landmass of Torness, Skateraw and Barns Ness protects the harbour from the worst of the weather from the west.
Any lifeboat stationed at Torness would still be known as the Dunbar Lifeboat and the Dunbar Lifeboat House will remain the HQ of the Station.
The Inshore Lifeboat will continue to operate from Dunbar and crew gear, assembly, training etc will remain there.
NEW SCHEME WILL SOLVE CLAIMS
Scottish Nuclear and the recognised trade unions within the company recently announced their intention to join the compensation scheme for radiation-linked diseases.
Formal arrangements and scheme documentation are still in preparation.
About one in three Scots will contract cancer and a quarter will die from it.
Although studies of radiation workers in this country show, in fact, that they experience fewer cancer deaths than the general population.
In addition, SNL doses are now very low.
It is clear some workers and ex-workers who do develop cancer will question whether their work with SSEB/SNL was in any way responsible.
To settle these questions, there is at the moment only legal action — expensive, lengthy, adversarial, and only able to be settled on an all-or-nothing basis.
Something better was required.
The Scheme makes no difference to an employee's rights to take legal action, and the Company accepts no liability.
But by joining, we will have an independent, agreed, and fairly simple and quick method to answer such questions based on sound expert scientific knowledge.
It is clear the vast majority of cancers are not due to radiation exposure at work and therefore in most cases, no compensation will result.
Compensation will be paid if appropriate.
In addition, the Scheme allows for payment to be made in some cases where the assessment of probability of causation would be insufficient for liability to be established in the courts.
The actual amount would be worked out by union and company solicitors on the same basis as if the case had been tried.
The Scheme calculates a probability of cause by comparing the radiation risk based on the individual worker's dose and the natural frequency of the cancer based on national statistics.
The Scheme was originally introduced in 1982 by British Nuclear Fuels, AEA joined in 1987.
It is administered by an independent Executive Secretary but managed jointly by management and unions.
The employee's Union will represent his or her interests during the progress of the claim.
Scottish Nuclear and the Trade Unions believe that the Scheme is advantageous to everybody concerned.
PRAISE FROM N.I.I.
CHIEF
Laurence Williams, Deputy Chief Inspector of the NII, recently wrote to Dr Robin Jeffery to congratulate the staff at Torness and Scottish Nuclear on the condition of the plant and the performance of its staff during a recent emergency exercise.
‘The criteria I use is simple,’ he wrote.
‘If an emergency were to occur, do I have confidence that the station staff could cope effectively with it’.
‘After seeing the exercise I have no doubts.
‘I would like to draw special attention to the management of the forward control point and the teams at the sharp end who had to don BA equipment and work under arduous conditions.
‘I thought their training and commitment to this task impressive.’
Mr Williams said the condition of the plant at Torness does credit to SNL and shows the management and staff are clearly committed to the high standards demanded of the nuclear industry.
TORNESS COMPETITION
Scottish Nuclear's ‘Follow That Dog’ sweatshirt are about to set a new trend in Scottish fashion — and we're giving five away in our special Bulletin competition.
Just answer the simple question, complete your name and address, not forgetting to include your size, and return the coupon to Bulletin Competition,.
We'll send sweatshirts to the first five correct entries out of the hat on 30 July.
Scottish Nuclear staff and their families are not eligible to enter.
WINNING TEAM
Winners all round — the Torness team with (front left) and (second from right front).
The skills required to manoeuvre flask transporters obviously stood Adam Luke, from Torness, in good stead when he entered the Scottish lorry driving championship held at the SECC in Glasgow recently.
He emerged with the trophies for Scottish Lorry Driver of the Year and will go on to the national finals at Telford in Shropshire.
The Station also won the Team prize, while John Thompson came second in the Van Driver of the Year Contest.
CARING FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
For the first time, Scottish Nuclear's Annual Report carries a detailed statement of the Company's environmental standards and policies.
‘Nuclear energy is one of the cleanest methods of generating electricity,’ it states, ‘and already makes a substantial contribution to reducing carbon dioxide emissions in the UK.
‘Much more needs to be done if the UK is to meet its CO2 emissions target by the year 2000 and control them beyond that date.
‘We must do more than simply continue to meet the stringent safety and environmental standards imposed by statute.’
Scottish Nuclear's business plan contains four important environmental goals:
To develop an awareness and understanding of the interactions between company operations and the environment for both itself and the general public.
To maintain a healthy working environment for all employees.
To respect the environment and to seek to protect it in the course of company activities.
To assist in the development of alternative forms of non-polluting electricity generation.
A special team sponsored by the Chief Executive will review all Company activities with the aim of developing a strategy to achieve its environmental goals.
At Torness a demonstration wind generator and solar panels have been installed at the Visitor Centre to raise public awareness of renewable technology.
And in conjunction with the National Engineering Laboratory and IT Power, Scottish Nuclear is financing the design, construction and testing of a pilot tidal stream turbine in Corran Narrows, near Fort William.
Press Release
SCOTTISH NUCLEAR STRENGTHENS LINKS WITH EASTERN EUROPE
Two senior Russian engineers from the Smolensk Power Station have arrived in East Lothian and begin work this week at Torness Power Station.
Head of the Smolensk Control and Instrumentation Department and  Head of their Planning Department will spend 3 weeks at Torness, working with different departments, learning about the Company and about procedures and working practices within the Station.
The working visit is part of an on-going exchange of information and personnel which follows the signing, last November, of a Protocol Agreement between Torness and the Smolensk Power Station.
The Smolensk Power Station at Desnogorsk, 350km south west of Moscow consists of three RBMK light water graphite moderated reactors of 3200 MW(th).
The units were commissioned in 1982, 1985 and 1990.
The reactors are similar in design to the Chernobyl plant but have undergone a number of modifications since 1986.
As the Russian engineers were arriving in Scotland, Gordon Beattie from Scottish Nuclear's Contracts and Purchasing department was setting out for Bulgaria for a six month secondment working at the Headquarters of the Bulgarian Energy Committee in Sofia.
A native of Bearsden near Glasgow, Gordon graduated in Business Studies from Stirling University in 1986 and joined CPC (Redditch) Ltd.
A Contracts Specialist with Scottish Nuclear since 1990, Gordon will be involved in the setting up and administration of a range of contracts for assessment studies for work to be carried out at the Kozloduy Power Station.
Funded by the European Community, the World Association of Nuclear Operators is co-ordinating an international effort to improve operating procedures at Kozloduy and bring them up to international safety standards.
John Hall, a senior operations engineer from Hunterston, has been working in Bulgaria since August of last year as part of the WANO ‘good-housekeeping’ team.
The Bulgarian power station at Kozloduy has six VVER type reactors all supplied by the USSR.
Four 440 MW units were commissioned from 1974 to 1982, the fifth, a 1000 MW reactor, began operating in 1988 and the other 1000 MW unit is in the final stages of commissioning.
Both the Russian visit to Torness and Gordon Beattie's secondment were arranged through WANO and are part of the increasing links between the British nuclear industry and operating companies in Eastern Europe.
For further information contact   
Scottish Nuclear NEWS Issue no. 25 August, 1993
Hunterston security guard Fred Munday did a double take as he patrolled the perimeter road recently.
Out on the mudflats towards the wall of the rig yard were two large pink birds on spindly legs.
Flamingoes!
‘But this if the Firth of Clyde,’ he said to himself.
‘Not Africa or the tropics of South America.
‘And it's cold.’
A second look confirmed they were there, but he asked photographer Douglas McCord to take a picture to convince everyone that they don't put something strong in the gatehouse tea and coffee.
David Mitchell of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds office in Edinburgh says the birds will be strays from a zoo or private collection and can thrive perfectly well in our climate.
The crustaceans and shellfish on the shores and rocks around Hunterston will provide them with ample food, and will also provide the carotenes they need to stay pink.
Our savings target is £2 million
This month sees the TOP Programme completing its first 18 months of operation.
In that time, it has created new philosophy within Scottish Nuclear for getting things done, improving the way we work, and making significant savings in the company's costs.
A recent assessment showed that already cost reductions of £430,000 per year have been achieved through TOP.
However, this is only the beginning.
And if Scottish Nuclear is to continue to prosper, the savings and improvement will have to be much larger.
Chief Executive Dr Robin Jeffery agreed the target for 1993–94 of savings of £2 million — a very great deal of money, but one which is attainable.
Improvements currently being developed through TOP have a potential to reduce spending by between £1 million and £i.5 million.
Of the savings made so far, £180,000 is in time saved in the work we do.
In other words, increased efficiency.
The other £240,000 is actual money saved.
Here's a breakdown of the benefits at each location:
We have also seen improvements in production safety, and communications, all the result of TOP  improvements .
Only by standing back can we see how work is now being done better, considering how jobs were handled before TOP.
But there is no room for resting on our laurels.
As a company and as individuals, we are still a very long way from the goals set at the outset of TOP in February 1992 and much remains to be done.
In some Peel Park and Torness departments, for instance, TOP has not yet had the impact required to bring the programme up to the standard achieved at Hunterston.
We must improve, to achieve the cost savings and extra efficiency needed for Scottish Nuclear's survival as a viable, profitable company.
Now we have to use the tools and techniques learned through TOP to make it happen.
Achievements are made by people working together as a team which is properly managed and led.
Every team leader, at all levels in the company, must put into action all the principles of TOP.
(See Page 3)
TAKING A HARD LOOK
As the Government's review of the nuclear industry draws nearer, the prime questions are ‘What do they want to know?
Which aspects of our operations will be put under the microscope?
By what standards will we be measured?’
As Scottish Nuclear News went to press, there was still no indication of the exact terms of reference the government will set.
However, Minister for Energy Tim Eggar told the British Nuclear Industry Forum conference, ‘The Government's policy is clear.
‘We are committed to retaining the nuclear option for the future, provided the industry can demonstrate that nuclear generation is economic and provided it can meet rigorous standards of safety and environmental protection.’
He said the Government needs to take a hard look at the future and the form the nuclear industry should take.
The examination of existing stations during the Coal Review established there is no case for early closure not for the abandoning Sizewell B.
Existing stations have low marginal and avoidable costs, contribute to diversity and security of supply, and help curb acid raid and ‘greenhouse gas’ emissions.
‘Since 1989, the industry has made great strides in getting costs down and output up, and maintaining high standards of safety and environmental protection,’ he said.
‘While much remains to be done, a very positive start has been made.
One key question, he said, was whether new nuclear stations will be commercially viable in the UK.
COMPETITIVE
The generators have told the Government they can build stations to come on stream in the early 2000s which will be price competitive with other fuels without subsidies.
‘The Review will test that ambition and examine the prospects for securing private sector financing,’ said Mr Eggar.
It will also examine the current financial arrangements, including the fossil fuel levy in England and Wales.
Praising the safety record of the British industry, he commended the links being developed with plants and industries in Eastern Europe and the former USSR, and welcomed the technical co-operation agreements such as the ‘twinnings’ of Torness and Hunterston.
‘We need to endorse this type of pragmatic assistance.
I am confident it will bring real benefits in the longer term,’ he said.
‘These are vital foundations for building the G-7's programme of action to which the Government is committed.
‘This was underlined by our £8.25 million contribution to the Nuclear Safety Account.’
Early end to outage
The annual maintenance outage on Reactor 1 at Torness was completed three days ahead of schedule…and that means an extra 45 Gigawatt hours of production for the Company.
‘The way we achieved this was simple — tremendous teamwork by everyone involved, pulling together and making that extra effort which achieves better results’, said Plant Manager Phil Blackburn.
‘The thanks of everyone in the company are due to them for really pulling out the stops when it was needed’.
The outage was complicated by the fact that the Torness fuel route is also undergoing an outage this summer.
(See Page 6).
Twelve channels of the reactor were refuelled before the outage began and then the fuel route was taken out of service immediately.
This fuel will now keep the plant running until the fuel route returns to service.
The new Dunbar lifeboat, the Waveney-class Thomas James King, was on station in Torness Harbour to greet Spirit of Scotland when she returned from the Tall Ships Race to Norway (see back page).
It will be based there for an experimental period of a year to evaluate suitability of the bay behind the power station as a permanent mooring for the lifeboat.
It's not the first time a lifeboat has been based in the bay.
From 1907 to 1943, the Sarah Kay, a 35-ft sailing/rowing lifeboat, was stationed as Dunbar No. 2 at a lifeboat shed next door to Olive Walker's house by the shore at Skateraw.
The old boat, seen in our picture (below) with her cox'n Walter Fairbairn, saved over 60 lives, and was the last pulling and sailing lifeboat in Scotland when she finally went out of service in 1943.
CRUSHED CANS RAISE CASH
Hang on to that can!
The Can Crusher King wants it.
Hunterston storekeeper David Frew noticed the number of cans of soft drinks being consumed at the power station, particularly during the outage.
‘Scrap merchants will pay 45p per kilo for empty drinks cans, provided they are crushed into a shape that's easily handled,’ he said.
‘It was obviously a good way to raise money for local charities, instead of just throwing them away in the waste bins.
‘I put in a TOP TIP about it and got the go-ahead to install Kan-Krushers at 18 different points on the site.
‘People have very quickly got used to the idea of crushing their cans and putting them in the special bins provided.
‘I'm now collecting over nine kilos a week and hope to build the figure even higher.
I'd like people to bring in their cans from home, crush them and add them to the on-site collection.
‘The money I get for the scrap is paid into the Finance Department, and when the fund has built up to a worthwhile sum I'll be calling for suggestions for a local charity to whom we can donate the cash.’
Tell us your news
Scottish Nuclear New's network of local correspondence has been expanded to cover various departments at Peel Park.
If you have a story, picture, or idea for the paper contact one of them.
Our new reporters at Peel Park are:
£4M AID PLAN FOR SMOLENSK
Scottish Nuclear's involvement with the European Commission and WANO in their programmes to bring former Soviet and East European nuclear plants up to Western safety standard took a step forward recently with the return from Russia of Business Development Manager , of Peel Park, and  of Torness.
The visit followed meetings in Moscow in March with Rosenergoatom and Minatom.
‘We were at Desnogorsk to start the first phase of an 18-month partnership programme between the Smolensk station and ourselves under the TACIS 92 programme’, said Arthur.
The initials stand for Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth of Independent States…an initiative by the EC to provide financial and technical assistance on safety to the operators of six Russian and two Ukrainian reactors.
The £190,000 contract signed by Jim Grant last month was for the installation of a pilot GOMIS system at Desnogorsk.
It will include the acquisition of non-destructive testing equipment for pipe-work and the training of Russian operators.
Total cost of the two Smolensk projects will be £4 million, funded through the TACIS programme.
The assistance programme began over two years ago under the auspices of WANO.
John Hall's successful year at Kozloduy and John Richmond's follow-up period were both part of this.
However, the problems were so huge and required so much finance that other resources were required and the European Community has now taken a leading role.
There are TACIS allocations from the EC budget each year.
The recent visit to the Smolensk station came from the 1992 budget.
There will be further contributions through TACIS 93, TACIS 94, etc.
Almost all Western nuclear operating utilities are involved, with each having been appointed lead company for particular projects.
Electricite de France are now leaders at Kozloduy.
Because of the twinning  arrangement with Torness, Scottish Nuclear is the leader at Desnogorsk.
‘We have found many of the stations we have visited are interested in using GOMIS as part of their upgrading, and the project at Desnogorsk will be a pilot for possible installation at other stations’, said Arthur.
‘Meanwhile, we are continuing to build further contacts in Eastern and Central Europe and the links between Hunterston and Khmelnitski will go on.’
SNL advice for Czechs
In a second contract, Scottish Nuclear will provide advice next month to the nuclear utilities in the Czech Republic on several aspects of the management of nuclear plant.
Gavin Tosh, of Fuel Contracts at Peel Park, visited both the Czech Republic and Slovakia recently to discuss the project with representatives of the nuclear industry in both countries.
‘There are four plants there,’ he said, ‘one PWR operating in each country and another under construction in each republic.
‘Like all countries in the former Eastern Bloc, they need advice now that old links with the Soviet system have collapsed.
‘We won the £25,000 contract in competitive bidding through the Overseas Development Agency as part of the UK Know-How fund which has been set up to provide assistance to the countries of Eastern Europe.
‘The programme for the four-day seminar covers financial planning and modelling for nuclear plant, the handling and storage of nuclear waste and spent fuel, public relations, and contractual and organisational links with government and other bodies.
‘The split of Czechoslovakia into two countries has caused problems in some areas, but there is good co-operation between the two nuclear organisations and it is possible we will be asked to repeat the exercise in Slovakia.’
Bird boss Ron
Cracks about budgies going cheap fall on deaf ears with Torness security man Ron Blackley.
As breeder and exhibitor of budgerigars for the past 12 years he finds the joke wearing thin, but it hasn't dampened his enthusiasm for his hobby.
Besides being secretary of his local club, the Heart of Midlothian Budgerigar Society, he's also assistant show secretary of the Scottish Budgerigar Show, the largest one day show in Britain.
His own club's show — the next is due on 29 August in Dalkeith — is third largest in Scotland with over 900 birds on display.
Improvement still needed in TOP
Colin Hutchinson, consultant to the company for the TOP Programme, has been examining its progress on all three sites.
Here is his conclusions.
In some parts of the Company TOP is starting to take off and make a real difference.
There have been some good examples of team working, radical ideas and of getting the right people involved to make changes happen.
It is good to see the increasing use of TOP techniques, such as brainstorming, in people's day to day jobs, as well as on specific projects.
Particular highlights for me over the last year have included:
The visit of Nev Curtis from Delmarva in the United States.
Nev's ten years experience of using TOP to help turn Delmarva into the best in the business was fascinating.
The sheer hard work and enthusiasm of the people who have made TOP work.
The Chief Executive's walk the Talk programme.
The impressive and mould-breaking TOP activities starting to take shape at Hunterston.
Allan Paterson and is team of Irene, Colin and Margaret deserve credit here.
The visits to other companies.
One of the best ways to learn is to find out how other people do things.
The list of things that make TOP — Time outs, Improvement Teams, TOP Tips, Customer Supplier Workshops, Process Analysis Teams etc.
IMPRESSIVE
You won't find many companies with a more impressive list.
You just need to make them all work for you.
However, things are still too patchy.
LEAD
Too many people are able to, and do say, ‘I haven't been involved with TOP at all’.
Executives, Managers and Supervisors need to take the lead in getting TOP activity under way in every part of the business.
There is a clear message from the benefits achieved in the last year — When you get the right people involved in improvement, you get good results.
And usually the people enjoy it too.
This has to be built on.
The more people involved, and the more skilled they become, the better the results will be.
By mid 1994 every person in the Company should have been involved with an important and meaningful piece of TOP improvement activity.
TOP is here to stay.
It is not going to disappear like so many initiatives that start well but fade away.
Keep working at it.
Keep trying new things.
And reap the benefits.
Assistant Company Secretary Dr Jean MacDonald recently conducted two seminars at Hunterston for managers whose responsibilities involve them with contractors and sub-contractors.
As her theme she adopted the message of the Law Society of Scotlands TV ads starring Russell Hunter — It's never to early to consult your solicitor!
‘The law regarding the responsibilities of a company for the health and safety of its contractors and their employees are complex and frequently misunderstood,’ she said.
‘Ignorance is no defence if anything should go wrong, so I set out to ensure managers are more aware of the broad outlines of the position.’
18 MONTHS OF TOP
Executive Support Manager Allan Paterson looks back over the TOP Programme as it has progressed at Hunterston and considers some of its achievements.
FEB 1992 In the 36 hours following the TOP launch in February 1992 senior managers talked to all Station staff, including shift workers, to explain the need for change and the part everyone would play in the process.
APR 1992 The first two Improvement Teams were trained and a database set up to record TOP Tips.
JUN 1992 TOP post boxes and notice boards set up at various locations around the site and in mess rooms to communicate TOP news.
JUL 1992 TOP Time Outs launched to allow staff to take authorised time from their working week to address problems in their own work areas.
OCT 1992 The first Reward and Recognition points appeared on payslips.
The first three Improvement Teams presented their recommendations to the Management Review Body.
NOV 1992 The number of Improvement Teams had grown to 20.
Seven teams had made their recommendations and implementation had begun.
DEC 1992 Safetips launched at the Staff Conference to give staff the opportunity to contribute towards a safer working environment and to enhance the safety culture.
FEB 1993 The first anniversary of TOP was marked by presentations to a representative group of staff outlining progress and difficulties encountered in the past year.
The message of the way ahead in 1993 was communicated via Team Briefing and a special newsletter.
MAR 1993 Dr. Jeffrey began his ‘Walk the Talk’ sessions.
TOP Time Out and Improvement Team recommendations beginning to bear fruit with improvement in many areas and integration of TOP principles into day-to-day work.
APR 1993 At the first TOP Surgery Allan Paterson met team leaders to find out first hand the progress of their teams.
MAY 1993 During the  Khmelnitski exchange visit to Hunterston great interest was shown in TOP and the Director and Deputy Director of Khmelnitski NPP sat in on a team meeting to see it in action.
JUN 1993 16 volunteers, from all staff levels, trained as additional co-ordinators to support the growing participation of staff in TOP.
Jim Fulton, Health Physics, first quarterly winner of Safetip with suggestion to erect a handrail around the laundry building roof to improve safety.
JUL 1993 44 Improvement Teams had been formed, 16 reached implementation, 27 gathering data.
TOP Tips totalled 1047 — 9% implemented, 49% rejected, 13% outstanding, 29% suspended pending recommendations by Suggestion Scheme Improvement Team.
Staff participation in TOP Time Outs increased to 114 TOP Time Outs involving 290 staff.
68% of staff had now participated in the TOP Programme.
IMPROVEMENTS SO FAR
Savings of £240.00 identified at Hunterston in 1993/94.
TOP is beginning to impact on how things are done throughout the Station and the emphasis is now on tangible results.
We have moved from a culture largely unchanged from nationalisation to one in which the need for change is accepted and many staff are now use TOP principles automatically ,
Moving breathing apparatus sets from the store in the laundry building at Hunterston A to Hunterston B and back again has always been a hassle in the past.
The BA sets are heavy and can be easily damaged if not handled correctly.
During outages, as many as 20 have to be moved each day.
In the past, the Health Physics staff have even resorted to putting the sets in a plastic dustbin on a wheelbarrow!
However, after a TOP Timeout, they came up with a real solution.
Using scrap metal and steel porter's barrow, they designed and built a trolley specifically for the job which carries not one but two sets in perfect safety and with greater manoeuvrability.
Our picture shows Tommy Lundie with the new trolley.
Process under the microscope
With the main outage completed and the holiday season pressure easing, TOP Team activity is gathering momentum at Torness after a couple of months in the doldrums, writes Executive Support Manager Mervyn Jenkins.
The main thrust now is to analyse the main business processes of the station with two each per department being targeted for this financial year.
The first two processes to be looked at are Flask Handling from pond to railhead, and the training process.
Further processes have been identified and teams will  start on them between now and December.
The other main initiative to integrate TOP into the Management Review is a programme of team training for Section teams of which some 40-50 have been identified throughout the Station.
The implementation of the team recommendation programme is being finalised for execution this winter so that the full benefits of team working may be realised.
TOP Tips continue to come in and have attracted some 13,000 points to date.
Top Time Outs have started again and the workshop team report on the improvement in control and use of lifting tackle is impressive.
It is with some sadness we said Goodbye recently to Tom Bryce who left us under SVS.
Tom was a valuable member of the original Executive Support Team which launched the TOP initiative and will be missed for his initiatives and hard work.
He was also a leading figure in the introduction of the new 5th edition Safety Rules and his depth of knowledge will be difficult to replace.
The new member of the EST is Chris Robertson, from the Engineering Department.
With the loss of Tom and the prospect of more Co-ordinators retiring, training for another group is scheduled for September.
The rebuilding and refurbishment carried out in the reactor building at Hunterston B have provided a more pleasant and more easily cleaned environment.
The improved turnstiles and entrance area, Health Physics offices, and change areas have all been upgraded.
Our picture shows contractors Archie Spiers and Bobby Martin, from Nu-Line Partitions, putting the final touches to the change area.
Hunterston sponsor Cup
The Ayrshire Cup competition for amateur football teams throughout the county will be sponsored by Scottish Nuclear for £1500 during the next two years with the option for the sponsorship to be extended to 1995/96.
The sponsorship came about through Hunterston health physics monitor Bernie Andrews who is a registered amateur football referee.
‘The Ayrshire Amateur Football Association, like all similar organisations, is having a difficult time raising finance,’ he said.
‘When I heard the Cup competition had no sponsor, I approached Executive Support Manager Allan Paterson who passed the request on to Production Director Peter Robinson.’
‘He got the approval of the Company and the money will ensure the competition can continue.
‘During the years of sponsorship, it will be known as the Scottish Nuclear Ayrshire Cup, and reported in all the local papers and on Westsound Radio as such.
‘There are about 90 teams in the competition, so the Company's gesture will be known all over the county.
‘It's very welcome move by Scottish Nuclear.
In the present economic climate many amateur sporting organisations are facing great difficulties.’
Said Peter Robson, ‘I was only too pleased to help.
As one of Ayrshire's major industrial employers, we at the power station are always pleased to be able to make a contribution to the local community.
‘Sponsoring the cup competition meets all our criteria and can have wider implications.
‘Many of Scotland's football stars have come originally from the amateur ranks.’
Date for bowlers
The 1993 SNL/SSEB Pensioners' mixed triples bowling match will be held at West Kilbride Bowling Club on Thursday, 19 August.
The game, which is open to all pensioners, male and female, from the SSEB, Scottish Nuclear or ScottishPower, will start at 2.00pm
Those wishing to play should arrive at the club no later than 1.30.
A high tea will be served at the end of the game.
42 people took part last year, and the organisers hope to see more old friends at this year's game.
Further details from , Hunterston,.,
or ,.
Green man Jim
Jim Telfer, senior engineer in the Safety Division, has been appointed to co-ordinate all environmental activities throughout Scottish Nuclear.
‘Our process for generating electricity is environmentally friendly, but as a company deeply concerned about the environment we must take action to ensure we are not guilty ourselves,’ he said.
‘I have started a review of our performance in all kinds of areas when there can be an impact on the environment to build up an objective picture of where we stand at the present and where improvement can be made.
‘But I am also keen to hear from anyone who has suggestions to make on how we can improve our environmental impact.
‘If you have a suggestion on how we can improve, I want to hear from you.’
Education initiative
Scottish Nuclear has agreed to sponsor a major new education initiative involving 221 secondary schools in Scotland.
The main feature of the scheme is a video training pack on science which has already been introduced successfully in schools in England and Wales.
Part of the pack will be information and education material specifically concerned with Scottish Nuclear, telling both teachers and pupils about the company.
The new programme will be publicly launched during August at a special event attended by senior representatives of the Government, education authorities and Scottish Nuclear.
STRAIGHT FROM THE SHOULDER
‘Walk the Talk’ meetings by Dr Robin Jeffrey with staff at all three sites have now become a regular feature of Scottish Nuclear activity.
The response from the people he talks to gives him a grassroots view of the questions being asked throughout the Company, while the meetings give the staff the opportunity to put their own points to him straight from the shoulder.
Many questions recur time and time again.
Here we have selected a few of the most frequent, with Dr Jeffrey's answers.
What will happen at Hunterston A after all the fuel is removed, particularly in regard to staffing?
The fuel should all have been removed from both reactors by December 1994 and sent to Sellafield by the end of March 1995.
This completes Stage 1 of the decommissioning programme.
Stage 2 will take some 20–30 years to complete.
Currently we are reviewing the number of staff needed for Stage 2, but this will almost certainly be a significantly smaller number, and I anticipate quite a number of the existing A Station staff will want to go on SVS: quite a number have already indicated a wish to do so.
The company will do its best to find jobs for those who want to stay with Scottish Nuclear, either in the B Station, the Dry Store, or possibly at Torness.
How successful has delegation and empowerment been?
Will this principle be extended to other areas of the company's operations?
I believe delegation and empowerment is starting to show improvements but we still have a long way to go.
It is my intention this approach should extend throughout the Company.
Why isn't the ‘Walk the Talk’ system being extended to Production Directors and other managers, making them more visible rather than being constantly at meetings in their offices?
Every director and manager has ‘Walk the Talk’ objectives signed into his or her workplan, and this is starting to happen throughout the Company.
Changes don't happen overnight but the feedback I get is there's now greater visibility of managers and supervisors.
However, there's a point I'd like to make very strongly…many of you reading this have responsibilities to supervise or manage staff.
Don't complain because your boss is less visible than you would like — make sure YOU go out and about and are seen by the people you're responsible for.
Nuclear Electric paid their staff a bonus of £1600 when they declared their annual results.
Why can't Scottish Nuclear pay a bonus when our performance was even better?
Nuclear Electric have what they call ‘gain-sharing schemes’ at each of their power stations, and those stations which achieved specific targets were able to pay their staff a bonus of up to £1600.
Stations not meeting their targets (and there were some) got nothing whatsoever, and neither did NE head office staff where the schemes do not apply, Scottish nuclear is committed to introducing a performance related pay or performance bonus Company-wide but the scheme must operate on a self-financing basis.
No one should run away with the idea bonuses will be easily obtained…bonuses can openly be paid where the Company, through the efforts of its staff, achieves greater profitability than its target, by increasing output and reducing costs.
The cost basis of the company will have to be genuinely reduced for any bonus to be paid.
It is a matter of fact that over the past 12 months, Hinkley B has out-performed Hunterston B and Heysham 2 has performed better than Torness.
We're becoming involved in helping the nuclear operators in Eastern Europe to upgrade their plant.
What benefit is that to us?
How can the staff below manager grade become involved?
There are three benefits to the UK nuclear industry from helping Eastern Europe.
First, much of this work is done at commercial rates.
Second, it gives our staff excellent experience to go abroad and broaden their horizons…people are less likely to complain about working conditions here when they've seen with their own eyes what conditions are like abroad.
Finally, if there's another accident overseas like Chernobyl, it will do enormous damage to the reputation of the nuclear industry in the rest of the world.
Regarding staff becoming involved, initial discussions tend to involve senior staff but once the programme of work is signed up it will involve staff at all levels.
Furthermore, we have taken great care during twinning visits to make sure the teams are fully representative.
What benefit has there been from the Doctus exercise apart from cutting the number of jobs?
Are there going to be any more job losses over the next couple of years?
Doctus have helped us look at every aspect of how we are running the business and have helped us develop ideas for saving money.
I'm often asked ‘Couldn't we have done this ourselves without Doctus?’
The answer is Yes, but it would have taken much longer and with the Government's 1994 Review so imminent it made good sense to push on with the change process.
On jobs, its almost certain there will be further losses during the next two years, but bear in mind that when I asked for SVS volunteers last September more than 230 people applied.
So far 52 have left the Company with firm departure dates set for a further 62.
Currently I am reviewing with the Executive Team the size of the next phase of the job reduction programme.
I will make sure this is communicated to all staff through TOPIC as soon as this can be done.
I believe this too will be achieved through voluntary severance.
You've said the company is committed to a Hunterston C. The Government won't finance any new development and the City of London won't touch nuclear, so where will the money come from?
The Company is committed to continuing to supply around half Scotland's electricity needs, which means a new power station to take over from Hunterston B when it finally shuts down.
At present, planned closure is in 2005, but a lot of work is going into extending this to 2010.
By then the Government might be more receptive to financing new nuclear build because of increasing awareness of the damage being done to the environment by ‘greenhouse’ gases and acid rain.
Furthermore, because of developments such as Dry Store and greater hands-on experience of decommissioning, many of the doubts about the finance of nuclear are reducing.
It's a very complex area but I do think there are positive signs in favour of nuclear.
Why is so much work being done by contractors?
Why can't the work be done by Scottish Nuclear staff?
Sometimes we need to employ contractors because they have specialist knowledge.
On other occasions, work is very ‘peaky’ and it would not make sense to employ our own staff because they wouldn't be occupied full-time.
On other tasks we take on contractors simply because they are cheaper.
Obviously is we can increase the productivity of our own staff by better planning and systems, then we must,— and then we wouldn't need to employ so many outsiders.
TOP has got bogged down in some areas.
What new initiatives are coming forward in that field?
TOP has had many successes, as illustrated by the articles elsewhere in this paper.
However, I have to say I have been disappointed that through TOP we are not managing to achieve more.
Perhaps it has got bogged down in meetings and bureaucratic structures.
We must keep on finding better and simpler ways of doing things.
If all we need is a TOP Time-Out to find a solution to a problem, we shouldn't set up an Improvement Team.
The National Audit Office said the taxpayer would have to pay £1.6 billion to decommission our plant.
Is this true?
It's true decommissioning will cost Scottish Nuclear £1.6 billion, but much of this has got nothing to do with our own power stations.
It is a hangover from the way in which SSEB was privatised, the liabilities for decommissioning BNFL's plant at Chapelcross and Calder Hall.
Having said that, the £1.6 billion reduces to £0.7 billion once the time-value of money is taken into consideration, and this will be reduced yet again once the Government accepts proposals for Deferred Safestore which we submitted to them more than a year ago.
Looked at on a year-by-year basis, the sum of money we must set aside to pay for decommissioning represents only 4% of our annual turnover.
When do you expect the Government to start their review of the nuclear industry?
What sort of things do you expect them to look into?
The Government have said they will start the Review before the end of 1993.
It is very difficult to see into the minds of the Government, especially when they are so concerned with the results of the Christchurch by-election and almost non-ratification of the Maastricht Treaty!
It's very likely they will want to focus very hard on the economics of generating electricity from nuclear and perhaps also on the financing of nuclear power stations.
In order to perform well, we must demonstrate to the Government a successful track record of increasing output from our plant and of reducing costs.
What's going to be the future for Scottish Nuclear after the Government Review?
What line are you going to take in the Review?
I am confident Scottish Nuclear has a long-term future and that it will continue to be one of Scotland's best engineering companies.
However, this can only be achieved if we have a market for our electricity.
The way we must do this is by working together to get our costs down and ensuring we provide the quality of service out customers need at the right price.
We all have an essential role in this.
Come & see says Moira
Moira Murray from Finance at Peel Park was just having fun when she phoned the Q96 local radio station from her home in Cardonald, Glasgow.
DJ Kevin Cameron hosts a Saturday afternoon programme of 60's and 70's hits which Moira claims she's too young to remember…but she listens anyway.
Kevin also runs a pop quiz with a prize of a Q96 tee-shirt for those who win.
‘I thought I'd have a go, just for fun, and phone the station,’ said Moira.
The researcher who took her call asked where she worked and made the usual jokes about glowing in the dark when Moira said Scottish Nuclear.
‘The DJ took up the same line when he came on for the broadcast quiz interview,’ she went on.
‘But he seemed genuinely interested, particularly when I told him I'd been round one of the stations on a Come & See tour.
‘He said he'd seen our advertising and said he'd be interested in visiting one of our stations himself.
‘Oh yes….
I won the quiz too.
And the tee-shirt.’
Keep sending those pictures!
There are still prizes to be won in the Scottish Nuclear News photo competition.
A £5 Boots voucher for every one published and £25 voucher for the one judged the best of the year when the competition ends.
We're looking for the funny, the beautiful, the weird and the wonderful, family pictures and holiday snaps, but each of them must have that little extra something….
Send  your pictures to  along with a note of your name, department and location and any title or story behind the subject of the picture.
We'll return them unmarked after the paper is published.
Doctus delivers the goods
The Doctus contract scheduled to expire at the end of June 93 has been extended until December to allow further work to be undertaken in specific areas within the company.
As most of the initial work is now completed, the additional work will be carried out by a reduced number of consultants.
Since Spring 1992, Doctus have been involved in some 40 improvement teams throughout the company whose work has covered a wide range of topics.
The Administration Internal Cost Review team, led by Peel Park Admin Manager Allan King, examined ways of reducing costs in travel, catering, purchases of journals for the Library, etc.
The team's recommendations on travel policy have been accepted by the Executive Team and are expected to save around £100,000 per annum.
Anticipated savings of £50,000 in other Admin. areas bring the total expected savings to approximately £150,000.
In Contracts & purchasing , the Commercial Approach Team led by Dave Wright identified ways to improve the company's approach to letting contracts.
The team has reported to the Executive Team and will be re-formed to implement recommendations.
In addition to being involved with various improvement teams, Doctus have also reviewed the company's organisation structure and are currently developing a Management Information & control System.
In many ways, Doctus have acted as a catalyst, bringing together staff from various locations and backgrounds to achieve improved performance and results in well defined areas.
ON-LOAD REFUELLING IN SIGHT
Keith Burns, the Project Manager for Torness Fuel Route Completion, compares his job to leading a mountaineering expedition.
‘At the end of July we had the summit in sight — completion of the installation work — but there is still some stiff climbing before we reach it,’ he said.
‘We then started the careful return to base — thoroughly testing all new equipment before returning the fuel route to normal, more efficient operation.’
‘The objective of the project is to upgrade the refuelling plant to improve operating efficiency and to make modifications which will allow us to refuel the reactors on load by spring 1994’.
About 4700 drawings will be changed and 170 modifications made.
The refuelling plant was taken out of service on 25 June after charging the reactors with as much fuel as possible.
However, the extent of the programme means that Reactor 2 will run out of fuel before fuelling machine testing is complete.
As soon as the machine is ready, new fuel will be charged into both reactors.
‘The team have different, complementary talents and come from every Division in the Company,’ said Keith.
‘Our flexible working arrangements mean that team members speak directly to each other.
Good communications can't be made through long and rigid chains of command.
‘Decisions are best when everyone contributes rather than having them imposed from above.
‘We must retain a team spirit of purpose and commitment to reach the summit and return successfully to base before the autumn monsoon.’
At Torness, Site Project Manager Sandy Mackay manages the job and Ivor Yule represents our customer, Production Director Bill Doig.
Outage Controller Bob Makin controls day-to-day site work, while Russell Walker, from Strachan & henshaw , manages the 180 contract workers.
The modification work continues around the clock.
Project Engineer at Peel Park is Luke Burke, coordinating the Projects Division HQ team.
In Engineering, David Anderson, Stuart Campbell and Ken Ingle interface for resources, fuel route design and electrical and control design respectively.
Jim Thompson, Bob Harkness, John Morrison and their teams look after safety case development and design specifications.
Keith Fox in Nuclear Safety ensures that all design work and safety cases through, independent assessment, and all necessary agreements with NII are secured in good time.
Formal assessment of modifications submissions is vital and Jill Featherstone of Computers & documentation at Torness keeps the paperwork moving.
‘The mountain has been one of the highest tackled by Scottish Nuclear so far, but the day is approaching when the blue flag with the diamond logo will flutter from the summit.’
Keith ended.
Speed-king Mick
Mick Papp got more than he bargained for when he stopped at Strathford's garage in East Kilbride a few weeks ago.
For £2.50, he got a petrol cap — and the choice of any top-of-the-range Ford.
Well for the morning anyway.
Mick from Projects at Peel Park and his wife Wendy won Strathford's ‘Fordrive’ competition with the opportunity to join other winners at Knockhill race track in Fife.
It wasn't a day for the faint hearted.
With the latest range of Ford vehicles available and Brand's Hatch drivers on hand to pass on their expertise, the morning was quite an adventure — advanced driving tuition, a skid car with four wheel steering, go karts, and road tests.
Highlight was the off-road, 4 wheel-drive session in a brand new Maverick driven by Robbie Head, one of Scotland's top rally drivers.
Mick also got the chance to drive an RS2000, Scorpio and two Cosworths with a rally driver.
QUEEN OF THE ROAD
Carol Bayliss is one of the best three woman drivers in Strathclyde.
If the Hunterston guide can also prove she's the best in Britain, she'll get a brand new Vauxhall Astra.
A member of the Scottish Women's Rural Institute at her West Kilbride home, Carol recently entered and won the regional final of a national competition among all Women's Institute members in the country.
Her success against 31 other drivers in the regional contest won her place in the national final in Bedfordshire later this year.
MARATHON DAY FOR JOHN
When John Bryce took up horse riding earlier this year, he didn't realise where it would lead — all over the Borders as one of the stars of the Common Riding season.
He was elected Right Hand Man to the Duns Reiver which involves taking part in Border festivals as far afield as Langholm, and Lanark.
‘The toughest test is staying the course during our own Duns Summer Festival,’ said John, who's a craft attendant at Torness.
‘It's on the same day as Jedburgh's, so we start off by riding there between 8.30 am and 1.00 pm.
‘Then it's back to Duns to get ready for our Summer Ball starting at 8.30 pm.
We leave at 12.30 for Jedburgh for their ball which goes on until 6.30 am.
‘We have to be back in Duns by 8.30 am to start our riding which goes on until 2.00.’
John now faces another couple of years of the same routine, as Reiver in 1994 and Left Hand Man the year after.
Our picture shows John (left) on duty.
Safety Booklet
Have you ever had an accident while DIYing or working in the garden?
You might be surprised how dangerous a place your own home can be.
Significantly more people are injured while working in their own homes or gardens than injured at work.
Every week, someone dies as the result of an accident at home or in the garden.
And every day, there are hundreds of home accidents, many serious enough to require medical treatment at a hospital or from a doctor.
The majority happen during DIY work or when garden tools or equipment are being used.
Most could be prevented by following simple safety rules or taking simple precautions.
Ask yourself these questions….
Would I do the job this way if I was asked to do it at work?
If not, why not?
The Department of Trade & industry have recently published a booklet called ‘Take Care with DIY’ which is full of good advice.
Among many good ideas, there are sections on ladder safety, electrical safety, safety in the garden, and what to do in the event of an accident.
Copies are available in all staff restaurants or from the local Safety Engineer.
Where babies cry when Dad comes home
The new nuclear plant being built by a French-led consortium at Daya Bay in Guangdong province will play a key role in China's bid to become one of the world's top economic powers in the next 15–20 years.
That's the view of John Broughton, Health Physicist at Torness, who recently returned from part in an OSART inspection of the plant.
‘The pace of industrial and economic development in that part of China is staggering,’ said John.
‘The city of Shenzen close to Daya Bay was a tiny fishing village 10 years ago.
Now it's a city of six million people, with a mass of industry created to employ them.
‘The local people work incredibly hard, six days a week.
‘Those at the power station, for instance, live in hostels at the plant during their working week to save them having to make the three or four hour journey each way from Shenzen where their homes are.
‘On a Monday morning, they don't start till 9.30, to give them the opportunity to stay at home until 6.00am.
‘They see very little of their families.
‘My Chinese counterpart told me his 11-month old daughter used to cry when he got home on Saturday nights because she didn't recognise him!’
The plant at Daya Bay is being built by a joint French-Chinese team with a few Australians, South Africans and a couple of Brits.
Its design is based on that of the station at Gravelines in Northern France which exports most of its production to Southern England via the Channel interconnector.
John's role in the OSART was to examine Daya Bay's emergency preparedness.
‘Their emergency planning was very good,’ he said, ‘but the lack of experience of the Chinese showed up in their preparedness and their procedures showed they are still at the development stage in their nuclear programme.
Now there's a good idea!
Among the gifts presented to John Broughton in China was this emergency planning calendar.
Under each picture of the plant are graphic instructions for local people of what to do in the event of an emergency as well as information about the plant.
GET ON YOUR BIKE!
The stalwarts of the Hunterston Cycle Club are taking to the road again in the name of charity.
On Sunday, 29 August, they'll ride from George Square, Glasgow, to King's park, Stirling, to raise funds for Childline.
Donations and sponsorship will be extremely welcome — contact the club officials, chairman  (), treasurer  (), secretary  ().
The club's open to anyone in Scottish Nuclear and organises at least one outing each month.
Recent trips have been to Arran, Bute, Aberfoyle and along various cycle tracks in Ayrshire.
THE BATTLE FOR JOHN BROUGHTON
Not many wives would be happy to watch two other women fighting over her husband but Chris Broughton, receptionist at Torness, found it hilarious.
Not least because she hadn't the foggiest idea what they were shouting.
It happened during a holiday tour Chris and her husband John took in China after he completed his part of the OSART at Daya Bay nuclear power station (see below left).
‘There are two currencies in China,’ said Chris.
‘The locals use what's called Remnimbi, while foreigners use Federal Exchange Currency, both based on the Yuan.
‘Some goods can only be bought with FEC, so they have a higher value to the Chinese who are desperate to get hold of them.
‘John was trying to buy two cans of beer from street vendors and was haggling with one of the women, when the other joined in and a real barney developed.’
During their time in the Chinese capital, John and Chris visited Tiananmen Square, the Forbidden City and the Great Wall.
‘What struck me most about all these places was the number of Chinese also visiting them,’ Chris said.
‘They were all dressed up in their Sunday best, in real contrast to the Western tourists who were all in casual, holiday clothes.
TRAFFIC
‘Everywhere there were people selling things.
‘What's more staggering is the traffic.
‘There are 11 million people in Beijing,’ said Chris.
‘They own 8 million bicycles — and they all seem to be on the road at once, every day!’
From Beijing, the Broughtons went to Xi'an, to see the famous terracotta army, thousands of lifesize statues of the emperor's bodyguard, each modelled on an individual soldier from the general to the lowliest private.
The army occupies an area of land the size of Torness turbine hall with each soldier standing stiffly to attention a few inches from his neighbours.
CANALS
On the way south from Shanghai to fly home from Hong Kong, Chris and John visited Guilin, where the scenery seems to have been lifted straight from a willow pattern plate.
Part of the trip was by canal boat, on waterways unlike any either of them had ever imagined.
‘They were absolutely thronged with boats of every size and shape,’ said Chris.
‘It was just like the M8 at rush hour, with water instead of tar macadam.’
LOSERS TAKE THE TROPHY
A challenge from Engineering Director Jim Grant to Martin Melling, his opposite number in GEC/Alsthom, resulted in the loss to Scottish Nuclear of a sporting trophy put up by GEC.
Yet the trophy sits in Jim's office at Peel Park and will stay there.
Background to this  conundrum lies in Jim's invitation on behalf of Scottish Nuclear's Dry Store team to their opposite numbers in GEC/Alsthom for an 8-a-side golf match at North Berwick.
The only problem was that Dry Store Project Manager Wilson McPherson doesn't play golf!
So the challenge was extended to include a clay pigeon shooting match at Gorebridge between two teams of four.
The result of both games was a win for GEC by just one point, after a recount on the golf scores.
But the men from the Midlands had enjoyed themselves so well, they decided the engraved glass trophy should stay in Scotland to give them the excuse to come back and play for it again!
Ask about Talkabout
Nuclear power is frequently misunderstood but the truth is it plays a vital part in our everyday life.
To help get this message across the Come & See Programme is designed to allow us to be frank and open about what we do and to allow the public to hear the true story behind nuclear power.
An integral part of Come & See is Talkabout .
This service gives clubs and organisations the opportunity to invite a speaker from Scottish Nuclear to give a talk and slide presentation to help them find out the true facts about us.
Are you a member of a club or society which could benefit from one of our presentations?
You know much about what the company does.
But do your friends and neighbours?
They might welcome the chance to learn.
The talks are always enjoyable and our speakers are specially trained to ensure their talks are informative and interesting.
Is your club's forward programme being arranged at present?
If the answer to any of these questions is ‘Yes’, please contact  at Peel Park on extension , who will make the necessary arrangements.
Peel Park picked
The Peel Park building was selected for the short-list of the Glasgow Institute of Architects annual competition for the best new building.
It was one of five selected selected for inspection by the Assessors from a total entry of 15.
The winner was the National Trust for Scotland visitor centre at Brodick Castle with the Red Cross Centre at Irvine taking the Commendation for second place.
The Assessors described Peel Park as ‘a dramatic building with an imposing circulation core centred on a  crucifix plan form.’
The were ‘impressed by its imposing presence but felt the exceptionally tight procurement period denied the design team the full opportunity to explore a design of high energy consciousness in keeping with the client's status.’
With a crew which included seven Fairbridge trainees from Strathclyde and East Lothian, Spirit of Scotland was one of the scores of sailing ships which set out on the 1993 Tall Ships Race when the starting cannon fired at Newcastle.
The first leg of the voyage was from the Tyne to Bergen in Norway, where a second group of trainees, from England took over to sail her back across the North Sea.
Also on board was photographer Allan Milligan, from The Scotsman, whose pictures appear on this page.
Scottish Nuclear NEWS Issue No. 24 July, 1993
PORTENCROSS PERFECT FOR PARA HANDY
The West Highlands moved south in mid-June when the pier at Portencross became the mythical West Highland port of Portacraig.
A genuine puffer complete with coal-fired boiler recreated the atmosphere of the 1930s, which was enhanced by sacks of coal, fish boxes, lobster creels and the like strewn about the pier.
The transformation was carried out by BBC Scotland's TV unit, who chose Portencross as the ideal spot to film exteriors for the forthcoming TV series of Para Handy.
Almost lost among the paraphernalia of props, lighting stands, camera tripods and cables was the star of the show, Para Handy's new incarnation Gregor Fisher — resplendent in bowler hat, blue serge suit, tacketty boots and a bristling beard.
Appearing with him are Andrew Fairlie as Sunny Jim — who previously worked with Gregor as Rab C. Nesbit's son Gash — and Sean Scanlon as Dougie.
Fourth member of the crew of the Vital Spark is veteran comedian Rikki Fulton.
HAIRCUT
When out photographer called, Sunny Jim was in the proceeds of receiving a pudding basin haircut…which was cut short by the arrival of an authentic but unwanted shower of rain.
Filming stopped the entire unit decamped for lunch, and then had to abandon the scene as the tide had gone out and the puffer dropped from its previous position at the pier.
Not to worry.
These Beeb types are always resourceful.
Filming began again in the afternoon on scenes starring Gregor and actress Anne Kristen.
The series is scheduled to be shown on the BBC national network next year, and BBC Scotland are confident Para Handy will become as well kent a figure as Rab's previous incarnation as Rab C. 
KING OF THE ROAD
The skills required to manoeuvre flask transporters obviously stood Adam Luke, from Torness, in good stead when he entered the Scottish lorry driving championships held at SECC in Glasgow recently.
He emerged with the trophies for Scottish Lorry Driver of the Year and will now go on to the national finals at Telford in Shropshire.
The East Lothian station also won the Team prize, while John Thomas came second in the Van Driver of the Year contest.
Torness to welcome 350 ambassadors
During the next few weeks, 350 young Americans will visit Torness through the Come & See programme.
They are all junior high school students, visiting Britain and Ireland through the ‘Citizen Ambassador’ programme run by People to People International.
‘The organisation was founded by Dwight D. Eisenhower during his term as President,’ said UK director Michael King.
‘In those days, there were various adult programmes and the whole operation came under the umbrella of the State Department, the American foreign ministry.
‘The aim was to increase knowledge of foreign countries among Americans and increase friendships.
‘Nowadays, the young ambassadors have to pay for their own trips, but to ensure there is a true cross-section of American society takes part many of them are sponsored.’
The visit to the power station is very important to them, as they can gain college credits, which count towards degrees and awards, for reports they make on their return home to America.
For this considering scientific, engineering or construction degrees and careers, what they learn at Torness, can be a valuable introduction.
During their four days in Edinburgh, in addition to their time at Torness, they will be briefed about Scotland by staff from the US Consulate-General, visit the Castle and learn about Scottish dancing.
MONEY TROUBLES AHEAD FOR SMOLENSK
Another view of the Smolensk Nuclear Power Plant at Desnogorsk in Russia, already ‘twinned’ with Torness, was gained recently when Hunterston A Project Manager Jack Archibald took part in an International Atomic Energy Agency evaluation of the safety of the station.
‘It was part of the follow-up to Chernobyl,’ said Jack.
‘Similar visits are being made to RMBK plants all over the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
‘Members of the team were drawn from nuclear organisations all over the world, with the remit to review the safety of the RMBK design and modification programme to bring the RMBKs up to Western safety standards.
‘My own remit was to consider the management of operational safety covering normal and emergency operating procedures, the conduct of control room and plant operations, and radiation protection.
‘Others on the team were examining core physics, accidents, structural integrity, and seismic behaviour.
‘I was very impressed with the Russians as plant operators — competent, knowledgeable and well motivated.
PROBLEMS
‘I could see nothing seriously wrong in their arrangements nor the need for immediate action in the interests of safety.
‘However, in the economic revolution which has overtaken them with the collapse of the Soviet Union I can see problems looming for them in future.
‘In the past any difficulty was dealt with by instantly bringing in large numbers of people to tackle it.
They carry huge staffs — the whole of Desnogorsk is dedicated to operating and servicing the power station.
‘When someone is told to do something, their good discipline ensures the job is done.
COMPUTERS
‘But they tend to be operated in small independent groups, and communication and integration of activity will have to be improved.
‘Their computer system is very poor.
Very often, the computing power of the PCs carried by members of the IAEA team was significantly greater than their mainframe computers.
‘Clearly, their major difficulty is finance — the rouble has dropped from parity with the dollar three years ago to 1200 to the $ now.
This drastic drop in the value of the Russian currency affects every corner of life.
Goods are traded and swopped for items in demand or for services.
Barter has become a way of life.
And everyone is on the hunt for dollars.
They have almost become second, albeit illegal, currency of Russia.
Jack himself was stopped in the street by a man who wanted to change two $50 bills at black market rate.
‘He got nowhere, I can tell you,’ Jack laughed.
‘I strongly suspect they were forged.
‘On another occasion a taxi driver wanted $5 to drive me to my hotel…which we could both see quite clearly a few hundred yards away!’
LACK OF TRAINING BEATS OUR TEAM
Having won the trophy last year for the team which raised most sponsorship cash, Hunterston were raised most sponsorship cash, Hunterston were invited top participate in this years Raleigh Power Challenge at Weston Park in Shropshire.
Unfortunately, the invitation came only a few days before the weekend fixed for the competition, giving the Ayrshire team no time at all to train.
‘Our team consisted of myself, Iain Ward from EMD, Hugh Maclaren from B Ops, Ricky Scott from Performance, Tom McKerrell from Training, and Sandy Stirton from Shift Maintenance,’ said David Findlay of Quality Assurance.
‘63 teams from all over the UK took part, and it was clear that many had been training for months.
‘We all had a very enjoyable time, but the lack of training told against us.
We finished 47th out of the 63.’
Our picture shows the Hunterston team puzzling over their next move at one of the checkpoints.
Alan speeds to victory places
Scottish Nuclear was well represented at the two-day Bob McIntyre Memorial Classic Races run by the Scottish Classic Racing Motorcycle Club at Knockhill in Fife.
Alan Taylor from Torness and John Logie from Peel Park were both selected to ride for the Scottish team in the four-way international match races against England, Wales and Ireland.
The races on both days resulted in wins for Scotland.
In the individual contests, Alan took top points to win the 250cc class in his Suzuki with a first second and third on Saturday and a second on Sunday.
In the 750cc class, he came fourth overall with a second and fourth place on Saturday and second and third on Sunday.
‘Scottish Nuclear will have a more public presence at the two other major events this season,’ said Alan.
‘The van I used to use to transport my bikes has come to the end of its day, and Bill Doig has very kindly offered me the use of the station van if it is not required for company duties.’
John, enjoying only his second year in the sport, had some troubles in the 250cc class with his BSA in the wet conditions on Saturday and retired it after only two laps in the first race.
However, in the 750cc class he gained two 10th places on Saturday and 9th and 7th on Sunday on his Rickman Triumph and was very pleased with the results.
‘I'd need to be much better to be up with Alan in the results,’ he says ‘but I'm improving.
‘My lap times this year are three seconds faster than last year and of course I was delighted to receive a trophy for the team results.’
Are you due for a screen test?
Are you a D.S.E. user?
‘A WHAT?
I hear you ask yourself!’ writes Industrial Safety Manager Colin Boyd.
‘Put another way, do you habitually use display screen equipment (VDUs) as a significant part of your job?
‘If the answer is yes, then you will shortly be having your workstation assessed to ensure it is properly set up to allow you to work comfortably.
‘If the answer is no then there are still a number of things you can do to make your workstation more comfortable.’
This interest in VDUs has come about as a result of an EC Directive relating to DSE, and UK legislation introduced on 1 January this year.
These require employers to assess users' workstations to ensure they meet certain standards.
The risk from using DSE is primarily associated with musculo-skeletal disorders resulting in temporary fatigue.
Medical evidence shows using DSE is not associated with damage to eyes and eyesight nor does it make existing defects worse.
Some users however may experience temporary visual fatigue or have other concerns.
Information or advice on these can be obtained from the Occupational Health Department.
An SNL Code of Practice on DSE will be issued shortly and assessments of workstations and training will follow.
TOP teams continue to be created to produce improvements across the company.
Our photographer was at Hunterston for the start-up meeting of Team No. 38, whose remit is to review the feasibility of the production of a single modification scheme and commissioning manual for the whole of Scottish Nuclear.
New concept for TOP teams
Over 36% of all at Hunterston have now participated in a TOP Time-Out, and 44 Improvement Teams with 178 members have had their recommendations accepted.
Executive Support Manager Allan Paterson has been very pleased with the way people apply TOP principles to finding solutions.
While chatting with Allan in the Admin Block corridor about a snag which had emerged, one of the senior managers said ‘We'll have to set up an Improvement Team to solve it’.
‘I want to see more of that,’ said Allan, ‘People looking for an answer from TOP first, rather than trying some other way and only using the philosophy as a last resort.
‘It would be wasteful for everyone to do the same team training over and over again.
‘I've introduced a new concept in the programme, involving a couple of dozen people, from all levels within the company, in half-day workshops which may look at as many as a dozen different Improvement Team targets.
‘This reduces the time spent on training and saves duplication for people who have already completed as initial full-day Team.
‘Another advantage is that the workshop members consider all the stations being subjected to the Improvement process.
People not directly involved with a particular team can contribute suggestions which on several occasions have proved to be helpful.’
NEW AWARD FOR TOP SCOTS FIRMS
The Quality Scotland Foundation, of which Scottish Nuclear was one of the earliest members, will shortly announce the launch of the Scottish Digital Quality Award for presentation annually to the company operating the best total quality management scheme.
‘This is just one of the quality awards now either available for competition for being introduced,’ said Performance Development Manager Charles Wilson, reviewing quality activity in Scotland at present.
‘There is an award sponsored by the European Commission for companies throughout the Community, which was won this year by Rank Xerox.
‘And the British Government are planning the launch of a UK-wide award, which will be announced by Michael Heseltine's Department.
‘The quest for improved quality is spreading throughout Scotland.
‘Already more than two dozen companies with schemes similar to TOP are members of Quality Scotland, and there are between 50 and 60 in the pipeline.’
During May, Peel Park hosted a meeting of the Quality Scotland Management Advisory Board.
Among the initiatives which have recently emerged under the QSF umbrella has been a series of ‘experience exchange days’ where people involved in the quality programme in one company visit another to study its achievements.
Robin Gomolka and Alastair Marshall from Peel Park recently visited IBM at Greenock.
In another initiative, Scottish Nuclear has sponsored an opinion survey of some 900 people, which will take place in July.
‘The questions are designed to discover the views of a wide range of people about quality in the workplace,’ said Charles Wilson.
‘They'll be asked such things as — Is quality your responsibility or that of your manager?
What should employers do about quality?
What are quality products?
Is quality important in power generation?
‘Besides company employees, a range of people in the street will also be questioned.
‘The survey will be analysed by scientific market research techniques and full details published in the Accountants Magazine later this year.’
GROUP TRAINING BRINGS TORNESS IMPROVEMENT
In a new initiative in the TOP Programme, Torness's executive support team have introduced working group training for people throughout the power station.
‘So far we have identified almost 50 separate groups who work closely enough together to benefit from this type of training,’ said E.S.
Manager Eddie Smith.
‘All of them are groups who work together on specific tasks under a single section head or foreman.
‘The aim of the programme is to assist them to improve the quality of the work they do and raise efficiency by giving them the task of analysing their own and their colleagues’ activities and producing improvements.
‘The composition of the team, strengths and weaknesses of its members, and styles of leadership are all considered with the aim of moving from purely controlling activity to coaching and leading.’
Half a dozen groups have already received training with arrangements being made for the process to become a permanent part of the TOP programme at Torness.
Our picture shows the Torness Financial Department, one of the sections who have taken part in the process, discussing their action plan which emerged from Working Group Training, Standing (left to right) are Donald McLaughlan, Vera Stoddart, Janine Ord and Donald Laird, with Joanne Cornwall and June Denholme sitting.
Missing from the group is Wendy Sinclair.
Answers in black and white
The TOP improvement team at Hunterston considering ways to extend GOMIS from a maintenance planning system to one capable of works resource planning across the station has used the second stage of the ‘Brown Paper’ technique described in last months edition of Scottish Nuclear News.
Having gathered data and established the existing flow of work around the system — the Brown Paper — they proposed solutions around a second flow diagram, this time on white paper.
It helps capture important people interactions which could lead to bottlenecks or breakdown of the process if not managed, and is an ideal visual aid for implementation workshops currently under way at the station.
This particular White Paper was something of a giant, 24 feet long, one of the longest yet produced, though White Papers are invariably smaller than their Brown Paper cousins.
In our picture (left) Ops engineer  (left) considers one of the proposed solutions on the White Paper, with (left to right).
We'll have a full report on the GOMIS team in our next edition.
Personal plans for managers
TOP took a further step forward at Hunterston last month with the formulation for each manager of his own personal action plan for the programme.
Each manager will identify opportunities within his own sector of responsibility to demonstrate his personal commitment to TOP.
The aim is to bring the improvement process into the day-to-day management of each section's work programme and encourage full participation by everyone.
Why not Come & See
So far over 12,000 people have visited our power stations through the Come & See programme this year.
The total since the programme began has been almost 60,000.
HAVE YOU MADE THE STATION TOUR?
For those of us who work at the power stations, the idea of going on a guided tour may seem daft.
But do you know everything about every part of the plant?
Have your family seen the place where you work and learned how your job fits into the overall pattern?
How many of you at Hunterston have seen Torness, and vice versa?
And how many of the families of those at Peel Park have seen the equipment which earns all our wages?
To arrange your visit, contact the TRAINING & welfare OFFICERS at either Hunterston or Torness, or  in the PR Department at Peel Park.
Long walk pays off
Dr  Barnardo's  benefited to the tune of £260 recently after Torness clerical assistant Murray Brunton, Peter Cotton from Information Systems and Ian Kilpatrick from Ops, walked through Lairig Ghru in the Cairngorms.
‘We started from the Linn O'Dee and took 7.5 hours to walk the 20 miles through the mountains to Coylumbridge,’ said Murray.
‘It was much easier than I'd expected though we had very good weather, sunny and dry all the way.
‘It was only the second long distance walk I've tackled, and very different from the first.
‘To train for it we walked the West Highland Way, when the weather was much worse.
The whole walk from Milngavie to Fort William took us six days.’
His two long walks have given Murray a taste for the sport.
He's now considering tackling the Southern Upland Way, starting in Galloway in the West and walking through the Borders to Cockburnspath, just a few miles from his home in Innerwick.
THE PIPER CLEARS UP A MYSTERY
Invitation to the Ukraine
During their visit to Scotland, the Khmelnitski staff identified several areas of good practice at Scottish Nuclear for follow-up.
They were particularly interested in our work planning system, outage control, maintenance work programme, work instruction, financial management, and the TOP Programme.
‘The informal exchanges between the Chief Executive and Director Viktor Sapronov during the formal dinner held in honour of our visitors helped cement an alliance between Hunterston and Khmelnitski which could lead to further exchange visits to discuss these subjects further,’ said Director of Production Peter Robson.
‘Mr Sapronov made a formal invitation to Dr Jeffrey to visit Khmelnitski.
‘Accepting it, the Chief Executive said he would like to accompany the next party from Hunterston visiting the Ukraine.’
During their visit to Scotland, the nine senior staff from Khmelnitski Nuclear Power Plant in the Ukraine had a fully study programme both at Hunterston and during their day visits to Torness and Peel Park.
‘They were interested in everything they saw and were told, and obviously identified many areas where we can provide them with advice and help,’ said Hunterston Station Chemist Peter Young who was one of their hosts.
‘There are also areas where we can learn from them, as we found when we visited Khmelnitski last year.’
However, the visit wasn't all hard work.
There was a full social programme to give them a good impression of Scotland and its people.
At their first dinner to meet the Hunterston management at the Brisbane Hotel, Largs, the Ukrainians were piped from their coach into the hotel, which cleared up a mystery in the minds of several of them.
‘When we visited the Ukraine, we had had great difficulty in explaining what a piper looks and sounds like,’ said Peter.
‘Bobby McMillan assisted by Irene Neilson, rolled up his trouser legs, put on a tartan apron, scarf and beret, and squeezed a set of pipes improvised from flag pins, a pen and rolled up napkins, to demonstrate!
‘At the Brisbane Hotel dinner, Jimmy Conn treated them to the full Address to the Haggis, splendidly translated by interpreter Pru Williams.’
After the visit to Torness, the visitors had a full day in Edinburgh, including a tour of the Castle and Royal Mile, followed by a day in Glasgow and sailing on Loch Lomond.
‘We toured the Transport Museum,’ said Peter, ‘and Alexander Karaulov and I stopped to look at the autogyro on display.
FLOORED
‘I couldn't for the life of me remember the English name for this vehicle and certainly didn't know what the Russian name was, so I asked him what he would call it.’
‘Autogyro’ was the reply — which completely floored Peter!
At a ceilidh held for the Ukrainians at Seamill on the Monday evening, Pru Williams again excelled herself translating the name of the band, Chanty Dyke, and even managed to explain ‘Holy Willie's Prayer’ as Jimmy Conn recited it.
On the Tuesday, the visitors moved to the Brisbane Hotel at Largs and found the breakfast buffet always included fresh fruit.
Bananas were what delighted them most.
Though they're common enough in Britain, they're regarded as very exotic in the Ukraine and the visitors couldn't get enough of them!
VISIT
The final formal social event was the dinner at which Mr Sapronov invited Dr Jeffery to visit Khmelnitski.
The agreement and friendship between the two men was sealed when the Ukrainians insisted in the toasts being drunk in the special pepper vodka they had brought from home for just such an occasion.
Their final outing in Scotland was a shopping trip to Paisley, where all sorts of presents were purchased for their families and friends back home.
One of the Ukrainians had spent all his sterling and wasn't interested in buying anything until he spotted a Black & decker drill.
US dollars was the only currency he had but a quick currency change with Peter Young solved that.
He bought the drill and spent the rest of the trip flourishing it like a footballer with the World Cup.
Gregor meets Gregorevitch
The day Station Guide Tricia Connor brought her baby son Gregor in to meet her colleagues, the Ukrainian visitors were also on hand, so baby Gregor was introduced to them.
Khmelnitski Director Victor Sapronov was delighted when he learned the baby's name…his father was called Gregor, and he bears the  patronym (middle name) Gregorevitch.
Safestore will save £200m
When the Annual Report and Accounts were issued last month, the Chief Executive referred to consideration by Scottish Nuclear of an improved decommissioning technique known as ‘deferred safestore’, which if adopted, will result in considerable benefits for the company.
In the case of Hunterston A, the deferred safestore approach would represent a saving of over £200 million.
Janice McClory, of the decommissioning group in the Engineering Division at peel Park, and Tom Mitchell, of Projects, have been closely involved in the study.
Janice said ‘Basically it means deferring any dismantling of the irradiated or contaminated plant until 35 years after station closure, so that when the time comes for removal, its level of activity will have diminished further, the dose rate for staff involved in dismantling will be much reduced.
‘The present defuelling programme will continue until 1995, when the reactors will be empty.’
All the active plant will be kept on a ‘care and maintenance’ regime for approximately 30 years, i.e. buildings are kept weathertight structures are preserved, and any loose contamination will be fixed or removed.
‘We may also demolish the non-active plant, such as the turbine hall and associated plant,’ said Tom Mitchell.
‘Sufficient maintenance and supervisory staff will be kept in place to ensure the plant continues to match the strict safety criteria currently in place.’
CONCRETE
Around the year 2025, work will begin to build a Safestore.
The reactor buildings, and pond and bunker area, will then be surrounded by 9 m. high reinforced concrete wall with stainless steel cladding above that.
At this time, the minimum dismantling will be carried out.
The plant will be effectively sealed off from the world apart from periodic inspection and monitoring visits by skilled staff.
There will be a rolling maintenance programme of the external walls and roof to ensure they continue to be wind and watertight.
After 100 years of storage, work could begin on dismantling the whole plant to ‘green field site’ status.
Scottish Nuclear costings and engineering studies are based on returning our sites to greenfield status.
Recent work indicates that mounding over or in-situ disposal, would cost less, but this is a decision for future generations.
SNL plans are based on complete clearance of the site.
SAFETY
‘Four possible options for final decommissioning of the stations were considered by the company,’ said Janice McClory.
‘These were assessed in a Best Practicable Environmental Option study, which considers factors such as radiological safety, costs and site-related factors, for example visual impact.
‘Deferred Safestore came out best on the BPEO, particularly because the radioactivity is being allowed to decay for longer before the active dismantling is carried out, and therefore the radiation doses predicted for the workforce will be less.
‘The BPEO study was carried out independently for Scottish Nuclear.
‘Nuclear Electric have carried out a similar study, which also showed Deferred Safestore as the best option.
AND NOW…
CHICKEN POWER
The world's first commercial power station fuelled by chickens has come into operation at Eye in Suffolk.
The Fibropower plant produces about 14 megawatts by burning the discarded litter from broiler chicken farms all over East Anglia.
Chairman if the company, Simon Fraser, got the idea of using the chicken litter — a mixture of wood shavings, straw and droppings — after experience with the 5 MW steam raising plant at the Torness Glenlivet distillery which uses forestry waste.
The 130,000 tonnes of litter consumed each year has about half the calorific value of coal.
Previously it caused serious environmental problems, with odour, leaching of nitrates, and water pollution all emanating from stocks held for manure.
There were also the dangers of salmonella entering the food chain and the emission of methane, 30 times more damaging than carbon dioxide.
The new plant emits only a third of the carbon dioxide of an equivalent coal-fired plant.
Smells are kept to a minimum by using covered lorries, specially designed storage and early combustion of the material at high temperatures.
A second plant is being built by Fibropower on Humberside and two others are being considered for Scotland and East Anglia.
Litter from battery hen farms is unsuitable for the plants and though turkey litter was tried last Christmas it proved much less successful than the chicken fuel.
Click and win
All over Europe, camera shutters are clicking as thousands of miles of film are exposed for holiday snaps.
And it's a fair bet that not a few of them will rouse hoots of laughter or gasps of admiration when you show them off to you friends.
Now we want to get in on the act.
Once again we're holding a competition…to find the best picture of 1993.
The field is wide open — hilarious moments…beautiful scenery…unusual angles.
If there's a story behind the picture we want to know that too.
We'll pay a £5 Boots voucher for every one printed in the paper and a £25 voucher for the one judged the best of the year.
Send your pictures to , Editor, Scottish Nuclear News, Peel Park, and don't forget to include a return envelope with your name, department and location.
DOUBLE GRUBS!
Almost every year, blue tits bring up a brood of chicks in the nest box fixed to the garden fence at the Kilwinning home of Hunterston security guard Angus Devoy and his wife Irene.
This year was no exception, with eight little ones hatched.
But these young birds were exceptionally well fed.
Halfway through their feeding by the two adult bluetits, a pair of blackbirds appeared on the scene…and began to provide second helpings to every meal!
The bluetits provided the normal grubs and caterpillars, which the blackbird supplemented with juicy worms.
No wonder the young bluetits took off like rockets when the time finally came to leave the nest.
‘Almost every year blackbirds nest in out hedge’, said Angus.
‘This year there were none.
‘We think these blackbirds must have lost their brood and taken on the bluetit chicks as substitutes.’
Don't take a tanning to get a tan
As we buzz off in all directions in search of the sun, a wee word of caution…
Spend a moment thinking about radiation-induced cancer.
Nothing to do with the nuclear industry, this but skin cancers due to ultraviolet radiation from the sun.
Even the sun in Scotland can cause damage, though the problem is clearly more intense in the Mediterranean and more exotic holiday locations.
There's not much wrong with having a tan — it's part of our natural defence against sun damage — but we should try to prevent the damage getting out of hand.
Here are a few basic rules:
1.
Children's skin burns so easily, as does skin of some adults.
Always protect them with high factor sunscreen creams, and wear a t-shirt and hat.
Keep babies under six months out of the sun altogether.
2.
Avoid the very hot sun around the middle of the day.
3.
Use sunscreens, even if you are sitting in the shade, and apply them frequently (every two or three hours, or in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations).
DAMAGE
Remember to use water resistant preparations if you are swimming.
Pay special attention to sensitive areas, bald patches, nipples, nose, ears, and the often-forgotten soles of your feet.
There are two types of UV light, which is what causes damage.
‘A’ penetrates deeper into the skin and probably causes premature ageing and wrinkling, while ‘B’is responsible for sunburn.
The factor number on a sunscreen refers to UVB protection with numbers over 15 indicating high protective values.
Recently a star system was introduced for UVA with 3 to 4 stars indicating superior protection.
Phase in your sunbathing gradually, starting with just one hour the first day, and increase your tanning time by perhaps an hour a day.
As your tan develops, you can reduce your UVB protection as your holiday goes on.
RECORD
As a recent immigrant to Scotland, I am well aware of the great benefits that living here brings.
But remember, Scots have the worst record for deaths from cancer of anywhere in the developed world and skin cancer rates have seen large increases recently.
However, there's no reason to spoil your holiday worrying about sun damage.
Just remember the safety rules and, most important — ENJOY YOURSELF.
TELL US YOUR NEWS
This is your newspaper.
But we want to make it better, to give you more of what you want.
To do that, we need your news, pictures, cartoons.
You don't need to be a trained journalist.
All you need to do is write down the basic outline of the story, with relevant names, departments, and an office-hours telephone number, and pass it on to one of our contact points.
There is one at each location:
YOU CAN CONTACT THE EDITOR,, DURING OFFICE HOURS ON  AT PEEL PARK.
Look at those haircuts
The class of '77 at Cockenzie were a kenspeckle bunch of 2nd, 3rd and 4th year apprentices.
But a fair number of them went on to greater things.
Jim Henderson (fifth from right, back row), now a shift maintenance foreman at Torness, said ‘The maintenance superintendent Charlie Whytock drove us hard, but we learned a lot from him.
That's him on the end of the back row.
What's striking is the number of us who have gone on to become foreman or engineers.’
Also in the picture are:
PETER TAKES THE CHAIR
Scottish Nuclear was well represented at a one-day seminar in London on ‘Environmental Aspects of Nuclear Power’ on 1 July.
Chairman for the day was Assistant Director of Engineering Peter Boocock, while Development Manager Ian Cathro gave a full exposition of the design for Dry Stores at both stations and the present position of the plans.
First speaker of the day was Professor Ian Fells, discussing the environmental and strategic issues affecting nuclear power.
Other speakers considered environmental economics, and the options for waste management.
Prior to a discussion by Howard Beale of NIREX of the UK proposals for a repository for low and intermediate waste, Hans Forsstrom explained Swedish operations and plans for their radioactive waste management.
GAME THAT ALWAYS ENDS AS A DRAW
Hunterston footballers played their annual match against Barrow-in-Furness teacher training college…and again had to resort to a penalty shootout to declare a winner.
‘Six years ago, Graham Carlin from MMD had a phone call from a friend of his who is a lecturer at the college and was on holiday in Scotland with a group of his colleagues,’ said Hunterston goalie Gibbie Kerr.
‘They had enough players for a football team and wanted a match, so we were happy to oblige.
‘It's now become an annual event, one year here, the next in Barrow, where we played recently.
‘The strange thing is, we have had only one result in six years from the full game.
‘Every match, bar one which we won, has ended in a 2– 2 draw and then been settled on penalties.
‘It happened again this year, though we won 4– 3 on penalties which gave us our fourth win of the series.’
Next year's contest is in Barrow — and no-one involved is in any doubt what the result will be!
Torness takes trophy
The footballers of Torness had a resounding win in their annual match against Heysham, played this year at Cockburnspath.
The score was 3– 1 at halftime with two more added in the closing ten minutes of the match.
One casualty of the game was John Ambrose…while running up the park he put his foot into a rabbit hole and twisted his ankle badly.
Bob Hendrie came on a substitute.
Our picture shows Heysham captain Martin Smith presenting the sliver salver trophy to Torness skipper Rab Todd.
Safetip wins £250
The £250 prize for the best Safetip submitted in the period January to March 1993 was awarded to James Fulton, Health Physics OSART Team, Hunterston.
His tip was for handrails to be provided around the Laundry Building, to prevent people falling during routine maintenance access.
Installation of the handrail will increase the safety for Health Physics staff carrying out surveys and for maintenance staff who have to work on the roof from time to time.
The judges were Colin Boyd, Industrial Manager, and Ian Poad, Employee Relations Manager.
Over 150 Safetips were received during the three month period from all three locations.
These were narrowed down to a short list of 13 from which Jim's was selected as best-overall.
The best tip of the year will receive a prize to the value of £500.
Prize helps fight flab
No excuse now for anyone at Torness running to seed.
Fresh from winning the 1993 Good Housekeeping Award, the final proceeds of their 1991 win have been used to purchase a new asset which will help anyone trying to fight the flab or who wants to improve his or her fitness.
‘The money we won in 1991 was spent in several ways’, said Personnel Executive Officer Ricky Quinn.
‘The staff decided £1500 should go to sponsor the giraffes at Edinburgh Zoo for three years.
‘Other cash was spent subsidising staff events.
‘With what was left, we've bought a multi-gym of the type favoured by health clubs, sports centres, and fitness trainers.
‘We've installed it close to the stores counter.
‘Instructor/supervisors are being trained to ensure that everyone using it is properly advised on how to gain the best from it without running the risk of strain or injury.
‘Now we're considering useful ways of spending this year's money’.
Health physics monitor Steven Crozier, a fitness enthusiast who was one of the group who visited Peel Park to collect the 1993 award, tried out the new multi-gym and pronounced it a real asset (below).
DELEGATES WILL VISIT SIMULATOR
Scottish Nuclear will play a major role in a conference to be staged at the Moat House Hotel, Glasgow, between 8 and 10 September which will bring together specialists in ‘Modelling and Simulation in the Nuclear Industry’ from all over Europe.
Organised by the Institution of Nuclear Engineers, the conference will consider general modelling and economics, safety, performance, and radiological protection and training.
It will open with a visit to Hunterston to see the B Station simulator in action, and for an explanation of its hardware and techniques.
Hunterston Training Manager Ian Shaw is one of the conference steering committee.
At the end of the second day's sessions, SNL will sponsor a reception for delegates and guests.
On the third day, Projects Director Dr John McKeown will chair the morning session on Performance.
BNFL, Nuclear Electric, AEA Technology, BAeSEMA, Babcock Energy, NRPB and Imperial College, London are also taking leading roles.
The aim is to bring together model developers and users from all disciplines to discuss progress in developing modelling techniques, and provide a wider understanding of the tools available.
SLOW PROGRESS AT KOZLODUY
John Richmond, of MCMS at Torness, recently returned for a year at Kozloduy NPP in Bulgaria where he was Engineer responsible for Requalification Testing with the WANO team.
Here he reports on the work being done to bring the 18-year-old VVER up to acceptable safety standards.
The team, including John Hall from Scottish Nuclear, had been there for a year before I arrived and had done much in identifying the work required.
The problem was, although the programme had been identified, little real work had been done by the Bulgarians and the plans for its achievement were well behind schedule.
The original scope of work had been severely reduced, limiting the unit's safe operation to only five years but even this reduced scope was progressing painfully slowly.
The WANO team was frustrated and disillusioned, with team spirit at an all-time-low.
TEST
Because of the reduced scope of work to be done, greater emphasis was placed on requalification testing, requiring 41 documents for all safety-related plant.
Although this plant had been identified and test procedures suggested, this hadn't been ‘signed on to’ by the Bulgarians.
Only one document had been written, by the WANO team.
A methodology had been produced and a required plan of achievement issued by the WANO team for the Bulgarians to follow.
These had been ignored and no progress made.
With Mr. Capel, the WANO Manager, and relevant team members, I spelled out the unacceptable situation to the Bulgarians and its consequences — no unit restart that year.
The WANO team was reorganised, giving me direct control of my Japanese and German colleagues who would assist in this area.
CO-ORDINATOR
The newly formed Requalification Group began exerting pressure on the Bulgarians who finally committed some resources to this work.
An NPP Operations Manager, Mr. Yankov, was made responsible for its completion and he quickly identified a co-ordinator and a full list of authors.
The NPP produced their list of re-qualification documents, based on those suggested by the WANO team and the differences were resolved.
The Requalification team began to work closely with the co-ordinator and the authors, identifying the criteria to be achieved and monitoring and assisting with the progress documents.
START-UP
A monitoring system was devised (based on Japanese experienced) and reported back to NPP and WANO management.
All 40 outstanding documents were duly written and agreed by the Bulgarian Nuclear safety Authority in time for execution.
All 41 tests were witnessed by myself or other members of the Requalification group and results compared against identified criteria.
This testing and results were the corner stone of the startup case which allowed the Unit to begin generating before the end of 1992.
The requalification work will be directly applicable to other VVER 440's throughout Eastern Europe.
The BNSA identified maintenance and planning as the next major areas for improvement and SNL, because of their relevant experience, have been asked to lead the advice.
There is still much work to do at Kozloduy before the world can relax, and a long term commitment is required.
U.S. boss warns on waste problems
At a recent nuclear industry conference in Washington state, USA, Harold Ray, senior vice president of the electricity utility Southern California Edison, said his company generate using four environmentally friendly energy sources — wind, nuclear, geothermal and solar.
A cost comparison during the past year showed that nuclear was the cheapest, with a production cost of 7.2 cents per kilowatt hour.
Wind costs 10.9 cents, geothermal 11.3 cents and solar at 15.1 cents, was more than twice as expensive as nuclear.
The company operates a three-unit PWR station at San Onofre with a capacity of 2576 megawatts.
Generation at the station, said Mr Ray, displaced the burning of over 100 billion cubic two million tons of coal.
It also saved the atmosphere from the release of 15 million tones of carbon dioxide, 20,000 tons of sulphur dioxide, 21,000 tons of nitrogen oxide, and 4000 tons of dust.
However, Mr Ray also warned delegates that the ‘achilles heel’ of the case for nuclear remains the issue of the disposal of waste.
‘Our problem isn't defined by whether future nuclear generation will cost 6 or 10 cents per kWh,’ he said.
‘Either way it will be less than the environmentally benign alternatives we currently must choose from.
‘The problem is the lack of a publicly accepted solution to the waste problem.’
Brooch wins award
The company who carried out the painting and varnishing of the large wooden replica of the Hunterston brooch which stands in the Visitor Centre at the station, JHB Decorators of Paisley, have been given a Merit Award by the Scottish Decorators Federation.
The Craig & rose Rosebowl is an annual competition involving tradesmen all over Scotland.
The Rosebowl is presented to the overall winner with four Merit Awards being granted to those who have achieved the highest standards of workmanship.
Our picture shows Station Guide Carol Bayliss with the Visitor Centre replica.
Hard hats come in three shapes and colours for Hunterson Station Warden Tommy Smith.
His full time role in the station calls for regular use of his standard white Scottish Nuclear hard hat.
But when the fire team are training or tackling a blaze within the perimeter he puts on a red fireman's helmet as a member of their support system.
And in his spare time, he has been on-call for the past six years to wear a yellow helmet as a Retained Leading Firefighter with D Division of Strathclyde Fire Brigade based at Ardrossan.
Torness take 5-a-side title
Winners of the 1993 Scottish Nuclear News five-a-side football competition were Torness Team 1 of .
Played at Pitz in Portobello, the competition involved ten teams from Torness and Peel Park.
Last minute organisational difficulties prevented the holders at Hunterston from defending their title but they've promised a hard-fought battle to win it back next year when Peel Park will host the event.
Twenty furious seven-minute first-round matches resulted in semi-finals between Gus Cargill's Torness 5 team and Tim Cromak's from the Project Division staff on Torness Site, and between Brian Joyce's Peel Park 3 and Rab Todd's Torness 1.
2– 1 and 1– 5 results produced an all-Torness final which saw the Todd ‘Tornadoes’ emerge 2– 0 victors.
The competition was hosted by Torness and Maintenance Manager Mark Northrop was only too delighted to present the prizes.
After which the assembled athletes demolished an excellent buffet washed down by the occasional glass of lemonade….
Put the fun back into fundraising
That's the challenge from the Electrical and Electronics Industries Benevolent Association, The EEIBA is the only UK charity dedicated solely to serving the needs of people associated with the electrical and electronic industries.
The challenge, specifically, is to raise funds for the Association in adventures, novel and unusual ways.
Each entry will be assessed by the judges on the level of initiative shown, taking account of the resources available to either the individual or to the team.
Prizes of £1000 and a trophy for the winning individual team and £250 for the best young entry (under 25) will be presented at the Electrical Industries Ball next November.
In a recent letter to Dr Jeffrey, the association's chairman, Electricity Association chief executive Roger Farrance, said ‘The EEIBA only just manages to balance its books and its case load is increasing all the time.
‘Contrary to what people often think, we spend more money on cases of ex-employees and their families of the electricity industry than the industry actually contribute to EEIBA funds.’
Entries likely to be considered for prizes will be innovative, extraordinary and daring, but THEY MUST BE SAFE.
Bungee jumping, with its known hazards, is not recommended to Scottish Nuclear staff.
However, one of last year's winners ‘wing-walked’ on a Tiger Moth biplane.
Entry forms and further details of the competition can be obtained from Company Secretary Robert Armour at Peel Park.
Completed entries listing the activity, those taking part and the amount raised must be received by the EEIBA no later than 30 September.
The EEIBA is clearly a good cause, well worthy of the support of everyone in Scottish Nuclear.
So get your thinking caps on, get the sponsorship forms circulating and let's see some SNL names on the winners list for 1993!
INDIANS GET U.S. CASH FOR DRY STORES
The days when the white man could commandeer huge tracts of the Wild West from the local Indians for a  handful of beads and a couple of bottles of rotgut whiskey are long gone.
Now the pattern has turned full circle.
Uncle Sam is paying hundreds of thousands of dollars to 11 Native American tribes to consider the siting of Monitored Retrievable Storage facilities — dry stores — on their land.
The Mescalero Apaches in New Mexico, the Skull Valley Gosute tribe in Utah, and the Fort McDermitt Paiute Shoshones in Nevada have already received $200,000 each to fund investigations into the acceptability to their people of siting an MRS on their land.
The Eastern Shawnee and the Miami tribes in Oklahoma, the Northern Arapahoe Economic Development Commission in Wyoming, the Ponca Industrial Corporation in Texas, the Prairie Island Indian Community in Minnesota, and the Ute Mountain Ute tribe in Colorado have applied for grants of $100,000 each.
This will pay to study feasibility and to inform people who live close to the proposed MRS facilities.
The US Government is also making available grants of $2.8 million for site selection and characterisation, but so far no Native American nation has taken up that offer.
The American plan is that the MRSs would store nuclear waste until a permanent repository is completed early next century.
Prize day at station
Over 60 school pupils from all over the Strathclyde travelled to Hunterston in Mid-June for the annual Mathematical Challenge Prize Day organised by Glasgow University.
The visit was hosted by Production Manager Harry Armstrong.
A total of 1273 pupils at 104 schools entered the three classes of the competition, and increase of 54% on 1992.
After the presentation of prizes in the Visitor Centre auditorium, the youngsters split into small groups to make a full tour of the B station before eating a buffet lunch.
In the afternoon, Harry Armstrong and reactor physicist Dave Maxwell held a question and answer session for them about Scottish Nuclear, the power station and nuclear energy in general.
LOCHABER MEN BEAT KAIM HILL
Hunterston sponsored the annual Kaim Hill race on the Montgomerie Estate at Fairlie recently.
First and second places went to two runners from the Lochaber hill racing club, who returned times of 29.04 and 31.52 minutes.
Hunterston Production Manager Ron Cooper, was one of the 42 competitors who tackled the 3.5 mile course, 1500 feet of it over rough heather.
‘I only managed 26th place taking 43 minutes, but Howard Moiser came 14th with a very credible time of 38.10 minutes,’ he said.
‘He improved his position by two places on the down hill run, having been 16th at the turn at the top of the hill.
‘Most of the runners were from local clubs or were local people unattached to any organisation.’
However, besides the two Lochaber men who took 1st and 2nd places, there were other visitors from Ochil and Westerlands clubs, Menstries, and even North London.
The male team prize went to Irvine A.C., the female to Westerlands.
George Reid from Kilwinning with 5th place was best Ayrshire finisher while Jackie Pearson at 10th took the best Local prize at 10th.
First female at 21st was Elspeth Scott of Westerlands.
June wins through
Despite having played for only two years, June Denholm, from Torness Finance department, is already beginning to make her mark in the game.
Recently she won the regional ladies competition of the Rover Cup competition over her home course at Winterfield Golf Club, Dunbar.
This qualified her to play in the Scottish final at the new course at Westerwood, Cumbernauld.
However, June will be on holiday in September when the match will be played.
Her place will be taken by Freda Anderson, whose husband Eric is one of the security staff at Torness.
Two pupils from Williamwood High School, Glasgow, spent a week at Peel Park at the end of June to gain work experience.
Both worked in Engineering Division, Barry Simpson (second from the left in our picture) with Philip Pymm in Control & Instrumentation and Colin MacCabe with Stuart Campbell in Fuel Route Design.
The visits were arranged by Peel Park Training Officer Alastair Marshall who is a member of the school board at Williamwood.
Before they left at the end of their week, Alastair and Stuart presented them with Scottish Nuclear baseball caps and T-shirts.
James Hann Trophy
The 1993 James Hann Trophy golf competition will be played over the Glen Golf Club at North Berwick on Friday, 20 August.
As usual, the competition is open to any golfer within Scottish Nuclear.
Details can be obtained from the secretary of your local golf section of the Soc. & rec .
Association.