

Retailing Levels 1 and 2
…
The best purchase decision you'll ever make!
What is the LCCI Retailing award?
The LCCI Examinations Board Retailing NVQ Certificate have been developed by the Board to meet the criteria for accreditation laid down by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications.
The awards at Levels 1 and 2 are precisely targeted at people working in the retail industry or undergoing training for retail work.
The Retailing NVQ certificate is available at Levels 1 and 2 with specialist options at both levels.
The Certificate is made up of a range of foundation units with specialist options.
The specialist options would cover the following occupational areas.
Selling
Pharmacy
DIY
Newsagents
Food
Credit is given for each unit achieved which can accumulate into a full Retailing NVQ Certificate.
Who is it for?
The awards are suitable for anyone working in, or undergoing training in, the Retail business.
They may be adopted with confidence by retailers of any size, private training providers including government contractors and colleges of further education.
What does LCCI offer?
Each candidate is issued with a quality, custom designed file which contains the course programme and essential information.
Space is provided for candidates' own work.
Successful candidates will receive certificates bearing the NCVQ mark — their guarantee that they have won an award qualifying for the status of National Vocational Qualification.
Certification
Competence has to be demonstrated actually on the job in all situations in which customers are involved.
Centres must be registered with LCCI and only those holding recognised and acceptable qualifications will be authorised to carry out assessment.
Regular visits from LCCI verifiers will ensure that consistent standards are maintained.
How much does it cost?
Costs as a matter of policy are held at a reasonable level.
Candidate registration (including candidate pack)
Level 1 £15
Level 2 £17
Full Certificate
Level 1 £27
Level 2 £30
Unit Certificates
£3.50 each
What do I do next?
For further information on LCCI Retail awards please contact  or write to her at the address below.
FIRST LEVEL
THE LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
SERIES 3 EXAMINATION 1989
MONDAY 3 JULY–1800 to 2000
RETAIL DISPLAY (CODE No: 1035)
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
(a)
Questions 1 and 2 are compulsory
(b)
Candidates should answer 3 other questions.
(c)
All questions carry equal marks.
(d)
All answers must be clearly and correctly numbered but need not be in numerical order.
COMPULSORY QUESTIONS
1 On the paper provided are three rectangles representing shop windows.
Within the rectangles show an example of;
(i)
rhythm
(ii)
repetition
(iii)
grouping
2 On the paper provided are five squares, each of which is divided in two.
In these squares paint an example of:
(i)
complementary colours
(ii)
a pair of neutrals
(iii)
monochrome
(iv)
two primary colours
(v)
harmonious colours
OPTIONAL QUESTIONS — Answer any three
3 State the meaning of each of the following terms:
(i)
focal point
(ii)
radiation
(iii)
lines of sight
(iv)
points of interest
(v)
image creation
4 Describe the display policies and techniques of each of the following:
(i)
department stores
(ii)
small independent shops
(iii)
self-service stores
5 (i) State the advantages and disadvantages of the following types of display lighting:
(a)
fluorescent tubes
(b)
tungsten filament
(ii) What safety factors must be considered when using display lighting?
6 By the use of simple diagrams illustrate the principles of symmetric and asymmetric balance.
7 (i) Define the following lettering terminology:
(a)
condensed
(b)
serif
(c)
upper case
(d)
fount
(e)
typeface
(ii) Suggest two types of lettering aids that could be useful in the production of price tickets/showcards.
Briefly describe how they are used.
8 State which properties and/or accessories you would use in displays of the following merchandise to create an appropriate atmosphere:
(i)
children's school wear
(ii)
artists' materials
(iii)
compact discs
(iv)
carpenters' tools
(v)
costume jewellery
9 (i) Explain the advantages of efficient in-store layout in a supermarket.
(ii) In what ways can a supermarket encourage the customer to make impulse purchases?
Certificate in International Freight Movement Documentation (Level 2)
New from the LCCI, awards for those involved in the freight movement industry
What is it?
The certificate in International Freight Movement Documentation (CIFMD) is an award produced in conjunction with Freight Train intended for those working or on work placements in the Freight Industry.
This award is available in four sectors:
Air
Sea
Courier/Express
TIR
Each sector is made up of 6 specialist units plus 3 units based on standards developed for the NQV Level 2 Business Administration award.
To gain the award candidates must choose any one of the above sectors and also complete their 3 Business Administration units.
Who is it for?
This award is intended for those people whose work involves freight documentation in any of the four sectors.
Typical candidates may work, or be on work placement, in an airline, in a shipping line or with a freight forwarding company.
Who offers this award?
This award is only available from the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry Examinations Board (LCCI), an internationally recognised awarding body, in conjunction with Freight Train, an organisation dedicated to the training requirements of those working in the freight industry.
Why should I take this award?
It is important to be able to prove to prospective employers that you have the relevant experience for the job.
The Certificate in International Freight Movement Documentation from the LCCI is intended to enable you to do this.
Working towards achieving the certificate will ensure that you are gaining experience in all the areas necessary to work within a specific sector of the freight industry.
How much does it cost?
The certificate has been granted interim VQ status by the Employment Department for funding and is available in LCCI approved Centres.
Candidate registration: £22 (includes a candidate pack with all units covering all four sectors, candidate folder and competence transcripts)
Certification per unit: £4.50
What do I do next?
For further details on this scheme including performance criteria, assessment requirements and how to register, please contact   or write to him at the address below.
Freight Train is a registered trademark.
LCCI Secretarial Qualifications
The Top Secretary's Choice…
Choose from a range of available qualifications
Private and Executive Secretary's Diploma
Private Secretary's Certificate
Secretarial Studies Certificate
Second Certificate for Legal Secretaries
First Certificate for Legal Secretaries
Information Technology
Audio Transcription 3 levels
Shorthand 3 levels
Typewriting 3 levels
Office Practice 2 levels
Why take secretarial qualifications?
Holding a qualification improves an individual's chances of getting the job that they want.
Additionally the right qualification ensures that employers have a good idea of an individual's capabilities.
LCCI secretarial qualifications are endorsed by panels of industry experts and are intended to test up-to-date secretarial skills.
Working towards LCCI awards provides a clear career development route.
Why choose LCCI for your secretarial qualifications?
The London Chamber of Commerce and Industry (LCCI) Examinations Board has long been recognised as the major international awarding body for secretarial qualifications.
With over 100 years of experience LCCI produces quality qualifications which are recognised by employers and educational establishments as standards for job market requirement.
What levels are the awards?
The secretarial qualifications offered by the LCCI are GCSE equivalent level up to professional level.
They are aimed at providing individual candidates with the skills necessary for specific job requirements from junior secretary through to Board level secretary and beyond.
Where can I take these awards?
Colleges worldwide offer LCCI secretarial qualifications.
A list of colleges in the United Kingdom, which provide these awards, can be obtained from the Board.
What do I do next?
For further information on these awards contact   or write to her at the address below.
THE LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
GROUP SECRETARIAL EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 1990
SECOND CERTIFICATE FOR LEGAL SECRETARIES
BACKGROUND NOTES
These Background Notes may be given to Tutors and Candidates in the Second Certificate for Legal Secretaries Examination on or after Friday 27 April 1990.
Candidates may make unabbreviated longhand notes in Ink in the margin as indicated on page 4.
Candidates may have only one copy of the Background Notes for use throughout the examination.
THESE BACKGROUND NOTES MAY NOT BE COPIED 
COMLON INTERNATIONAL plc COMLON HOUSE WEST STREET LONDON SW1Y 2AR
Comlon International plc provides fruit and vegetables from all over the world.
The major part of Comlon's operation is that run by the Contracts Managers, for the business was founded upon provision of fruit and vegetables to hotels, restaurants and clubs.
There has been a steady growth in the newer area of sales to retail outlets, some of which are supermarkets but many of which are traditional grocery shops.
Comlon guarantees to its customers provision of fresh fruit and/or vegetables of consistently high quality and therefore the Managers in the Purchasing Department are constantly seeking to improve procedures to ensure that the necessary supply of a wide range of fruits and vegetables is available in each of their distribution depots — in Athens, Bonn, Frankfurt, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, London, Madrid, Paris, Perth, Rome, Singapore and Sydney.
Failure of crops and transportation delays must be foreseen and alternative arrangements made quickly and efficiently.
Administration is carried out from the Head Office in London, where up-to-date office technology is very much in evidence.
Most senior executives now have access to desktop microcomputers and, of course, fax and telex are used regularly.
Comlon as a part of its employee relations policy is restructuring and improving internal communications and repackaging the payment systems.
LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
SERIES 3 EXAMINATION 1993
TUESDAY 22 JUNE
THIRD LEVEL
ACCOUNTING
Instructions to Candidates
(a)
The time allowed for this examination is 3½ hours.
(b)
Answer 4 questions — Question 1 and 3 other questions.
(c)
Question 1 carries 49 marks, all other questions carry 17 marks each.
(d)
Begin each question at the top of a question at the top of a page in the answer book.
(e)
All answers must be clearly and correctly numbered but need not be in numerical order.
(f)
Show details of workings, where appropriate, in your answer book.
(g)
Candidates may use calculators provided the calculators give no printout, have no word display facilities, are silent and cordless.
The provision of batteries and responsibility for their condition must rest with the candidate.
The steps taken in the calculations must be shown in the answer book.
QUESTION 1
Sour Ltd bought 40% of the Ordinary Shares of Crowt Ltd many years ago, when the capital structure of Crowt Ltd consisted of 200,000 Ordinary Shares of £0.50 each fully paid less a debit balance of £5,000 on Profit and Loss Account, its only reserve.
During October Year 41, Sour Ltd was notified that, due to the death of Crowt Ltd's managing director, who held 30% of the Ordinary Shares, the remaining directors were considering liquidating Crowt Ltd unless a buyer could be found for the shares previously held by the managing director.
Sour Ltd is considering buying the whole of the 30% shareholding of the managing director at the agreed offer price of £68,500, of which £46,500 would be payable in cash and the balance by means of £20,000 9% Debentures Years 60/61.
The accountants of the two companies have prepared the following budgeted information at 31 December Year 41:
REQUIRED
(a) Prepare a Journal entry in the books of Sour Ltd, without narrations, to record the acquisition by Sour Ltd of the additional 30% shareholding in Crowt Ltd for Cash and Debentures.
(b) Prepare, in good style, the consolidated Balance Sheet at 31 December year 41 of Sour Ltd (and its subsidiary) on the assumption that Sour Ltd acquired the shares in Crowt Ltd on 31 December Year 41 and all forecasts were completely accurate.
(c) Calculate, to one decimal place, the following ten ratios based on your answer to (b) and on the other information given above:
(i) In respect of Sour Ltd and Crowt Ltd and the group as a whole:
(1)
Working capital
(2)
Acid test
(ii) In respect of Sour Ltd and Crowt Ltd only:
(1)
%Return on opening capital employed
(2)
%Earning per share (in pence)
(d) Comment on the proposal, using your ratios from (c) above where appropriate.
QUESTION 2
Snow and White were in partnership sharing profits/losses in the ratio of 3:2 respectively.
Their summarised Balance Sheet at 31 December Year 50 was as follows:
On 1 January Year 51, Frost became a partner.
It was agreed that there would be no partnership salaries or interest on capital and that Frost would be entitled to a 20% share of the profits/losses.
As a result of the new partnership, the following Journal entries were passed through the partnership books:
At 31 December Year 51, the partnership prepared the following Trial Balance:
REQUIRED
(a) Calculate the profit/loss sharing ratio in the new partnership.
(b) Using the ratio you have calculated in (a) above to divide the profits for Year 51, prepare a summarised Balance Sheet for Snow, White and Frost at 31 December Year 51.
QUESTION 3
Mr Messy, a sole trader, opened his only branch on 1 January Year 41.
Although his head office sent the branch all the goods sold by the branch in Year 41, Mr Messy did not record how much was sent and kept no records at the branch other than branch sales.
Owing to local trading circumstances, goods were sold by the head office to the public at a fixed mark-up on cost of 25% and by the branch to the public at a fixed mark-up on cost of 20%.
The following information concerning Year 41 is available:
It is assumed that there were no stock differences either at head office or at the branch for Year 41.
REQUIRED
Prepare, for Mr Messy, for Year 41:
(a)
Head Office Trading and Profit & Loss Account
(b)
Goods sent to Branch Account
(c)
Branch Stock Account at selling price
(d)
Branch Stock Adjustment Account
(e)
Branch Profit & Loss Account
Note
No Trading Account is required for the branch.
Work to the nearest whole £.
QUESTION 4
The following data relate to Grieg, a sole trader, at 1 April Year 13:
(1)
Debtors £68,000
(2)
Provision for specific bad debts £3,440
(3)
Provision for general bad debts (5%) £3,228
During the year ended 31 March Year 14:
(4)
Specific bad debts (provided for at 1 April Year 13) of £1,160 were received in full and the remainder were written off.
(5)
Other bad debts written off totalled £13,840.
(6)
Bad debts written off in previous years but recovered this year amounted to £1,740.
(7)
Sales on credit amounted to £660,000 which represented an increase of 10% on the previous year.
At 31 March Year 14:
(8)
Debtors £80,000
(9)
Provision required for specific bad debts £5,200
(10)
Provision required for general bad debts equal to 6%
REQUIRED
(a) Show Grieg's Bad Debts Provision Account, including bad debts, as it may appear in his ledger for the year ended 31 March Year 14.
(b) Show the entry for debtors as it may appear in Grieg's Balance Sheet at 31 March Year 14, assuming it is prepared in good style.
Briefly explain your entry.
(c) Calculate, in terms of days, whether or not Grieg was more (or less) efficient in collecting his debts during the year ended 31 March Year 14 than he was during the previous year.
(d) Explain briefly why accountants normally consider a provision for bad and doubtful debts necessary but are less likely to insist on a provision for discounts allowable to debtors.
QUESTION 5
Bergman Ltd started business on 1 January Year 42 as a dealer in electronic games.
During Year 42, the company made the following purchases of Game X:
The company was undecided whether to adopt the First In First Out (FIFO) basis of stock valuation or the Last In First Out (LIFO) basis of stock valuation.
On 31 December Year 42, the units of Game in stock had cost Bergman Ltd £17,750 using the FIFO basis or £13,000 using the LIFO basis.
Bergman Ltd has used the periodic system of recording stock.
REQUIRED
(a) Calculate how many units of Game X from each of the above purchases were assumed, for valuation purposes, to be in stock at the end of Year 42, using alternatively:
(i)
a stock valuation based on the FIFO basis
(ii)
a stock valuation based on the LIFO basis
During Year 43, the company purchased 1,000 units of Game X at £8.00 each and a further 500 units of Game X at £8.50 each.
On 31 December Year 43, there were 2,000 units of Game X in stock.
Throughout Years 42 and 43, the selling price of Game X was £15 per unit and no units were lost or destroyed.
REQUIRED
(b) Calculate the gross profit on sales of Game X during Year 43, using alternatively:
(i)
a stock valuation based on the FIFO basis
(ii)
a stock valuation based on the LIFO basis
(c) Recalculate the two profit figures from (b) above assuming that all data remain the same except that, on 31 December Year 43, Bergman Ltd had purchased an additional 1,000 units of Game X at £10.00 each and there were 3,000 units of Game X in stock on that date.
HMD/joc.103
July 1 1993
Dear Peter
Thank you for your time on Wednesday.
I found our conversation to be extremely useful (especially if Jag produces the market data!) and it was a pleasure to meet you.
Having had the opportunity to discuss the international trade market, my understanding of requirements for market data is as follows:
a)
Total number of UK companies involved in international trade and services.
b)
A list of the top 100 UK exporters or where this information can be obtained.
c)
The number of UK companies involved in international trade and service who are members of the London Chamber and the Chamber movement nationally.
d)
The number of employees for all the above.
Not all of this data will be readily available but any ideas you have on where I could get answers are much appreciated.
I enclose notes from our meeting for your information.
As I mentioned I will discuss the possibility of certification of LCCI training course with Liam and let you know the outcome.
Kind regards
Yours sincerely
Marketing Manager
FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION
Beth
1
Spine inserts: we won't bother with these, the cost is too high.
2
With reference to your fax dated  you mention illustrator to be commissioned.
In relation to what on the corporate guidelines?
I need more details before approval as I need to keep the costs to a minimum on this.
3
Can we aim for the  at the latest.
This deadline is too far away for me.
Regards 
MEMORANDUM
RE: VOICE
I would like to know what else he wants as part of this deal ie: does he want to cut exam fees?
However, I feel that we should support the Eastern European programme whenever we can.
I know Edward Richards who he mentions is trying hard to push our qualifications in Poland and therefore feel confidence about his support.
Despite our wariness of exclusivity, if I had a satisfactory answer to my first question (somewhere along the lines of: we pay nothing and lose none of the candidate fee!)
I would feel comfortable with allowing Voice exclusivity on EFTI in Warsaw.
I would offer a contract that allowed him exclusivity if he gets a minimum of 100 candidates in November 1993 and 200 during 1993/94.
If he falls below these (or similar) agreed targets we have the right to open up the EFTI market in Warsaw.
Regards 
HMD/joc.105 
Dear Mr Richards
Thank you for your recent letter, it is always useful for me to hear what use the publications that I have sent out were put to.
I am glad that you found them useful.
The information you requested is being sent under separate cover.
I am extremely pleased to hear about the interest in our English qualifications in Poland and if here is anything further that we can do to support your endeavours please do not hesitate to contact me.
Best regards
Yours sincerely 
LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
SERIES 3 EXAMINATION 1993
FIRST LEVEL
OFFICE PRACTICE
Instructions to Candidates
(a)
The time allowed for this examination is 2 hours.
(b)
Answer any 5 questions
(c)
All questions carry equal marks.
(d)
All answers must be clearly and correctly numbered but need not be in numerical order.
(e)
Refer to the form enclosed before answering Question 5.
(f)
Each candidate who answers Question 5 must return the completed Postage Book form with the answer book.
A Postage Book form is printed on both sides of the loose-leaf insert.
Each candidate may therefore make 2 attempts but must put a line through the Postage Book form which is not to be marked.
Using this organisation chart state who would be responsible for the following;
(i)
training of staff
(ii)
arranging meetings of shareholders
(iii)
processing cheques received in payment for goods supplied
(iv)
ordering raw materials
(v)
preparing letters on word processors
(b) Give 5 benefits which a company gains from having its offices organised in an open-plan style.
2 (a) List the following documents in the order in which they would arise in a business transaction and state the purpose of each document:
(i)
invoice
(ii)
quotation
(iii)
statement
(iv)
order
(v)
advice note
Give 4 details which should appear on an order form other than the name and address of buyer and seller.
3 Explain 5 of the following abbreviations:
(i)
VAT
(ii)
VDU
(iii)
COD
(iv)
R/D
(v)
NCR
(vi)
ADC
(vii)
E & OE
(b) List 5 important items of information which should appear in a letter of application written by a person applying for a first job.
4 You have been asked to take charge of you Department's stationery cupboard.
(a) List 6 rules to be followed to ensure that the Department's supplies are stored safely and all items are maintained in stock.
Give a reason for each rule.
(b) Design a simple form to be used as a stationery requisition.
5 The following items of mail are to be despatched today:
(a) Enter the above items on the Postage Book form provided, total and balance off at the end of the day.
(The rates for postage are shown below.)
(b) State 2 reasons for keeping a postage book.
6 (a) Why are reference books important in an office?
(b) Which source of information would you use of find the following:
(i)
the names of countries sharing a boundary with Germany
(ii)
the name and telephone number of a 3-star hotel in Cardiff
(iii)
the telephone number of a local builder
(iv)
the dialling code for Aberdeen
(v)
the correct way to address a letter to a Bishop
(c) Name one viewdata service and 2 types of information available from it.
7 (a) Name 5 features which are useful on a photocopier.
(b) Suggest 5 rules for ensuring that the most cost-effective use if made of a photocopier.
8 (a) State 5 rules to follow when answering an incoming telephone call.
(b) List 5 qualities a telephonist should possess.
9 (a) Name 10 services offered to members of Girobank.
(b) State the circumstances in which you would use:
(i)
a telephone credit card
(ii)
a telephone answering machine
(iii)
the transferred charge call service
(iv)
the confravision service
(v)
the freefone service
LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
JUNE SERIES 1993
GROUP SECRETARIAL EXAMINATIONS
SECOND CERTIFICATE FOR LEGAL SECRETARIES
COMLON INTERNATIONAL plc
COMLON HOUSE WEST STREET LONDON SW1Y 2AR
Comlon International plc operates a fast food franchise.
Specialities reflect the cuisine of the country in which the franchise is held.
The organisation's policy is to allow no more than 4 companies to have a franchise in any one country.
In France the speciality is crêpes; in Italy, lasagne and in the United States and Canada, waffles.
The franchises for the United Kingdom are to be offered in September 1993.
The following regions have been identified: Scotland; Northern England; Wales and the Midlands; South East England and East Anglia; South West and South of England.
The results of research have indicated that there are already too many fast food operators providing meat in burger form.
It has been difficult to decide on a speciality for the whole country and the Comlon Board has accepted that regional differences may require a change in attitude.
It has been decided that the speciality food to be launched in September will be fish.
One of the Marketing Assistants thinks there may be potential in offering a vegetarian dish as a speciality, possibly in the South East of England and East Anglia.
LCCI EXAMINATIONS BOARD 103rd ANNUAL REPORT
Chairman's Report
THE COMMERCIAL EDUCATION TRUST HAD A SUCCESSFUL 1991/92.
THE EXAMINATIONS BOARD IS BACK INTO SURPLUS AND THE HISTORY OF SIGNIFICANT DEFICITS IN ENTERPRISE TRAINING HAS BEEN BROKEN.
I CAN, THEREFORE, REPORT A SURPLUS AND HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT THIS PERFORMANCE CAN BE CONTINUED, THUS ENABLING THE TRUST TO INCREASE ITS INVESTMENT AND INVOLVEMENT IN EDUCATION AND TRAINING FOR COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY WORLDWIDE.
Discussion regarding a proposed merger with another Examinations Board dominated the plans and activities of the Board and its Trustees during the year.
Agreement could not be reached on a formula that would serve the best interests of the Charity and the discussions were finally closed.
Despite this diversion the board grew significantly showing an overall increase in income of 20% this year.
I am particularly pleased to report a major increase in the numbers of NVQs certificated by the Board.
The importance of investment in the enhancement of skills and knowledge in the workplace is foremost in the plans of the Trust through its focus on Commerce and Industry and its strong connection with the Chamber movement.
We intend to continue to strongly support the Government in NCVQ in their endeavours to achieve the national targets.
The future offers great opportunities for the Board to continue to influence and be involved in education and educational development transglobally.
As communications and travel continue to increase; the transportability of qualifications, particularly in employment, becomes more important.
For more than a century the Board has been providing qualifications for industry that are internationally recognised and this pedigree leaves it ideally positioned to contribute to the growing need for transportable workplace focused qualifications.
Funding for training activities continued to be tight but Enterprise Training through its concentration on quality and output achieved an increase in revenue during the year.
The Trust is committed to training for work and we hope that the difficulties involved in funded training can continue to be tackled creatively in partnership with the TECs.
Chief Executive's Report
THE PERIOD 1991/92 SHOWED AN IMPROVEMENT IN THE FINANCIAL POSITION OF ALL AREAS OF THE COMMERCIAL EDUCATION TRUST AND, AS THE CHAIRMAN REPORTS, PLACES THE EXAMINATIONS BOARD AND ENTERPRISE TRAINING IN A STRONG POSITION TO ACHIEVE THEIR EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING OBJECTIVES DURING 1992/93.
The demand for English Language Awards in all of the Board's overseas markets has grown significantly.
A new Language Award targeted at the Tourist Industry, English For the Tourism Industry (EFTI) will be launched in selected markets in the summer.
This initiative emphasises the policy of maintaining the focus of our qualification on Commerce and Industry and further developments are being considered for the future.
FLAW (Foreign Languages at Work) grew dramatically and there is no doubt that the quality of the award combined with its flexibility and relevance to the workplace gives it value to both employees and employers.
Business Studies continued to show the largest demand with very significant increases recorded in Marketing and Public Relations.
Once again the LCCI Top Secretary's Award was recorded in the national press and we are confident that the planned changes in the Group Awards will prove popular in this very important business area during 1992/93.
We did not seek to extend the Board's NVQ portfolio because of the merger discussions, but I am pleased to endorse the Trust's policy of strong support for the organisations charged with achieving the NVQ national targets.
It is, therefore, our intention to seek to increase the range of NVQs offered by the Board and to market them to employers in co-operation with the Chamber movement.
The Board created a new Marketing Department in June 1992 which has been very active in seeking input to our awards from our overseas partners in education.
It has commenced researching the LCCI awards in individual  markets to ensure there is continuing development to increase their relevance and use in the workplace.
The drive to assist in the development of education and training for Commerce and Industry in Eastern Europe was continued with a project on the outputs from different teaching methods in Hungary and further activity in Romania, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Russia and Slovenia.
Also initiatives were taken to increase the Board's influence in South America, particularly in English Language, which has resulted in significant growth in this market.
The Board's plans for 1992/93 include the introduction of a new Corporate Image which is reflected in this, our 103rd Annual report.
We will also increase investment in development and management to ensure we can continue to deliver awards that are recognised internationally for their practical focus on the workplace.
Enterprise Training recorded its most successful year for many years and will continue to focus on increasing the range of its training activities.
Once again the staff, in all areas of the Trust, responded splendidly during a period of uncertainty and great change and now very much look forward to the challenges of remaining an independent awarding body.
I record here the appreciation of the Board for their tremendous efforts and support.
Highlights: A Year of Change and Expansion
During 1992, the LCCI Examinations Board has implemented a range of initiatives to meet the changing demands of business and industry.
One of the key developments for the Board has been to prioritise the role of marketing.
Our newly created marketing team has identified customer requirements in major markets as well as helping us to redevelop our corporate image.
We believe that as well as promoting a contemporary vision, the new corporate identity better reflects those qualities of excellence and integrity which the LCCIEB sets our to embody.
Building on solid foundations it is extremely encouraging to report that last year we saw a dramatic increase in the numbers of candidate entries.
The rise was especially notable in our foreign language examinations.
Almost 60 percent more candidates took Foreign Languages for Industry and Commerce (FLIC) while demand for Foreign Languages at Work (FLAW) rose by close on 40 percent on last year.
The number of National Vocational Qualifications (NVQ) candidates for both registration and certification also increased significantly during the year.
The Board is deeply committed to NVQs and plans to recruit four new members to the management team responsible for NVQ development and implementation.
A new system was also installed in the Vocational Qualifications (VQs) department which has resulted in a marked improvement in the turnaround of NQV certification.
With its range of awards including the new Assessors Award, the Wordpower and Numberpower certificates in communication and numeracy skills and the Vocational Access Certificate, LCCIEB has certainly taken up the challenge to provide wider access to qualifications.
The next step in this programme will be to move into the Management NVQ and Language NVQ fields.
On the international stage, LCCIEB is also at the forefront of educational  development.
This year we examined Business English candidates from Hungary to Russia and from Slovenia to Poland.
It is our express hope that through the development of business and language awards we can help to support those organisations which are relative newcomers to competitive world markets.
With this is mind our Eastern European specialist, Ernest Lee, has travelled extensively throughout the year identifying those area where LCCIEB can contribute to the development of a well qualified workforce.
Meanwhile in the Asia Pacific region, the Board's long-standing relationships with organisations and Centres were strengthened by market visits to Western Malaysia, Sabah, Sarawak, Singapore, Hong Kong and Indonesia.
These visits underpin our commitment to an increased local presence in all of our key markets.
In the near future we expect to recruit an Asia Pacific representative who will enable us to expand further in this region.
Finally, and supporting all these new initiatives, we have introduced improved quality control procedures.
Our service to you, our customer, is paramount and it is our objective to ensure that through consistently high standards we meet and realise your needs.
Spotlight on success
BUSINESS STUDIES
Two new business studies examinations have been launched successfully this year.
Preliminary Level Practical Book-keeping is a vocational examination; its focus is on practical job skills and it utilises ‘real world’ financial documents such as ledgers and cheques.
Foundations of Business was introduced into the Eastern European market.
This examination incorporates financial, language and commercial components and support those people who want to build up essential business skills.
Meanwhile for marketing we continue to attract growing numbers of candidates.
The Third Level Group Diploma in Marketing is especially popular and full recognition by professional bodies ensures that successful candidates have better access to professional qualifications such as CIM and CAM.
LANGUAGES
It may well be that the rise in UK candidates wanting to take the Foreign Languages for Industry and Commerce (FLIC) examination is a positive response to the challenge of an increasingly open Europe.
Certainly it is welcome news to report that oral examination entry levels rose by 33 per cent with FLIC overtaking its sister examination, Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC), for the first time in six years.
The Foreign Languages at Work (FLAW) scheme also experienced a good year, with candidate numbers up by 38 per cent.
In total some 300 Centres produced successful candidates for FLAW certification in French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish and English as a foreign language.
In its first full year, entry levels for Euroqualifications exceeded all expectations with 72 per cent of candidates attaining passes, credits or distinctions.
With UK and continental centres coming on-stream all the time, the awards of Commercial Language Assistant Certificate, European Executive Assistant Certificate and the Diploma in European Business Administration seem set for a bright future.
VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
National Vocational Qualifications continue to be a key area of growth for the board.
The number of NVQs certified grew dramatically and the new computer system increased the turnaround time on certificates substantially.
A suite of awards for Assessors and Verifiers, based on the Training and Development Lead Body standards, was successfully launched this year.
The NVQ units for languages (Levels 1–5) were piloted, preparatory to their launch next year.
An agreement was signed with The Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit to offer joint certification of Word power and Numberpower.
As part of the board's commitment to improving access to NVQs, the Vocational Access Certificate became available.
This qualification was designed for candidates with special needs who intend to progress into occupational NVQs.
Future developments for the board include Management NVQs at levels 3 and 4, Freight Documentation and Accounting.
SECRETARIAL
The Private and Executive Secretary's Diploma produced this year's top secretary.
Our congratulations go to Heather Cammock from Northern Ireland.
It is the Board's intention to identify ways in which it can extend examination options for secretarial staff.
For example, a successful validation exercise in Singapore enabled the Board to add a manuscript transcription component to both the Private Secretary's Certificate and to the Secretarial Studies Certificate.
We will continue to look for opportunities such as these to achieve wider access for candidates.
New for '92
Language training to support the requirements of those who are working in the tourism industry is one of LCCIEB's latest projects.
Our English for the Tourism Industry (EFTI) examination has been developed in direct response to the growth of this sector and will be launched imminently.
The awards for Assessors and Verifiers of NVQs were introduced this year, thereby providing qualifications and ensuring standardisation of assessment across the UK.
For the first time LCCIEB offered registered trainer status which allows experienced candidates to cascade training to assessors and verifiers.
LCCIEB has worked hard to increase the availability and take up of modern languages, both within the UK and overseas, and it views the developments in NVQs as a natural extension of this work.
FLAW has already been cited by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) as the scheme most compatible for transfer to a language NVQ.
Field tests on the relationship between FLIC and FLAW and draft standards for NVQs in languages are planned, and a report will be available soon.
The Vocational Access Certificate has been designed as a preliminary vocational qualification for those with special training needs.
The certificate is a practical award that assess the candidate's actual performance and it can be tailored to meet the needs of each candidate.
Importantly, the Vocational Access Certificate provides a progressive and meaningful route into NVQs.
Wordpower and Numberpower are certificates that have been introduced to help candidates improve their communication and numeracy skills.
These awards were produced in conjunction with the Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit, the DFE (Department for Education) and the BBC and are a part of the Basic Skills Accreditation Initiative to develop new qualifications for adults.
Other new awards on offer for the first time this year included Practical Word Processing.
Practical Computing in English and foreign language schemes in Spanish, German and French.
Plans for the Future
The decision not to merge with the RSA Examinations Board, announced by the Trustees in October 1992, heralds a new period for the Board as an independent examining body.
The keynote for the future will be the development of awards that build skills and knowledge in industry and commerce.
The Board will increase its range of awards in response to the requirements of the many and diverse markets which we serve.
In the UK the Board will seek accreditation for a wider range of NQVs.
The focus will be on assisting the Employment Department and NCVQ to increase the recognition and penetration of NVQs in the workplace — an are where the Chamber's Examination Board has real strengths.
Additionally, the Board will investigate how it can help in the development and distribution of GNVQs, possibly through cooperation with other awarding bodies.
Eastern Europe will continue to feature strongly in our future.
Increasing emphasis will be placed both on ensuring the market relevance of overseas awards and on encouraging their take-up by industry and commerce.
The Board is very conscious of the need to be able to service its activities efficiently and to respond to the demands of its customers and markets.
It will therefore continue to develop its management and staff by seeking accreditation for ‘Investors in People’.
At the same time the Board will continue with the development of its systems to ensure flexibility and responsiveness, and also to satisfy the increasing demand for statistics both internally and externally.
One of our main objectives for the future is to make it easy for candidates, Centres and employers to get information about LCCI awards and to do business with the Board.
The increasing demand for good quality language training within the workplace has been met by the Board with their business focused language awards.
The Board intends to continue to respond to this growing language requirement by introducing its existing language awards to new markets around the world.
Enterprise Training Highlights of the year
This has been an important year for the development of Enterprise Training services.
Already an established provider of training to school leavers and adults, mainly through the Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs), the focus at Enterprise Training centres is increasingly for trainees to take NVQs or join courses which help them back to work.
Achievement by Prior Learning (APL), ensures that as many trainees as possible have the opportunity to move through the programme and the results are very encouraging.
In 1992, the trainees' achievement rate for NVQs has surpassed all previous years with each of the training centres in Acton, Vauxhall, Docklands and Islington exceeding the targets agreed with the TECs.
Enterprise Training is also proving its worth in helping more trainees than ever to find work placements and is committing additional resources to ensure that in the future such placements are available for all trainees.
This drive to help people back to work is equally evident in the success of the Job Search Seminars which were held this year and funded by Employment Services.
The seminars proved especially beneficial to people who have been made redundant.
They are further supported by the Enterprise Training Jobclub which provides help for people who need long term support with job searching.
The special needs of some trainees has led this year to the introduction of the Vocational Access Certificate, Wordpower and Numberpower Certificates.
Many of the trainees who come through Enterprise Training are non-native speakers of English and the programme English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) is always full.
The ESOL programme provides a gateway for these trainees into the mainstream programme.
Enterprise Training also secured a number of major contracts in both the Public and Private sectors to train and accredit staff in Business Administration.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
During the last year Enterprise Training paid special attention to becoming more cost effective and as a result, investment has been made in equipment, staff development, and the premises.
Quality is also high on the agenda.
Enterprise Training has developed its own Quality Assurance Policy which includes a commitment to the ‘Investors In People’ programme.
The staff development policy has been revised and all staff are now guaranteed their own individual development plan and will work towards the appropriate NVQ units for their job role.
Furthermore, training provision is being expanded into areas such as International Trade and Management.
Finally, plans are underway for the head office of Enterprise Training to move to Sidcup.
One of the key benefits of the move will be to give Enterprise Training access to a professional marketing department through which it can promote awareness of its services to employers.
The Team
Examinations Board
The Board is very aware of the contribution that the management and staff make to its ongoing success.
With this in mind we have undertaken this year a review of the management team and staff resources with the objective of ensuring that LCCIEB is prepared for the challenges that it is likely to meet in the future.
As a result of the review we have established a new senior management team headed by Liam Swords as Chief Executive.
Other members of this new team are Ernest Lee, Kumaresan Padmanathan, Margaret Horner and Dawn Postans.
Our new marketing department is also an integral element of the new LCCIEB structure.
Established to develop a more proactive response to the market, the marketing team will also help to improve communication of LCCIEB's objectives and mission.
Our best wishes go to those who retired from the Board during the year and we would like to thank all those who serve so tirelessly on our committees for their advice and guidance.
We would also like to acknowledge all those people within the LCCIEB network, Verifiers, Assessors, Examiners, committee members, representatives and Consultants.
These people extend the LCCIEB network to some 2,000 nationwide.
LINK
Strategic developments…
THIS EDITION of Link heralds the beginning of a new era in the long and successful history of the LCCIEB as an independent awarding body.
Our new corporate image is the visible evidence of a revised strategy for the future which you will see emerging as we progress through 1993 and into 1994.
The logo and style are designed to reflect the best traditions of the Board and its policy of being at the leading edge of education for industry and commerce internationally.
Of key importance in the strategy for the future is a focus on awards for the workplace.
Our awards are renowned for their transportability across the many countries in which the Board has been recognised for more than a century.
This long-standing experience and credibility will be cornerstones of our planning.
We are responding directly to the needs of both candidates and their employers, and our international standing ensures — and will continue to ensure — that an LCCIEB qualification is welcomed by employers worldwide.
Members of the senior management team who will be responsible for guiding and shaping the Board to meet the many challenges and opportunities of the future are…
— Director of Examinations:responsible for all LCCIEB Examinations.
Also carrying a special responsibility for developments in Eastern Europe.
— Director of Assessment and Marketing:charged with the task of widening the Board's range of NVQs to offer a complete portfolio to all its Centres.
Also responsible for marketing the Board, worldwide.
— Director of Finance and Administration:responsible for improving systems and procedures so that they are responsive and flexible.
A key objective is to make it easier for our Centres to communicate and do business with us.
— Director of Training:responsible for all the training activities of the LCCI Commercial Education Trust which is the charitable institution that embodies the Examinations Board.
The Board will continue to place the highest emphasis on the quality that is synonymous with its reputation and image right across the world.
This emphasis will underpin our every action and will ensure that our awards continue to be recognised by education authorities and employers trans-globally.
We look forward to your continued support and involvement in helping us to achieve our educational goals.
Chief Executive 
International News
Indonesia
Proposed link with Indonesian Chamber
IN FEBRUARY and LCCI Certificate of Centre Registration was presented to the newly registered London School of Public Relations (LSPR) in Jakarta by  Marketing Manager of the LCCIEB.
A draft proposal for a Centre of International Professional Certification has been signed with Kadin (the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce).
This ambitious project is intended to allow employees in Indonesia access to international awards and thus increase the potential of the Indonesian workforce.
Discussions are still in progress and final agreements are expected soon.
Hungary and Romania
LCCIEB and Linguaphone collaborate
IN 1992 the LCCIEB collaborated with the Linguaphone Institute in an English-learning project in Hungary.
A control group of Hungarian students followed a Linguaphone course with Supported Distance Learning (or Directed Home Study)— whilst two other groups followed different study routes, using the same Linguaphone material.
At the end of the trial period all three groups took an English for Commerce examination to assess progress.
The Hungarian authorities consider the experiment to have been successful.
Supported Distance Learning is seen to be a highly cost-effective way of teaching English in Eastern Europe, where the acquisition of the international language of business is essential for the regeneration of a free market economy.
Now Romania has followed suit.
Linguaphone's Romanian distributors have founded Percomex, a teaching institution in Bucharest.
Percomex is also planning to use LCCIEB examinations for the certification of students.
South America
Help for teachers
Languages Services Manager, visited both Argentina and Uruguay last December to hold talks and workshops to aid teachers preparing candidates for LCCIEB written and oral Business English examinations.
She was also able to recruit and train several local native English-speaking SEFIC examiners and to conduct approximately 350 SEFIC examinations.
Discussions with  (Educational Advisor) are expected to lead to a new support network for LCCIEB centres.
SEFIC examinations and LCCIEB workshops were held at CADI (Buenos Aires and several other branches) and in Montevideo at the Oxbridge Institute, the Dickens Institute and the Instituto-Cultural Anglo-Uruguay.
All centres already hold, or plan LCCIEB Business English examinations this year.
For further information in South America contact:
Ireland
On a recent visit to the Republic of Ireland's new LCCIEB examination centres,, from our Marketing Department took time out to meet prize winners from Skerry's Business College in Cork.
The group photograph shows, from left to right:.
MANAGEMENT CHARTER INITIATIVE
UK employers now have nationally recognised competence-based standards for assessing the performance and capabilities of their managers.
The MCI framework for management education and development assess at three levels of the management hierarchy.
LCCIEB has been endorsed by MCI to jointly seek accreditation to deliver MCI Level 3 (for Supervisors) and Level 4 (for Junior Managers).
Accreditation is planned for May 1993 after which approved organisations will begin the delivery of MCI.
LCCIEB are currently in the process of establishing criteria on the recruitment of Verifiers for this award.
We will deliver MCI as part of the already wide and relevant portfolio of business-focused qualifications.
Details from ,
Achievements
of Singapore took her LCCIEB (Higher Stage) Marketing in 1979.
She writes:
‘I studied marketing in Singapore so as to branch out from accounting to marketing.
After acquiring the relevant paper qualifications in 1979 I got my first sales and marketing job in 1980.
Since then my sales and marketing career has given me opportunities to meet people, handle interesting products and also do a lot of travelling.
I got married to an Australian and emigrated to Australia in December 1987 and feeling the need for an Australian qualification  enrolled for a Bachelor of Business degree course at a local university.
I graduated with a Bachelor of Business (Major in Marketing) degree in July 1991.
The knowledge which I had acquired from the LCCIEB was so relevant that I enjoyed the course tremendously.
After my graduation I lectured in marketing-related subjects at a local Australian Government College.
I had always enjoyed working in the commercial sector and was missing the action so I got a job in Singapore in March, 1992 and am working as a sales and marketing manger in an electrical engineering company.
Now I notice newspaper advertisements for job positions which specify the need for LCCIEB qualifications.
It certainly is a good sign that LCCIEB is still well received in this region.
I am sure LCCIEB students will experience new horizons, just as I did.
It certainly has opened many doors for me.’
of London, was granted a Bell Scholarship in the LCCI Commercial Education Trust to complete a MBA at INSEAD (Institut Européen d'Administration des Affaires), Fontainebleau, France, one of the leading Business Schools in Europe.
He was awarded his MBA with Distinction in June 1992.
He writes:
‘The course was, as I expected, a very intensive and international one, with a strong focus on general management as well as a firm basis in the major disciplines of finance, marketing, operations, etc.
In addition to the academic side I especially appreciated the chance to get to know business people from many corners of the world.
There was, of course, a great deal of fun as well , and I made some contribution to the musical life of INSEAD by setting up an 11-piece band which played at the summer ball amongst other events.
After finishing the course in June, I spent some time travelling within Eastern Europe and then spent two months in Austria to improve my German.
I have now rejoined McKinsey and Co, Management Consultants, and am attempting to put some of the learning into practice!
The Bell award is available to UK domiciled students for advanced business studies at institutions such as INSEAD, Harvard,(USA) or a suitable UK College or University.
Details from:,
Tax relief on vocational training
UNDER THE Vocational Training Relief Regulations:
From 6 April 1992 eligible trainees are entitled to deduct tax at the basic rate from payments made for qualifying training.
Broadly speaking eligible trainees are individuals who pay for their own training or assessment out of their own resources, who do not receive assistance from an employer or are not funded under a Government Scheme towards the cost of such training.
Relief is due to tax-payers and non tax-payers, employed and unemployed alike.
Relief is available for any programme of activity capable of counting towards a qualification accredited as a National Vocational (NVQ) or Scottish Vocational (SVQ) qualification at Levels 1 to 4 inclusive.
If you can establish a link between the training which you provide and an accredited NVQ or SVQ then such training falls within the tax relief scheme.
It is not a condition of the relief that a trainee must qualify at the end of a course.
If you both provide qualifying training, and have trainees who pay for the cost of such training, you should register for the Scheme by completing form VTR21, obtainable from the ,’
Books
Back to business with Pitman 2000 Shorthand (a Combined Learning Pack
by 
Published by Pitman 
This book is another winner from .
It has been written to meet the needs of those returning to work after a career break.
Emphasis is put on the fact that learned skills such as shorthand are never forgotten and can soon be brought back to the standard required.
Dictation practice is given in each unit with emphasis on speed in the later units.
Theory revision is given — followed immediately by material which applies the rules.
Short forms, phrases and intersections are spread throughout the book.
Some of the ‘new’ short forms are those which originally appeared in Pitman New Era shorthand.
A key to revision is given in each chapter.
The layout and print is easy on the eye and the revision passages for dictation becomes increasingly difficult as the book progresses.
The book and cassette together would provide a good home refresher course but could be used equally well during a day or evening class revision course.
Reviewer 
First Course in Keyboarding and Document Processing (6th Edition)
by 
Published by McGraw-Hill Book Company, Europe
In an early 1992 copy of Link we promoted this new book and told readers it would be available in the Spring of 1993.
We are pleased to tell you that the book has been published and is now available — certainly in the UK.
How to contact the LCCIEB
IT IS EASY to contact the LCCIEB.
Address your communication by name if you can, but otherwise by department or subject.
You will see that a contact name is always given, where needed.
New Link
AS PART OF the new beginning Link is now a targeted publication.
Published three times each year Link will carry general news of interests to all.
Inserted will be Data Sheets, each with a particular focus.
In this issue we concentrate on languages and marketing examinations.
Copy is welcome.
If possible it should be typed, double spaced, and sent under cover of a brief note which gives the background details of the contributor.
Photographs should be in black and white.
Please send your contributions to:(We regret that photographs cannot be returned, and reserve the right to edit material submitted.)
LINK
MAY '93 — DATA SHEET 1
UPDATES
LANGUAGE NVQS
LCCIEB has worked very hard in its purpose of increasing the availability and take-up of modern foreign languages both within the UK and abroad, and views the development in NVQs as a natural extension of this work.
The Languages Lead Body is moving towards completion of the standards, and Awarding Bodies are, in parallel, being asked to plan the introduction of languages as additional units to NVQs.
Languages are not deemed to represent a discrete occupation because they are generic and can be applied to all occupations.
Nevertheless, NCVQ is considering the accreditation of ‘stand-alone’ units in response to a strong demand.
LCCIEB is focusing on Business Administration as a partner of the Language Units.
We are looking forward to positive outcomes in the next few months, and will keep everybody informed of the progress.
FIRST AND SECOND CERTIFICATES IN OFFICE TECHNOLOGY
These two examinations are to be withdrawn in 1994 with the increasing emphasis on national vocational qualifications.
The last opportunity for entry for full candidates will be June 1994.
Candidates who are granted a referral will re-sit the referred component in December 1994.
This decision will not affect any of the other Group Secretarial awards for which we have seen an overall increase in demand internationally.
The Board remains totally committed to the provision of relevant secretarial qualifications and is currently investing in marketing resources to support these schemes in both the UK and overseas.
Any queries please contact:
PUBLICATIONS FOR ENGLISH
A LIST OF BUSINESS ENGLISH MATERIALS
This book is intended for teachers and students preparing for English for Business, English for Commerce and SEFIC.
It provides information on all materials that are deemed appropriate for these awards.
A GUIDE TO ENGLISH FOR COMMERCE
This guide is intended to help teachers and students by examining the weaknesses shown in previous examinations and providing advice on model answers.
This is an invaluable asset to anyone taking English for Commerce.
Both are available from LCCIEB — each priced £2.50 (UK); £3.00 (Rest of Europe); £3.50 (Rest of World).
USE OF WORD PROCESSORS IN OFFICE SKILLS EXAMINATIONS
Centres are reminded that the Board will allow candidates to use word processors or electronic typewriters in single subject Audio Transcription, Shorthand Transcription and Typewriting examinations.
COMING SOON
A range of Specimen Answer Packs is planned to meet the continual requests for such a service.
LCCIEB Answer Packs will combine the Chief Examiner's Report on candidates' achievement with detailed answers to every question asked.
These packs will be invaluable to both tutors and students alike because they will provide very clear guidance on the level of achievement required by the Board.
Note, however, that we shall supply ‘specimen’ and not ‘model’answers.
This is because in many subjects there is no ‘perfect’ answer.
It is anticipated that the first Answer Pack will be available in the autumn and cover Marketing (Third Level) examinations.
We shall bring you full details as soon as possible.
THIRD LEVEL ACCOUNTING EXAMINATIONS — GUIDANCE NOTES
The Board's Examiners have produced detailed Guidance Notes on how best to approach Question 1, the 49 mark question, in Third Level Accounting examinations.
The notes cover the following important points:
Format of the question;
Examination technique;
Consideration of a recent past question;
A special section on Financial Reporting Standard 1, on Cash Flow Statements.
Guidance notes available free from: Business Studies Manager.
NEW LANGUAGE QUALIFICATIONS
Did you know that 18.1 million overseas visitors came to Britain last year?
And that 625,000 of them came to study English?
Tourism and English language training are two of today's fastest growing markets.
There is an increasing need for qualified staff to service the Tourism Industry, often with English language as a vital part of training programmes.
Naturally there is also a growing need for qualified teachers of Business English.
In response to these needs two new qualifications are being offered.
DIPLOMA IN TEACHING ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS
The Diploma in Teaching English for Business (DipTEB) is awarded by the LCCIEB in association with the London Guildhall University.
Applicants will normally have a first degree, a relevant teaching qualification and at least two year's experience teaching English for Business.
In the case of people changing careers from Business to EFL, applicants should have an EFL qualification and one year's general EFL teaching experience.
To qualify for the DipTEB candidates must successfully:
attend TWO intensive three-week summer courses in successive years;
compose a long essay in English from a choice of subjects by 1 December following the first summer course;
complete a project during the intervening year;
prepare materials for a business case study or simulation by the end of the second summer course.
The DipTEB is a unique in-service teaching qualification created in 1992 by the EFL unit at London Guildhall University.
The University (formerly the City of London Polytechnic) is in the heart of Britain's business community and has more than 25 years experience of teaching English for Business Purposes.
Staff teaching the course are actively involved as teachers of English for Business.
A participatory style is adopted and this, together with the international recruitment, give participants the opportunity to work with and learn from colleagues operating is a wide range of teaching contexts.
Details from:
ENGLISH FOR THE TOURISM INDUSTRY
A LCCIEB qualification in English for the Tourism Industry will be offered at two levels from November 1993.
The four key skills of reading, writing, listening and speaking will be tested at First and Second Level.
Written and oral components can be taken separately and each part confers its own certificate.
The oral is already available.
(Details on request.)
Students gaining both a written and oral component within 24 months qualify to register for the Group Award in English for the Tourism Industry (EFTI).
ORAL EXAMINATIONS
Available:On demand (at a month's notice).
First level:Preliminary Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC)— 20 minutes.
Second Level:Intermediate SEFIC (Tourism version)— 40 minutes.
WRITTEN EXAMINATIONS
Will be available within the Series 1, 3 and 4 examination schedules (March, May/June and November/December).
The first examination will be offered in November/December 1993.
First Level:Written English for Tourism — 2 hour paper
Second Level:Written English for Tourism — 2½ hour paper
The written papers will be piloted shortly.
Syllabus and specimen papers from:
LINK
MAY '93 — DATA SHEET 2
MARKETING NEW SYLLABUS
From 1 January 1994 all marketing examinations will be based on a new syllabus.
The last examination working to the old syllabus will be in December 1993.
The Chief Examiner explains the rationale behind the change.
‘The new syllabus is required because marketing is highly dynamic subject which is now regarded as of key importance to many disciplines other than advertising and sales.
Many young people coming into industry and commerce have a basic knowledge of marketing techniques and employers are expecting more of their marketing people.
‘From 1994, therefore, candidates will be called upon to demonstrate that they understand marketing in use.
This will enhance the value of those who hold the LCCIEB qualification since it will provide evidence of basic competence founded on sound academic knowledge.
‘The question paper format remains unchanged: 5 answers will be required from 10 questions offered, and the first question will remain compulsory.
It will be seen from the specimen paper that follows, that the compulsory question will require candidates to adopt a role as a junior marketing manager, and to show that they understand the basic principles of marketing management.
‘It is emphasised that this paper is at fundamental level, and will be set and marked accordingly.
Breadth of knowledge will be tested — but so will understanding.
Approximately 30% of the marks will be for straightforward handling of theory — but additional marks for pass, credit and distinction standard must come from the quality of the candidate's understanding and ability to communicate in acceptable fashion.
‘Candidates will be required to show that they have looked at marketing in the real world as well as through the limiting perspective of the texts.
They will also be expected to submit answer books that are of acceptable standard.
We expect candidates to communicate effectively — but will not be looking for perfect Business English.
Presentation will not be graded, but candidates and tutors must be aware that unless a marketing standard of presentation is achieved it is possible that points made will go unnoticed by the examiners.
‘The questions set in 1993 will be seen to begin the gradual transition of style towards the 1994 papers.
Great care will be taken to ensure that private study candidates will not be penalised because they come to the examinations in 1993/94 without advance warning of the changed expectation.’
Syllabus from: Business Studies Manager.
CANDIDATE'S INSTRUCTIONS
From 1 January 1994:
(a)
The time allowed for this examination is 3 hours.
(b)
Answer 5 questions — the compulsory question (Question 1) and 4 others.
(c)
Failure to attempt the compulsory question will disqualify the candidate.
(d)
All questions carry equal marks.
(e)
All answers must be clearly and correctly numbered by but need not be in numerical order.
(f)
Write legibly on both sides of the paper.
Rough work (if any) must be ruled through neatly after use.
(g)
Red or green ink should not be used.
(h)
If supplementary sheets are used the candidate's number must be clearly shown and the sheets securely inserted inside the answer book.
The question(s) to which they refer must be clearly numbered.
A specimen question paper from the 1994 syllabus is shown overleaf.
The LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
A LIST OF BUSINESS ENGLISH MATERIALS OF THE LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
BOOK CENTRED MATERIAL
LONGMAN CONCISE DICTIONARY OF BUSINESS ENGLISH Longman 1986
An abridged version of the Longman Dictionary of Business English (q.v.), specially written for students in commercial and vocational schools and which covers all the vocabulary needed for day-to-day office and business practice.
LONGMAN DICTIONARY OF BUSINESS ENGLISH Longman 1989 (2nd edn)
The dictionary has been compiled specially for people working in a business environment, and for students and teachers of business and commerce.
There are more than 13,000 entries, using the Longman Defining Vocabulary of 2000 words.
Additional information includes tables of weights and measures and basic and commercial information on individual countries.
INTERNATIONAL HOTEL ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1989 189 pp
Exercises focus on structural and functional items and are based on authentic situations and tasks which require students to apply what they have learned to related problem situations.
Practice is given in understanding and responding to different varieties of English and native and non-native accents.
COMMERCIAL READING Gyldendal, Copenhagen (5th edition) 1988 283 pp
A variety of texts on trade and industry, transport, finance, insurance and advertising for advanced students of English.
MANAGEMENT ENGLISH Oxford University Press 162 pp (Allami Konyvterjeszto Vallalat 1986)
American English.
Problem-oriented approach to aspects of business management, mainly through cartoon/pictorial presentation.
Emphasis on choice, evaluation, decision-making.
Throughout, emphasises creative language use.
Among topics covered: dress, technology, telecommunications, transport, meetings.
Accompanied by a Listening Activity Book and cassettes.
Sound content, but humorous approach may not be to everyone's taste.
A HANDBOOK OF COMMERCIAL CORRESPONDENCE Oxford University Press 1984 280 pp
Provides annotated examples of letters, with guidance on style and form.
Comprehensive index gives access to information on any aspect of business correspondence.
Points to remember section at end of each chapter provide useful review of the language needed to produce a specific effect in a given context.
BASIC COMMERCIAL ENGLISH Pitman 1986 184 pp
Detailed coverage of a wide range of commercial organisations and practice, with realistic exercises and role plays.
For all students in the English-speaking world, particularly those whose mother tongue is not English.
BUSINESS ENGLISH PRACTICE Pitman 1986 BOOK 1
A set of two workbooks containing exercises and assignments to improve students' English and understanding of the commercial world.
For use with the Business English and Basic English series.
BASIC OFFICE ENGLISH Pitman 1986 192 pp
Modern office practice for those using English as first, second or foreign language in commerce.
BACIE (BRITISH ASSOCIATION OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION)
REPORT WRITING BACIE 1961 (2nd revised edition, 16th impression 1981) 23 pp
A GUIDE TO THE WRITING OF BUSINESS LETTERS BACIE 1973 (5th edition 1980, 16th impression)
PROFESSIONAL WRITING Prentice Hall International 1989 101 pp
For EFL students; the units progress through separate skills, from explanations and instructions to business proposals and job applications, and consider phrases, vocabulary and grammar features associated with each mode of writing.
Writing exercises are based on text, visual and listening sources.
Appendixes: the language of graphs and statistics; guide to abbreviations.
CHANGING BRITAIN Belin, Paris 1972 192 pp
A regional characterisation of the British economy and civilisation, in three parts, considering cultural institutions and trends.
THE ESSENTIALS OF ENGLISH Cassell 1975 160 pp 
SPEAK UP FOR YOURSELF Pitman 1989 120 pp
Towards effective oral communication for business.
Not primarily for foreign learners of English, but helpful in developing sensitive use of language for those who already have a good command of English.
The exercises and role play make useful and interesting variants on the usual task-based instruction.
Interviews, assertiveness techniques and use of the telephone are among topics covered.
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING Special English Series Cassell 1978 128 pp
The job of the computer programmer, the programmer's tools, interpretation, making and shifting, file.
IMPORT/EXPORT Special English Series Cassell 1978 (reprint 1987) 128 pp
Exchange control, forward exchange, commodity market, freight booking, codes and communications, customs clearing and bonding, advertising and trade fairs, etc.
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS BBC English by Radio and Television 1984 112 pp
A practical guide to written English for the business world.
Using case studies, models and exercises, the book demonstrates the use of formal and informal written English and illustrates the language needed for the different communicative functions involved in business English.
Useful in developing a feel for the subtleties of language in letter, telex and telephone communication.
HOTEL ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1988 114 pp
RESTAURANT ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1988 107 pp
The courses are intended to provide hotel and restaurant staff with the language necessary to answer clients' queries and to supply information on their own initiative.
Situational presentation suitable for role play exercises; dialogues and information enable student to be creative in use of language, and practice is given in the sort of English in use in international hotel and catering institutions.
CAREER DEVELOPMENTS Oxford University Press 1982 176 pp
The second part of a beginner's course (part one: Career prospects).
Takes beginners up to intermediate level by showing trainees working on specific jobs.
CAREER PROSPECTS Oxford University Press 1981 152 pp
Covers the basic structures and vocabulary for the English of business, based on the story of a group of employees at the start of their training in an international company.
Part one of a two-part course (Part Two: Career developments).
THE COMPANY GAME Longman 1986 60 pp
Written with Arabic-speaking students in mind, and designed as a commercial reader with a story line of setting up a company.
Includes an Arabic word list.
BUSINESS CONTACTS Prentice-Hall International (Pergamon 1981) 128 pp
Classroom and self-study practice in skills for specialist business students.
Glossary of vital terms.
Pricing policy, interviews diary, product description with key language on tape.
Valuable for home study and/or home work.
Role play exercises very useful.
BUSINESS ISSUES Material for developing reading and speaking skills for students of business English.
Prentice-Hall International 1987 160 pp
Themes of international interest, presented through articles taken from leading business journals, eg The Economist, Marketing, New Law Journal.
EARLY BUSINESS CONTACTS Prentice Hall International 1989 146 pp
Material for developing listening and speaking skills aimed at specialists and non-specialists studying for and working in international businesses where English language skills are required.
Covers a range of business situations and associated functional and structural language items.
Particular emphasis on socially oriented topics, such as receiving visitors, making visits, appointments, entertainment and business travel.
SECRETARIAL CONTACTS Prentice Hall International 1989 178 pp
For students training for and working in secretarial positions in international companies.
Situationally organised; areas covered include making business arrangements, reception skills, business meetings, office equipment, telephoning, telexes, dictation, and social communication.
Skills-oriented texts focus on informational with linguistic content.
ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS: THE BELLCREST VIDEO SERIES Oxford University Press and BBC
A course based on thirteen video episodes concerning an imaginary British electronic and engineering firm.
It takes viewers through a variety of business transactions and social encounters which demonstrate language functions.
Video cassettes available from BBC English by Radio and Television, supporting material from the Oxford University Press.
The Bellcrest File is designed for independent study.
See LONGMAN BUSINESS ENGLISH SKILLS SERIES 
A GUIDE TO BETTER LETTERS Stanley Thornes 1987 104 pp
Models of letters plus exercises and explanations.
The business letters cover general business and commercial uses: letters of reference, resignation, complaint, job applications and curriculum vitae.
BUSINESS ASSIGNMENTS see VIDEO section 
BUSINESS CIRCLES Nelson 1988 127 pp
Introduces functions and their associated structures through a single business storyline developed throughout the book.
Reinforcing practice for reading writing and listening skills, using authentic materials.
Index of language points and of irregular verbs.
A bit stiff, but efficient.
Traditional approach.
BUSINESS READING SKILLS Nelson 1985 87 pp
A collection of 35 authentic texts taken from circulars, letters, reports, advertisements and brochures, representing both British and American English, and intended to help students develop their reading and writing skills.
Staged treatment of each text — skimming, intensive reading, reading for reference, with attention to special vocabulary and language points.
Useful reference section helps students to appreciate the cultural context of their business contacts.
Not a book to teach skills, but a rich, solid approach to the development of skills.
Can be used for individual study.
DECISION-TAKER Longman 1987 Inter/adv, software, users' notes, students' worksheets.
A computer presentation which provides a realistic management situation designed to stimulate discussion among business English students.
The software consists mostly of numbers and graphics, and can be used at various language levels.
In BBC B pack and Apple IIe formats.
TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION AND LANGUAGE PRACTICE Stanley Thornes & Hulton (Hulton Educational 1980)
Two books aimed at developing language skills through presentation and discussion of thought-provoking topics.
Format is the same in both books: cartoon presentation of the topic, with follow-up designed to elicit creative language through discussion along, role play and written work.
The appendix lists phrases for helping various types of discussion.
Attractive and clear presentation; interesting content.
THE CARSAT CRISIS — see VIDEO section  — see BUSINESS ASSIGNMENTS, VIDEO section.
ANGLAIS COMMERCIAL Larousse, Paris 1971 286 pp (new edition 1984)
Aimed at the graduating classes of the Grandes Ecoles Commerciales.
ENGLISH IN PUBLISHING Pangbourne English Centre 1987–1988
A series of four handbooks for people in international publishing, each including a checklist of topic-related terminology, models of documents showing authentic use of terminology, case histories of specific situations requiring the use of the terminology, language in context giving guidance on use of certain terms and the avoidance of pitfalls, and a glossary presented as an alphabetic index to relevant pages and providing help with pronunciation where clarification might be useful because of usage or differences between arts of speech.
BOOK 1: PUBLISHING ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT 1988 (The business aspects of publishing) 32 pp
BOOK 2: PUBLICATION PROCESSES 1987 (A handbook for editors, designers and production) 32 pp
BOOK 3: MARKETING IN PUBLISHING 1988.
BOOK 4 PUBLISHING RIGHTS & CONTRACTS 1988 also available.
BUSINESS REPORTS IN ENGLISH Cambridge University Press 1984 90 pp
For practising managers and secretarial personnel and business studies students.
A course in report reading and writing in the areas of administration, productivity, personnel, finance, marketing and sales and general business.
Task-based activities cover content, structure, language and writing of a report.
ENGLISH FOR THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY Oxford University Press 236 pp
The course, developed in co-operation with British, French, Swedish and Norwegian telecommunications institutions, is designed for those working or training as managers, engineers and technicians with telecommunication administrations, equipment manufacturers, government departments and other agencies.
AMERICAN ENGLISH FOR INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSMEN Institute of Modern Languages, Washington DC 1973 168 pp
For student with a high intermediate to advanced level of proficiency in English whose occupational needs include ability to communicate with English-speaking members of the business community.
KEYS TO MANAGEMENT Nelson (Unwin Hyman 1988) 224 pp
Topic-based approach centred around aspects of management: role, planning, strategy, goal-setting, motivation, performance appraisal, leadership and management of time.
The course as a whole emphasises oral communication, but each unit includes topic discussion, with practice in the four main skills, relevant vocabulary, language and grammar study, a controlled role play and case study.
Valuable for the oral practice and the interesting situations raised.
Although the book is claimed to be suitable for self-study, students would probably find it more useful to work through the material with a teacher.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS TOPICS Nelson (Evans Bros 1980) 174 pp
Contains 20 topics on topical and sometimes controversial issues, including the role of multinationals, bribery, equality for women, Japanese business methods, industrial democracy, copyright.
Following each passage there are five sections covering comprehension, vocabulary, language practice, oral work and writing exercises.
WORLD OF BUSINESS An intermediate course in Business English Nelson (Bell & Hyman 1983) 144 pp
15 units based on different aspects of business.
Units comprise discussion, reading, role play, writing assignment, vocabulary building, practice in points of grammar.
Topics include Vanderbilt jeans, De Bijenkor department stores, American unions etc.
Useful course book with particular interest in such topics as a Rights Issue and a Franchise.
HARRAP'S AGENDA Business English through case studies Harrap 1983 127 pp 
TERMS OF TRADE Edward Arnold 1985 96 pp
A cassette pack for business English, with each unit on a different theme: choosing an overseas market, meeting a potential customer, clinching a deal, import-export documentation, methods of payment, insurance, marketing, agency contract.
In addition to developing aspects of speech and comprehension, may be used to supplement other courses, and is suitable for independent study.
PACK (includes book)
ON THE LINE Oxford University Press 1981
Oral/aural telephone transactions from situation outlines.
Part 1 contains information, Part 2 related set of information for respondent.
If taped at the time, ideal for both self-study and teacher guidance.
All the conversations represent a specific task (eg changing a flight) and involve an information gap to be overcome.
PITMAN BUSINESS ENGLISH Pitman 1982–3
A complete course of value to both native and non-native speakers of English who wish to acquire knowledge of and practice in the full gamut of business communication: letters, memos, graphs, telex, flow-charts, timetables, year-planners, proof reading, itineraries, CVs and many more.
Assignment tasks are based on well illustrated cases and a problem-solving approach.
The lowest level of language presupposed is intermediate for foreign learners and the highest aims at LCCIEB Third Level English for Commerce or English for Business.
In addition to language, layout conventions and typing hints are included.
A very rich, varied and interesting foundation for all office language skills at three functional levels.
BILINGUAL HANDBOOKS OF BUSINESS CORRESPONDENCE AND COMMUNICATION Prentice Hall International 1989 c200 pp each book.
A bilingual series (English with French, Italian, Spanish and German respectively) designed for students and professionals in international secretarial and business fields requiring competence in letters, telephone and telex communication in two or more languages.
Each volume includes standard models for commercial correspondence, business communication (telephone and telex), and cultural briefing.
Explanations, information and annotations in the user's native language relate to the procedures and practice in the foreign language.
DAVIES S and ESNOL A: English/French 222 pp.
DAVIES S and GIAGNONI ARDUINI A M English/Italian.
DAVIES S and O'NEILL CAMPRUBI M: English/Spanish.
DAVIES S and ROHRMANN J: English/German.
IT'S A DEAL Die Keure, Bruges 1988 80 pp
A single story line throughout is developed in a functional/notional approach associating the task with the relevant business letter and exercises and dialogues.
The introduction is devoted to explanation of the layout of business letters.
Extension activities section gives some information on American vocabulary and usage.
Good content, lighthearted presentation in cartoons.
BUSINESS ENGLISH: ANGLAIS COMMERCIALE ET ECONOMIQUE Nathan, Paris 1970 224 pp.
Aimed at University Institutes of Technology, a course organised in to sections on Channels of Distribution.
Transacting business, settling accounts and office life, with French as the teaching medium.
WRITE FOR BUSINESS Effective communication in English for business and industry.
Longman 1988 158 pp.
A comprehensive, step-by-step programme of exercises and activities designed to develop and practice skills needed in reading, interpreting and writing reports.
LANGUAGE & STYLE IN THE PRESS A readers guide to British Newspapers.
Collins 1984 96 pp.
Systematic treatment of linguistic and stylistic elements of journalistic text.
14 newspaper items offer the reader an opportunity to develop judgement on reportage and content.
Useful glossary and answer key.
Very useful for student with time for home study.
ENGLISH FOR TRAVEL Oxford University Press 1980 113 pp.
Essential language skills for tourists and business people: asking questions and understanding the replies, checking and extracting information, reading brochures, regulations and instructions.
Settings include the airport, hotel, restaurant, and doctor's office.
ENGLISH COMMERCIAL PRACTICE & CORRESPONDENCE Longman 1983 250 pp.
For students with good knowledge of English and those who wish to make a start on commercial correspondence.
Exercises to test knowledge of commercial terms and of English.
The first half focuses on the language of business (job applications, job interviews, etc.); the second part emphasizes correspondence (the appendix gives standard phrases for correspondence).
AN ENGLISH READER: ‘THE TIMES’ Collins 1984 110 pp
Extracts from The Times grouped round 4 major themes: Employment, Finance, Trade and Science.
Vocabulary relevant to the theme precedes each extract.
Exercises to elicit (a) understanding (b) language use (c) writer's attitude (d) stylistic features of prose (journalese)(e) non-verbal data (graphs etc).
Essential reading material for any serious student.
see LONGMANS BUSINESS ENGLISH SKILLS SERIES.
ENGLISH FOR CAREERS Prentice Hall International 1987.
A set of career-related texts, each containing an introduction to opportunities and problems in a given field, practice with specialised vocabulary and the basic structures of English, a 1000-word narrative on a specific topic, and exercises.
Designed to be informative, even for the professional in the field.
Sample titles:
AIR TRAVEL IN ENGLISH (2 books)
HOTELS IN ENGLISH 122 pp
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE IN ENGLISH 128 pp
INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENGLISH 120 pp
MARKETING IN ENGLISH 108 pp
RESTAURANTS AND CATERING IN ENGLISH 128 pp
TOURISM IN ENGLISH 92 pp
LONGMAN 1984 119 pp
3 case studies.
Specific needs in business field by problem-solving, information transfer tasks.
Native and non-natives on cassette giving practice in multi-national communication.
Case study.
Free standing units offer valuable review and new language in highly professional settings.
Very useful.
COUNT ME IN LONGMAN 1982 49 pp
Understanding numbers in English.
Practice and consolidation of numbers including percentages, fractions, dates, telephone numbers etc.
Excellent.
TALK BUSINESS inter, SB (2), U10, dictionary.
An audio-based course with two supporting books, one in the student's mother tongue (English 1979, French 1980, German 1981, Spanish 1989), the other in the target language, each fully cross-referenced with the other.
Chapters are built around a short business dialogue, which introduces new grammar in a natural context.
Students are required to listen and respond throughout.
May be used with the video course PARIS (qv).
COMMUNICATION AT WORK Pitman 1987 (2nd edition) 247 pp
An introduction to business communication, office practice and information technology.
The associated language analysis is useful as a reference work and set of handy tips.
Relevant for native and non-native (if advanced) users.
IMPROVING ENGLISH SKILLS Pitman 1986 258 pp
Analyses the mechanics and styles of English, and gives examples, with assignments for practice.
Written primarily with native speakers in mind, but the self-study element makes it potentially useful as a reference work for non-native speakers who already have good knowledge of the language.
OUT OF THE IN-TRAY Using English for business Collins 1982 80 pp
Provides realistic and thought-provoking material, eg letters, memos, orders, reports, which need a reply.
ENGLISH TELEPHONE CONVERSATION Nelson (Bell & Hyman) 1980 72 pp
Useful telephone vocabulary and procedures.
ENGLISH FOR BANK CASHIERS Nelson (Bell & Hyman) 1978 72 pp
Exclusively for cashiers with language used in banking practice.
Built around a series of dialogues between cashiers and clients.
ENGLISH FOR INTERNATIONAL BANKING Nelson (Bell & Hyman) 1981 112 pp
Consultation technique and language of the banking world.
Dialogues set in Switzerland.
Provides guidance on English and American usage.
For personnel dealing with eg, short term investments, bonds and shares, small loans, mortgages, etc.
ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS Pitman 1988 (3rd edition) 218 pp
Concentrates on the use of language for effect, and presupposes a competence beyond the merely grammatical.
Model passages and letters illustrate principles.
Some main pitfalls of usage, spelling and punctuation are signalled.
Clearly presented, and useful for both native and non-native speakers of English.
ENGLISH FOR INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES Prentice Hall International (Pergamon 1982) 63 pp
Language for those working in the fields of science, economics, politics and administration.
Dramatised conversation, structural drill, language strategy, listening comprehension.
Pedagogic principles are stated but not practised to any notable degree.
see BID FOR POWER, VIDEO section 
TECHNICAL ENGLISH FOR INDUSTRY Longman 1988 123 pp
A course designed to meet the needs of people in industry who have to communicate in English during their working lives.
Makes extensive and varied use of realia, such as specifications, extracts from company brochures, manuals, diagrams, etc.
Aims to develop reading, listening, speaking and writing skills in an individual day to day, practical context.
see VIDEO section 
GOOD FOR BUSINESS Nelson (Harrap 1983) 102 pp
An intensive course in Business English.
Excellent index sets out presentation in 4 clear areas:(1) situation (2) structures (3) functional area (4) vocabulary.
60–80 hours of teaching.
A solid yet agreeable course book with material to commend it to the serious student.
ENGLISCHE GESCHAEFTSBRIEFE: ANLEITUNG ZUR ENGLISCHEN HANDELSKORRESPONDENZ Grossman, Stuttgart 1972 (5th edition 1985) 144 pp
Information on the forms and conversations of English business letters under functional headings.
ENGLISCHES WIRTSCHAFTSALPHABET Grossman, Stuttgart 1987 (12th edition) 156 pp  
ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS STUDIES Pitman 1981 406 pp (3rd edition)
Part one provides instruction in the use and practice of English in different types of communication, including essay, business letter and other forms of business writing; activities provide for development of all the skills.
Part two presents associated grammatical disciplines together with punctuation, spelling and usage and may also be used as a reference source.
Exercises give practice in answering examination questions set by professional bodies.
MODEL BUSINESS LETTERS Pitman 1981 544 pp (3rd edition)
More than six hundred letters covering a wide range of transactions, with associated rules of good writing and structures of the modern business letter.
A special feature is the commentary in non-technical language on reasons for the different types of transaction and on the commercial and legal relationships they create.
ENGLISH IN COMPUTING Nelson 1987 128 pp
Topic- and task-based units to develop predictive and retrieval reading skills, with particular attention to the different register used for spoken in contrast to written instruction, and guided writing practice.
Task format and quiz with key makes it suitable for private study and for use by non-specialist teachers.
A useful introduction to the subject and its language.
Well set out and interestingly written.
User-friendly.
PRACTICAL LETTER-WRITING Heinemann Educational 1967 96 pp (latest reprint 1983)
Extensive practice in all the most common forms of letter writing.
In two parts: personal letters and formal letters.
Final chapter revises grammatical points important in letter writing.
Useful for native and non-native speakers of English.
BUSINESS TARGETS Heinemann Educational 1986 96 pp
Development of skills is task-based.
Each unit covers a general theme, with sections of specific topics within the theme (eg writing a job description, interviewing a candidate).
Cassette contains listening passages.
THE PENGUIN DICTIONARY OF BUSINESS Penguin 1987 (3rd revised edition) 318 pp — formerly PENGUIN DICTIONARY OF COMMERCE.
A CONCISE COURSE OF COMMERCE AND CIVILIZATION Casanova, Turin (5th edition, 1st edition 1969) 480 pp
Preliminary information on business practice and correspondence for adult learners with basis of English.
Partly in English and partly in Italian.
CASE STUDIES IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS Prentice Hall International 1988 155 pp
Each case presents a real business situation or problem for large and small companies in developed and less-developed countries.
Topics include business strategy, marketing, finance, international trade, cross-cultural management.
Glossary of business terms is provided.
BUSINESS LISTENING TASKS Cambridge 1986 121 pp
Units covering making contact, buying and selling, planning and control, a business meeting; also there are up-to-date materials for class and self-study use.
the units may be taken in any order; within the task, activity is dictated by the level of the learner's language.
MAKING POLITE NOISES Nelson (Evans 1979) 62 pp
Cover 21 of the most common language functions.
DEFINING AND VERBALISING Nelson (Evans 1979) 89 pp
Units concentrate on communicative ability with particular reference to defining graphs, maps, etc.
Lively and holds students' interest.
ACTIVATING VOCABULARY Arguing and discussing Nelson (Evans 1980) 93 pp
Key topics with illustrations to put vocabulary into context.
Units presented dynamically with words and phrases of relevance.
WITH PLEASURE!
Edward Arnold 1984 64 pp
A task-based course which trains bar, restaurant, kitchen and house-keeping staff to cope when spoken to in English and to respond appropriately.
Focus is on listening to and understanding a wide range of accents.
The course is suitable for use with other similar courses for hotel staff; part one: language common to all service staff; part two: individual practice in each area.
YOU'RE WELCOME Edward Arnold 1984 64 pp
Task-based listening units feature short dialogues between receptionists and guests and give practice in understanding a variety of accents and with authentic reading texts (telexes, letters, notices).
The reference section includes British and American hotel terms, information on countries, conversion tables and standard telephone spelling codes.
HARRAP'S DICTIONARY OF BUSINESS AND FINANCE Harrap 1988 400 pp
For use by students of business, economics, accountancy and banking, and staff at every level.
Assumes only minimal amount of previous knowledge, and therefore concentrates on clarity of definition and explanation.
Bell & Hyman DICTIONARY OF COMMERCIAL ENGLISH Nelson (Bell & Hyman 1983)
An annotated glossary which includes detailed explanations of the most commonly used terms in shipping, banking, insurance, computers, and general commercial transactions.
Intended for the foreign student with a limited knowledge of English, the defining vocabulary is limited to about 2000 common English words.
Differences between British and American English, spelling and measurements are noted.
A useful reference work, although some definitions presuppose a fairly high level of knowledge by the students.
A CASE FOR ENGLISH Cambridge University Press 1979
Main emphasis on role play and simulation.
Each case presents a different problem to solve through pair work and group work.
Accent on lively oral communication but language practice and writing also included.
IMPORT/EXPORT Series World at Work Longman 1982 48 pp
Import/Export transactions and insurance, telex cable rates, letters of credit, customs and excise.
‘Play’ book relieving heavy course material with very useful back-up vocabulary etc.
A MODERN COURSE IN BUSINESS ENGLISH Oxford University Press 1967 152 pp (6th reprint 1972)
A course for intermediate adult learners of English who take a practical interest in business and economic affairs.
The course manual can be used for independent study.
PORTFOLIO Longman 1987 86 pp
The material integrates all the language skills an functions to develop the skills of discussion, argumentation, hypothesis, analysis, presenting, and reporting back.
The teacher's guide explains the business concepts in the case studies, and how to exploit them in teaching.
— see VISTRO, VIDEO section.
BUSINESS TALK Longman 1982 129 pp
Authentic listening material for business/professional English, covering a wide range of business meetings and discussions, recorded on site.
Authentic unscripted material for listening comprehension and speaking skills.
Cassette has speakers in a variety of professional fields talking without concessions to foreign learners.
Notional/functional language areas exploited for top-level listening comprehension and speaking.
COMPUTERS Cassell 1986 (reprint 1988) 128 pp
Special English Series — What is a computer?
The history of the computer, Hardware, the Control Processor, Data, The Programmer, the Systems Analyst etc.
COMPUTER APPLICATIONS Special English Series Cassell 1980 128 pp
Living with computers: Steelmaking, Medicine, Local Government Research, Banking and Finance, Design, Education, Public Utilities, Printing and Publishing, Retail Grocery, Air Freight, Cause for Celebration?
THE CARSAT CRISIS BBC English by Radio and Television 1988 252 pp
For those in the fields of engineering, science and technology.
Based on a thirteen-part drama serial on video cassette; authentic reading material from newspapers, magazines and technical journals, and training on writing skills through guided summaries, descriptions and reports to develop the professional language needed.
Suitable for independent or class study.
see also THE CARSAT CRISIS, VIDEO section.
INTERFACE Longman 1984 129 pp
English for technical communication.
Units based on tools, engines, computers, construction, energy, fluids, from STARTER through to TASK.
Useful companion course for students in scientific fields.
ECONOMIC SURVEYS AND BUSINESS NEWS Belin, Paris 1969 128 pp Tapes.
Third and final part of a secondary school course in business English, to prepare students for university studies in Economics.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS ENGLISH Cambridge University press 1989 236 pp
A course in communication skills which covers authentic writing and oral business tasks, using integrated skills approach, as well as giving practice in individual skills.
Listening practice uses wide range of international English accents.
Teachers' book can be used even by teachers unfamiliar with business English.
Role play exercises based on authentic information-gap situations requiring spontaneous reaction.
LANGUAGE FOR ECONOMICS Collins ELT 1986 128 pp
Ten units each in two stages structured for practice in special vocabulary, language use, and extension activities which give opportunity to practice language in a less controlled way.
Some independent study potential but techniques suggested make it more useful in a class setting.
Methodology places particular emphasis on the language of persuasion.
Aims to give practice in the English commonly used in economics studies: grammatical features, vocabulary, language functions, study skills and the use of data.
WRITING BUSINESS LETTERS An introduction for foreign learners Macmillan 1978 144 pp
THE LANGUAGE OF ENGLISH BUSINESS LETTERS Macmillan 1972 192 pp
Commercial course for foreign students of English.
Sample of letters are followed by extensive notes, exercises and guided letter-writing practice.
see LONGMAN BUSINESS ENGLISH SKILLS SERIES.
ENGLISH BUSINESS LETTERS Longman 1962 163 pp (6th reprint 1985)
The principles and layout of English and American business letters, with exercises to enable students to create their own.
Each unit deals with a different aspect, eg. packaging, orders, enquiries, shipping, insurance.
With examples of documentation and letters.
BUSINESS LETTERS FOR SECRETARIAL STUDENTS Stanley Thornes & Hulton 1980 128 pp
Teaching the format of correct English business letters.
CORRESPONDENCE COMMERCIALE ANGLAIS Payot, Lausanne 1969 175 pp
A manual and index with model letters arranged in short transactional series.
FUNCTIONING IN BUSINESS Longman 1987 64 pp
Focuses on American English.
Graded listening and speaking activities for people in a range of social and business contexts.
Intended to develop recognition and efficient production of key functional phrases, improve listening ability, and expand basic business vocabulary.
Episodes are based on dialogues, role play and cloze exercises, with the emphasis on building awareness of language appropriateness.
Listening material includes native and non-native spoken English.
BUSINESS READING Longman 1986 88 pp
Examples from international journalism, for those who need to keep in touch with current events and new ideas through reading.
Develops intensive reading skills and reading for gist, gives practice in business vocabulary and revises grammatical structures.
The book consists of extracts from the British and American press and is suitable for independent study.
see EURO-LANG MEDIA COURSES, VIDEO section.
NEGOTIATE IN ENGLISH Nelson (Harrap 1984) 96 pp
Face-to-face negotiations on a variety of situations which require special vocabulary on (a) invoices (b) credit control (c) prices and discounts (d) agency contract (e) salaries and work (f) licensing etc.
Much needed material in motivating and impelling presentation.
Realistic and commonly met business situations.
ENGLISH ON BUSINESS The language pack for international executives Collins 1984 course book 192 pp, dictionary 480 pp.
Unique package comprising book, cassette and dictionary for business people whose main concern is English.
Units cover the main areas of contact in business, with an emphasis on oral-aural skills.
Users need not work through the exercises sequentially, but can choose according to immediate need.
Cross-reference system a special feature.
MODERN BUSINESS LETTERS HECKNERS, WOLFENBUTTEL 1967 (now in 32nd edition) 192 pp
A functional classification of business letters with general comments.
A glossary of technical terms with phonetic transcriptions and German equivalents is separately published as a booklet.
SKYTALK: English for air communication Stanley Thornes and Hulton 1984
The book is designed to develop the professional communication skills in English needed by pilots and air traffic controllers whose first language is not English.
For trainers or practising professionals needing a refresher course.
Practice material conforms to the 1984 ICAO manual.
Exercises follow the sequence of a typical flight, and each unit introduces and practices the language of a particular aspect of air traffic control communication.
Useful transcripts of live RTF transmissions provide trainees with practice in understanding a variety of non-native accents, and non-standard phraseology.
LINGUAPHONE BUSINESS ENGLISH Linguaphone Institute Ltd 1989
Inter, SB, explanatory handbook in numerous languages, cassettes, minilab option with headsets and interactive cassettes.
The standard course comes in three books of case studies covering a variety of business activities in different parts of the world.
Students are exposed to a variety of different accents on the cassettes and are provided with standard business documents and practice material in the books.
There is a business English dictionary of more than 4,500 entries and different packages add to the basic kit.
Designed for highly motivated self-study.
COMPANY TO COMPANY Cambridge University Press 1988 120 pp
A task-based approach for those needing to write letters or telexes in English.
Activity section of each unit gives practical assignments for pair or group work.
Index of model letters useful as a prop and exercises based on them also encourage creativity in letter writing.
Teachers' book may be used by teachers unfamiliar with English business correspondence.
Suitable for independent study.
LONGMAN BUSINESS ENGLISH SKILLS SERIES mid-upper inter
A series of four books, each with an accompanying cassette, which give training in key business communication skills.
Each book/cassette package can be used as a self-contained course module on short, intensive, skills-based courses, or for independent study.
Emphasis on building awareness of language appropriacy and fluency in typical interactions.
TELEPHONING 1987 80 pp
SOCIALIZING 1987 94 pp
PRESENTING FACTS AND FIGURES 1988 80 pp
MEETINGS AND DISCUSSIONS 1987 96 pp
THE SAVOY COURSE FOR CATERING STUDENTS Edward Arnold 1973 160 pp
A structurally graded course which deals with the English grammar and vocabulary needs of catering staff in all areas and all work levels.
Also intended for use as a reference book.
BANK ON YOUR ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1987 131 pp
An elementary course in communication for bank employees: bank employee's coursebook.
Speaking, dialogues, listening comprehension, writing, form-filling, reading with true/false questions to elicit comprehension.
About 60 hours study.
Lively, imaginative approach.
Keeps learners motivated.
THE LANGUAGE OF BUSINESS BBC English 1970 255 pp (reprint 1987)
This book is published in English and in bilingual (with English) editions for Arabic, French and Spanish.
A dramatised story of the operations of an imaginary business, which covers in a realistic way most aspects of business.
Emphasis on functions where English is particularly important, such as marketing, with examples of written items, eg. correspondence, minutes of meetings, cables.
The glossary contains approximately one thousand business terms.
the books are available separately or in sets with two audio cassettes.
Book: English/Arabic.
English/French.
English/Spanish.
COLLINS GEM BUSINESS DICTIONARY Collins 1979 (new edition)
BUSINESS INTERACTIONS Prentice Hall International 1987 208 pp
A textbook for the development of oral skills in English for the foreign business professional or student which can be adapted for use with various class sizes, student needs and interests, language levels and time constraints.
Prepares students to participate in small group discussions, teaches common business terms, and gives experience in discussion techniques and group interaction.
Appendices focus on individual and group evaluation.
OFFICE TO OFFICE Practical business communication Longman 1982 158 pp
Practice in all aspects of commercial English, including letters.
Dialogues generate action plus more formal language.
LEGAL PROBLEMS Special English Series Cassell 1978 122 pp (reprint 1988)
Setting up in business, making contracts, arbitration, restraint of trade, negligence, raising money, winding-up a company, etc.
PRACTICAL BUSINESS ENGLISH Stanley Thornes & Hulton 1980 3 volumes 
ENGLISH FOR THE OFFICE Macmillan 1984 256 pp
Comprehensive practice book for students in all levels of commerce.
Each unit gives background information to the practice and theory of secretarial duties.
Some American English is also practical.
ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS STUDIES Macmillan 1983 256 pp
Intended for students wishing to enter for serious business study courses and examinations.
ENTERPRISE ONE Heinemann 1985 96 pp
Based on topics and situations related to day-to-day business activities: telephone work, office practice, etc.
Students' Book develops situations in the running of a small company; workbook introduces additional practice.
Dialogues, drills, pronunciation exercises on cassette.
each unit introduces a situation on which various kinds of language practice are based.
ENTERPRISE TWO: ENGLISH FOR THE COMMERCIAL WORLD Heinemann 1986 96 pp
The second in a three-book course, providing more complex tasks and vocabulary than in book one, with increased emphasis on writing, and practice in dictionary work.
ENTERPRISE THREE: ENGLISH FOR THE COMMERCIAL WORLD Heinemann 1986 96 pp
The final book in a three-book course.
Develops the skills further, and pays special attention to more sophisticated sub-skills such as scanning a text.
Tasks focus on the problem-solving and decision-making activities common in business management.
Attractive presentation through pictures and illustrated dialogues; revision section.
ENGLISH FOR COMPUTER SCIENCE Oxford University Press 1988 (2nd edition) 241 pp
Reading course for in-company training and self-study.
Information on computer components and processes.
A ‘must’ for any student who is into computers.
Heavy going for reading as a skill.
A completely revised and updated edition of the publication first issued in 1984.
TAKE A LETTER Macmillan 1984 64 pp
Includes form-filling, layout and simple letter writing.
Students are encouraged to develop their reference skills and to work by themselves.
Workbooks approach.
The appendix includes a map of the world and a list of business terms.
TAKE ANOTHER LETTER Macmillan 1987 96 pp
Designed as a sequel to TAKE A LETTER (qv) but may be used by students with no previous knowledge of business correspondence.
Concentrates on the language of letter-writing itself, with special emphasis on the build-up of vocabulary.
There is an appendix on standard business terminology and abbreviations used in the book.
BUSINESS LETTERS FOR ALL Oxford University Press 1977 163 pp (12th impression 1986)
A guide to English and American business correspondence.
In addition to formal business correspondence, includes letters on social situations that play an important part in business and personal contacts: formal and informal invitations, thanks for hospitality and help, congratulations etc.
With comprehension questions and letter writing exercises.
Four sections: the form of a letter, business situations, social situations, telegrams and telexes.
The reference vocabulary draws equally on American and British sources, and on various kinds of publicity and information material.
Clear and entertaining presentation.
TELEPHONING IN ENGLISH Cambridge University Press 1987 124 pp
Provides exercises appropriate for a range of common telephone situations: orders, bookings, complaints, etc.
Useful guide in each unit to the various services provided by Telecom, and how to use them.
Cassettes give practice in understanding British, American and other kinds of world English.
For use in class, or for independent study.
Good on authentic and idiomatic language.
ENGLISH FOR COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS Longman 1988
A three-book course adapted for Arabic students from the author's WE MEAN BUSINESS and WE'RE IN BUSINESS (qv).
May also be used with Blundell's reader.
EXPORT ENGLISH BBC English by Radio and Television 1980 134 pp
A course designed to extend and practise commercial English.
The course is based on a continuous integrated story which naturally introduces the special usage of language required, by posing a commercial problem needing marketing and business analysis.
FINANCIAL ENGLISH BBC English by Radio and Television 1986 102 pp
A course designed to enable executives in business, finance and international banking to improve their use and understanding of the English used in the financial world.
Each unit covers a specific area of finance and is based on unsimplified written extracts from The Economist magazine and recorded extracts from the BBC's International Money programme.
May be used for study alone or in class.
Individual units can be used as supplementary material with other courses.
WE'RE IN BUSINESS English for commercial practice and international trade.
Longman 1983 138 pp
Four skilled practised in an authentic commercial situation, graded vocabulary and structures.
2 cassettes of dialogue, laboratory drills, student's cassette of dialogues and listening exercises.
very popular work.
see WORLD AT WORK.
THE COUNTRYBAR STORY Nelson 1984 3 volumes:
1.
Reviewing the Situation
2.
Developing the Product
3.
The Sales Campaign
A 3-book business English series based on the progress of a chocolate manufacturing company.
Book 1 reviews the past presented through authentic business materials, eg memos, reports, letters, etc.
Book 2 examines the different aspects of product development, such as reporting on the competition, the market and profitability.
Book 3 examines different aspects of marketing the product through advertising, organisation of sales force, expansion of sales outlets.
Takes a restricted view of commerce but is full of factual information.
BUSINESS NEWS Longman 1980 56 pp
Based on articles and advertisements from the ‘Financial Times’ with comprehension exercises, talking points and structure practice.
Basis for a short intensive course.
TALKING BUSINESS Macmillan 1975 128 pp
Dialogues cover various business situations, including the initial exploratory meeting, the negotiation of a contract, the making of delivery arrangements and the investigation of export facilities.
Note: Pack (coursebook, transcript of dialogues, drills and cassette)
TELEPHONE ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1987 99 pp
General information on using the telephone including identification, dates, standard telephone vocabulary, time zones, dialling procedures, emergency phrases, directory enquiries etc.
A second part presents patterns with situational practice (restaurant reservations, appointments, etc) calling for choice of register and degree of formality.
Model conversations set out in tapescripts for audio cassettes for supplementary exercises on note taking from telephone conversations, and for revision.
American and British usage.
TELEX ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1988 61 pp
A combined reference and textbook to familiarize users with the jargon, components, format and techniques of English telexes.
Four sections: analysis and presentation, practice, key, reference section of stock phrases and their application.
THE ECONOMIST: AN ENGLISH LANGUAGE GUIDE Collins 1982 64 pp
This practical handbook highlights and practises language features commonly used in ‘The Economist’ and similar publications.
Designed principally for classroom use but can be used for self-study.
A CASE FOR BUSINESS ENGLISH Prentice Hall International 1985 135 pp
Fifteen case studies covering the situations and vocabulary arising in business.
Fourteen Business Briefs include topics such as writing a business letter, welcoming visitors etc.
THE PERFECT SECRETARY Collins 1983 192 pp
Focus on skills demanded of secretaries.
Chapters divided into four sections:(a) improve understanding (b) extend word power (c) develop communication techniques (d) test efficiency.
All examples international.
Probably a ‘must’ for a dedicated career secretary but requires some determination.
ENGLISH FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE Nelson 1988 (Bell & Hyman 1982) 112 pp
Extensive reading with bias towards the world of shipping, to give an understanding of world trade conditions and familiarisation with the documentation used in international trade.
LANGUAGE FOR BANKING: AN INTRODUCTION TO TERMINOLOGY FOR EFL STUDENTS Collins 2984 128 pp Preparation for qualifications in the field of banking (the AIB stages 1 & 11) to handle complex data and source material.
Subject matter relevant to the study of banking: commodity money, coin currency etc.
FIVE STAR ENGLISH For The Hotel and Tourist Industry Oxford University Press 1982 (7th impression 1987) 201 pp
Each unit covers an aspect of the industry, for example: enquiries and reservations, reception, hotel services, food service, local tours, complaints, tour operation and conferences.
Cassette features a variety of native and non-native accents.
HIGHLY RECOMMENDED: ENGLISH FOR THE HOTEL AND CATERING INDUSTRY Oxford University Press 1988 108 pp
For trainers who need to speak and understand English in the context of restaurant, kitchen and bar, reception, reservation and all ‘front of house’ areas.
Includes guidance on methods of work (eg taking bookings, dealing with enquiries and complaints).
Multilingual word list in English (including American English), French, Italian, Spanish, German and Greek.
Attractive illustrations, clear presentation.
MANAGEMENT ASSIGNMENT Edward Arnold 1989 128 pp
Designed to enable the user to function effectively in the situations which occur most frequently in business.
Linked to the Council of Europe Waystage inventory; emphasis of listening comprehension and on giving and obtaining factual, quantitative information.
MANAGEMENT ENGLISH Edward Arnold 1989 192 pp
An intensive course for executives, designed to fit into a four-week period of full-time study, although it may be used for different study periods.
Emphasis is on natural language in the expression of management functions.
The Activities Book, although linked to the main course, may be used for an independent programme of practical study.
The Projects Book presents thirteen situations of business and topical interest.
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS Nelson (Evans Brothers 1986) 160 pp
An introductory handbook.
Not a language-teaching text, but useful as a source of authentic reading material covering technical terms and regulations associated with various import-export operations, eg methods of payment, inspection, records, cargoes, insurance.
Gazetteer shows salient trading facts about each country, region, or regional organisation.
Glossary of abbreviations and common terms used in imports and exports.
see WORLD AT WORK 
A SHORT COURSE IN COMMERCIAL CORRESPONDENCE (Kurzlehrgang der modernen englischen Handelskorrespondenz) Hüber, Munich 1984 (new edition) 108 pp
Small book covering layout of English and American business letters and various stages of buying and selling of goods.
Includes English/German vocabulary and list of commercial terms and common abbreviations.
MANAGE WITH ENGLISH Oxford University Press 1981 194 pp
Function and concept relating to skills of management, units corresponding to five teaching hours each.
Areas covered include marketing, sales promotion, personnel, finance, production.
CASE STUDIES IN INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT Prentice Hall International 1987 138 pp
Uses open-ended case studies and authentic supporting documents to help students to refine their English language skills in handling data and problem solving, to think in English, and to improve their cross-cultural understanding.
MANAGING PEOPLE Edward Arnold 1989 160 pp
For managers at any level who need to communicate effectively in English with clients and associates at all work levels.
Mainly case study format which focuses in each unit on a major activity, eg assessing staff, together with a secondary topic, eg manpower planning.
Role plays and simulations of realistic situations.
TB is essential to the course.
COMMUNICATIONS IN CATERING Edward Arnold 1985 64 pp
Although originally written for native speakers of English, the book is also useful for foreign learners.
There are practical assignments which feature a wide variety of stimulus materials, in realistic contexts.
COMMUNICATIONS IN TRAVEL AND TOURISM Edward Arnold 1988 96 pp
Fifty assignments in oral and written communication, of use for native and non-native speakers alike.
Practice is given in using the telephone, coping with crises and working in various specialist areas (eg courier, receptionist, travel agent, coach driver).
BUSINESS WORLD Oxford University Press 1983 184 pp
Six sections on environment, social economics, retailing, energy and management issues.
Heavily slanted towards American business methods.
Authentic texts from American business magazine.
BUSINESS INFORMATION Edward Arnold 1985 64 pp
Students are helped to develop their communication skills by exercises using authentic business documents, requiring comprehension within a given context and creative use of the information given.
AGENCY INTERNATIONAL — A short course in Business English Collins 1984 64 pp
Units based on real agency and contract negotiations.
Listening component an integral part of the course.
Flexibility of level ensures students of all varieties included.
ENGLISH FOR THE BUSINESS STUDENT Nelson (Bell & Hyman 1974) 224 pp
Specially prepared to meet students' needs preparing for commercial English examinations.
Special attention is paid to commercial correspondence and English grammar.
LONGMAN COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION Longman 1988 160 pp
Systematically covers the main types of business letter, and also provides information about international commerce and British financial institutions.
Contents include a graded ‘syllabus’ of letters, with functional language development, attention to punctuation, practice on the structures and vocabulary of commercial language, modern office technology (eg fax).
(Updated version of English Business Letters.)
DICTIONARY OF BUSINESS STUDIES Pitman 1989 286 pp Second edition.
Alphabetical list of the terms and expressions used in commerce and industry.
Includes a glossary of abbreviations.
Definitions include examples.
A DICTIONARY OF ECONOMICS AND BUSINESS PAN 1986 (2nd revised edition)
SEAFARING Cassell 1978 144 pp
Talking about the ship, types of ships, crew's duties, putting to sea, collision rules, steering a course, etc.
MODERN SECRETARIAL PRACTICE McGraw-Hill 1973 (3rd revised edition 1986) 309 pp  see VIDEO section 
COLLINS BUSINESS ENGLISH DICTIONARY Collins 1984 288 pp
3,000 words and phrases, useful addresses, specialist appendices.
Clear definitions covering fields of accountancy, marketing, production and business administration.
Appendices list common business abbreviations, examining bodies for business and other useful addresses.
IN BUSINESS Nelson 1984 (Harrap 1983) 200 pp
Professional and social English based on the story of a large multi-national takeover.
Highly recommended by users.
Non-book material.
COMMUNICATING IN THE REAL WORLD Prentice Hall International 1987 187 pp
Uses a case study analysis and problem-solving approach to help students appreciate cultural and social problems, analyse communication breakdown and develop strategies for communication, with particular reference to the US workplace.
WRITING FOR BUSINESS Nelson 1987 160 pp
Designed to give practice in the main functional patterns used in writing the most common forms of business letters.
Not a reference work of models, but training in original composition of letters; therefore, only a small number of language patterns presented.
Functional index and glossary of words used which are not in the Cambridge English lexicon (Levels 1–3).
For independent study or teacher presentation.
LET'S TALK ABOUT BUSINESS Hüber, Munich 1972 88 pp
Audio course in business English for German students with an advanced knowledge of general English.
WORLD AT WORK Longman.
A series of short, practical books which develop structures and vocabulary in a specialist area.
IMPORT/EXPORT 1982 48 pp 
OFFICE PRACTICE 1982 45 pp 
BANKING 1982 48 pp.
VIDEO PACKS
(ordered alphabetically by title)
THE BELLCREST STORY BBC English 1972 adv, U13, 2 video cassettes, audios and textbook.
A drama serial concerning an imaginary British electronic and engineering firm.
Designed to develop the ability to handle language formulae or expressions which are essential to successful business communication: eg attracting attention, interrupting, making a point, manipulating a discussion.
The formulae are systematically presented, but grammar is not treated systematically.
Both business and social language are presented.
Videocassettes (2)— VHS/BETAMAX formats; orders to BBC English, PO Box 76, Bush House, Strand, London WC2P 4PH; tel: 01–2886/2864
See also BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION (BBC) ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS (main sequence) for details of supporting materials.
BID FOR POWER BBC English by Television 1983 101 pp 
For business people needing to develop English language skills for negotiating with other English speakers and representing their firms in English-speaking environments throughout the world.
The video is in the form of a drama serial which follows a new enterprise from discovery to development and associated business practices, with attention to international cultural differences.
Suitable for individual use (handbook & audio cassette) or classroom use (SB, TB & audio cassettes).
Separate packs available for individual use and for classroom use.
BUSINESS ASSIGNMENTS Oxford University Press 1989 
The course is based on eight self-contained case studies representing a realistic negotiation or decision-making meeting at managerial level.
In-depth exploration of a kind not usually catered for in video or ordinary television transmissions.
Input supplied by video and audio cassette and by a variety of documents (in the information file).
Optional deskwork book provides for written and spoken practice.
The video plus supporting material constitutes a useful training package for those needing to perform complex communication tasks in English at a high level.
THE CARSAT CRISIS BBC English 1988
A thirteen-episode video designed to teach the language of scientists and engineers working together on an international (space) project and using English as the medium of communication.
Includes functional, professional, social, technical language and situations, together with associated body language.
Authentic settings, themes and characters.
The video may be used sequentially or selectively.
HEART OF ENGLISH Euro-Lang Media Courses 1986
In two parts: part one shows the usual travel and tourist situations, including beauty spots and tourist attractions.
Part two is business-oriented and built around a visitor's search for a new factory site.
All video and audio exercises require an oral or written response, and opportunity for grammar and vocabulary practice.
THE COTTON PLUS STORY Euro-Lang Media Courses 1985
A business course based on a sales campaign.
Three participating managers are interviewed, and their answers to the questions are illustrated with sequences filmed at the relevant events in Portugal and France.
The second part consists of ten exercises based on the filmed sequences and providing wide-ranging language practice.
PARIS (English version) Euro-lang Media Courses 1985
Famous sights and buildings shown and described in the first part.
Language exercises in the second part are based on the film and commentary, with particular attention to the formation and use of tenses.
A similar video course is available for LONDON.
FOLLOW ME TO SAN FRANCISCO BBC English 1981
A course for those needing to live or work with Americans, and for students of British English who need to develop an understanding of American English.
Presented as a soap opera story, with (in the British English version) an introduction by Randolph Quirk, explaining particular language points and differences.
SPEAK EASY BBC English 1984
Fourteen mime sketches with supporting materials, designed to help students to understand and handle language functions by observing people's intentions and actions other than having to interpret what they say.
The teacher's role is to help students to progress from considering what the characters do to working out what they need to say in order to achieve the same result in similar circumstances.
Suitable for teaching any language.
VERSION 1: THE LANGUAGE OF PRESENTATIONS Longman 1988 
Provides a detailed and realistic model of how to organize and structure a formal business presentation.
The presentation is divided into units for specific language work.
Student's handbook can be used as a reference work and permanent record after the course.
VISITRON 2: THE LANGUAGE OF MEETINGS AND NEGOTIATIONS Longman 1988  A video-based training package designed to teach the language skills essential for effective participation in meetings and negotiations at management level.
Provided cross-cultural insights into British, American and Japanese styles of communication.
FORTHCOMING
MARKETING CONTRACTS Prentice Hall International due 1991 
PREPARING FOR ENGLISH FOR COMMERCE Prentice Hall International due 1990
Closely targeted preparation material and guidance, directly related to the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry examination at First and Second levels.
IN AT THE DEEP END: SPEAKING ACTIVITIES FOR PROFESSIONAL PEOPLE Oxford University Press
Content of the work is determined by the communicative needs and levels of the individual students, as revealed by their performance in speaking tasks in English undertaken without preliminary practice.
Designed for use in small groups for one-to-one tuition and covering a range of areas such as finance, personnel, engineering, marketing, advertising.
Self-study tasks are included.
INTERNATIONAL RESTAURANT ENGLISH Prentice Hall International
Exercises focus on structural and functional items and are based on authentic situations and tasks which require students to apply what they have learned to related problem situations.
Practice is given in understanding and responding to different varieties of English and native and non-native accents.
SUCCESS AT THE LCCI ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS EXAMINATION Oxford University Press due 1990
A set of books relevant respectively to the First, Second and Third levels, which constitute the official practical guide to the examination, written by the examiners.
NEW BUSINESS MATTERS: PRACTICE MATERIALS FOR BUSINESS COMMUNICATION IN ENGLISH Prentice Hall International
Instruction in the language of international business practice, based on typical tasks: letter writing, job applications, handling complaints, making and replying to orders and enquiries, import/export, banking and insurance.
There is a special section on international market development, including promotion and distribution.
Emphasizes the relationship between the spoken and the written word.
BUSINESS INITIATIVES Longman
Intended to teach survival English in social and business situations.
Variety of native and non-native accents on the audio cassettes, in keeping with the view of English as an international language.
Modular approach for flexibility in teaching and use; grammar reference section for remedial language work.
Teachers Book.
Office Skills
From 1993
LCCI EXAMINATIONS BOARD
SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENTS
Audio Transcription
The titles of the Audio-Typewriting examinations (First, Second and Third Level) have been changed to Audio Transcription
On Demand Shorthand Examinations
The passages for dictation will not be supplied on cassette.
Texts will be supplied in the normal format for dictation by dictators appointed by the Local Examinations Secretary.
Typewriting
The regulations about the equipment that may be used in Typewriting examinations have been amended, as follows:
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
Foreign Language Shorthand
French, German and Spanish Shorthand examinations are available, on demand.
EXAMINATION TIMINGS
2 EXTRACTS FROM GENERAL REGULATIONS
2.1 Local Examination Centres
Entries to the examinations must be made through a registered Local Centre.
Forms of application for registration as a Local Centre may be obtained on application to the Board.
2.2 Percentages of marks required
2.2.1 First and Second Levels
For a Pass 50%
For a Distinction 75%
2.2.2 Third Level
For a Pass 50%
For a Credit 60%
For a Distinction 75%
2.3 Examination results and certificates
Results of examinations are sent to Local Examination Secretaries, followed in due course by certificates/diplomas for successful candidates.
2.4 Candidates with disabilities
Special arrangements may be made for candidates with disabilities: details are given in the Administrative Arrangements booklet.
2.5 Items allowed to Candidates in the Examination Room
(a) Electronic Calculators
Candidates may use electronic calculators in any examination, provided they:
give no print out
have no word display facilities
are silent and cordless
Notes
1
The provision of batteries and responsibility for their condition must rest with the candidate.
2
Calculators which can be used as data banks may not be used.
3
Candidates may not share or borrow calculators.
(b) Dictionaries
(i)
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
(ii)
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
3 GROUP AWARDS
Full details of group awards are published in the Administrative Arrangements booklet.
The cases where Office Skills subjects feature in those awards are:
Audio Transcription (First Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the First Level Certificate in Commercial Studies.
Audio Transcription (Second Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the Second Level Business Studies Certificate.
Office Practice (First Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the First Level Certificate in Commercial Studies.
Office Practice (Second Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the Second Level Business Studies Certificate.
Shorthand (First Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the First Level Certificate in Commercial Studies.
Shorthand (Second Study)is an optional qualifying subject for the Second Level Business Studies Certificate.
Shorthand (First Level)is a compulsory subject for the First Level Group Certificate in Shorthand and Typewriting.
Shorthand (Second Level)is a compulsory subject for the Second Level Group Certificate in Shorthand and Typewriting.
Typewriting (First Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the First Level Certificate in Commercial Studies.
Typewriting (Second Level)is an optional qualifying subject for the Second Level Business Studies Certificate.
Typewriting (First Level)is a compulsory subject for the First Level Group Certificate in Shorthand and Typewriting.
Typewriting (Second Level)is a compulsory subject for the Second Level Certificate in Shorthand and Typewriting.
Shorthand and Audio Transcription qualifications may be offered as components for the ‘Euroqualifications’ awards — Commercial Language Assistant Certificate, European Executive Assistant Certificate and Diploma in European Business Administration.
Note;
The First Level Certificate in Commercial Studies will be offered for the last time in 1993.
4 PRIZES AND MEDALLIONS
4.1
The Kores Award is offered for Typewriting (Third Level).
4.2
Gold/silver medallions are awarded to the candidates who gain First and Second Place worldwide, in each Second and Third Level subject.
4.3
Gold/silver medallions are awarded to the candidates who gain First and Second Place in each country in each Second and Third Level subject for which the country has presented at least 200 candidates.
Note
Prize/medallion winners must have gained marks of 80% or above.
5 SYLLABUSES
5.1 AUDIO TRANSCRIPTION
5.1.1 First Level (1004)— Series 3
The examination will be conducted by means of a cassette recording for dubbing on to the audio equipment at the Local Centre to achieve universal standards of dictation.
It is expected that candidates will have a production speed of at least 25 wpm.
Candidates must demonstrate their ability to use, at an employable level, the skills of audio transcription in a practical office situation: they may use either a typewriter or word processing equipment.
The recording will contain letters, memoranda and other correspondence, with instructions for display, attention lines, headings and numbered/lettered paragraphs.
In manuscript assignments, candidates will be required to demonstrate simple display techniques.
Reference to this assignment will be made in the course of the dictation.
Examination Requirements
A 1 ½-hour examination.
The examination will consist of 5 assignments — 4 pieces of dictation and a manuscript assignment.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates should produce as much mailable copy as they can in the time allowed and should be discouraged from sacrificing quality for quantity.
Adequacy of output will be a matter for assessment by the Examiners.
3
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
4
When no specific instructions are given to candidates about the layout of assignments any recognised style of layout will be acceptable to the Examiners, so long as it is followed consistently.
Guidelines on layouts are published in the British Standards Institution booklet ‘Guide for Typewriting’(PD 6506: 1982).
5
In addition to featuring in the Series 3 timetable, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Examinations Board.
6
Books which have been found useful in the preparation of candidates:
5.1.2 Second Level (2004)— Series 3
The examination will be conducted by means of a cassette recording for dubbing on to the audio equipment at the Local Centre to achieve universal standards of dictation.
It is expected that candidates will have a production speed of at least 35 wpm.
Candidates must demonstrate their ability to use, at an employable level, the skills of audio transcription in a practical office situation: they may use either typewriter or word processing equipment.
The recording will contain letters, memoranda and other correspondence, with instructions for display, attention lines, headings and numbered/lettered paragraphs.
In the manuscript assignment, candidates will be required to demonstrate display techniques.
Reference to this assignment will be made in the course of the dictation.
Examination Requirements
A 2-hour examination.
The examination will consist of 6 assignments — 5 pieces of dictation and a manuscript assignment.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic dictionaries.
2
Candidates should produce as much mailable copy as they can in the time allowed and should be discouraged from sacrificing quality for quantity.
Adequacy of output will be a matter for assessment by the Examiners.
3
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
4
When no specific instructions are given to candidates about the layout of assignments, any recognised style of layout will be acceptable to the Examiners, so long as it followed consistently.
Guidelines on layouts are published in the British Standards Institution booklet ‘Guide for Typewriting’(PD 6506: 1982).
5
In addition to featuring in the Series 3 timetable, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
For recommended booklist, see page 5.
5.1.3 Third Level (3004)— On Demand
The examination will be conducted by means of a cassette recording for dubbing on to the audio equipment at the Local Centre to achieve universal standards of dictation.
It is expected that candidates will have a production speed of 45 wpm.
Candidates must demonstrate their ability to use, at an employable level, the skills of audio transcription in a practical office situation: they may use either typewriter or word processing equipment.
The recording will contain letters, memoranda and other correspondence, with instruction for display, attention lines, headings and numbered/lettered paragraphs.
One assignment will normally necessitate the production of a continuation sheet.
The manuscript assignment, candidates will be required to demonstrate display techniques.
Reference to this assignment will be made in the course of the dictation.
Examination Requirements
A 2½-hour examination.
The examination will consist of 7 assignments — 6 pieces of dictation and a manuscript assignment.
Note
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates should produce as much mailable copy as they can in the time allowed and should be discouraged from sacrificing quality for quantity.
Adequacy of output will be a matter for assessment by the Examiners.
3
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
4
When no specific instruction are given to candidates about the layout of assignments, any recognised style of layout will be acceptable to the Examiners, so long as it is followed consistently.
Guidelines on layouts are published in the British Standards Institution booklet ‘Guide for Typewriting’(PD 6506: 1982).
5
In addition to featuring in the Series 3 timetable, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
For recommended booklist, see page 5.
5.2 OFFICE PRACTICE
5.2.1 First Level (1027)— Series 2 and 3
Candidates will be required to demonstrate understanding and knowledge of the way in which a modern office works and of the various support services it needs.
Syllabus
1
Office Organisation 
Division of the office function into departments; their work, responsibilities and relationship to each other.
2
Documentation 
Simple processing of forms and documents for internal and external use.
Forms and functions of the more common business documents.
Commercial terms and abbreviations.
Petty cash transactions.
3
Materials and Stationery 
Use and control; methods of economy.
Form design.
Preparation of material for printers and correction of printers' proofs.
4
Storage and Retrieval of Information 
Indexing and filing: systems, methods and equipment; control of files; centralised filing.
Use of reference books and other sources of information.
5
Office Machinery 
Appreciation of the functions of office equipment, including typewriters, dictating machines, word processors, photocopiers, mailing equipment, accounting machines, calculators and adding machines.
6
Internal and External Communication 
Telephonist; messenger service; mail handling; Post Office postal services; the Post Office Guide; facsimile telegraphy.
Letters and memoranda — purpose and up-to-date layouts (including composition).
7
Services Provided by Outside Agencies 
Methods of payment.
Services provided by the Post Office, by Banks and by business.
Examination Requirements
A 2-hour examination.
5 questions are to be answered from a choice of 9.
5.2.2 Second Level (2027)— Series 3
Candidates will be required to demonstrate an understanding of the functions of an office, office procedures and uses of equipment.
Syllabus
1
Office Organisation 
The office as a centre for collecting and processing of information for internal and external use.
Organisation and division of the office function into departments: their work, responsibilities and relation to each other.
Advantages and disadvantages of centralisation of office services such as Post Room, Reprographics, Stationery and Stores.
Typical clerical grades, duties, responsibilities and necessary qualities.
Importance of good personal relations with other staff.
The need to organise work.
Flexible working hours.
The role of the Office Manager, Supervisor and other key personnel.
Types of office including open plan with landscaping.
The importance of health and safety at work: the general requirements of the Health and Safety at Work Act (1974) as they apply to the office situation.
2
Documentation 
Standard documentation used by departments: Accounts, Purchasing, Sales, Stores, Despatch, Personnel and Production.
Simple processing of forms and documents for internal and external use.
Candidates should be able to explain the purpose of each document and their inter-relations.
Completion and interpretation of petty cash transactions.
3
Materials and Stationery 
Use and control; methods of economy.
Form design.
Preparation of material for printers and correction of printers' proofs.
4
Storage and Retrieval of Information 
Indexing and filing — systems, methods and equipment.
Centralised and departmental filing.
Control and security.
The use of microfilm.
Electronic storage and retrieval of information; computer files.
5
Use of Office Machines and technology 
Appreciation of functions of office equipment, including typewriters, word and data processors, dictation machines and audio typing units, photocopiers, mailing equipment, accounting machines, calculators and adding machines.
Safety aspects of siting, care and maintenance of machinery, including VDUs.
6
Internal and External Communication — spoken, written and electronic 
Use of the telephone, switchboards, telex, international cables and telemessages, facsimile transmission, video and tele systems.
Purpose and composition of internal memoranda, reports and letters.
Functions of meetings; associated terms and documents.
Selection of appropriate communication media, including the use of notice boards, paging devices and public address systems.
Procedures for dealing with incoming and outgoing mail.
Presentation and interpretation of information in chart or graph form; line graphs, bar graphs, pie charts and visual control boards.
Extraction of information from appropriate reference sources.
7
Services Provided by Outside Agencies 
Services provided by postal and telecommunication bodies, insurance companies, commercial and merchant banks, advertising agency, staff recruitment agencies, central and local government.
Examination Requirements
A 2-hour examination.
5 questions are to be answered from a choice of 9.
Note
For recommended booklist, see page 9.
5.3 SHORTHAND
5.3.1 First Level
50 wpm (1046) and 60 wpm (1047)— All Series.
Passages will be dictated at 50 and 60 wpm for a period of 3 minutes.
Candidates must transcribe one passage at their chosen speed, from their shorthand notes, the transcription time allowed being at the rate of 7 words per minute.
Candidates may use any system of shorthand writing.
The shorthand notes must be submitted with the transcription and the name of the shorthand system used must be stated by the candidate on the bag envelope.
Spelling, punctuation and the presentation of the work will be taken into account when the candidate's transcription is being assessed.
To obtain a pass, the candidate must transcribe the chosen passage with a minimum of 96% accuracy.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates must provide their own materials for taking dictation.
3
Paper for longhand transcription will be provided.
4
Candidates may use a keyboard to transcribe their notes, if facilities are available at their Local Centre.
(Typing paper must be supplied to candidates by the Local Centre.)
Candidates passing the Shorthand examination and submitting a well-typed transcription will be awarded a certificate endorsed to this effect.
5
In addition to being timetabled at all series, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
Centres amy request cassette recordings of the passages set for Series 2 and Series 4 examinations.
7
Books which have been found useful in the preparation of candidates:
5.3.2 Second Level
70 wpm (2046) and 80 wpm (2047);90 wpm (2048) and 100 wpm (2049)— All Series
Note
The 70/80 wpm examination and the 90/100 wpm examination are timetables on separate days .
Candidates may enter for both examinations, if desired.
Passages will be dictated at 70, 80, 90 and 100 wpm for a period of 3 minutes.
Candidates must transcribe one passage at their chosen speed, from their shorthand notes, the transcription time allowed being at the rate of 7 words per minute.
Candidates may use any system of shorthand writing.
The shorthand notes must be submitted with the transcription and the name of the shorthand system used must be stated by the candidate on the bag envelope.
Spelling, punctuation and the presentation of the work will be taken into account when the candidate's transcription is being assessed.
To obtain a pass, the candidate must transcribe the chosen passage with a minimum of 96% accuracy.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates must provide their own material for taking dictation.
3
Paper for longhand transcription will be provided.
4
Candidates may use a keyboard to transcribe their notes, if facilities are available at their Local Centre.
(Typing paper must be supplied to candidates by the Local Centre.)
Candidates passing the Shorthand examination and submitting a well-typed transcription will be awarded a certificate endorsed to this effect.
5
In addition to being timetabled at all series, these examinations are available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
Centres may request cassette recordings of the passages set for Series 2 and Series 4 examinations.
7
For recommended booklist, see page 9.
5.3.3 Third Level
110 wpm (3046) and 120 wpm (3047)130 wpm (304) and 140 wpm (3049)— Series 2
Note The 110/120 wpm examination and the 130/140 wpm examination are timetabled on separate days .
Candidates may enter for both examinations, if desired.
Passages will be dictated at 110, 120, 130 and 140 wpm for a period of 5 minutes.
2 passages will be dictated at each speed — one of 3 minutes and one of 2 minutes' duration.
Candidates must transcribe the 2 passages at their chosen speed, from their shorthand notes, the transcription time allowed being at the rate of 7 words per minute.
Candidates may use any system of shorthand writing.
The shorthand notes must be submitted with the transcription and the name of the shorthand system used must be stated by the candidate on the bag envelope.
Spelling, punctuation, proper arrangement into paragraphs and the general business-like appearance of the work will be taken into account when the candidate's transcriptions are being assessed.
To obtain a pass, the candidate must transcribe the chosen passages with a minimum of 96% accuracy.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates must provide their own materials for taking dictation.
3
Paper for longhand transcription will be provided.
4
Candidates may use a keyboard to transcribe their notes, if facilities are available at their Local Centre.
(Typing paper must be supplied to candidates by the Local Centre.)
Candidates passing the shorthand examination and submitting a well-typed transcription will be awarded a certificate endorsed to this effect.
5
In addition to the timetabled series, these examinations are available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
Centres may request cassette recordings of the passages set for Series 2 and Series 4 examinations.
7
For recommended booklist, see page 9.
5.4 TYPEWRITING
5.4.1 First Level (1064)— All Series
The examination will test accuracy, neatness, intelligent display and reasonable output.
The assignments will include typing from printed and manuscript copy.
Any means of correction may be used but all corrections should be neat and unobtrusive.
Candidates require a production of at least 25 wpm for this examination.
Examination Requirements
A 1½-hour examination.
5 assignments are set.
In order to qualify for the award of a certificate, the candidate must complete at least 4 assignments successfully.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates may provide a backing sheet for use in the examination.
3
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
4
When no specific instructions are given to candidates about the layout of assignments, any recognised style of layout will be acceptable to the Examiners, so long as it followed consistently.
Guidelines on layouts are published in the British Standards Institution booklet ‘Guide for Typewriting’(PD 6506: 1982).
5
In addition to being timetabled at all series, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
Books which have been found useful in the preparation of candidates:
5.4.2 Second Level (2064)— All Series
The proficiency examination will test accuracy, neatness, intelligent display and reasonable output.
The assignments will include typing from printed and manuscript copy.
Any means of correction may be used but all corrections should be neat and unobtrusive.
Candidates require a production speed of at least 35 wpm for this examination.
Examination Requirements
A 2-hour examination.
5 assignments are set.
In order to qualify for the award of a certificate, the candidate must complete at least 4 assignments successfully.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates may provide a backing sheet for use in the examination.
3
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
4
When no specific instructions are given to candidates about the layout of assignments, any recognised style of layout will be acceptable to the Examiners, so long as it is followed consistently, Guidelines on layouts are published in the British Standards Institution booklet ‘Guide to Typewriting’(PD 6506: 1982).
5
In addition to being timetabled at all series, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
For recommended booklist, see page 9.
Speed Test
An optional 10-minute speed test (2105) may be taken by candidates entering for the proficiency examination, without additional fee.
Candidates should continue typing (repeating the passage if necessary) for the whole of the 10 minutes.
The speed and accuracy achieved will be endorsed on the certificate, provided candidates:(i) gain the proficiency certificate:(ii) attain a speed of not less than 30 wpm:(iii) achieve not less than 98% accuracy.
The endorsement will state the gross average speed per minute and the percentage of accuracy achieved.
Candidates may attempt further speed tests (2065) without retaking the proficiency examination, within 2 years of gaining a proficiency certificate.
(A Speed Test fee will be payable for such supplementary entries.)
5.4.3 Third Level (3064)— All Series
The proficiency examination will test accuracy, neatness, intelligent display and reasonable output.
The assignments will include typing of varying difficulty from printed and manuscript copy.
Any means of correction may be used but all corrections should be neat and unobtrusive.
Candidates require a production speed of at least 50 wpm for this examination.
Examination Requirements
A 2½-hour examination.
5 assignments are set.
In order to qualify for the award of a certificate, the candidate must complete at least 4 assignments successfully.
Notes
1
Candidates are allowed to use standard English dictionaries in all examinations except English for Business (all levels) and English for Commerce (all levels).
Candidates may use traditional book format dictionaries or ‘electronic’ dictionaries.
2
Candidates may provide a backing sheet for use in the examination.
3
Candidates may use a typewriter or word processing equipment.
Any memory available on the equipment may be used.
4
When no specific instructions are given to candidates about the layout of assignments, any recognised style of layout will be acceptable to the Examiners, so long as it is followed consistently.
Guidelines on layouts are published in the British Standards Institution booklet ‘Guide for Typewriting’(PD 6506: 1982).
5
In addition to being timetabled at all series, this examination is available on demand at any time of the year: details available from the Board.
6
For recommended booklist, see page 11.
Speed Test
An optional 10-minute speed test (3105) may be taken by candidates entering for the proficiency examination, without additional fee.
Candidates should continue typing (repeating the passage if necessary) for the whole of the 10 minutes.
The speed and accuracy achieved will be endorsed on the certificate, provided candidates:(i) gain the proficiency certificate;(ii) attain a speed of not less than 30 wpm;(iii) achieve not less than 98% accuracy.
The endorsement will state the gross average speed per minute and the percentage of accuracy achieved.
Candidates may attempt further speed tests (3065) without retaking the proficiency examination, within 2 years of gaining a proficiency certificate.
(A Speed Test fee will be payable for such supplementary entries.)
PUBLICATIONS
Information that was previously printed in the annual booklet of regulations, syllabuses and timetables has been split into a number of sections for 1993.
Publications for 1993 are available as follows:
6.1 Administrative Arrangements
Notes
This booklet contains examination timetables, regulations, details of prizes, medallions and scholarships to be awarded, group awards, designatory letters and publications.
(A free publication)
6.4 Fees
6.5 Single Subject Examination Syllabuses — price £3.00
6.5.1
Commerce and Economics Subjects
6.5.2
English Subjects
6.5.3
Financial Subjects
6.5.4
Information Technology Subjects
6.5.5
Law Subjects
6.5.6
Management Subjects
6.5.7
Marketing Subjects
6.5.8
Office Skills Subjects
6.5.9
Quantitive Studies Subject
6.6 Other booklets available:
6.6.1
Group Secretarial and Group Office Technology Examinations — £1.40
6.6.2
Euroqualifications — £3.00
Foreign Languages at Work — £2.00
Languages for Industry and Commerce (FLIC/SEFIC)— £3.00
6.6.3
Verified Schemes for Vocational Qualifications — free publication
6.6.4
validation of Centre Schemes — free publication
6.7 Past examination materials
For details of past papers, cassettes and videos, see the Publications booklet    
English
From 1993
LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY EXAMINATIONS BOARD
SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENTS
1 Development work on a new examination, English for the Tourism Industry, is being continued.
Notice of a launch date will be given in due course.
Please contact the Board for further information.
2 A new Group Certificate has been introduced, in which English for Business/Commerce feature.
See page 11.
1 EXAMINATION TIMINGS
2 EXTRACTS FROM GENERAL REGULATIONS
2.1 Local Examination Centres
Entries to the examinations must be made through a registered Local centre.
Forms of application for registration as a Local Centre may be obtained on application to the Board.
2.2 Percentages of marks required
3.2.1 First and Second Levels
For a pass 50%
For a distinction 75%
3.2.2 Third Level
For a Pass 50%
For a Credit 60%
For a Distinction 75%
2.3 Examination results and certificates
Results of examinations are sent out to Local Examination Secretaries, followed in due course by certificates/diplomas for successful candidates.
2.4 Candidates with disabilities
Special arrangements may be made for candidates with disabilities: details are given in the Administrative Arrangements booklet.
3 GROUP AWARDS
Full details of group awards are published in the Administrative Arrangements booklet.
The cases where English for Business/Commerce feature in those awards are:
Either English for Business (First Level)or English for Commerce (First Level)must be passed for the First Level Certificate in Commercial Studies award (which will be offered for the first time in 1993).
Either of these subjects must also be passed for the First Level Group Certificate in Shorthand and Typewriting award.
Either English for Business (Second Level)or English for Commerce (Second Level)must be passed for the Second Level Business Studies Certificate award and for the Second Level Group Certificate in Shorthand and typewriting award.
One of these subjects may be offered to qualify for the Second Level Group Certificate in Book-keeping and accounts.
Either English for Business (Third Level)or English for Commerce (Third Level)may be offered as a qualifying option for the Third Level Diploma in Business Studies.
4 MEDALLIONS
4.1
Gold/silver medallions are awarded to candidates who gain First and Second Place worldwide, for each of the Third Level Group Diplomas.
4.2
Gold/silver medallions are awarded to the candidates who gain First and Second Place worldwide, in each Second and Third Level subject.
4.3
Gold/silver medallions are awarded to the candidates who gain First and Second Place in each country, in each Second and Third Level subject for which the country has presented at least 200 candidates.
Notes
Medallion winners must have gained marks of 80% or above.
5 SYLLABUSES
5.1 ENGLISH FOR BUSINESS
5.1.1 First Level (1041)— All series
The aim of the examination is to test basic understanding of the written language and its use in brief office communication.
A successful candidate will have demonstrated ability to write, briefly and intelligibly, the basic forms of office correspondence and the ability to understand and use them along with most usual forms of information displayed.
Credit will be given for appropriate style, format and communicative effect.
The examination will consist of four sections:
(a)
The composition of letter, or memo, communicating within an organisation or between organisations.
(b)
A prose passage of about 300 words for comprehension.
The brief answers required will oblige candidates to relate and use information across the passage, not merely to reproduce it in sequence.
(c)
A ‘look and think’ comprehension task, based on graphic or numerical display stimulus and requiring only short answers.
(d)
A ‘look and write’ production task where candidates will have to label a diagram, flow chart or organisation-tree, fill in a form or questionnaire, or reorder and supplement data.
Examination Requirements
A 2-hour examination.
All questions are to be answered.
Notes
1
The mark allocations for each question will be indicated to candidates on the question paper, but the weighting will be roughly 30-30-20-20.
2
Two questions will concentrate on production while the other two will stress comprehension, but accurate comprehension will be fundamental to all.
3
While candidates will receive credit for good grammar, accuracy, style, layout and maturity of expression, the scope of these criteria will be limited, since comparatively little continuous prose will be demanded.
Candidates will be able to display good comprehension without risking a loss of marks through poor production.
4
Candidates are not allowed to use dictionaries in this examination.
5
A text book, composed specifically for this examination, has been published — Written English for Business (First Level), by Alan Stanton, publisher OUP.
‘A List of Business English Materials’ is also available from the Board.
5.1.2 Second level (2041)— All Series
The aim of the examination is to test the candidate's ability to understand and write connected English on business topics and in formats usual in business communication (and, in the case of the case of the candidates whose mother tongue is not English, to confirm the parallel ability to speak English at an equivalent level).
A successful candidate will have demonstrated the ability to write creditable and accurate English on behalf of an employer, with minimal supervision, and to choose the tone, form and content appropriate to the requirements of a particular situation.
The examination will consist of three sections:
(a)
An extended writing task requiring candidates to produce a report, article, memorandum, etc, on a choice of role-related topics drawn from the business and economic life.
Candidates should display the virtues of good non-literary writing — order, clarity, balance, relevance, economy and logic.
(40 marks)
(b)
A letter writing task, the stimulus for which will be an incoming letter and data needed to reply to it.
(30 marks)
(c)
A reformulation task requiring candidates to expand, reduce or selectively rewrite a passage of English for some defined purpose within a given role.
Candidates will be offered tasks that will draw on their ability to make notes, or reassemble elements of a text for a specific purpose, which will be stated.
(30 marks)
Examination Requirements
A 2½-half examination.
All questions are to be answered.
Notes
1
This level of examination goes beyond the groundwork laid at the First Level by testing more complex writing and understanding, and giving candidates a range of choice, not only of questions that will do them most credit, but of answers that will best suit the circumstances described.
This reflects the greater responsibility successful candidates might be expected to exercise on behalf of an employer.
2
The tasks will require candidates to adopt office roles and write to identified addresses within a defined situation.
3
Marks will be awarded for: content; accuracy in spelling, layout, punctuation and grammar.
In addition, there will be marks for the satisfactory completion of a communicative task, which will depend on the appropriacy of the candidate's choice of tone, style, length and format.
4
In the extended writing task some topics will permit candidates to draw on their experience of local circumstances, while the others will require imaginative treatment.
5
In the letter-writing task, candidates are recommended to use the letter layout adopted by the British Standards Institution (PD 6506: 1982), but the examiners will accept a variety of current layouts, provided they are followed consistently.
6
Candidates should be made aware of the variety of forms of writing used in business life, so that they will be able to select most appropriate form — notes, summaries, memoranda, telex, quantification displays, etc — according to circumstances.
7
Candidates should also be able to reformulate data presented in one form — notes, telex, etc — and produce it in another form appropriate to a given purpose.
8
Candidates are not allowed to use dictionaries in this examination.
9
A textbook, composed specifically for this examination has been published — Written English for Business (Second Level), by RGH Andrews, publisher OUP.
‘A List of Business English Materials’ is also available from the Board.
Oral Test (2101)
The Oral Test will be as for the English for Commerce Second Level examination (see 5.2.2) and the same subject code (2101) will apply.
Where administratively feasible, a compatible level of Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC) may be taken in lieu, by Combined Entry Procedure.
For details see separate SEFIC booklet or enquire of the Board.
5.1.3 Third Level (3041)— All Series
The aim of the examination is to test high-level ability to understand, write and variously process the general and special varieties of English used in business, and the ability to use appropriate formats (and, in the case of candidates whose mother tongue is not English, to confirm a parallel ability to speak English at an equivalent level).
A successful candidate will have demonstrated the ability to write mature, fluent, accurate and idiomatic English on behalf of an employer, choosing technical terms, tone, form and content appropriate to the requirements of a particular situation.
The examination will consist of four tasks:
(a)
The composition of a letter, the stimulus for which will be an incoming letter, or the employer's instructions, or both.
The rubric will include data on which a reply might be based and an indication of the tone required.
The candidate's letter must be ‘mailable’ and hence must be correctly laid out, linguistically accurate and appropriate in tone and content.
(25 marks)
(b)
The drafting of an internal report based on raw data given in the form of graphs, notes, press cuttings, charts, tables, etc.
Candidates will have to understand, select, collate and, if necessary, supplement this data in order to write the report in the light of the instructions given.
The report must be clear, well-organised and logically paragraphed and — where appropriate — numbered.
The language must be correct and stylistically appropriate, so the report will be fit for internal distribution.
The rubric will give guidance on the form and content required.
(25 marks)
(c)
A comprehension task in which candidates will be asked to show understanding of a passage for a defined purpose.
This might be a press article, an extract from a business journal, company reports, circular letter, tender, or some other form of business reading matter, with which candidates should be familiar at this stage.
Questions will be asked to probe their understanding, not only of factual content but of argument, bias, persuasive devices and internal organisation.
Their comprehension should be signalled by the most economic means available, eg incomplete sentences, figures, single words, diagrams, organisation trees etc. (25 marks)
(d)
A conversion task involving the formulation of a message for some defined purpose.
The candidates may be required to produce a memo from a telex, cable, letter or computer printout; or an abstract from an article; or a summary of a phone call for discussion; or a telex/telegram/cable from a company notice, employer's instructions, etc.
The essential is that a message received in one form is transmitted in another form.
This will involve reducing lengthy messages, expanding fragmentary messages, completing inadequate messages, or selecting from redundant messages.
In transferring the data from one form to the other the candidate must adopt the appropriate format and tone.
(25 marks)
Examination Requirements
A 3-hour examination.
All questions are to be answered.
Notes
1
This examination will test at a higher level the linguistic skills and business knowledge tested at the Second Level.
The techniques for handing, displaying, interpreting, transferring and reformulating information already introduced at the previous levels will be invoked for more advanced tasks.
It is assumed that there will be no need for as great a level of close supervision and scrutiny as that required at lower levels, and that successful candidates will, apart from occasional stylistic errors and slips, be able to carry out successfully all the linguistic tasks and employer might set.
2
Marks will be awarded differentially for content, tone, style, layout, correctness and communicative impact, according to the nature of the various tasks.
3
Candidates will be assigned an office role within a scenario and provided with ample data on which to base an adequate answer.
Nevertheless, there will be scope for the display of imagination, originality and business background and fulfilling the role and developing the scenario.
4
There should be no doubt that, for all foreseeable business purposes, candidates can perceive and convey meaning in its written English forms, both quickly and accurately.
Their English should be sufficiently accurate, specialised and idiomatic for them to detect subtleties of detail and meaning in English material presented to them, and to express such subtleties when they write.
Candidates will be required to exercise their judgement on matters of appropriacy and adequacy.
They should be able to grasp a total situation from the fragments presented to them and respond linguistically in a way that would benefit their business.
5
Candidates are not allowed to use dictionaries in this examination.
6
A textbook, composed specifically for this examination, has been published — Written English for Business (Third Level, by Bernard Bater and Gerald Lees, publisher OUP.
‘A List of Business English Materials’ is also available from the Board.
Oral Test (3101)
The Oral test will be for the English for Commerce Third Level examination,(see 5.2.3) and the same subject code (3101) will apply.
As for Second Level, a compatible level of Spoken English for industry and Commerce (SEFIC) may be opted for in lieu, where this is administratively feasible.
For details see separate (SEFIC) booklet or enquire of the Board.
5.2 ENGLISH FOR COMMERCE
5.2.1 First Level (1042)— All Series
The examination is designed to test basic knowledge of the written language.
Credit will be given for the appropriate use of complex sentences, punctuation and vocabulary, and for grammatical accuracy.
The examination will consist of three sections:
(a)
To write about 200 words on any one of six topics.
The subject matter will be of a general and commercial nature.
(40 marks)
(b)
To answer questions testing comprehension of a passage of about 300 words.
Some of the questions will require short written answers derived from the content of the passage; others will test specific vocabulary items.
(30 marks)
(c)
To write a letter of about 100 words based on given data.
The subject of the letter will not be technical and the assignment will involve writing as a private individual to an organisation.
(30 marks)
Examination Requirements
A 2-hour examination.
All questions are to be answered.
Notes
1
Candidates are not allowed to use dictionaries in this examination.
2
‘A Guide to English for Commerce’, ‘A Syllabus for English for Commerce’ and ‘A List of Business English Materials’are available from the Board.
3
A textbook, composed specially for this examination, has been published — Preparing for English for Commerce, by David Davies and Douglas Picket, publisher Prentice Hall.
5.2.2 Second Level (2042)— All Series
The examination is designed to test knowledge of the English language as a means of communication within a commercial or industrial context.
The written examination will consist or three sections:
(a)
To write about 300 words on any one of six subjects connected with business or current affairs.
(40 marks)
(b)
To summarise a passage of about 400 words.
The subject matter of the passage will concern current affairs or business.
(30 marks)
(c)
To write a letter of 150–200 words based on given data.
The assignment will involve writing in an official capacity to an organisation concerning a straightforward business transaction.
(30 marks)
Examination Requirements
A 2½-hour examination.
All questions are to be answered.
Notes
1
This level of examination goes beyond the groundwork laid at the First Level by testing more complex writing and understanding.
2
In the letter writing task, candidates are recommended to use the letter layout adopted by the British Standards Institution (PD 6506: 1982), but the examiners will accept a variety of current layouts, provided they are followed consistently.
3
Candidates are not allowed to use dictionaries in this examination.
4
‘A Guide to English for Commerce’, ‘A Syllabus for English for English for Commerce’ and ‘A List of Business English Materials’are available from the Board.
5
A textbook, composed specifically for this examination, has been published — Preparing for English for Commerce, by David Davies and Douglas Picket, publisher Prentice Hall.
Oral Test (2101)
Candidates whose mother tongue is not English will be required to pass an Oral Test before they can be awarded a certificate.
The Oral Test will consist of a conversation (7–8 minutes) with the examiner.
Certificates will be awarded only to those who pass the Written and Oral Tests within not more than 12 months of each other.
Where administratively feasible, a compatible level of Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC) may be taken in lieu, by Combined Entry Procedure.
For details see separate SEFIC booklet or enquire of the Board.
5.2.3 Third Level (3042)— Series 2,3 and 4
The examination is designed to test the candidate's knowledge of English and ability to use it efficiently and appropriately within a business context.
Candidates are therefore required to display a knowledge of business practice and an ability to discuss commercial and economic issues.
The written examination will consist of four sections:
(a)
To write 400–500 words on any one of six topics requiring some knowledge of commercial practice and procedure.
Candidates may be asked to give their answers in the form of a report or memorandum.
(25 marks)
(b)
To answer questions testing comprehension of a passage connected with current affairs or commerce.
(25 marks)
(c)
To summarise a business passage of about 500 words in the candidate's own words.
(25 marks)
(d)
To write a letter as from an organisation to an individual concerning a specific transaction.
This will involve some such task as giving an explanation of difficulties, requesting clarification, writing an apology, etc.
The necessary background information will be given.
(25 marks)
Examination Requirements
A 3-hour examination.
All questions are to be answered.
Notes
1
This examination will test, at a higher level, the linguistic skills and business knowledge tested at the Second Level.
2
Candidates are not allowed to use dictionaries in this examination.
3
‘A Guide to English for Commerce’, ‘A Syllabus for English for Commerce’ and ‘A List of Business English Materials are available from the Board.
Oral Test (3101)
Candidates whose mother tongue is not English will be required to pass an Oral Test before they can be awarded a certificate.
The Oral Test will consist of a conversation (8–10 minutes) with the examiner.
Certificates will be awarded only to those who pass both the Written and Oral Tests within not more than 12 months of each other.
As for Second Level, a compatible level of Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC) may be taken in lieu, where this is administratively feasible.
For details see separate SEFIC booklet or enquire of the Board.
6 OTHER QUALIFICATIONS
6.1 Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC)
Spoken to a satisfactory minimum number of candidates being presented at an appropriate fee, SEFIC examinations can be carried out anywhere in the world , on any suitable premises and at any time of the year (with at least a month's notice).
They are available on a routine basis in the United Kingdom and on the continent of Europe.
The examinations, which are purely oral, are carried out by specially trained native speakers.
They are available at four levels:
Results are expressed on a 10-point profile grid, showing a candidate's strengths and weaknesses: profile descriptions are available in French, German, Italian and Spanish.
Successful candidates are graded Pass, Credit or Distinction.
SEFIC examinations, at appropriate levels, may be taken in lieu of the short Oral Tests prescribed for the Second and Third Level English for Business and English for Commerce examinations.
Entries must be made on special forms which can be obtained on application to the Board.
6.2 Foreign Languages at Work Scheme (FLAW)
FLAW is a course certification scheme, mounted in conjunction with the British Overseas Trade Board (the export arm of the Department of Trade and Industry) and jointly certificated by the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry Examinations Board and the University of Oxford Delegacy of Local Examinations.
The scheme is intended for post-16 students in any language (including English), and teachers are encouraged to design courses in the practical predominantly oral use of language.
Continuation or ab initio courses may be designed for any student beyond the compulsory age of secondary education (ie post 16 years), provided that a minimum of 50 hours tuition is timetabled.
The scheme is highly flexible in that no external examination is imposed at the end of the course and teachers are free to design the details of the courses.
A network of LCCI-appointed Regional Consultants help individual Centres with the planning, implementation and moderation of courses.
The final assessment of the student is by means of a profile of performance completed by the course teacher.
The summative profile is accompanied by a Teacher's Statement, which is a written report of the student's particular strengths and an outline of the kinds of topics covered on the course.
The profile format caters for 17 specific language skill areas, which can be assessed at 5 levels.
Successful students receive the profile assessment of their language skills, confirmed by a course certificate: the range of achievement that can be certificated extends from GCSE to post GCE A-level.
6.3 Foundations of Business
A new Group Certificate was introduced in 1992 — the Group Certificate in Foundations of Business.
The qualifying subjects are:
(a)
Either Practical Book-keeping (Preliminary Level) or Book-keeping (First Level)
(b)
Either English for Business (First Level) or English for Commerce (First Level)
(c)
Elements of Commerce (First Level)
The 3 qualifying subjects must be passed within a period of 12 months.
6.4 Euroqualifications
Euroqualifications from LCCIEB have been developed specifically to meet the needs of those doing business in the European Community after 1992 and to help to promote mobility of labour in the internal market.
The aim of the awards is to provide candidates with evidence in the form of certificates to show that they are proficient in the skills necessary for them to operate in a business environment in at least 2 European languages.
Euroqualifications are available worldwide for speakers of English (as a foreign language), French, German and Spanish.
Offered on demand as well as series-timetabled examinations, the new examinations are structured in sets of modules, each of which can be recognised by a separate certificate.
Candidates have a 5-year period to accumulate the module certificates required to make up the full group awards of:
Commercial Language Assistant Certificate (CLAC)
European Executive Assistant Certificate (EEAC)
Diploma in European Business Administration (DEBA)
A Euroqualifications’ syllabus booklet and a detailed Guide for Centres covering administrative procedures are available on request.
6.5 Diploma in Teaching English for Business (DipTEB)
The diploma in Teaching English for Business is currently awarded by the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry Examinations Board in association with London Guildhall University.
It is aimed at providing practising teachers of English as a Foreign Language with the additional skills and knowledge required to operate effectively in the field of teaching English for Business purposes.
Further details from:
7 PUBLICATIONS
Information that was previously printed in the annual booklet of regulations, syllabuses and timetables has been split into a number of sections for 1993.
Publications for 1993 are available as follows:
7.1 Administrative Arrangements
Note
This booklet contains examination timetables, regulations, details of prizes, medallions and scholarships to be awarded, group awards, designatory letters and publications.
(A free publication)
7.2
List of Local Examinations Centres — free publication
7.3
Recognition of LCCIEB Qualifications — £5.00
7.4
Fees
7.5
Single Subject Examination Syllabuses — price £3.00 each
7.5.1
Commerce and Economics Subjects
7.5.2
English Subjects
7.5.3
Financial Subjects
7.5.4
Information technology Subjects
7.5.5
Law Subjects
7.5.6
Management Subjects
7.5.7
Marketing Subjects
7.5.8
Office Skills Subjects
7.5.9
Quantitative Studies Subjects
7.6 Other Books available:
7.6.1
Group Secretarial and Group Office Technology Examinations — £1.40
7.6.2
Euroqualifications — £3.00
Foreign Languages at Work — £2.00
Languages for Industry and Commerce (FLIC/SEFIC)— £3.00
7.6.3
Verified Schemes for Vocational Qualifications — free publication
7.6.4
Validation of Centre Schemes — free publication
7.7
Past examination materials
For details of past papers, cassettes and videos, see the Publications booklet