

Chairman's Foreword
I am greatly honoured to have been appointed by Her Majesty the Queen as Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the National Library of Scotland in succession to Mr Michael Strachan, who retired in November 1990 after 16 years' service.
Much was accomplished in those years, and many achievements are recorded in the Library's Annual Reports for that period.
Mr Strachan's time in office coincided for the most part with the tenure as Librarian of the late Professor Denis Roberts.
The two, working together, made a formidable team, whose powers of persuasion were demonstrated clearly over the years by the Government's support of major new initiatives, most notably the provision of the Causewayside Building, the second phase of which is now under construction.
Mr Strachan's acquaintance with the Library did not begin with his appointment as Chairman, since he had been for many years, as a historian and biographer, a reader in the Library's Reading Rooms.
He therefore had a lively sense of what the Library's readers expect and require, and of the scholarly standards that the Library must maintain.
As then Chairman of Bell Line Steamers Ltd and a Director of the Bank of Scotland, he brought to the Board his wide experience of the business and commercial world.
Such experience proved invaluable as increased administrative and financial responsibilities were placed on Trustees.
Not the least of these was the responsibility for the maintenance of the Library's buildings.
I am delighted that Mr Strachan has agreed to continue to serve as a Trustee, and that his long experience and wise counsel will continue to be available to the Library.
The Trustees can take justifiable pride in what has been achieved since the Library's foundation and particularly in the dramatic expansion of its services in the last few years.
But there is no shortage of new challenges.
New technology affecting the storage and dissemination of information will change the collection in ways that can only be guessed at.
The Library must be in a position to accept these challenges.
I believe that it will do so because we are fortunate to have a staff who have gained a world-wide reputation for their efficiency and courtesy.
It is their skills and dedication which will play the major part in ensuring the future health of the National Library of Scotland.
Their varied tasks in the Library have all contributed to its success and we owe them a very real debt of gratitude.
The Rt Hon THE EARL OF CRAWFORD AND BALCARRES 
Librarian's Introduction
Corporate Plan
The Library's Corporate Plan, now rolled forward to cover the years 1991–95, gives an annual opportunity to restate the Library's objectives, to define its priorities, and to present a detailed analysis of its spending plans.
The Plan also allows the Library to highlight issues of particular importance and specific areas of concern.
The current Plan shows that in 1991–92, as was the case in 1990–91, the level of grant provision is sufficient to avoid the diversion of purchasing funds to meet salary costs, which was unfortunately necessary in 1989–90.
In the past year this meant that the Library could acquire much important material, none more significant than the literary manuscripts of Hugh MacDiarmid, which have now found their natural home in the National Library of Scotland.
The Plan warns, however, that the inflation rate of book and manuscript prices continues to outpace the general rate of inflation and this year's increase in Purchase Grant.
The Plan also expressed the Library's concern at the loss of knowledge and experience following the retirement of several senior staff in recent years.
A loss that will become increasingly serious over the next decade.
A modest start has been made to recruit young, able staff, but further progress will depend on adequate resources being available to fill posts that for financial reasons are currently left unfilled.
Building Programme
With the care and maintenance of the Library's buildings forming an increasingly significant factor in the Library's plans since direct responsibility for its buildings was transferred to the Library in April 1989, it is gratifying to note that already much has been achieved.
Essential repairs and refurbishment have been carried out to the Library's Sighthill Bindery and to the Lawnmarket Building.
Now both buildings should give many more years of service without major attention to their fabric.
Unfortunately the same cannot be said for the George IV Bridge Building.
The building's mechanical and electrical plant and services are reaching the end of their life and the need for a major upgrading of fire precautions in the building has been identified and confirmed.
The Library is fortunate, however, that Ministers have allocated funds to cover the substantial costs of this project, and work has already begun on new systems to protect staff, readers and the collections by the early detection and suppression of fire.
Inevitably, there will be disruption and inconvenience for staff and readers while this work is carried out.
Nevertheless, when the work is completed, we will have the satisfaction of knowing that the George IV Bridge Building will provide a secure and stable environment for some of the nation's greatest treasures for the foreseeable future.
It is a great pleasure to be able to record that the contract for the construction of Phase 2 of the Causewayside Building was let in March 1991.
Work on site has already begun, and the foundations, actual and metaphorical, of the Library's development in the 21st century are being laid.
Library Co-Operation
Scotland continues to be at the forefront of library cooperation in Britain.
As the pressure on resources is felt more keenly by all sectors of the library world, the necessity for closer co-operation among libraries becomes more urgent.
The British Library's recent reports, Research Libraries in Transition and The Research Process, the most extensive surveys so far of the view of British academics, confirm the widely held opinion that academic research is being hampered by a decline in the quality of the collections in research libraries.
Sadly, this is true of Scotland, in spite of the undoubted benefits of the innovatory projects in co-operation sponsored by the Working Group on Library Co-operation, which consists of the eleven major research libraries in Scotland.
The National Library of Scotland is collaborating with the British Library and the other legal deposit libraries of the British Isles in a pilot project of shared cataloguing in order to improve the currency and coverage of catalogue records for British books by sharing the responsibility for the creation of those records.
The Library's participation in the national programme of co-operative preservation microfilming is firmly established.
Following the review of the British Library's acquisition and retention policies, published in 1989, a Working Group, including the National Library of Scotland, has been considering the scope for co-ordinating collection policies among the legal deposit libraries.
All of these initiatives demonstrate the fact that the need to pool resources is spurring the library community to greater collaborative efforts.
Nevertheless, it must be recognized that co-operation by itself cannot compensate entirely for inadequate funding.
I.D.
McGowan Librarian  
‘The Hebrides Surveyed’, the first exhibition to occupy the Exhibition Hall after its modernization.
Photograph: The Still Print Company.
The Library's Collections
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT
Printed Books
The enrichment of the Library's printed collections by selecting appropriately from the constant flow of new knowledge, as well as completing gaps in those publications already represented in the collections built up over the last three hundred years of the Library's development, is of paramount importance for scholars and researchers.
As reported in last year's Annual Report, the most serious factor in relation to purchasing for 1989–90, owing to Government's failure to meet the cost of nationally-negotiated pay awards over recent years, was the need to divert purchasing funds to pay essential salary costs during the year, thereby causing substantial reductions in the purchases of printed books of all periods, as well as manuscripts, maps and music.
It is, therefore, particularly gratifying to be able to report that, in response to the case for maintaining the level of purchases made by the Library with the support of other Scottish research libraries, and users, both local and remote, Government agreed in December 1989 to restore substantially the level of the Library's Purchase Grant in 1990–91 by allocating an additional £200,000 for purchases for the Library's collections.
This year, as in previous years, the Library's printed collections have also been enhanced by generous donations from both private citizens and institutional donors.
Sir Horace Kadoorie, CBE, JP, of Hong Kong, presented a copy of The Art of Ivory Sculpture in Cathay ([Hong Kong], 1988), a  sumptuously illustrated work on ivory sculpture based on his own extensive private collection.
An interesting gift from Wing-Commander A. E. Ross, DFC, was a copy of The Queen's Squadron: the History of the 603 (City of Edinburgh) Squadron, 1925–1957 ([Parnham], 1989), his privately published history of the Queen's Squadron, one of four Auxiliary Squadrons of the Air Force created by the Cabinet in 1924, on the recommendation of the then Prime Minister, the Right Hon.
Ramsay Macdonald, and continued until 1957 when the Royal Auxiliary Air Force was disbanded.
Mr Frank Braynard, the American maritime writer and artist, presented a copy of his six-volume work on the ‘World's Greatest Ship’: the Story of Leviathan [New York, 1972–83].
The Leviathan was launched in Hamburg in 1913 but was subsequently sent to the United States as part of the First World War reparations, and eventually reached the ship-breaker's yard in Rosyth in 1983.
A welcome addition to earlier gifts of similar works by the Directors of the Royal Blind Asylum and School, Edinburgh, was a further group of books printed for the use of the blind, in a variety of embossed and other alphabets, mainly by the two Edinburgh printers, James Gall and John Alston.
Professor Keishiro Okuma presented the first issue of the new journal Studia Celtica Japonica (Toyohashi, 1988), published by the Celtic Society of Japan, a welcome reminder of the wide span of international interest in Celtic studies.
For some time now Professor Nina Demourova, of Moscow, herself a distinguished book-collector, has generously provided the Library with modern Russian children's books which have been difficult to acquire through conventional channels: this year was no exception and a significant number were received during the year, including Muzafar Alimbaev's Kto nachinaet den: stikhi (Moscow, 1988), translated from the Kazakh.
Mr R. L. C. Lorimer presented eight volumes of pamphlets, containing 112 items, and 12 other works, mainly relating to ecclesiastical matters, including the First Report of the Edinburgh Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews [Edinburgh, 1829], and J. G. Lorimer's Church Establishments Defended: Being a Review of the Speeches, Delivered in Dr. Beattie's Chapel, on Monday Evening, the 12th November, 1832, by the Leading Men of the Voluntary Church Association (Glasgow; Edinburgh, 1832).
Mrs Elizabeth A. Clark, a generous benefactor to the Library, presented a copy of Lenin: L'uomo dietro la maschera (Milan, 1990), an Italian translation of her husband's work.
A volume rich in provenances of Scottish association was presented by Mr Peter Eaton: a copy of A Rationale upon the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England (London, 1661).
On the evidence of inscriptions recorded in the volume, it appears to have been in the possession of Amelia, Lady Lovat, in the 17th century, and John, 1st Duke of Atholl, in the 18th century: it seems to have come into the ownership of Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe in the 19th century, and from there to have passed to the Wigan Free Library.
Facing: ‘Perceval winneth the cup’, a ‘vellucent’ binding designed and painted by Jessie M. King, and executed by Cedric Chivers.
It is on a copy of The High History of the Holy Graal translated from the Old French by Sebastian Evans (London and New York, 1903), one of the first books to be illustrated by Jessie M. King.
Reduced from 260mm high.
‘The Barbarous Cruelty inflicted on a Negro’, from John Gabriel Stedman, Curious Adventures of Captain Stedman, during an expedition to Surinam, in 1733 (London,[1809?])
Reduced from 189mm high.
One of the events arranged to mark the Library's Tercentenary in 1989 was a bookbinding competition, in which binders were invited to design appropriate bindings for copies of For the Encouragement of Learning: Scotland's National Library, 1689–1989.
Mr John Allison, the overall prize-winner, and Mr Fraser Wilson, the Scottish winner, generously presented their bindings to the Library.
Mr Norman Huntingford kindly presented his competition binding to the Library, and the Library also purchased bindings by Mrs Maureen Duke and Mr Mike Duckworth.
Long-standing benefactors of the Library's collections have again given generously this year.
Professor Dr Horst W. Drescher, Director of the Scottish Studies Centre in Germersheim/Rhein, Germany, presented copies of works in the series Scottish Studies, produced by the Centre; and Mr Ruari McLean, CBE, DSC, presented a group of photographs of Highlanders, and other subjects, dated 1855–56, taken by the well-known photographer, Joseph Cundall.
This has been a particularly rich year for purchases of printed books of all periods.
It is pleasing to report the purchase during the year from the private owner of twenty-four half-sheets of a copy of Breviarium Aberdonense (Edinburgh, 1509–10), generally known as the Aberdeen Breviary, the earliest surviving substantial work known to have been printed in Scotland.
Works of the 18th-century Enlightenment have long been collected by the Library to add to the existing collections: this year the purchase of the second edition of Adam Smith's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (London, 1778) enabled the Library to achieve a complete  representation of editions of this most important work issued during the lifetime of the author.
Other 18th-century works purchased this year included Thomas Brewer's A Journeman [sic]Shoemaker's Letter to a Certain Right Honourable [Edinburgh?, 1757], a rare broadside, apparently unrecorded, which complains about the quality of the leather used to make the shoes intended to equip the recently raised regiments of Highlanders destined for service in the British colonies in America; and the Letter to a Member of Parliament, Concerning the Subject Matter of the Equivalent [London, 1719?], an extremely rare pamphlet relating to the financial background to the Act of Union between Scotland and England.
Works from important early Scottish libraries are purchased by the Library when they come to notice.
During the year a copy of Giovanni Battista Guarini's pastoral drama Il pastor fido (Venice, 1602–03), which was formerly in the private library of Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, was acquired.
Another similar purchase was a copy of Sir Robert Sibbald's A Collection of Several Treatises in Folio, Concerning Scotland, As It Was of Old, and Also in Later Times (Edinburgh, 1739), which was sold, in 1758, from the library of Thomas Ruddiman, the grammarian and former Keeper of the Advocates' Library.
Among the Library's most spectacular purchases during the year was a copy of Confessione della fede Christiana di M. Theodoro Beza, Vezelio ([Geneva], 1560), reliably considered by scholars to have been part of the private library of Mary Queen of Scots.
It is thought that the work may have been presented to the Queen by her Privy Councillor and Ambassador, Sir James Melville (whose signature appears on the title-page), perhaps following a visit he made to Italy.
It may have been presented to the Queen in order to show her something of the impact that Protestantism had made in Italy.
The work is bound in contemporary vellum and both covers are lettered in gilt ‘MARIA R. SCOTORU[M]’.
Another outstanding acquisition was a copy of James VI and I's The Essayes of a Prentise, in the Divine Art of Poesie ([Edinburgh], 1584), the first book of verse to be published by the young King, bound in contemporary Scottish orange-stained vellum, and lettered ‘H. Lord Hunsdon’.
The volume was bound for its original owner, Henry Carey, first Lord Hunsdon, Queen Elizabeth's cousin and her Ambassador to the court of King James.
A particularly elegant binding of a later period is that designed by Jessie M. King on a copy of The High History of the Holy Graal Translated from the French by Sebastian Evans; with Decorative Drawings by Jessie M. King (London, 1903).
This is one of three ‘vellucent’ bindings known to have been designed by Jessie M. King.
Additions to the Library's already strong holdings on photography have a high priority for purchase.
This year a copy of the rare and only edition of Through Cyprus with the Camera, in the Autumn of 1878 (London, 1879) by John Thomson, one of Scotland's most important 19th-century photographers, was acquired.
John Thomson travelled extensively across the world in the course of his photographic assignments, including visits to Cambodia and China.
This work records the last photographic journey of his life: to Cyprus.
Among other works of note purchased during the year were a copy of Richard Westall's Victories of the Duke of Wellington (London, 1819), comprising twelve coloured aquatints of British battle scenes, including one of Highland troops of the 91st Regiment (the Argyllshire Highlanders) repulsing French cavalry at the Battle of Vimiera; a copy, in extremely fine condition, of R. R. McIan's Picturesque Gatherings of the Scottish Highlanders at Home, on the Heath, the River, and the Loch (London, 1848), published by Ackermann and Company; and a copy of Angus McLean's Lindigo, the White Woman; or, The Highland Girl's Captivity among the Australian Blacks (Melbourne, 1866).
British books and other printed materials have been received by the Library through the privilege of legal deposit from 1710 onwards, and this more than any other single factor has produced the breadth and range of the Library's printed collections.
However, works produced in only a small number of copies are often not received in terms of the Copyright Act, and instead are purchased to ensure that a copy is added to the collection.
Among works purchased this year were Duncan Glen's Out of the Calf of Man, September 1989: a Poem and Etchings ([Edinburgh], 1990), one of an edition of ten numbered copies privately printed by the artist/poet at Edinburgh Printmakers' Workshop; Geoffrey MacEwen's Inferno: a Book of Twenty-one Drypoints (Edinburgh, 1990), based on Dante's Divine Comedy, one of an edition of fifteen copies; and Ken Campbell's Martyrs ([England], 1989), an interpretation of the psalm tune ‘Martyrs’, one of an edition of 40 copies.
Works printed in the Gaelic of Scotland are actively sought by the Library, and a welcome addition this year was a substantial run of the rare journal Am Mosgladh (The Awakening) published in Sydney, Nova Scotia, between 1922 and 1933, mainly for the expatriate Catholic community in Nova Scotia.
The Library is fortunate to have an almost complete set of the publications of the Tragara Press: an addition this year was a copy of Sylvia Plath's Mirror (Edinburgh, 1966).
Among microform research collections purchased during the year were The U.S. Intelligence Community: Organization, Operations and Management, 1947–1989 (Alexandria, Virginia, 1990); and Terrorism: Special Studies, 1985–1988 (Frederick, Maryland, 1989).
Manuscripts
The Manuscripts Division continued to acquire a substantial and varied amount of material, by donation, deposit, and purchase.
Only a selection can be mentioned here.
The most expensive in terms of price, and the most valuable in itself, was undoubtedly the acquisition of a very large collection of the literary manuscripts of Hugh MacDiarmid.
MacDiarmid, the nom de plume of Christopher Murray Grieve (1892–1978), the major figure in Scottish literature of this century, destroyed most of his manuscripts when he left Whalsey at the beginning of 1942; this collection consists of what he kept then and what he wrote subsequently.
There are manuscripts, typescripts and proofs of poems, essays, articles, reviews and autobiography, manuscripts of speeches and broadcasts, literary notebooks, and some correspondence (the major part of his correspondence was divided between the National Library and Edinburgh University Library after his death).
Major works represented include Lucky Poet (1943), and the long poem ‘Mature Art’, much of which was never published.
Essential financial assistance towards the purchase was given by the National Heritage Memorial Fund, the MacRobert Trusts, the Wolfson Foundation, and the Friends of the National Libraries.
Manuscripts and correspondence of many other 20th-century Scottish writers were added to the collections, creating or adding to their representation.
These include A. J. Cronin (school and university essays, manuscripts of novels, short stories and autobiography, 1911–78, deposited by Mr Vincent Cronin); Eric Linklater (manuscripts and typescripts of plays, novels, poems, articles and broadcasts, and correspondence, 1922–72); Sydney Goodsir Smith (manuscripts and typescripts of plays, novels, poems and essays, and correspondence, 1923–74; and 12 sketch-books, 1935–72, deposited by Mrs Hazel Goodsir Smith); David Thomson (manuscripts of novels, memoirs, plays and children's stories, with related correspondence, 1929–89, presented by Mrs Martina Thomson); Sir Compton Mackenzie (manuscripts of Figure of Eight, 1936, and of two plays, 1941, and correspondence with Sir Gerald Barry, 1930); James B. Caird (manuscripts and typescripts of poems, essays, articles, reviews and talks, and correspondence, 1935–87, presented by Mrs Janet H. Caird); Robert Kemp (typescripts and broadcast scripts of plays, 1947–57, presented by Mr David Kemp); Alex McCrindle (playscripts, memoirs and correspondence, 1947–90, presented by Mrs Jessica Balfour); George Mackay Brown (correspondence, 1952–74, on deposit and not available for consultation for the time being); Gael Turnbull (manuscripts and typescripts of poetry and prose, 1953–90, presented by the author); Alex Hutchison (manuscripts and typescripts of poems and translations, 1972–90); Ernest Nicholson (manuscripts of memoirs, stories and verse, C.1980–90, presented by the author); and Liz Lochhead (typescript drafts of the stage production and the published version of Mary Queen of Scots Got Her Head Chopped Off, 1989, presented by the author).
Caricature of Duncan Macrae in Robert Kemp's adaptation of Sir David Lindsay's Satyre of the Thrie Estaites for Sir Tyrone Guthrie's production at the Edinburgh Festival, 1948.
Enlarged from 94mm high.
Several accessions straddle the border between literature and criticism.
Papers of Duncan Glen, C.1960–89, comprise manuscripts and typescripts of poems, reviews and essays, including critical work on Hugh MacDiarmid.
Papers of Professor Alastair Fowler, 1962–88, include manuscripts and typescripts of poems and of works on English literature.
Michael Parnell presented his research notes for his biography of Eric Linklater, 1984.
Other branches of modern scholarship are represented by  a gift from Professor Denys Hay of correspondence concerning, and drafts of an article on ‘British Historians and the Beginnings of the Civil History of World War II’, 1971–76; and by papers of Sir Robert Grieve on the Clyde Valley Regional Plan and other planning matters, C.1945–64 (on deposit and not yet available for consultation).
Among papers of Hamish Henderson, C.1947–87, are drafts of his translation of Gramsci's Lettere dal Carcere.
Stanley Simpson, who has devoted much of his career in the Library to modern literary manuscripts, examines part of the Hugh MacDiarmid collection, possibly the year's most significant acquisition.
Photograph: Steve McAvoy.
From the literature of earlier periods Sir Walter Scott is inevitably represented, though to a lesser extent than frequently in the past.
Apart from single letters, there is from his hand only a fragment of the History of Scotland, 1830, complementing the galley and page proofs already in the national collection.
However, the Library also took on deposit from Messrs Strathern and Blair, WS, a batch of business papers of James Ballantyne and Co., 1824–33, largely on the financial and literary affairs of Scott.
Two hundred and fifty letters of Archibald Constable and Co. to Hurst, Robinson and Co., London, 1818–26, on the publication and sale of Scott's works, were also acquired.
Other literary manuscripts acquired are papers of Sylvester Douglas, Baron Glenbervie, including material on Gavin Douglas's Works, and sermons of Robert Douglas, Bishop of Dunblane (presented by the British Records Association); a sheet of miscellaneous poetry by Robert Burns, n.d., including part of ‘Fête Champêtre’; and verses of Robert Tannahill, n.d.
The acting text of  Sir David Lindsay's Satyre of the Thrie Estaites prepared by Robert Kemp for the production at the Edinburgh International Festival of 1948 was deposited by Mr David Kemp.
‘Mr Dalgetty giving a Lantern exhibition’, from an album of photographs showing Church of Scotland mission work in Gujerat, India, early this century.
Enlarged from 103mm high.
On the historical side, the most important acquisition was a letter of Mary Queen of Scots to the Earl of Leicester, 1567, in which she asks for his assistance in promoting a good relationship between her and Queen Elizabeth.
A curiosity is an account of the expenses incurred in the imprisonment and execution of an alleged witch in 1649.
Two volumes (out of an uncertain number) of ‘A Political State of Scotland 1788 and 1789’, an alphabetical set of electoral records prepared for the Whig leadership by Laurence Hill, WS, were purchased.
Also bought were correspondence and papers concerning the career in the Navy, in politics and as Governor of Burma of the Hon.
Sir Archibald Cochrane (1885–1958).
Some estate papers of Graeme of Inchbrakie, 1850–60, were presented by Messrs Dundas and Wilson, CS.
But in this area everything is overshadowed by the second deposit by the Countess of Sutherland of her family's estate papers.
This very large accession takes up where the first deposit stopped, and covers the years 1861 to 1920, in addition to some titles and papers of earlier date which must have been at some time extracted from their proper place.
There are files of correspondence, rentals and accounts relating to the several divisions of the estate; approximately 500 maps (many being older items previously overlooked); boxes on a miscellany of topics from industry and agriculture to education and churches; and much that is as yet totally unsorted.
In all there are roughly 500 volumes and 700 boxes.
French Republican passport issued at Calais to Sophia Whitehill White, 20 Thermidor, an douze (i.e. 7 August 1804).
Reduced from 242mm high.
A bridge to the topic of the Scot abroad is formed by a letter-book of the Leith Hall Sugar Plantation in Jamaica, 1846–48, presented by Messrs Travis and Emery, London.
The Department of World Mission and Unity of the Church of Scotland continued its presentation of files relating to colonial, continental, Jewish and foreign missions, 1939–85 (availability as always is restricted for those records less than 25 years old).
Correspondence and journals of Dr Herman Philip, missionary to the Jews, his wife Dora Stephens, and their daughter Anna Maria Henderson, 1841–81, were purchased.
Journals of travels in the Near East and Greece by Archibald Campbell, 1844–45, were also bought.
Among papers of the family of Lamont of Knockdow are journals and notes relating to Novaya Zemlya, C.1869–70, by Sir James Lamont.
The journals and correspondence of Verney Lovett Cameron, mostly relating to the unsuccessful attempt to relieve David Livingstone and the subsequent crossing of the African continent from east to west, were deposited by Major H. P. Lovett Cameron.
From the other side of the globe comes a letter-book, 1906–12, of J. H. W. Houstoun, postmaster and acting commissioner at Szemao in China.
Travel within Scotland is represented by three volumes of tours by an unidentified Englishman, 1785–88, to the Central Lowlands, to the English Lakes via the Scottish Borders, and to the Highlands.
Interesting details are provided in annotations in a copy of Posting Book, with Tables for Calculating the Expense of Horses and Post-Boys, 1837.
The archives of businesses and organizations continue to be acquired.
The final part of that of John Bartholomew and Son, the geographical publishers, came during the year and has been amalgamated with earlier gifts.
A small batch of papers relating to George Johnstone, Dumfries, 1810–16, casts light on the difficulties of a provincial bookseller.
The letter-book, 1824–32, of the Inverness Courier and letters of its editor, Dr Robert Carruthers, 1824–75, were deposited by the newspaper.
Records of the Grand Lodge of Free Gardeners, Scotland, 1849–1901, were purchased; those of the Glasgow and West of Scotland Master Bakers Association and the Scottish Area of the Federation of Wholesale and Multiple Bakers, 1932–65, presented; and those of the Scottish Craft Centre 1949–90, deposited.
Commun na Clàrsaich (the Clarsach Society) deposited its records.
Manuscripts of music acquired include a book of tunes for the flute, 1722; a volume of fiddle tunes, perhaps from Perthshire, C.1850; and a volume of pipe music written by Pipe-Major Alexander McLennan, H. L. I. Militia, 1865.
Most significantly the Library bought the manuscript of Ronald Stevenson's song-cycle, ‘A Child's Garden of Verses’, 1985; it is hoped, on both sides, that this will be the beginning of a collection of all Stevenson's works.
Artistic papers were represented by a sketch by David Roberts of a design for a drop-scene for the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, 1831; correspondence of Roberts, 1849–63; correspondence of Randall Davies as editor of the annual volume of the Old Water-Colour Society's Club, 1939–41, including several letters of Sir William Russell Flint; and seven letters of Russell Flint to Kenneth Hobson, bookbinder, 1966–68.
The Royal Society of Edinburgh added to its previous deposits the papers of the 18th-century astronomer James Ferguson, including manuscripts of his writings and various calculating instruments in remarkably good condition.
Several further letters of Lord Kelvin were purchased.
Additional papers of Robert Stevenson and Sons, civil engineers, were deposited (not available for general consultation).
Groups of letters and single letters were, as always, numerous.
The former include: letters to Dr Samuel Brown, 1851–86, from, among others, Harriet Martineau, Mazzini and Prince Kropotkin (presented by Mr Colin Forrester); letters to Professor R. A. Rankin, 1934–61, including 39 from George Campbell Hay (presented by Professor Rankin); letters to Naomi Mitchison from Aldous Huxley, Stevie Smith and Neil Gunn, 1939–43, n.d. (presented by Lady Mitchison); and letters to Nigel McIsaac, 1959–69, from Willa Muir, J. D. Fergusson and Margaret Morris (presented by Mr McIsaac).
Writers of single letters acquired include (in addition to some already mentioned): Lady Anne Barnard, John Buchan, Thomas Carlyle, Allan Cunningham, James Hogg, Edward Lear, David Livingstone, J. G. Lockhart, Neil Gunn, and Sir David Wilkie.
Facing: Sketch by Sydney Goodsir Smith for his poem ‘Under the Eildon Tree’, published in 1948.
Reproduced by permission of Mrs Hazel Goodsir Smith.
Reduced from 255mm high.
Maps
The Map Library's purchasing policy has to keep a balance between the acquisition of early maps and atlases of Scottish interest and association, and the need to provide an up-to-date collection of maps, atlases and reference works relating to all aspects of cartography and all parts of the world.
Funding being limited, it is not always possible to purchase foreign maps with Scottish associations or simply to fill gaps in the collection.
It was with particular pleasure therefore that the Library has taken on deposit the ‘Residual Map Library’ of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Although the collection contains early Ordnance Survey and Geological Survey mapping of most of Great Britain, it also includes the cream of 19th-century European thematic and topographic mapping, as well as the 19th-century mapping of the Indian subcontinent produced by the Survey of India; it fills a significant gap in holdings.
Thought to have been brought together by two distinguished Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Alexander Keith Johnston and Roderick Impey Murchison, the collection was beautifully mounted and dissected, and housed in purpose-built boxes; most items are in virtually mint condition.
A further deposit of maps, plans and charts from Mr R. Quentin Stevenson, mainly consisting of material used by the Stevenson family in their civil engineering projects in Scotland, has added to the already significant number of maps from this source.
Other Scottish-produced accessions included a manuscript map of Orkney, drawn for its new owner, Sir Lawrence Dundas, around 1766, and a set of educational building bricks, mid-19th century.
These six-sided bricks, each facet displaying part of a printed map, when correctly positioned display six maps by W. and A. K. Johnston, including England, Scotland, Europe and the World, and were neatly boxed as part of the original product.
Items such as these are the icing on the cake.
The cake itself, it should not be forgotten, is the regular and unsensational intake of current British maps and atlases by legal deposit.
Music
Notable among this year's accessions is the donation of Angus Mackay, A Collection of Ancient Piobaireachd, 2nd edition (Edinburgh, 1839).
The rare second edition of Queen Victoria's piper's influential piobaireachd collection joins the manuscript and the first edition in the Library's holdings.
The donor is Mr James Campbell, of the Kilberry family who have long been experts on piobaireachd.
Among the more extensive purchases, the policy was continued of steadily augmenting holdings of the large historical music collections made available in the microfilm publications of Research Press.
A subscription was taken out to Repertoire international de la presse musicale, a substantial new series of indexes to 19th-century European music journals.
Scottish Science Library
The library was pleased to receive during the year a substantial donation in the form of the library of Sir George Taylor, former Director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
Other, smaller donations, mostly from libraries, are helping to fill gaps in back runs of periodicals.
Although the SSL continues to receive legal deposit material and some foreign periodicals on exchange via the Royal Society of Edinburgh, funding for purchases is still not at the level which the Trustees believe to be necessary for a major national scientific and business information resource.
At present approximately 50 per cent of the SSL's purchase grant is spent on periodicals; this proportion will rise annually as prices increase without a matching increase in the purchase grant.
It has therefore been decided to concentrate on purchases in certain areas known to be of importance in Scotland rather than attempt to purchase small amounts in all scientific disciplines.
A survey of science libraries in Scotland, for example, revealed that apart from British Standards, which are held in a number of locations, holdings of other standards in Scotland are minimal.
Since the SSL had received an increasing number of enquiries about standards, and as BSI now places restrictions on the type of standards it is willing to lend, the SSL now has complete sets of the Standards of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) and the American Society for Testing of Materials (ASTM), and Comité Consultatif International Télégraphique et Téléphonique (CCITT) blue books.
Additionally, English translations of Deutsches Institut fur Normung (DIN) Standards, and International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Standards have been identified as a high priority if and when more funds become available.
One of the strengths of a national library is the range of material it receives through legal deposit.
This means that in such areas as environmental science the National Library is unique in Scotland in having collections covering all aspects of environmental issues, from ecology to legislation.
The SSL holds a core collection of material covering scientific and technical aspects backed up by the National Library's other relevant collections such as official publications, legislation, and popular science items.
The SSL is also purchasing in this area to supplement the UK collections with material published in other countries.
The Business Information Service (SCOTBIS) has continued to expand its coverage.
New sources in Eastern European business information have been acquired, and there has been an increase in the number of trade directories and market research reports.
SCOTBIS can now claim, with some authority, to hold one of the largest collections of business information in the UK.
The service also makes substantial use of non-book materials, running a successful online service for which a charge is made.
All divisions of the SSL make extensive use of CD-ROMs.
Despite these achievements, the service is not without its problems.
The frequency and volume of business material, not all of which falls into the legal deposit category, means that gaps do exist in the business collection.
This is particularly the case with market research reports, most of which are extremely expensive, thus putting Scotland at an economic disadvantage in not having direct access to this material.
CATALOGUING, STOCK MANAGEMENT AND AUTOMATION
Printed Books
During the year under review the highest priority has continued to be given to making printed materials, received from all sources, available quickly for consultation by users of the Library, and to providing bibliographic information about the collections to users at remote locations via the Joint Academic Network (JANET).
After a decade of severe staffing pressures it has been possible to achieve the objective of currency only by accepting reductions in the standard of the catalogue information provided to readers (for example, the Library does not have the resources to supply subject information to reduced records acquired from the British Library), and by continuing not to assign much-needed additional staff resources for the essential work of the proper management of aspects of the Online Catalogue (for example , authority control), in order to make consultation of the Catalogue easier for
The complexity of information in many older printed books has led to the creation of special rules for their description.
Since the Library's automated system (VTLS) is based on US MARC format, it was decided in November 1989 that it would be sensible for the Library to adopt the descriptive rules prepared by the Library of Congress: the Bibliographic Description of Rare Books (BDRB) published in 1981.
These rules are now in use for the cataloguing of all pre-1801 printed books, with effect from February 1990: a revised edition of the rules to be published under the title Descriptive Cataloguing of Rare Books (DCRB) is expected shortly.
A Survey, by questionnaire, of readers' reaction to the General Catalogue of Printed Books was carried out over two periods during the year.
The results from the completed Survey of Catalogue Use indicate that there are a number of improvements that readers would like to see introduced, the principal of which is the unification of the present three sequences of the General Catalogue into a single machine-readable file.
The completion of this work would increase the convenience of searching the General Catalogue for researchers and save them valuable time, and it would also create savings in time for Library staff.
This project, which is widely supported by other Scottish libraries, was given the highest priority for new funding by the Library in its Financial Plan 1990–1994, prepared for the Scottish Office Education Department (SOED).
Unfortunately, although the case for the benefits of the retrospective conversion of the Library's General Catalogue was accepted, SOED did not find it possible to fund the project in 1991–92.
The project will continue to have the highest priority in the Library's Corporate Plan for 1991–95.
Since national libraries generally have the most extensive collections in a country, it is important that they should take advantage of the benefits of automation to share information about their collections and services with other libraries via networks.
The eleven major research libraries in Scotland (the eight university libraries, the two major public reference libraries in Glasgow and Edinburgh, and the National Library) meet together regularly to discuss matters of common concern and to plan joint initiatives.
Their work in the 1980s led to the creation of the Scottish Academic Libraries Bibliographic Information Network (SALBIN), developed by Edinburgh University Library on behalf of the Group: nine of the eleven research libraries, as members of the Joint Academic Network (JANET), are able to consult one another 's collections via the network, and the two remaining libraries will also be linked up shortly; and work is proceeding on planning an online file of current serials in Scottish libraries, and a distributed directory of library resources in the eleven libraries, which will be available over JANET.
Both the Bibliography of Scotland (BOS) and the Union Catalogue of Art Books in Libraries in Scotland (UCABLIS), formerly known as the Union Catalogue of Art Books in Edinburgh Libraries (UCABEL), are now available as online catalogues, although much retrospective conversion remains to be undertaken in the case of both catalogues to make them fully beneficial for users.
Volume of Bibliography of Scotland was published in March 1990; the next volume, which will cover three years, will be produced on microfiche, with accompanying documentation, in summer 1991.
Thereafter, volumes covering the preceding year will be published in February each year.
It is hoped to produce the Bibliography on CD-ROM in due course, but consultation with customers has indicated that transition to this medium would be regarded as premature at this stage.
Stock management is a very important factor in ensuring that the printed collections are properly and reliably controlled, and are available for readers whenever they wish to consult them.
The Annual Closed Week at the beginning of October enables a formal programme of stock-checking to be carried out: in October 1990 a total of 46,182 volumes were thoroughly checked.
Since the Library's collections are dispersed throughout three buildings, it is necessary to have a more or less continuous programme of transferring stock from one floor to another, and from one building to another, in order to create space for expansion and to ensure that the printed collections are placed to the maximum advantage as far as distribution, access and preservation are concerned.
The need to engage in substantial transfers of stock, in addition to all the other day-to-day work of book delivery, and the stamping, placing, pressmarking and shelf-cataloguing of new accessions, has created serious staffing pressures.
The commitment of staff who work in all the departments responsible for the printed collections, in difficult conditions, is very much appreciated.
Manuscripts, Maps and Music
The particularly complicated editorial and keying work on volume 8 of the Catalogue of Manuscripts Acquired since 1925 has made substantial progress this year; the catalogue description is finished and the disc has been sent to HMSO, while work on the index is at an advanced stage.
Problems with the software have prevented for the moment the implementation of an automated indexing system.
Manuscripts fully catalogued during the year include a gathering-up of letters of Sir Walter Scott, papers of Neil Munro, George Scott Moncreiff and Fred Urquhart, the Lesmahagow Missal and other liturgical and biblical manuscripts, and various items from the Advocates' Manuscripts.
The cataloguing of the papers of Ruthven Todd has been completed.
Work continues on the Lynedoch and Newhailes papers, the Lockhart of Lee and Carnwath collection, the T. and A. Constable archive, and F. S. Oliver's papers.
The first steps have been taken to catalogue the large number of outstanding musical accessions.
Inventories of recent manuscript accessions compiled during the year include: further missionary papers of the Church of Scotland, the archive of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and papers of Alastair Fowler, the National Union of Mineworkers (Scotland), Lord Macleod of Fuinary, Sir Robert Grieve, Lord Glenbervie, and James Bridie.
That of the papers of the Scottish Craft Centre is substantially complete.
Work continues on listing the Crawford papers, and has begun on the additional Sutherland papers.
Revision of the lists of manuscripts relating to various countries has been undertaken.
In the Map Library a start was made on the re-classification of the reference book collection.
Cataloguing of foreign atlases and cartographic reference works into the automated catalogue continued, and a backlog which had accumulated during the move into the new building, was removed.
Preparations for the projected automation of the music catalogue were further advanced.
PRESERVATION
In the course of the year two important condition surveys were completed.
The first concerned the volumes housed in the Special Collections Room of the Map Library, where some 2,000 volumes were cleaned, and leather dressing was applied where appropriate.
During this exercise the condition of the paper and binding of each volume was recorded, and the information gathered will be of value for planning future conservation work.
For the second survey a sample of 1.7 million volumes was taken from a number of areas of the Library which were considered to be representative of the book collections as a whole.
The aim was to determine the condition of bindings and assess the effectiveness of past preservation policy, to measure the demand for present and future binding-related conservation work, and to identify areas from which material in need of remedial treatment should be taken.
The results indicated that, of the sample, some 17,000 volumes (approximately 1%) were in need of remedial treatment to the binding, and on this basis it is reasonable to assume that about 50,000 volumes in the entire collection require such treatment.
This confirms that past preservation policy has been relatively successful, but also shows a continuing need to maintain such a programme.
These surveys add data to those furnished by previous surveys carried out by the Preservation Division in recent years, that measured the brittle paper problem in the Library and the condition of particular areas of the special collections and manuscript collections.
Will Maclean, ‘Memories of a Northern Childhood’(1977), reproduced in colour in Scotland Creates.
Wood, slate and found objects.
Reduced from 276mm high.
The Division has continued to concentrate on applying remedial treatment to degraded material in the map collection.
A total of 2,588 items were treated; though in most cases this consisted only of the application of a backing material, work on badly degraded older material is much more labour-intensive.
Extensive conservation work was carried out on an important manuscript map of the Isle of Lewis, produced by Alexander Gibbs in 1817.
The map (78 x 85 inches) was in an extremely fragile condition, having suffered from acid migration, a crude attachment to rollers, physical damage from wear and tear, and rough attempts at repair in the past.
Remedial treatment included the removal of the map from its rollers, cleaning, relaxation of the paper fibres, deacidification and consolidation.
Missing parts of the paper were infilled and the map was finally mounted on archival linen.
The restored map featured in ‘The Hebrides Surveyed’ exhibition during the summer.
With the other legal deposit libraries, NLS is participating in a preservation microfilming project funded in part by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, which is devoting some $2.5m to this purpose in the UK.
The Library is represented by Mr McIntyre, Head of Preservation, and Dr Hillyard of the British Antiquarian Division on the Working Group which provides guidance and advice on controls and standards.
They travelled with the Group to the United States in May to become familiar with the American co-operative microfilming programme, and to take part in discussions with counterparts in that country.
In NLS the camera operator's salary and the cost of microfilm are funded by the Foundation, with the Library's contribution being in processing, quality checking, accommodation and capital costs.
Filming began in March 1990, since when a total of 175,301 frames have been produced from items in the Library's collections.
The project was initially for three years, and will therefore run at least until 1993.
It usefully strengthens the Library's preservation microfilming programme with a substantial external financial contribution.
However, the Mellon Foundation specifically excludes newspapers from the programme, so that the serious situation of the deteriorating newspaper collection will remain until the co-operative microfilming programme dedicated to this problem can be established.
Three microfilming cameras specially adapted to film from bound volumes of newspapers have been purchased, together with other equipment for the processing and production of microfilm.
Accommodation has been upgraded and specially designed in the Sighthill Bindery to house the filming unit; further funding is required for staff and running costs before production can begin.
The Library has again participated internationally in preservation matters.
Mr McIntyre represented the Library at the first East/West conference on the conservation of library materials held in Budapest in September; he presented a paper on ‘Risk Management’ and acted as Conference Chairman on the final day.
He was also invited to attend a seminar in Leningrad to review progress in the recovery of materials damaged in the disastrous fire in the Academy of Sciences Library in 1988.
Mr McIntyre visited Ottawa to act as consultant to the Canadian Co-operative Preservation Project, working on the National Preservation Policy and Strategy for Canadian libraries.
The Preservation Manager, Mr R. Jackson, lectured to librarians from English-speaking African countries at a seminar held in Loughborough in September, organized by the Department of Library and Information Studies, Loughborough University, and IFLA.
EXHIBITIONS AND PUBLICATIONS
The completion of the modernization of the Exhibition Hall at the end of June marked the beginning of a new era for the Library, and probably constitutes the single most important development in the field of Library exhibitions since the opening of the George IV Bridge Building over thirty years ago.
Now, for the first time, the Library has the opportunity to mount imaginative, multi-media displays, individually tailored to their subject matter and capable of competing on equal terms with exhibitions in other major venues.
Provided the necessary resources to maintain an active programme of exhibitions are made available, the Library is now in a better position than ever before to project itself to the public at large through the use of instructive and stimulating displays.
The first exhibition to occupy the newly-modernized Exhibition Hall was ‘The Hebrides Surveyed’, a look at the Hebrides through the eyes of the map-maker from the time of Ptolemy to the present day.
Researched by Miss Margaret Wilkes and Ms Diana Webster of the Map Library, and with sponsorship and support from The Highlands and Islands Development Board, Mobil North Sea Limited, British Aerospace, and the Ordnance Survey, the display fully exploited the new exhibition facilities to bring together a stunning collection of maps, charts, aerial photographs, satellite images, and map-making instruments.
A competition with a Hebridean holiday as a prize was run in conjunction with the exhibition, a more specialized competition for schools was organized with support from the Royal Bank of Scotland, and private views were arranged for specialist bodies and organizations.
The exhibition was opened on 1 August by Dr Finlay MacLeod, whose enthusiasm for Hebridean  maps had been the inspiration behind it, and by the time the exhibition closed on 31 October it had proved to be the most successful exhibition ever mounted by the Library, with an attendance of over 20,000 visitors.
Television personality Cathy Macdonald announces the winner of the competition run in conjunction with the exhibition ‘The Hebrides Surveyed’.
With Cathy Macdonald are Mr and Mrs Garvie, whose daughter Jenny was unable to attend to receive her prize: a holiday for two in the Western Isles.
Photograph: Antonia Reeve.
On 15 November, the second exhibition to occupy the modernized Exhibition Hall was opened by Sir Steven Runciman.
Entitled ‘Lairds, Libraries and Lullabies’, devised by the National Trust for Scotland in collaboration with the Library, and sponsored by the Royal Bank of Scotland, it marked the start of the Trust's Diamond Jubilee celebrations by taking a look at the country house library.
Books of all kinds, from children's books and cookery books to works on literature and philosophy were displayed amid paintings, works of art and furnishings, which combined to create a country house atmosphere, while a series of lectures explored related themes.
Also organized to accompany the exhibition were story-telling sessions for both children and adults.
The exhibition again fully exploited the potential of the new Exhibition Hall, and this was reflected in the excellent reviews which it received, including one in The Times which described it as ‘a show that proves books need not be boring’.
The exhibition closed on 10 March.
‘George Mackie’ and ‘Book Arts: Art Books’, widely contrasting little exhibitions united by their focus on the book as object and work of art, were opened by Mr Ruari  McLean on 20 March.
In the former exhibition, George Mackie, DFC, RDI, RSW, one of this century's leading graphic artists, confronts the challenge of explaining to layman and bibliophile alike the nature of his ‘invisible’ craft and the intellectual and emotional considerations which underline it, and this theme is further elaborated in the accompanying catalogue, Books, mostly scholarly and some Ephemera, designed by George Mackie, which was produced thanks to the generosity of The Stinehour Press, who printed it.
‘Book Arts: Art Books’ puts on show a selection of books from the Musée royal de Mariemont, Belgium.
Unlike the Mackie exhibits, these are self-consciously works of art, ranging from fine printing and binding which will delight the traditional bibliophile to the more outrageous contemporary livre d'artiste and livre-objet.
Both exhibitions will close on 2 June, after which the Mackie exhibition will travel in a modified form to Dartmouth College in the United States.
George Mackie in jovial mood at the opening of the exhibition of his work on book design over more than 40 years.
Photograph: Antonia Reeve.
In the course of the year, the Library was also heavily involved in ‘Scotland Creates’, the collaborative exhibition which the Library, together with the National Galleries of Scotland, the National Museums of Scotland, and Glasgow Museums and Art Galleries mounted in the McLellan Galleries, Glasgow, as part of the programme to mark that city's year as cultural capital of Europe.
As well as being involved with the exhibition itself, the Library was co-publisher of the accompanying book, Scotland Creates: 5,000 Years of Art and Design, to which Mr John Morris of the British Antiquarian Division contributed a chapter on ‘Scottish Design and the Art of the Book 1500–1800’.
The Library was also involved in another collaborative venture, associating itself with the Edinburgh Bibliographical Society to mark the latter's centenary by publishing The Best and Fynest Lawers and Other raire Bookes.
The publication consists of a facsimile of the earliest (c. 1683) list of books in the Advocates' Library with an introduction, modern catalogue, and associated indexes prepared by Miss Maureen Townley of the British Antiquarian Division.
The work sheds new light on the early history of the Library, and offers a sound basis for further research into its collections.
Professor Guy Donnay, Director of the Musée royal de Mariemont, examines some of the exhibits on loan from Belgium for the exhibition ‘Book Arts: Art Books’.
Photograph: Antonia Reeve.
‘Lairds, Libraries and Lullabies’, an exhibition marking the Diamond Jubilee of the National Trust for Scotland, shows the potential of the modernized Exhibition Hall.
Photograph: White House Studios.
The Library's Service to Readers
REFERENCE SERVICES
The attendance figures for readers using the George IV Bridge Reading Room during the day (53,644) and in the evening (29,476) have declined by about 9% from last year.
The level of attendances does, however, remain between 10% and 15% higher than the year before that.
The decrease in numbers may be due in part to the transfer of readers to the Scottish Science Library as its services have become better known.
By comparison with the attendance figures, the number of readers' tickets issued has increased generally.
An increase of 18% brings the number of 3-year tickets issued to 3,319, and a very substantial increase of 30% brings the issue of l-year undergraduate tickets to 1,595.
Short-term ticket numbers went down slightly, by about 4%, to 13,155.
The number of books issued in the Main Reading Room, 203,442, shows a decrease of nearly 6%, but this is almost certainly due to the disruption in book supply caused by the progressive programme of floor closures required by fire alarm renewal installation work throughout the second half of the year.
Services Information leaflets covering copyright regulations and the supply of copies, and Crown Copyright were issued, together with revised versions of leaflets describing the Union Catalogue of Art Books in Libraries in Scotland and Bibliography of Scotland.
Staff in Reference Services continued to benefit from Wednesday morning training sessions, and took part in a two-day Customer Care training course during the Annual Closed Week.
This course, modified to take one day, was repeated in January for the officers in charge of Evening Duty and in March for those next in seniority in the evenings.
An Evening Services Liaison Group, comprising all officers in charge of Evening Duty, was set up in order to improve co-ordination and communication between day and evening service staff.
LENDING SERVICES
Lending Services dealt with 25,894 requests during the year, a decrease of 326 (1%).
It is estimated that overall some 23,304 requests were satisfied: 14,989 from Scottish libraries and 8,315 from elsewhere.
Requests received under the British Library Document Supply Centre's back-up scheme have again dropped very significantly to 792, less than half of last year's requests.
The Library's ability to satisfy requests by photocopies from stock has virtually ceased, because Reference Services staff can no longer handle the work involved.
At 31 March, the Scottish Union Catalogue (SUC) held a total of 2,153,493 works, a net increase of 74,297.
Co-operating Scottish libraries continued to support the SUC ISBN COM File (a microfiche listing, by ISBN, of items in the SUC) by contributing reports of 136,545 new accessions, and 63,181 withdrawals.
Due to staff shortages and changes in previous years, a backlog of about 25,000 withdrawals from the SUC had accumulated.
Four members of staff working regularly on over-time succeeded in reducing this backlog to less than 9,000 by the end of the year.
It is expected that this in turn can be eliminated as part of regular daily routines.
The number of libraries submitting satisfactory magnetic tapes for direct merging with the SUC remains at 5.
A questionnaire on the position on automation in collaborating Scottish libraries has been prepared, in order to help with planning the future of the SUC.
The number of Scottish libraries subscribing to the two-monthly update service of the ISBN COM File microfiche stood at 59.
Staff catalogued 3,175 new entries into the VISCOUNT database of items held in Scottish libraries, and a further 11,411 locations were added.
Lending Services continued to play a full part in the VISCOUNT Project, with Miss McKenzie acting as Secretary of the Technical Working Party.
The VISCOUNT system itself was enlarged in the course of the year when a further three English regional library bureaux joined.
A new operating system for the project has been planned in the course of the year for installation in 1991–92.
The Scottish Books Exchange, which was revived in 1989–90 with the generous help of Bearsden and Milngavie District Libraries, was continued, with the issue of two lists.
From these, nearly 500 books were allocated to requesting libraries.
Publicity for the Exchange has been increased during the year, and a small, but significant, increase in use has been noted.
The Scottish Panel on Inter-Library Lending met three times in the course of the year, with several new members joining at the latest meeting as part of an arrangement to rotate membership to bring in as wide a representation of Scottish libraries as possible.
Among the topics discussed by the Panel were the revision of inter-library loan procedures and the SUC directory of library codes; the collection of inter-library loan statistics; the Scottish Fiction Reserve; charges for lost volumes; and training for inter-library loans assistants.
The Panel is proving its worth as a forum for the discussion of new procedures and for bringing practical information to the attention of Lending Services.
Lending Services continued to play an active part in the work of the Library and Information Co-operation Council (LINC) and the Circle of Officers of National and Regional Library Systems (CONARLS), handing over chairmanship of the latter body to the Irish Central Library for Students at the AGM held in Edinburgh in  May.
Amongst the activities of CONARLS the production of a report on the UK Fiction Reserves was very relevant to Lending Services' work.
In parallel with this study, a survey was undertaken by Lending Services to establish the current views of Scottish libraries on the Scottish Fiction Reserve (which is separate from and arranged differently from the English fiction reserves).
It was then possible to contribute the findings to the CONARLS study, and to consider a revision of the Scottish Fiction Reserve in the near future.
MAP LIBRARY
The first months of the year were dominated by curatorial preparations for ‘The Hebrides Surveyed’ exhibition.
This major display of maps and related map-making equipment not only aroused considerable public interest during the three months the exhibition was open, but also generated new links with individuals and institutions in Scotland and elsewhere.
There was also a marked increase in the number of letter enquiries concerning maps, with a rise from 747 in 1989–90 to 830.
Commercial enquiries rose from 40% to 45 % of the total, illustrating the importance of map information to the civil and structural engineer, the chartered surveyor and the building contractor in particular.
For the first time a tally was kept of the number of items issued to users or consulted by Map Library staff in answering letter enquiries.
This showed the use of 25,771 items, a number dominated by the larger-scale Ordnance Survey mapping of the period 1850–1939.
Heavy use too was made of the newly-created folders containing photocopies of early regional maps of Scotland.
The increased public interest in maps was shown by the pattern of outreach activities featuring visits to the Map Library from educational, special and general interest groups, as well as by the illustrated lectures given elsewhere by Map Library staff.
For the tenth consecutive year the Edinburgh Three-Day Cartographic Event involved Map Library staff, when some thirty members of the British Cartographic Society were welcomed to a special viewing of ‘The Hebrides Surveyed’.
The newly-established staff training programme, taking advantage of the later opening time of 10.00 am on Wednesdays, has allowed in-depth sessions on particular aspects of the map collections, as well as specifically tailored visits to other sections of the Library and to other institutions.
As a result, there is a much improved knowledge of the foreign maps, and a subsequently enriched service to users.
The acquisition of two small, purpose-built, exhibition cases, allowing the display of larger sheet maps, has permitted Map Library staff to present monthly exhibitions on Level 4 of the Causewayside Building.
These displays have commemorated such events as the 50th anniversary of the sinking of SS Politician off Eriskay in February 1941, and the bicentenary of the Ordnance Survey.
A colourful selection of map ephemera in the form of Christmas cards, gifted to or collected by the Library over the past 15 years, was used as the cover for the December 1990 issue of the international journal The Map Collector.
The programme of bulk supply of map photocopies to libraries and schools' resource centres has continued, though the lack of funds within the local authorities has affected the speed of this.
Visits from archivists and librarians to study the holdings of local maps has led to useful contacts as well as to the provision of further photocopies to the local archive and library services.
Visits from further afield have been directed more at studying the planning and layout of the new Map Library; they included visits from map librarians from New York Public Library, the University of California, Los Angeles, and the National Diet Library, Japan.
MUSIC ROOM
In line with the steady upward trend in the use of the Music Room over several years, the readership again increased this year, rising to 1,127, with the number of items issued also reaching a new high point at 3,129.
Postal enquiries included letters and photography orders from many parts of the world — from Finland and Japan, for example, as well as countries of Western Europe and North America.
An Aiwa Compact Disc Stereo Radio Cassette Recorder was added to the sound equipment available.
The Division made a useful contribution to exhibitions during the year, arranging, for example, for the provision of the well-received background music to ‘The Hebrides Surveyed’.
Contacts with national and international bodies included involvement in the business of the International Association of Music Libraries, and staff participation in the Glasgow '90 East-West Forum ‘Scotland and the Slavic World’ and in the Jewish Music Festival Conference, 1990.
SOUTH READING ROOM (MANUSCRIPTS AND RARE BOOKS)
The number of readers of manuscripts throughout the last decade has fluctuated, never falling below 2,500 and never rising above 3,000, without any clear trend being visible.
In 1990–91 the figure was 2,853, which is the third highest of that period (2,928 in 1985–86, 2,952 in 1982–83); it might have been greater, for no manuscripts could be issued during the last five weeks of the year because of the installation of the new fire alarm system in the strong-rooms.
The usual pattern of summer high, with June, July and August each having more than 300 readers, and winter low, with less than 200 per month, was observed.
The number of readers of pre-1701 printed books, and books in Special Collections, has continued to show a small increase over the year, in line with similar steady, but undramatic, increases over recent years.
There was some interruption of access to printed books while the new fire detection and alarm system was being installed in those areas where rare books are housed, and any inconvenience to readers is very much regretted.
Readers wishing to use lap-top computers are increasing in number, and to accommodate those whose machines are not totally silent, acoustic hoods have been provided.
Foam supports for fragile or valuable bindings, allowing the volumes to be opened with minimum strain, are also now available.
SCOTTISH SCIENCE LIBRARY
In its first full year of operation, the SSL has seen a marked increase in the number of users and in demand for information and other services.
The SSL was delighted to be the recipient of the 1990 Jason Farradane Award of the Institute of Information Scientists ‘because of the importance of this development for Scotland, and the significant progress it marks in the information community’.
The Award Committee also commented that, while much remained to be done to generate full benefit from expanding use of the service, the new facilities have been well planned and prepared and the new potential is clear.
The launch of the SSL was the subject of a successful submission for the Library Association/T.
C. Farries Public Relations and Publicity Awards competition, resulting in the National Library being given a special award for this promotion; and the SSL was also short-listed for The Scotsman Computer-User of the Year Award.
The Physical Sciences Division was renamed Technical Information, to reflect better the requirements of industrial users and the services that the SSL planned to offer.
The question of the provision of patent information was investigated.
It was decided that, because of the specialized nature of patents and SSL's lack of resources, detailed patent enquiries should, for the time being, be referred to other specialized agencies in Scotland.
The Royal Society of Edinburgh's former collection of foreign scientific periodicals, now located in the Causewayside Building as part of the SSL, continues to be maintained and catalogued by library staff.
Although it will be some considerable time before it is fully catalogued, all the material is accessible and a record is being maintained of the areas most in demand; cataloguing priorities are being established accordingly.
Several CD-ROM products, including Science Citation Index, Compendex, Biosis, and FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy), are available and proving popular with users, and staff as a valuable resource for answering enquiries.
A meeting of science librarians in Scotland, hosted by the SSL, has led to the formation of a co-operative group to be known as FOSSIL (Forum of Scottish Science and Information Libraries).
The staff of the SSL continue to market its services by a wide range of activities.
These include organizing visits to the Library for interested parties (including tours for the general public during the Edinburgh Science Festival), and illustrated talks to groups unable to visit the Library themselves.
The SSL was pleased to welcome the Lord Provost of the City of Edinburgh, and visitors from Helsinki University of Technology, La Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie, Paris, and the Department of Health, Manila, Philippines.
A leaflet entitled Information for Industry was produced and mailed to almost 1,000 companies in Scotland.
These had been identified using the FAME database.
This mailing resulted in an immediate response by over 20 companies, and further enquiries on an on-going basis.
SCOTBIS took a stand at the CBI National Conference and Exhibition at the SECC in Glasgow in November.
This conference was attended by major companies throughout the UK as well as by key figures from politics and the media.
The interest displayed here and at an earlier Scottish Industry Exhibition at which SCOTBIS also exhibited was very encouraging, thereby raising the profile not only of the SSL but also of the National Library.
An outstanding event was a lecture sponsored by IBM and given by Professor Benoit Mandelbrot, famous as the originator of the fractal.
The success of this has led to further sponsorship for an annual IBM/SSL Lecture.
The SSL now has a small exhibition area in which displays are arranged each month.
These are intended to alert users to the wide range of material available in the library and have covered such topics as Aids, Anatomy and Art, Business and 1992, Fractals, The Metric System and the Tulip.
SSL staff continue to be involved in a wide range of professional activities.
The Director is a member of the Science and Technology Libraries Committee of the International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA), and of the Advisory Committee of the British Library's Science Reference and Information Service (SRIS).
The Head of Business Information has served as Secretary of the Scottish Online Users Group and as Editor for the Library Association Industrial Group (Scotland).
The Library's Buildings
The legislation necessary to effect the transfer to the Trustees of the titles of properties occupied solely by the Library has not yet been enacted, and questions still remain unresolved relating to the definition of the boundaries of properties.
In the meantime, however, the Library continues to exercise responsibility for the property that it occupies and controls.
As foreseen in last year's Annual Report, competitive quotations were sought, and a contract let, for plant operation and maintenance of the Library's buildings for three years from 1991–92.
A contract has also been let for the production by computer-aided design (CAD) of record drawings for the George IV Bridge and Lawnmarket Buildings, and the Sighthill Bindery.
This will give the Library the flexibility to maintain accurate records of each of the buildings, and through interface with facilities management software, to build up full records of maintenance costs, asset registers, floor areas, and circuit diagrams, so producing accurate statistics on which to base maintenance decisions.
The year ended on an optimistic note, with the signing of the main contract for the construction of Phase 2 of the Causewayside Building.
After detailed design had been completed in May 1990, tenders were invited, and a tender report submitted to the Scottish Office Education Department and HM Treasury.
In January 1991 Ministers accepted the £22.01m cash ceiling agreed with Treasury, although delays, beyond the Library's control, meant that the contract could not finally be let, to Sir Robert McAlpine & Sons Ltd, until late March.
Construction is, therefore, six months behind the original timetable, with a planned completion date of March 1994.
By then, it is reckoned, all available space in the Library's existing buildings will be filled, so this second phase is essential for the Library's growth and development, and we are grateful that funds have been granted to enable it to proceed.
Work on improving the fire safety of the George IV Bridge Building has continued throughout the year.
The installation of a new fire detection and alarm system is underway, and should be completed by July 1991.
A structural appraisal of the building identified a number of potentially serious defects which could arise in the event of fire.
The main areas of concern were the lack of fire resistance of the intermediate floors that are supported by the unprotected steel uprights of the bookstacks on the floor below, and the inadequate means of escape from the Reading Room area.
Buildings of similar construction exist elsewhere, for example some of the buildings of the Library of Congress, and investigations there have shown that the most effective means of ensuring the survival of the building and its collections would be the installation of a water sprinkler system throughout the building.
Although traditionally sprinkler systems have been resisted in libraries, it has been shown that modern systems, which open and close individual sprinkler heads in response to temperature rise and fall, would prevent fires developing to the point at which structural collapse would occur, and would restrict water damage to a relatively small area of stack.
Alternative solutions to the problem such as strengthening the floors, do not appear practical.
Following further studies by a fire engineer from the USA, an investment appraisal was submitted for SOED and Treasury approval.
Ministers have agreed to set aside resources totalling £4m over the next three years to enable the Library to plan and execute fire safety and precaution works, though formal approval of the figures is still awaited.
The first stage will be the development of a master plan to integrate these works with the already projected repairs to the fabric, wiring and air-conditioning plant in the building.
In the meantime a series of minor works to implement recommendations of the various fire reports, which can be carried out without additional funding, has been started.
From June 1990 to February 1991 the Lawnmarket Building was vacated in order to allow a programme of refurbishment to be carried out.
Replacement of the electrical wiring and heating systems, and refurbishment of the lift, were completed on time.
However, close examination of the external stonework, only possible when scaffolding had been erected, revealed the extent of necessary repairs had been underestimated, and the contract had to be extended to June 1991.
Finance and Personnel
The year under review began with staff still shocked and saddened by the death of Professor Roberts (Librarian, 1970–90).
On 10 May members of his family, present and past staff of the Library, professional colleagues and personal friends gathered — most fittingly in the Causewayside Building for a memorial celebration of his life and work.
The Acting Librarian Mr I. D. McGowan read a message dictated by Professor Roberts to be read on this occasion, and Mr M. F. Strachan, then Chairman of the Board of Trustecs, gave a moving address, before inviting guests ‘to meet, talk and refresh ourselves as Denis wished’.
A Civil Service Commission selection board was held, and on 20 July the Secretary of State approved its recommendation that Mr McGowan should be appointed to the post of Librarian to succeed Professor Roberts.
Mr McGowan has been with the Library since 1971, Keeper of Catalogues between 1978 and 1988, and most recently Secretary of the Library.
He was replaced as Secretary by Mr M. C. Graham.
In December Mr P. M. Cadell, Keeper of Manuscripts, Maps and Music, was appointed Keeper of the Records of Scotland; his post in the Library was filled, through internal promotion, by Mr I. C. Cunningham.
Mr Cadell had worked in the Department of Manuscripts since 1968, with two years, 1978–80, as Assistant Secretary in Administration.
Though the Library will miss his expertise and knowledge of the collection, it is hoped that his removal to Register House will further enhance the good relationship between the two institutions.
The practice has been terminated whereby the staff of the Accounts Section served in the Library on secondment from the Scottish Office.
Two officers whose term of secondment came to an end in the course of the year were replaced by promotions from within the Library's staff, and it is intended that this pattern should continue when the remaining officer returns to the Scottish Office in due course.
Mr W. Jackson, Buildings Manager, previously on secondment from PSA, was transferred permanently to the Library staff in October.
The Library's Performance Pay Guidelines were approved by SOED, and payments, backdated as necessary in accordance with national agreements, were made in November.
The Library's Whitley Council meets regularly to allow representatives of the trade unions to discuss with management matters of common concern.
The Health and Safety Committee now has members representing all of the main staff working areas; it has produced a policy document on alcohol-related problems, and discussed such matters as first aid provision, working with VDUs, and fire procedures.
A ‘Healthcare Forum’ run by the Civil Service Occupational Health Service was held in the Board Room, to give staff information and advice on a variety of health matters.
Grants from the Theodore Stewart Fund were made to Miss R. I. Hope, towards the expenses of her attendance at the VTLS Users' meeting in Uppsala, to Mr W.A. Kelly, in connexion with visits to libraries in what was formerly East Germany, and to Miss R. Wood, who attended workshops and lectures forming part of the Jewish Music Festival in London.
Facing: An Astronomical Rotula, made by the self-taught Banffshire astronomer and instrument-maker James Ferguson.
It shows the moon's state every day of the year, as well as solar and lunar eclipses.
Reduced from 242mm high.