

Training and competence in financial services discussion continues
The three chartered accountant institutes, like other recognised professional bodies such as the Law Society of Scotland, are currently discussing with the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) proposals to implement the recommendations of the MacDonald report on training and competence in the financial services area.
Whilst to date no formal agreement has been reached with SIB, the institutes have accepted that authorisation to carry on investment business will be dependent in the future on some form of proof of competence of those individuals actually engaged in, for example, the giving of investment advice.
This is an important shift away from the concept that a firm is competent to carry out investment business and may be authorised solely on the grounds that its partners have at some time qualified as chartered accountants.
The three institutes of chartered accountants are therefore working together to forward joint proposals to SIB which would satisfy the regulatory authority that those members identified as carrying out investment business are trained and competent in this work.
Many of the skills already possessed by chartered accountants are more than adequately demonstrated in their training experience to date; corporate finance is one such area, as is taxation.
In a number of other areas, and particularly, for example, in the provision of investment advice about packaged products, this is not so clear and SIB is not yet convinced that chartered accountants have obtained and retained the requisite level of knowledge — the discussions on this continue.
It is likely that for new entrants into the financial services regime, whether qualified or not, an initial test of competence will be required — as will be expected from any other financial adviser, whether a solicitor or an individual wishing to join FIMBRA.
The results of these discussions, therefore, could have significant implications for authorised firms and the training needs of their members, who may well be asked to demonstrate not only their proven skills in handling such matters but also the level of their knowledge of the market and the products on offer.
The institutes will keep their members informed of progress but nonetheless ask those interested in financial services to monitor the press and the negotiations with SIB — not just those between SIB and the three bodies of chartered accountants, but with all the independent professional advisers and their respective regulatory bodies.
Rationalisation update
A preliminary presentation of the results of the CCAB questionnaire, explained to members of ICAS by the then president, in February, was made to the directors of CCAB in May 1993.
Whereas the majority of respondents from the six CCAB bodies favoured the principle of rationalisation by means of reduction of the number of bodies, 58 per cent of ICAS respondents did not.
Significantly, when asked whether rationalisation of the profession justified significant compromise by their professional bodies, only 50 per cent of all respondents agreed and 45 per cent actively disagreed.
Specifically, the problem of professional designation in a ‘rationalised’ profession again raised its head.
Responding members of the ACCA, CIMA and CIPFA preferred the option of all members being called chartered accountants, whereas those from the three institutes of chartered accountants indicated that they would have difficulty with this proposition.
The board of CCAB recognised the need for further consideration of the underlying implications of the research results and agreed to establish a small working party under the chairmanship of  immediate past president of the ACCA, its remit being to receive and consider the results and the policy options available, with the aim of reporting back to CCAB in July 1993.
A further progress report will be given thereafter.
In this issue
Details on ASB's FRED6, UITF9, Draft Foreword to UIFT Abstracts, and Foreword to Accounting Standards
Details on APB's revised standard EDs
Information on opportunities in the US
New CA Practitioner Service Technical Bulletin launched
ASB NEWS
Recent proposals from the Accounting Standards Board.
ASB on acquisitions and merger accounting
Covering its proposals for acquisition and merger accounting, the Accounting Standards Board (ASB) has issued a financial reporting exposure draft — FRED6.
The exposure draft aims to confine the use of merger accounting to the relatively small number of cases which are true mergers of two companies and not the takeover of one company by another.
The ASB's proposals build on and develop those of the Accounting Standards Committee published as ED48 in 1990.
The key proposals of FRED6 are as follows:
Acquisition accounting to be used for all business combinations where a party can be identified as having the role of an acquirer, since this method of accounting reflects the application of resources by the acquirer and shows the value of the net assets acquired.
Merger accounting to be restricted to those business combinations where the use of acquisition accounting would not properly reflect the true nature of the combination.
A merger is defined to be a business combination in which, rather than one party acquiring control of another, the parties come together to share in the future risks and benefits of the combined entity.
It is not the augmentation of one entity by the addition of another, but the creation of a new reporting entity from the parties to the combination.
Five criteria must be met before merger accounting may be used.
Disclosure requirements are stipulated for both mergers and major acquisitions to enable users of financial statements to understand the full impact of the new group.
FRED6 was included as an insert in the June issue of CA Magazine.
Further copies are available from the ICAS publications department,
Accounting for operations in hyper-inflationary economies
Clarifying SSAP20, the Accounting Standards Board's Urgent Issues Task Force has issued its ninth consensus (UITF9) Accounting for Operations in Hyper-Inflationary Economics.
SSAP20 Foreign currency translation refers to the potential distortions caused by hyper-inflation when incorporating operations in such economies into consolidated accounts.
The standard has, however, left some uncertainty as to when and how adjustments should be made to cope with this problem.
UITF9 requires adjustments to be made where the distortions caused by the hyper-inflation are such as to affect the true and fair view given by those accounts.
In any event adjustments are required where the cumulative inflation rate over the three years is approaching or exceeds 100 per cent and the operations in the hyper-inflationary economies are material to the group.
The abstract discusses acceptable methods of eliminating distortions.
It is effective for accounting periods ending on or after 23 August 1993, with earlier adoption encouraged.
A copy of the abstract is included as an insert in this month's issue of CA Magazine.
Additional copies are available from the ICAS publications department 
ASB accounting standards authority detailed
Setting out the authority, scope and application of accounting standards, the Accounting Standards Board (ASB) has published its Foreword to Accounting Standards, which also sets out the procedures whereby the ASB issues accounting standards and their relationship to international accounting standards.
The Foreword to Accounting Standards stresses that compliance with accounting standards will normally be necessary in order for the accounts to give a true and fair view.
It is also emphasised that in applying accounting standards it is necessary to be guided by the spirit and the reasoning behind them, as set out in individual standards and in the ASB's Statement of Principles for Financial Reporting.
The foreword draws attention to the commitment by the Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies (including ICAS) to promoting and supporting compliance with the standards by members of its member bodies.
It also sets out the statutory compliance enforcement powers available to the Financial Reporting Review Panel and the Department of Trade and Industry.
The Foreword to Accounting Standards is included as an insert in this issue of CA Magazine.
Draft Foreword to UITF Abstracts
The Accounting Standards Board (ASB) has published for comment an exposure draft of the Foreword to UITF Abstracts explaining the authority, scope and application of the Urgent Issues Task Force (UITF) abstracts issued by the ASB which set out the consensus reached by the UITF on particular issues.
Copies of the exposure draft are included as an insert in this issue of CA Magazine.
More revised standards from the APB
As part of its revisions project of the existing auditing standards and guidelines, the Auditing Practices Board (APB) has issued its second batch of exposure drafts of proposed statements of auditing standards (SASs).
The five drafts cover: objective and general principles governing an audit of financial statements, overall review of financial statements, considering the work of internal audit, the relationship between principal auditors and other auditors, and using the work of an expert.
These exposure drafts reflect the APB's decision to distinguish within SASs between basic principles and essential procedures, with which auditors are required to comply, and other explanatory material.
This is in contrast to the majority of existing pronouncements, which are in the form of guidance throughout and contain no explicitly prescriptive material.
The APB intends to publish all exposure drafts from this revisions project by the end of October 1993.
The deadline for comment for the second batch of exposure drafts is 30 September 1993.
Copies of the exposure drafts are included as inserts in this issue of CA Magazine.
Going West
An open letter from , president of the Association of Chartered Accountants in the United States (ACAUS), to the many who, in the future, may consider opportunities in the US.
Dear fellow chartered accountant,
Thank you for your recent enquiry about ACAUS and opportunities in the United States.
Although they are fewer in the current recession, opportunities still definitely exist in this country.
This brief letter should provide you with some guidance concerning the United States job market and your best way of approaching it.
We will refrain from describing the much publicised problems of the US economy, of public accounting firms in this country, and the related layoffs and hiring freezes at almost every major company — it is assumed you have already heard all that.
As you are probably aware, there are several hurdles that must be overcome in order to successfully enter the UK job market.
If you attend an interview you will almost certainly be asked:
Do you have a US passport or residency permit (commonly known as a ‘Green Card’?)
Do you possess the US Certified Public Accountant (CPA) qualification?
Most Americans have never heard of a ‘Chartered Accountant’ and possession of the US qualification would be a pre-requisite for eligibility for almost any accounting position.
This in turn means passing the US CPA examination and meeting local education and experience requirements.
Since formation in 1978, ACAUS has sought reciprocity of accounting qualifications and have met with success in only a few states to date where foreign accountants are eligible to sit for the CPA examination (examples include California and Illinois).
We continue our drive for recognition of foreign qualifications.
In practice, most accountants moving to the US transfer here with a multi-national (’ Fortune 500’) corporation or an international public accounting firm.
If you plan to move to the US, we strongly encourage you to talk to such an organisation in Scotland.
If you move to the US without a prearranged position, at least ensure that you have a place to stay for your first few months.
Apartment rents in most major cities in the US are astronomical, and hotel costs are virtually out of the question.
In summary, the ideal situation is to be transferred to the US by your employer.
In addition to a guaranteed job, employers usually assist with relocation costs (typically about $3,000 to $5,000).
Failing that, be prepared for a lengthy and frustrating job search.
Despite all the bad news, opportunities do exist in the US.
If you decide to come here, be sure to look up the ACAUS chapter in your city and we will be glad to assist you to the extent we can.
Yours sincerely,
IFAC on post completion review
The financial and management accounting committee of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) has issued an exposure draft — Post Completion Review — of a statement of international management accounting practice.
The exposure draft addresses the process of assessing, ex post, the efficiency and effectiveness of a capital budgeting decision and of the management of its implementation.
The deadline for comments to IFAC is 15 July 1993.
Copies of the exposure draft are available from the ICAS publications department,
Details of EC Seventh Directive options implementation
The EC Seventh Directive on consolidated accounts, published in 1983, has now been implemented in all EC member states.
Details on the implementation in national laws of options in the Directive are contained in a recently published book by the Federation des Experts Comptables Europeens (FEE).
The book provides a review of the Seventh Directive and its implementation in the EC Member States as well as giving background information on its history and contents.
There are also chapters on those areas most affected by the Seventh Directive: harmonisation, equivalence and mutual recognition.
A summary details the implementation of options in the EC countries and there is a comparative overview of the use of the options in the EFTA countries surveyed.
Copies of the book Seventh Directive Options and their Implementation can be obtained, price £65, directly from the publisher:
Directive on the provision of cross-border insurance services
An EC life insurer can now provide insurance in other member states without having to set up a branch or agency in those other states, according to the Insurance Companies (Amendment) Regulations 1993 which came into force on 20 May 1993, giving effect to the Second Life Insurance Directive (90/619/EEC) of 8 November 1990.
However, the degree of liberalisation afforded by the Directive is limited; full freedom to provide insurance on a cross-border or ‘services’ basis only applies where the life insurance contract is entered into by the policyholder on their own initiative; in the case of other (’non-own initiative’) contracts the Directive allows the authorities of the member state into which the insurance is provided to require such services business to be authorised by them.
The UK, which already allows freedom to provide services into its territory, is not taking up the option to require authorisation.
Later this year the DTI will be issuing a consultative document on its proposals for implementing the Third Life Insurance Directive, which is due to come into operation by mid-1994 and which will enable an insurer to offer insurance anywhere in the Community on the basis of a single authorisation in the state where its head office is situated.
Copies of the regulations, price £2.80, and the Directive are available from HMSO.
Taking a good look at company law
The DTI is to set up working groups to examine the scope for change in some of the most complex areas of company law.
Over the years, companies legislation has grown both in volume and complexity and it is questionable as to whether the legislation achieves its aims in the simplest possible way.
The law must be periodically examined to make sure it provides the best possible service to its users.
The working groups will look at particular topics, consider the existing legislation and help prepare a discussion document for wider public consultation setting out the various options for reform.
Following this the results will be developed into specific proposals which will be incorporated in a further consultation paper issued by the DTI.
Areas to be examined include:
Company Voluntary Arrangement,
the potential for reducing the number of requirements to file information at Companies House,
simplifying the law affecting private companies
the law on groups of companies
disincorporation
Section 151 of the 1985 Act which generally limits companies from assisting people to buy shares in them.
There will be representatives from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland on a number of the working groups.
CA Practitioner Service's new Technical Bulletin
Last month saw the launch of a new ICAS publication — Technical Bulletin.
Published every two months and approximately 12 pages in length, it is intended as an ideal means of keeping the practitioners and their staff up to date on topical issues.
Technical Bulletin covers a wide variety of subjects, concentrating mainly on audit, accounting and tax.
Articles in issue one include: the new audit report, salaries or dividends past 5 April 1993, the new national insurance manual, and the draft SORP on charities.
Ideas for new topics are welcome.
Currently available free of charge to members of the CA Practitioner Service, Technical Bulletin will shortly be available to non-members of the service at a cost of £95 per annum.
If you would like to subscribe to Technical Bulletin or would like any further information, please contact   
Clarification on debt restructuring
The Controller of Audit recently became aware that there is some confusion as to whether debt restructuring is ultra vires Scottish local authorities.
Counsel advice has been taken on this issue and it is concluded that debt restructuring is permitted by virtue of paragraph 1(1) (c) of Schedule 3 to the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1975.
The counsel opinion is based on the understanding that debt restructuring involves undertaking new borrowing to repay an existing loan, the object being to relieve the burden of necessary borrowing by replacing loans on less advantageous terms with loans on more advantageous terms and in doing so replacing one liability of the loans fund with another.
Inland Revenue telephone number change
Claims Branch in Bootle, an Executive Office of the Inland Revenue, has installed a new telephone system.
The new switchboard came into effect on 5 July 1993 and the Claims Branch telephone number is now:
Where the extension number is known a new direct dial facility will enable callers to bypass the switchboard and get straight through to the person they wish to speak to.
This can be achieved by dialling: followed by the four digit extension number.
These changes only apply to Claims Branch in Bootle.
The Claims Branch offices in Edinburgh and Worthing are not affected.
Please also note that the North West Tax Offices in St John's House, Bootle are also unaffected by the change.
The telephone number for Tax Offices North West 1–7 is still .
Pensions tracing service
If you have earned pension rights in past employments but have been unable to claim your entitlements because you have lost touch with your pension scheme, then the Occupational Pensions Board's pensions tracing service could provide the missing link.
Set up in 1991, the service has received requests for traces from over 15,000 people and possible pension source has been located in over 90 per cent of cases.
In a recent instance, a sum of over £10,000 was paid out by a scheme following a successful trace.
For further information on this service contact the Occupational Pensions Board on .
Revision of RICS members accounts regulations
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors has recently revised its member's accounts regulations and accountant's report regulations.
These will take effect from January 1994.
Many of the amendments have been introduced to clarify the meaning of the regulations and do not change their scope.
Significant amendments to the accountant's reports regulations include the following:
it is now left to the discretion of the accountant to decide the scope of the inspection necessary to verify that the RICS member's accounting system complies with RICS members' accounts regulation 11;
the accountant is required to extract balances on the clients' ledger accounts at two or more dates — now at least three months apart — and compare the total liabilities to clients with the cash book balance on the client account, and reconcile the cash book balance with the client account balance as confirmed directly to the accountant by the bank or building society;
on the accountant's report form they must state the reason for any difference in the figures at the dates of comparison.
For further details contact the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors 
Participation scheme information
‘Sharing in Success’ is a publicity booklet recently launched by the Treasury, the Department of Employment and the Inland Revenue, designed to promote greater awareness of the potential benefits of financial participation schemes and the statutory incentives that are available to encourage their promotion.
The Government takes the view that by giving employees a direct stake in the ownership and prosperity of the businesses for which they work, employers give their employees greater involvement and are able to focus the enthusiasm and commitment of those employees to their mutual benefit.
The booklet includes contributions by various UK based companies and descriptions of the statutory schemes that they operate are set out, together with schemes that are currently available (such as profit-related pay schemes and employee share schemes) and details of where further information is obtainable from.
It is intended to be a user friendly guide and available to both employers and employees who may be considering whether to establish such schemes.
VAT confidentiality
A Statement of Practice on the question of tax advisers and confidentiality in VAT matters has recently been agreed by Customs and Excise, ICAEW, IOT and the VAT Practitioners Group.
The statement is issued as VAT leaflet 700/47/93 Confidentiality in VAT matters (Tax Advisers) and is available from VAT offices.
COMING EVENTS
Charity conference
Charity accounting is going through a period of rapid and far-reaching change as accountants with charity clients or who are trustees themselves come to terms with the new regulatory procedures introduced by the Charities Act 1992 and the impact of the new SORP2 regulations.
The second national conference for charity accountants provides an opportunity for all those involved in charity financial management, including accountants, advisers with charity clients, treasurers and trustees, to meet other working in the same field, and to examine the new demands and expectations facing charities and the impact of new charity law.
The theme of the conference is ‘accountability’, and topics covered will include management and policy issues, taxation, improving effectiveness and practical accounting.
There is a choice of sessions, as well as specialist advice shops and plenaries, and a range of speakers from leading firms of accountants, charities and other major bodies including the Charity Commission and the Charity Finance Directors' Group.
The second annual charity accountants conference will be held from 20 to 22 September 1993 at the University of Sheffield and is organised jointly by the Directory of Social Change, an educational charity, and Sayer Vincent chartered accountants.
For further information contact , Directory of Social Change ().
ICAS Lanarkshire association dinner
The ICAS Lanarkshire association would like to hear from members who wish to attend its first annual dinner which is to be held at the Silvertrees Hotel in Bothwell on Friday 29 October 1993 at 7 for 7.30pm.
Guest speaker will be , the governor of Barlinnie prison.
Tickets, price £21, are available from  .
Numbers are limited and requests for tickets have to be received by 31 July 1993 and a £10 deposit is required.
Dress is formal and block bookings are available.
REPORTS
Corporate insolvency reform
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland and the Law Society of Scotland held a general discussion group for insolvency specialists in St Andrews on 18–19 May 1993 to address the concern that the current corporate insolvency legislation does not provide a suitable rescue procedure which is quick, easy to use and cost effective.
ICAS has been invited by the Bank of England for its considered views on the subject and as a result a report is being sent to the DTI and to other interested bodies.
Charitable actions
Partners and staff at  offices in Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow raised more than £3,000 for the Cancer Research Campaign by participating in an activity weekend with a difference.
A brave team of 13 members of staff underwent an intensive training programme at Fife Parachute Centre in Errol, Perthshire to take part in a 2,500 ft parachute jump, while 13 other volunteers tackled a 3,553 ft Munro — Shiehallion — just south of Kinlochrannoch.
Organiser  of  Edinburgh office said: ‘Everyone who took part entered into the spirit of the event.
We would hope to make this an annual event for charity.’
Golf News
The Association of Scottish Chartered Accountants in London Golf Club once again held its annual competitions at Denham Golf Club on 8 June 1993.
It was an excellent day with the largest turnout for several years.
The results were as follows:
Library update
Be wise: make use of your Institute's libraries.
The Edinburgh library staff would like to remind users that there are still books on loan under the old manual system.
Please check and return any overdue books to the library.
Students using the libraries are advised that examination papers cannot be borrowed or photocopies but there are sets available for consultation.
A selection of new books added to stock is listed below:
International news
Flying the Scottish accountancy flag in Australia are Murray and Lesley McKay who are in partnership in Perth, Western Australia.
As far as they have been able to check, they believe that they are the only two Scottish CAs in partnership together in Australia, but we would be interested in hearing from anyone who thinks that they might have a claim to that title.
The  McKays qualified and married in Edinburgh and then left to work in London for a short time before travel beckoned and they went to work firstly in Papua New Guinea and then in Lusaka, Zambia.
They have been in Perth now for nine years and in business as McKays for three, providing, as Lesley McKay explained, ‘accounting services to companies that have grown big enough to need an accountant or finance director, but not big enough to afford one full-time’.
She has also helped found the ‘South of the River ICA Success Group’ which is a discussion group for all chartered accountants in our area.
‘We hope it will help practitioners from small practices assist each other with technical and practice management issues’, she said.
We wish them continued success in their work.