

Comment
New magazine for the industry
So, what's so new about Hospitality you might ask?
It has been with us for the past 10 years.
That's certainly true of the title but that is the only feature of the magazine which remains.
This month sees the birth of a new bi-monthly publication for the hotel and catering industry; one which more adequately reflects the new image of the HCIMA.
As we move towards the end of the millennium the Association is increasingly widening its horizons.
Its objectives have not changed — to promote the standards of good management practice and to advance the aims of education and training.
But the way those objectives are achieved must of necessity change.
Our influence is no longer confined to domestic issues.
HCIMA is an international body; part of an international industry with strong representation in Europe with access to the European Parliament, as well as influencing hospitality and tourism throughout the world via our spread of members in over 90 countries and 16 international groups.
HCIMA is today an integral part of an international industry and it needs a magazine which will reflect that status.
So, in future editions, you will find a far greater emphasis on international hospitality management and education issues.
There will be more coverage of what the industry is doing, rather than what the HCIMA is doing, although we will tell you what we, as the professional body of the industry, think about it.
We are in a people business and Hospitality will seek the views of the top people in the industry on a variety of issues — on legislation, management practices, the economy, tourism, education and welfare.
There will be a place for academics to publish their research or forecasts for different sectors of the industry.
Hospitality is the magazine for professional managers in the hotel and catering industry and now reaching all of its senior executives.
I hope you like its new look and find its approach to yours needs to be equally professional.
Jeremy Logie Chief Executive 
INDUSTRY NEWS
Regent returns to London
Regent International Hotels, which was recently acquired by Four Seasons, has returned to London — where it owned the Dorchester for a short while — to open the 309-room, Regent Hotel, Marylebone.
The building, originally opened in 1899 as the Great Central Hotel, was taken over in 1949 by the British Transport Commission as its headquarters.
Now completely restored at a cost of £75 million, the central feature of the hotel is a magnificent atrium, The Winter Garden, which was originally the central courtyard of the building.
General manager of Wolfgang Nitschke who returns to London after a spell as area director for New York and Chicago.
Between 1985–87 he was general manager at The Dorchester, until the company relinquished its management of the property.
‘We will be offering guests and local visitors a range of facilities unequalled in London,’ he said.
‘The hotel features some of the capital's largest bedrooms, the eight storey atrium is a unique focal point and we have a fully equipped health club, a swimming pool and large choice of restaurants and bars.’
A feature on The Regent will be published in a later issue of Hospitality .
Winter Garden atrium
Friendly Guide to Quality
Managing Quality has been published by the HCIMA Quality Working Group, following six months of consultation and research.
The working party was set up as a result of the HCIMA Quality Forum held at the Institute of Directors in April last year.
Managing Quality is designed to provide the hospitality industry with a user-friendly guide to consider the appropriate measure of quality in an organisation.
Whether or not accreditation such as BS5750 is sought, quality assurance systems are important in the hospitality industry as a means of maintaining standards and ensuring consistency of service to customers.
Copies are available from the information office, at Trinity Road, and cost £5 to HCIMA members, £10 to non-members.
CIG re-launched
The Catering Industry Group (CIG) has been relaunched as the Catering Arena.
The new group will welcome old and new members and offer regular opportunities for all sectors of the catering industry to meet and discuss a wide range of topics of interest.
Meetings already arranged for this year include ‘Changes in the wind — the end of the traditional British holiday?’ and ‘The retail and catering consortium’.
Individual membership to the group is £25 per person per year.
For more information contact Peter Backman, chairman, on , or Naomi Arnold, general secretary, on .
Hospitality advisers
A number of senior members of the hospitality industry have been invited to form an editorial panel, which will advise on the content of Hospitality .
The panel, which will meet two or three times a year is: Bob Cotton, PR Director, Gardner Merchant; Neville Dyckhoff, deputy director of catering (support) Metropolitan Police; Michael Finkelman, senior vice president, Hilton International; Mike Ward, catering policy manager, Whitbread Pub Partnerships; Hugh Cade, partner, Touche Ross, GBS Division; and John O'Connor, head of department, Oxford Brookes University.
Breaking Even now on disc
The articulate published in the February/March edition of Hospitality on Breaking Even, has created considerable reader interest.
We regret that there was a typographical error in one of the calculations which may have created a problem.
However, the author, Bodipala Wijeysinghe, has now made the computer disc available to Hospitality readers and it can be obtained from Iris Tworogal at ,, price £10.
Job opportunities in contract sector, says survey
A presentation to college lecturers by the British Hospitality Association's contract catering panel, urged them to point out to students that career opportunities in the sector were excellent.
With a workforce of 91,802, 10,562 outlets serving meals to the value of £763.8 million a year and a turnover of £1,580,000, opportunities ranged across many areas, including, craft, location management, purchasing, marketing, sales, personnel, and design and planning and were available both in the UK and overseas.
The presentation was part of a series given by BHA to launch its latest Contract Catering Survey, which is part-sponsored by Booker Fitch Food Services.
The 760 million meals served by contract caterers in 1992 was the highest ever and an increase of 17 per cent over the previous year, the survey says.
Turnover was up 10 per cent, to £1.5 billion, with 19,000 employees currently undergoing formal training — another record figure.
The growth has come from privatisation of services provided in the public sectors, particularly healthcare and education and from catering for the public.
And while the traditional business base showed a slight decline, from 7,775 to 7,671 outlets, there was still a 12 per cent growth in the number of meals served.
Even so, contract caterers are now providing nearly 55 per cent of meals served in business and industry, a 11 per cent increase over the previous year and the overall number of outlets operated by contractors also grew by one per cent .
Other statistics from the survey showed that the number of employees in the sector has grown by one per cent and the total wages bill of £628 million was a 4.5 per cent increase.
Food and other purchases (£794 million) increased in line with the additional number of meals served.
Coming Events
April
4–5 The International Pizza & Pasta Showcase, at the Harrogate International Conference and Exhibition Centre.
21 Basic Food Hygiene Course, London.
Contact Zoe Jacobs on .
22 Hotel Technology Conference 93, Mayfair Hotel, London.
Cost £75 plus VAT.
Contact Ann Lewington on .
21–28 The International Food Exhibition .
May
10–11 Developing Sustainable Tourism, a two-day conference at the Marriott Hotel, London.
Contact Amanda Wright, IBC Technical Services, on .
10–17 National Wine Week.
25 HCIMA 22nd Annual Luncheon, The London Metropole Hotel,.
Reception 12.30pm for lunch at 1pm.
Contact Fiona Snell MHCIMA on .
26 Basic Food Hygiene Course, London.
Contact Zoe Jacobs on .
Shadowfax looking for middle market niche
Ian Neill FHCIMA, former managing director, Rank Restaurants, and his partner Jonathan Dell MHCIMA, formerly franchise director, Pizza Express, are making plans for a new middle market ethnic group of restaurants.
Operating as Shadowfax Restaurants, the partnership has been together for a number of years, and currently has two Pizza Express outlets in Barnet and Finchley, and part ownership of a pizza restaurant in the West End of London.
Both have wide experience of the middle market business, Ian Neill having also worked for Berni and Pizza Express before taking over Mecca's restaurant division, which was acquired by Rank and then recently sold to Michael Guthrie in a £20m deal.
‘We intend to learn from the mistakes of the larger corporations, rather than copying what other people are doing,’ says Mr Neill.
‘Coincidentally, we both left our previous jobs on the same day, which we have decided is a good omen.
But now that we are free from the constraints of big business, we have a major opportunity to develop our own ideas.
‘Too many companies have been marketing led rather than being motivated by what the customer really wants — which is good, tasty, hot food at a reasonable price.
Instead we have seen the rise of ideas like theme restaurants, where the emphasis has been on the theme and not on the quality of the food.
Large corporations draw up ground plans for restaurants and reduce everything down to a level of mediocrity.
They completely forget about the food quality.
‘There are exceptions, like Pizza Express, which has survived for so long and is still very successful because quality is paramount.
We will be looking for more Pizza Express franchises as part of our expansion plans.’
He believes that the three major influences on the middle market sector in the past 50 years have been the growth of Chinese restaurants in the 1950's, Berni Inns and McDonald's.
The Chinese restaurants and McDonald's are still doing well because they have concentrated on the product.
Berni's problems began, he believes, when they started being influenced by marketing and introducing themes to the properties and designing the menus to match.
‘McDonald's is the source of our future business,’ Jonathan Dell says, ‘as it is training children to eat out.
They get used to the idea and switch to other tastes later in life.’
While remaining guarded about the exact type of operation Shadowfax is considering, the partners are currently looking at sites and expect to open the first one within the year.
‘It will concentrate on one speciality item, which is already available but not being done very well,’ says Mr Dell.
‘It will be a cooked-to-order product, using fresh ingredients with the kitchen on view to the public.’
Masters of Hospitality at Rombalds
Ian Guthrie, proprietor of Ilkley's Rombalds Hotel, is pictured with some of his well-trained staff after being pronounced as Investor in People, the first independent catering business to do so.
Investor in People (IIP) is a Government-sponsored initiative which demands that companies adopt a training philosophy aimed at quality, and allowing all employees to develop their full potential.
In 1991 the hotel won the Yorkshire and Humberside Tourist Board's White Rose Award for Excellence.
Masters of Hospitality — Ian Guthrie (back) is pictured with some of his well-trained staff of the Rombalds Hotel.
Practical Hygiene offer
The closing date for the Croner's Practical Hygiene offer made on the insert in this edition of Hospitality has been extended to May 31.
Industry Matters in Northern Ireland
A Northern Ireland careers week, held to promote opportunities in the hospitality and tourism industry, has been organised by the Province's Hospitality Matters group.
The group, an off-spring of Industry Matters, the industry-education link body of the hospitality and tourism industry, is an advice network for careers in the industry.
An initial working party, made up of representatives of all sections of the industry, was established in conjunction with Industry Matters to address the issues which have led to the perception of the industry as an unattractive career option.
Chris Devlin MHCIMA, chairman of HCIMA Northern Ireland branch and chairman of Hospitality Matters, said: ‘The negative image is largely due to prejudice and ignorance of the many aspects which the modern day industry has to offer.
Hospitality Matters is a driving force, promoting a positive image of our industry to young people — this careers week is a culmination of all our efforts to date.’
Denis Broderick FHCIMA, former president of HCIMA and chief executive of the recently launched Tourism and Hospitality Training Council in Northern Ireland, has also supported the Hospitality Matters initiative since its inception.
Pictured at one of the group's Insight into the Hospitality and Tourism Industry days are:(standing l-r) Michael McQuillan, Manor House Catering; Frances Bickerstaff, Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education; Jack Creighton, director, Industry Matters;(seated l-r) Denis Broderick FHCIMA; and Chris Devlin MHCIMA.
NEWS BRIEFS
The Association's library would like to thank Melvyn Green OBE, FHCIMA for the books that he has donated.
The books are How to buy your own hotel by Miles Quest;Introduction to management in the hospitality industry by Thomas F Powers;The business condominium by David Clurman;A guide to cook chill catering by Lewis Napleton;The successful sales presentation by Jan Wage;How to sell banquets ; and Profitable hotel reception both by Derek Taylor.
The library would very pleased to receive other unneeded books from readers.
The British Executive Service Overseas (BESO) is looking for volunteers with skills to work overseas, training people in the Third World, particularly chefs.
Assignments can last from two weeks to six months.
For more information contact The Director, BESO,,.
(See page 16 of Hospitality March 1992 for more details).
Are you one of 1800 graduates and HNDs who completed a relevant course in 1989 at a university, polytechnic or college?
Have you received a gold questionnaire from the School of Hotel and Catering Management, Oxford Polytechnic?
If you haven't received a questionnaire, or you know somebody in that category, please would you contact Kate Purcell or Jarlath Quinn at the School of Hotel and Catering Management, Oxford Brookes University,,.
The Portfolio Group has announced the opening of Portfolio Asia/Pacific based in Hong Kong.
Under the direction of Ron Hilvert, former vice president of Human Resources for both Hyatt and Hilton International, the company is already servicing extensive recruitment needs throughout the Far East.
The office has been set up in partnership with FM Recruitment, the London-based financial management specialists.
A bleak picture of Government higher education policy has emerged from an opinion survey of the heads of new universities (former polytechnics) and colleges of higher education.
Seventy three per cent of them believe that inadequate resources are a key issue facing higher education, according to the survey, which was conducted by Gallup and commissioned by NATFHE, the university and college lecturers' union.
The survey also found that 74 per cent of the heads of institutions are not confident of the Government's ability to develop and implement a coherent and successful higher education policy.
But opinions were equally divided over the Government's recent record.
An Alumni Association is being planned by the School of Hospitality Studies at Thames Valley University.
The Association will provide past students with a chance to renew old friendships, make new contacts or build up a strong, useful network within the catering industry.
Victor Ceserani MBE, FHCIMA, head of the School of Hospitality Studies (1964–80), has accepted an invitation to become the Association's first president.
Past students are asked to write to Professor David Foskett, School of Hospitality Studies, Thames Valley University,, giving their full name (nee) and address, the name of the course studies, the year they left and their current position and company.
The first 100 students to make contact with TVU will be able to join the committee and attend the inaugural dinner.
The final year Hotel and Catering Management degree students at the University of Huddersfield are compiling a number of reports focusing on the domestic hotel market in various international locations.
The reports aim to be the most up-to-date, in-depth assessments of eight domestic hotel industries, identifying the dominant hotel groups and consortia.
Analysis will cover the main hotels and consortia for the country, environmental factors and future projections to the year 2000.
Each report is available separately or as a disclosed collection.
For further information contact Matthew Shelley, c/o Liz Hart, University Library, The University of Huddersfield,,.
Lord Archer relaunches Coburg Resort Hotel
The Rt Hon Lord Archer is pictured (second right) unveiling the plaque after he officially relaunched the Coburg Resort Hotel, Bayswater, London.
The relaunch was attended by members of the local business community, Resort's City advisers and representatives of the hotel and travel industry.
Also pictured are (l-r) John Levis, operations director; Tony Jarvis, general manager; and Robert Field, managing director.
NVQ first for McDonald's
McDonald's is the first major company in the fast food sector to be approved by the Hotel & Catering Training Company (HCTC) to operate NVQs.
The company will initially be piloting NVQs at level 1 in twelve of its restaurants in the UK; three in the South, three in the Midlands and six in the North.
If the pilot is a success, McDonald's will be looking to operate the system countrywide — currently that's 470 — by the end of 1995.
The company will also be looking at levels 3 and 4, so that supervisors and managers can also take part.
New workplace regulations launched
The Health & Safety Commission (HSC) has published a guide to the new workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992, which came into force at the beginning of 1993.
The regulations implement in Great Britain the European Community Workplace Directive.
They complete a series of six new sets of health and safety regulations which implement EC Directives.
The regulations, which go a long way towards updating the older health and safety laws, cover a wide range of basic health, safety and welfare issues.
They will apply to almost all workplaces.
Workplace Health, Safety and Welfare — Approved Code of Practice is available from HMSO or through booksellers.
House rules were displayed in every bedroom in the 1920s.
My Kinda Award
The ISO ISO Quality Assurance Register has awarded the My Kinda Town franchising operations BS5750 accreditation for the ‘design, development and international franchising of American theme restaurants’.
Internationally, BS5750 equates to the standards required for ISO 9001, which also forms part of My Kinda Town's award.
Managing director Peter Webber FHCIMA says: ‘Achieving BS5750/ISO 9001 registration is a recognition of our expertise in this field.
I understand that we are the first company in the catering industry to gain BS5750/ISO 9001 for franchising.
Our appeal to potential national and international franchises is now obviously greatly increased.’
Hotel management training survey
The Worshipful Company of Innholders is keen to promote further development of management skills within the hotel industry.
In conjunction with the Master Innholders with whom it is closely associated, the Worshipful Company has commissioned Gayton Consultancy to undertake a survey to assess the current levels of training received by management.
As a result of the survey, the Innholders hope to learn the requirements of management and supervisory staff for further training to assist in the development of their careers and to highlight any skills shortages that exist.
Boiled milk in the coffee?
Crieff Hydro Hotel, Perthshire, is this year celebrating its 125th birthday.
To celebrate, it has produced The Hydro of Yesteryear , a history which makes fascinating and, in part, highly amusing reading.
The ‘Directions for Waiting’ and ‘House Rules’are two from which it is difficult to move on.
Modern F&B managers would delight at the instructions to waitresses to ‘only half fill the Cups with Coffee (unless asked to fill them up) and add Boiled Milk but do not quite fill the Cups’, or, for dinner, ‘Begin at Right end of each Division and with a Bill of Fare held in front of each Person, at each course, ask, naming the article, what they will have.’
Guests were informed that Accounts would be rendered weekly and ‘Visitors for less than a week are charged 1 shilling per day extra’ and that the Swimming Pool opened ‘Daily at hours which can be ascertained from the office.’
Lights were lowered in bedrooms at 11.15pm.
The book is available from local shops in the Crieff area at £9.95 or direct from the hotel for £11.50 including post and packing.
Crieff Hydro,.
Calling all food scientists
The Council of Science and Technology Institutes has been awarded a contract by the Employment Department to commission a major six-month study into the employment pattern of scientists.
To supervise this jointly-funded project, a Task Force has been established, under the chairmanship of Sir Norman Lindop DL CChem FRSC, with representation from the professional science bodies, the Royal Society, employers and employees, as well as the Employment Department, Department for education, Office of Science and Technology, National Council for Vocational Qualifications and SCOTVEC.
The consultants LMG Associates Ltd, working in collaboration with Sheffield Hallam University, have been appointed to conduct a comprehensive mapping exercise and initial analysis of job function of all scientists, of all disciplines and at all levels of qualification.
Statistics will be obtained on the employment pattern, and functional responsibility of scientists in industry, commerce, teaching and the public service.
The HCIMA has been asked to alert scientists working within the hospitality industry to this project.
However, it is very difficult to locate such specialists individually.
So if you are a scientist working in this industry, please contact Linda Goodman, LMG Associates Ltd,, in order to insure the survey is a fair representation of where scientists are employed and the jobs they do.
Please alert your science colleagues to do this survey.
Amsterdam's re-cut diamond
Alan Sutton visits the luxuriously restored, Amstel Hotel
The timing of the re-opening of the highly luxurious Amstel Inter-Continental Hotel, Amsterdam, is, says general manager John Serbrock, just right.
‘The public's attitude to wealth is changing.
It is becoming fashionable once again to be seen to be successful,’ he says.
‘It is all part of the psychological phenomenon of coming out of recession.
People talked themselves into it and now they talking their way out.’
With the Royal Suite commanding 3400 guilders (£1260) a night and rack rates across the other 79 rooms ranging between 700 guilders to 925 guilders (£260-£342), such optimism is vital.
But within the first few months of opening, the hotel was on target and, if anything, had underestimated its weekend business.
The Mirror Room
Much of the weekend business may be the curious coming to see the result  of the $40 refurbishment which closed the 125 year-old hotel for two years.
The Amstel, according to Mr Serbrock, is regarded almost mystically in Holland.
If this is true, it seems an expensive way of satisfying one's curiosity.
But while room rates are high, they are no higher than those of some London hotels.
In fact, John Serbrock, who has come to the Amstel from the Conrad at Chelsea Harbour, reckons that they would be 10–15 per cent higher if the hotel was in London.
And, certainly, no can argue that the Amstel is not the last word in luxury.
Amstel's Health Club.
The former 111 rooms of the hotel were reduced to 79 larger suites and executive rooms.
All are served by butlers, one to each floor.
‘The butlers come from many different backgrounds,’ John Serbrock says, ‘but they are all what I call ‘Can do’people.
Any need a guest, has will be met.’
The highest levels of service are paramount.
There are 2.5 staff for each room in the hotel and the rooms are equipped with an assortment of technology, including personal fax machines, VCRs and CD.
The remote control television carries several international channels, including Japanese, received via the hotel's satellite link to Japan.
It also claims to be the first European hotel with a direct connection to Reuter, offering 24 hour updates on world and financial news.
Print-outs are provided to guests who wish to keep abreast of particular events, but should a major story break during the night, the information is slipped under every guest room door.
Whilst all of the guest rooms are furnished to the highest levels — model rooms were built for every member of staff to comment on and the opening was delayed by several months until things were felt to be completely right — the Amstel's jewel in the crown is its Royal Suite.
It drips with gold plate, including the ceiling mounted shower head, and includes a lounge, dining room seating 12, kitchen, hall, two toilets and two separate bedrooms, each with bath.
Where possible, some of the hotel's original furniture has been retained after being refinished in France.
And one of the major features of the old building, the central staircase, has also been kept, affording guests an imposing view as they first enter the marble foyer of the building.
La Rive restaurant has been doubled in size and is served by an award winning kitchen, designed by British consultant Ken Winch, and said to be seven years ahead of anything else in Holland.
It also has a magnificent wine cellar, with around 3000 bottles, stored in cupboards which have the temperature controlled by computer to ensure that every variety is held at the correct level.
Adjacent to La Rive is the Wine Room, a private dining area with a large central table and bottles stored around the walls.
The hotel's sommelier records the origins of the wines in a large book, where guests can add their own comments and those who select a special vintage from one of the great chateau have their names inscribed in copper.
Chef Robert Kranenborg has a Chef's Table in the kitchen, where a small number of guests are invited to dine on special occasions to watch the brigade at work.
Unlike so many hotel kitchens, which are completely enclosed, La Rive's has the unusual feature of being surrounded by windows, with a door on to a magnificent herb garden, where guests can only go at the invitation of the chef.
The restaurant is an important part of the hotel's attraction, says John Serbrock, as the food and beverage operation is very important for local business.
In fact, since the hotel opened last September, the restaurant has been fully booked at weekends.
‘The Amstel is totally geared toward the top end of the market.
It is in the same league as other Landmark hotels, such as the Grande in Paris or the Carlton in Cannes.
And personal service is a priority.
‘My task is to fill the hotel but make sure that we live up to the high expectations guests associate with this sort of establishment.
The only way you can do that is the old fashioned way of taking care of your guests in the best possible manner.’
The Grand Hall
A typical Executive Suite
PEOPLE
Sri Lanka salutes HCIMA accolade
HCIMA has formally recognised the Diploma Course run by the International Hotel School, Sri Lanka.
The announcement was toasted recently by the faculty, l-r: Jehan Karunaratne, lecturer; Devika Edirisinha, senior lecturer; Eardley Edirisinha AHCIMA, principal; Professor Chandana Jayawardena MHCIMA, managing director; and Kushan Dharmawardena MHCIMA, vice principal.
Moves & Appointments
Roy Munday FHCIMA has been appointed managing director of The Cottage Loaf Company.
He was formerly sales and marketing director of Stuart Cabeldu Catering Group.
Ram Pershad FHCIMA, chairman, Ambassador Hotel, Sujan Singh Park, New Delhi, and chairman of HCIMA India, has been reelected as president of the Hotel & Restaurant Association of Northern India, New Delhi.
Hilton International has given additional operational responsibilities to Michael Finkleman FHCIMA, senior vice president — Western Europe, Mediterranean and Africa.
He will now be responsible for Hilton's five properties in Turkey and three in Israel.
John Sartain MHCIMA has been appointed general manager of Chichester Resort Hotel.
He joined Resort Hotels a year ago.
Michael Thaw MHCIMA has been appointed general manager of Oulton Hall, Leeds, opening in June of this year.
Flight Lieutenant Gareth Williams MHCIMA, formerly training officer at the RAF School of Catering, Aldershot, has been promoted to Squadron Leader and has just taken over as Officer Commanding Catering Squadron, at RAF St Athan, Barry, Wales.
Ruari Mackenzie MHCIMA has been appointed to head up Moray Leisure Ltd, the company developing a £4.2m leisure centre in Elgin.
John Anglos MHCIMA, former managing director and general manager of Astir Hotels, is now secretary general of the Greek National Tourism Organisation.
Paul Burley MHCIMA, operations director, Vienna Group of Hotels, has been nominated to the position of chairman for the South East Region of British Junior Chamber (BJC).
David Rae MHCIMA, ex warrant officer class 1, has recently left the Army Catering Corps after serving 25 years.
He has joined Commercial Catering Group in its offshore division in the North Sea.
Richard Gosling MHCIMA has moved from food and beverage manager, The Blue Waters Beach Hotel, Antigua, to assistant food and beverage manager, The Holiday Inn Golden Mile, Hong Kong.
Richard Gosling
Ruari Mackenzie
Obituary
We regret to announce the death of Mabel Adams FHCIMA who died recently at the age of 92.
She had been one of the founder members of the Institutional Management Association in Yorkshire and later involved herself additionally in the Hotel & Catering Institute and always kept in contact with the professional association throughout her career.
Mabel studied at Battersea Polytechnic between 1919 and 1922 and continued her professional education at King's College, London, and the National Training College.
She concerned herself with standards of education, participating in this Association's examining activities.
The Association's condolences have been sent to her family.
interview
MEMBERS IN PROFILE
Building a magic kingdom for Hilton International
by Alan Sutton
Michael Hirst FHCIMA, Chairman and Chief Executive, Hilton International
Michael Hirst, FHCIMA has spent his whole life in the hospitality business.
But although he now runs a hotel chain with 160 properties in 47 countries, he has never actually managed a hotel.
In fact, if the truth be known, he would really have liked to have been Walt Disney!
‘I really enjoy spectacles and like to make a grand occasion of everything,’ he says.
‘Whatever we do in this business, it's all a bit of a show.
I look at hotels as a theatrical experience, with the staff entertaining the guests as well as caring for them.’
If that sounds like the sort of utterance one might expect from your typical entrepreneur, it is probably because Michael Hirst is a great believer in the art.
It was his own early instincts as a risk taker which first put him on the path that was ultimately to lead to him becoming chairman and chief executive of Hilton International.
A graduate of Westminster Hotel School,(where he was winner of the HCIMA's premier student prize, the Sir Francis Towle Award) he was among the first intake in Forte's executive management trainee programme.
The scheme took graduates through all departments in the company, and he worked as an assistant in the garde manger at the Cafe Royal, where he met fellow trainee, Rocco Forte; the Hunting Lodge Restaurant in Regent Street; Jule's Bar in Jermyn Street; and the buying department at Walnut Tree Walk, where he made Aunt Mary's Apple Pies and jam doughnuts.
But while he was there, he also carried out some private research into the potential for amusement machines in pubs which the government had just legalised.
He wrote to the managing director of THF's leisure division, suggesting that the company could make a lot of money by putting the machines into its own outlets.
The result was an invitation to London and the offer of a job as assistant to the managing director, with the responsibility of overseeing a project to install amusement machines in the company's pubs and restaurants.
‘The need today for high levels of entrepreneurial skills in this industry is greater than ever,’ he says.
‘The industry has come of age and while professional management skills are imperative, you can only take training so far.
In the very best hotels it is those who have an instinct for the business who will stand out.
You see it in the best maitre d'or concierge.
They can walk into a room and see instantly if something is out of place or if a guest has a need.’
A hotel is probably one of the most complex businesses operating in the modern world, with high levels of information technology, alongside complicated engineering systems and the full customer service aspects.
The skills required in pulling all of those functions together is immense, he says.
He believes that the value of such skills cannot be over-rated in an industry which has become more and more competitive and increasingly important to the economies of the countries in which Hilton operates.
‘When I first started almost 30 years ago, hotels were quite parochial businesses,’ he says.
‘But today Hilton rates alongside major international brands, like BMW or Coca Cola, which is major positioning in marketing terms.’
The industry is also getting a lot more respect from outside than it used to, Mr Hirst believes.
While many hoteliers get upset because successive  governments appear to ignore the industry's needs and say that it can look after itself, he regards that as a compliment.
‘As long as we don't have obstacles put in our way we are self-sufficient,’ he says.
‘There are areas where larger energies could be brought to play, of course, particularly in promoting tourism, and it would be helpful if our Government could see fit to help as those in other countries do.
‘But taking an international overview, I am not over-critical of the UK.
In many parts of the world there are big restrictions on the way we trade, but the industry here has not been preventing from growing and we have a good environment in which to do business.
In fact, the industry may even have outgrown demand, as hotels do mirror the economy.
‘But,’ he says, confidently, ‘even though we may be one of the first to be affected by cut backs in the economy, we will also be the first out.’
From his early days as a trainee manager to chairman of the board, Michael Hirst hopes and believes that his operating style has not changed.
He would, he says, much prefer to have hands on the business, rather than be sitting behind a desk.
But with a constant round of hotel openings — Hilton has opened 25 properties in the past three years and has 15 in development — he doesn't actually get a lot of time behind the desk.
Each operating region is visited once every three months and in between, he visits other countries to look at specific projects.
For Hilton International, all the world's a stage.
And for the chairman and chief executive, every day sees the start of another show.
The Glasgow Hilton opened at the end of 1992
The ladder to the top
From Westminster Hotel School, Michael Hirst joined Forte in 1964 as an executive trainee, where he worked in several departments of the organisation.
He joined the leisure and later the entertainments division, where he later became director, with responsibility for such venues as Talk of the Town, Belle Vue Zoo, Blackpool, Eastbourne and Yarmouth piers and a caravan park.
He later moved on to head up the restaurants and banqueting division.
He joined Ladbroke Holidays in 1976 as operations director and two years later became joint assistant managing director, Ladbroke Hotels, Holidays, Entertainment and Catering.
Between then and 1987 he helped grow the business from three hotels to 63, becoming managing director of the hotel division in 1985.
Ladbroke acquired Hilton International in 1987 and he was appointed chief executive in 1990.
Going Green
Kate McDermid looks at the industry's environmental initiatives
Catering may be a small-scale polluter but it is widespread.
And travel and tourism, while still not major polluters in the ‘smokestack industry’ mould, are increasingly being seen as bearing a particular responsibility for environmental improvements.
As Wolfgang Momberger of Steigenberger Hotels neatly put it in the Review of the World Travel & Tourism Environmental Research Centre (WTTERC), published to coincide with last year's Rio Earth Summit, ‘We move, feed and accommodate hundreds of millions of people around the globe every year.
A good environment is at the core of our business.
We must ensure that air, water, landscape and heritage are protected.
We must make sure that our growth is environmentally compatible.
This is not only right, it is sound business.’
While the WTTERC, based at Oxford Brookes University and anxious to hear from more UK hotels with active environmental programmes*, continues its task of establishing a research base, identifying problem areas and probing ways of improving environmental practice, how bad an environmental offender is this industry?
Soap, candles and other sundries are collected at Botley Park Hotel for Romanian orphanages.
According to Bob Rouse of specialist hotel consultancy Business Green, the industry's position ‘well down the chain of environmental polluters’ has caused an unfortunate piecemeal approach, driven by the need for instant solutions rather than the long-term commitment required, with initiatives mostly those of large companies.
While ultimately hoping for a unified effort which reaches the smaller operator, he welcomes the global approach of the WTTERC — the sheer volume of the business produces, he says, enormous opportunity for environmental gain.
With 127 million employees plus billions of consumers, the fast-growing industry is ‘up to its eyeballs in people’ who can influence as well as be influenced.
‘On a worldwide basis, there are about 5.3 billion sleeper nights per annum.
Hopefully most of these people wash in the morning and use a shower (those who don't are probably compensated for by those who take baths)…5.3 billion showers equals an annual consumption of something like 160 billion gallons of water a year.
The fitting of non-aerated or aerated low-flow shower heads could halve that consumption without loss of amenity to the consumer.’
Looking at the world's 20 million bedrooms, he also estimates that replacing incandescent light bulbs with compact fluorescents would not only save two thirds of the energy needed to produce the same amount of light but would, over the 5–10 year lifespan of the compact, keep out of the atmosphere 100 million tons of CO2.
He points, too, to the ‘gross overheating’ of many hotels whereas modern boiler systems and local sectional control insulation can produce savings of up to 35 per cent, and to the fact that recycling one glass bottle from a hotel bar can light a 60W bulb for four hours.
‘There are many opportunities for conservation in hotels such as noise reduction, improvement of air quality, the non-consumption of unsustainable products such as hardwoods, use of more efficient vehicle transportation and less of it, preferred cooking methods and significantly better insulation.
A hotel is only a house multiplied up which is one of the reasons why it offers such a good opportunity to demonstrate to people at large what can be achieved.
There is, of course, much more to the   environmental story than low-flow shower heads.
Clive Gordon runs The Environment and Development Company, chairs HCIMA's working group on an environment British Standard (BS5750) now being piloted and is preparing a guide on how to write an environmental policy (available through HCIMA later this year).
he believes that the issues have been oversimplified and that, for example, caterers should start thinking hard about how the food they sell is produced.
‘Not every hotelier can plant trees but everyone can ask questions about their food.
Sourcing it would be attractive to consumers.
It would be good to know, for example, where a restaurant's beef come from.
A lot is imported into the UK from South America where, particularly for the beefburger industry, the cattle are reared on land derived from burning down forests.’
The inevitable cynic's view that an environmental improvement is a useful marketing tool — albeit one which has to be used carefully — is an increasingly respectable one.
Bob Rouse quotes a recent American survey which showed travellers would spend 8.5 per cent more on products provided by environmentally responsible suppliers.
His own UK version last year produced a figure of 5 per cent.
And the newly-launched International Hotels Environment Initiative (IHEI), one of two projects HCIMA is currently assisting, stresses the business case for good environmental practice in hotels.
Its 200-page Environmental Management for Hotels: The Industry Guide to Best Practice , to be launched on Mar 21, points out that energy conservation measures pay for themselves through cost saving and hence improve the business' competitiveness; that the pressure is on worldwide to demonstrate commitment to the sustainable development of tourism; that staff will want to work for companies with good environmental practices; that concern for the environment is shared by an increasing number of those involved in hotels; and that a good track record in the field helps when developing new ventures or projecting a brand image.
The manual (RRP £80) began life at Inter-Continental Hotels when the group's then chief executive, John Van Praag, well aware, among other things, of the impact of the international traveller's habit of leaving lights on and of the chemicals used in a 500-bedroom hotel's laundry, noticed a huge variation in environmental behaviour.
‘Some were indifferent, some were trying,’ he  recalls.
He produced a manual for internal use, including a three-monthly monitoring system and general managers' bonuses tied to implementation, and sent it to his competitors.
‘I invited them to use anything they wanted to and to let me know if they could improve on it.
Many were supportive.’
At the suggestion of the Prince of Wales and encouraged by leading environmentalist Jonathan Porritt, he contacted the Prince of Wales Business Leaders' Forum, an international network now in its third year of aiming for global business success through good corporate citizenship and sustainable development.
The IHEI, featuring 11 international hotel groups and two million hotel bedrooms and now hoping to attract more, was born.
The manual's sections take each aspect of a hotel operation in turn and give recommendations for action.
It includes plentiful case studies, lists international organisations available for further advice and is designed to allow hotels to draw up individual environment action plans.
Wendy Twist, IHEI programme manager, calls it ‘a user-friendly, illustrated, living document, a working took to help hoteliers develop their own working methods…
If the manual achieves one thing, it will be to increase the dialogue about issues between staff, suppliers, guests and local authorities.’
Add John Van Praag: ‘Most environmental groups are good at signalling the problems but not at implementing any solutions.
With this, hundreds of solutions are being kicked round the world and that's why I like it.’
Winners of the Considerate Hoteliers Award scheme received their accolades from Deputy Manager of Westminster, Cllr Angela Hooper.
BS7750, the British Standard for environmental management systems now being piloted, will inevitably have a marketing role to play, too.
As the BSI's Chris Sheldon, says: ‘The challenge for many companies is that a new aspect of business life, the environment, is being entered on to the balance sheet for the first time.
Whether or not they consider it appropriate to enter the European Eco audit systems when it appears, using the new standard will certainly give a company (and its other clients and audiences) confidence in the knowledge that they're tackling environmental concerns in a systematic and integrated way.’
HCIMA has been working closely with ARA Services to see how the standard can apply to catering and John Sharpe FHCIMA, the company's quality development director, admits that contract caterers, unburdened by the extra difficulties caused by owning premises, are perhaps better suited to the concept than other sectors and will increasingly be asked in tender documents about their approach to BS7750 and its quality assurance forerunner 5750.
By January 1994, he hopes for accreditation at six ARA sites.
The company already applies its US parent's ‘Earthsense’ creed which has been spreading its ‘reduce, re-use and recycle’message for several years (thousands of US freshmen are not given an Earthsense re-usable beaker at the beginning of their college careers in the hope of steering them away from disposables).
BS7750, with 18 fairly rigid sections, is tougher — Clive Gordon wants to see specific catering-geared guidelines on  how to use the standard.
‘It must be comprehensible and easy to use.’
John Sharpe selected his six pilot sites with care.
‘They had to be clients — National Power and PowerGen, for example— who were already very environmentally aware.
Not everyone is going to be interested — if you're a bank, the most you can do is recycle paper.’
ARA, with its clients' co-operation, can do more than that.
It serves 38 million vending cups a year, most of which have been ending up in bins.
‘A company called Sav-A-Cup () is now collecting cups and recycling them into coat hangers.
The only alternative is a china cup and in Holland, all new vending machines going out mow must be able to take one.’
Elsewhere, the company is persuading people to take just one paper napkin instead of the traditional handful (usage is down by 40 per cent at one US example) and asking them to help themselves to just as many vegetables as they think they'll realistically eat.
An analysis of food waste at one of the UK British Standard pilot sites produced a figure of 15 tons a year, including non re-usable waste such as bones and potato peelings in food preparation.
‘Once that sort of analysis is made, then targets can be set which is what this is all about.
The new angle is sitting in front of a client who specifies we maintain six choices right to the end of service.
That can generate a lot of waste.
The debate is between offering sufficient choice and the morality of waste.’
The BS project has meant more probing into clients' energy management control.
‘Few clients can give us a breakdown but historically we've burnt up a lot of fuel.
It has been known for caterers to come in at 8am, turn all the ovens on and not use them for three hours.’
Suppliers are also being tactfully asked about their packaging.
‘We're doing them a favour because legislation will catch up with them in the end.
Dishwater fluids are probably the biggest containers to arrive in the kitchen.
In Germany, the supplier comes back to get the empty containers; here, we chuck them out.
A lot of this will only happen when the law changes.’
Meanwhile, John Sharpe hopes that others will follow one ARA client which, as part of a move to create a smaller-scale working atmosphere and not generate plastic cups, has specified no vending machines at its new head office.
Instead, there will be small kitchens and ‘tea points’, also known as kettles.
* Dr Rebecca Hawkins, Senior Researcher, WTTERC, Oxford Brookes University, OCTALS,,.
Canadian Hotels go green and save cash
CANADIAN PACIFIC HOTELS & RESORTS
WE'RE THINKING GREEN
The Royal York Hotel, Toronto is saving over $260,000 a year in waste removal costs by compacting, and where possible recycling, its garbage.
And an additional $200,000 has been cut from its annual bills by fixing leaky steam pipes.
At its sister hotel, L'Hotel, also in Toronto, $25,000 was saved in one year when it swapped its 40W fluorescent tubes for 30W tubes; the Hotel Vancouver has installed a computer to monitor and control energy use throughout the building and received a $19,000 rebate from the power company in one month; and the Hotel Macdonald, Alberta, is saving $1000 a month on waste collection.
All are part of the Canadian Pacific Hotels and Resorts chain, which, since the introduction of its Green Programme in 1990, has been making enormous cash savings while contributing widely to Canada's environmental policy.
The programme is the responsibility of director of communications and environmental affairs, Ann Checkley, who told Hospitality how it began.
‘We carried out a wide reaching survey in every department and among all grades of staff in our 90 hotels in Canada and North America,’ she said.
‘It looked at practices over waste disposal, housekeeping, in the kitchen, the laundry, the offices — in fact right across the company and asked very detailed and specific questions.
‘It was important to involve our employees and one of the interesting factors to emerge was that 88.8 per cent of them said they would be proud to work for a company with an environmental policy.’
The result was the setting up of a 16 point Green Plan.
As well as the more obvious things like reducing energy costs and recycling where possible, the community is  benefiting from the programme.
A charitable organisation called Second Harvest receives unused food which would otherwise become solid waste, and other charities take soaps from the hotels.
It has also produced the Green Partnership, a 12-step programme implemented by the hotels, which guides them through a series of initiatives to make the properties more environmentally friendly.
Guests participate through the introduction of ‘blue boxes’ in bedrooms, into which they are encouraged to throw recyclable waste.
Each hotel has an environmental committee made up of staff and management, looking at new ideas and the company has started to win environmental awards.
‘The whole idea very quickly snowballed,’ says Ann Checkley, who soon found herself travelling to other organisations with CPR's ideas.
Among them was the Prince of Wales Initiative, in England, where she was recently invited to give a presentation.
‘The most important thing about the Prince of Wales Initiative is that it gives the opportunity for other industries to share their knowledge of environmental protection,’ she says.
‘The catering industry needs things like industrial cleaners for dishwashers which are phosphate free, for instance, and if we can speak to the suppliers as an industry, rather than as individuals, we have more power of persuasion.’
Ann Checkley
Setting an example…
•ITT Sheraton : an inch thick manual of good practice; initiatives ranging from tree planting to voluntary donations from customers matched by the hotels and given to local conservationists.
•Ramada : expanded corporate to include environmental responsibility in 1990, covering 120 hotels, 40 countries and 28,000 employees, all challenged to initiate operational changes to improve performance in waste recycling, energy conservation and water conservation/management.
Some of the many changes include replacing existing lighting with low watt bulbs, using solar energy, introduction of low-flow shower heads, use of salt water in lavatories in some areas, replacement of disposable crockery with china and glassware and paper napkins with linen, promotion of draft rather than bottled beer, a purchasing policy favouring recyclable packaging.
•Marriott : headquarters alone recycles 400 tons of paper, 35,000lbs of aluminium, 90 tons of cardboard, 42 tons of glass bottles and nearly 30,000lbs of polystyrene.
•Steigenberger Hotels , Germany: tactfully explains to guests the cost of energy and detergent in washing towels daily and invites them to re-use — if willing.
•Westminster Council , London: Considerate Hoteliers programme in which hoteliers work together to improve their approach to environmental practice and, now, Considerate restaurateurs, tackling interior and exterior appearance of premises, recycling, ‘greening’ buildings with plants and flowers, providing no-smoking areas and controlling noise and cooking smells.
Both schemes include an annual awards event and regular newsletters.
The following examples are from the database held by the World Travel & Tourism Environmental Research Centre, Oxford Brookes University:
•Botley Park Hotel and Country Club , near Southampton, Hampshire: undertook environmental audit in conjunction with local authority and, in 1991, issued policy statement recognising environmental responsibility and pledging long-term commitment.
Among other efforts, the hotel recycles paper, using proceeds to plant an orchard containing fast disappearing traditional varieties of apple, sends candles and soaps to charities operating in developing countries, recycles bottle and donates proceeds to charity, is researching ways of recycling kitchen waste, has minimised the environmental impact of its golf course, has bought energy-saving technology such as timer switches and has discovered that 70 per cent of its guests would be more likely to return as a result of its environmental practices.
•Dusit Hotels and Resorts , Thailand (eight hotels): has planted one tree for each of its hotel rooms, separates and recycles waste, uses unbleached and undyed cotton for sheets and towels in new hotels, has installed silver reflects, lowering the number of light bulbs used by half; uses solar panels for hot water supply, has fitted water flow regulators in taps and showers and has introduces a ‘wet-down, soap-up and rinse-off’ campaign to promote water conservation, sponsors environmental seminars and is now initiating a ‘green wing’scheme — a wing of guest rooms in every hotel converted to an eco-friendly environment, to be monitored over two years to see how energy consumption compares with standard rooms.
•Laguna Beach resort , Thailand (when complete, will include four five-star hotels, golf course, shopping/entertainment complex) 1000 acre site with six salt water lagoons and three km of beach: originally this highly polluted abandoned tin mine was identified as devoid of all tourism potential but has been turned into a profitable, attractive tourist resort managed to strict environmental criteria.
•Royal Hayman Hotel , Great Barrier Reef, Australia: redeveloped by new owners within context of an area of extreme natural beauty.
Features include a sound-proofed power station, water desalination plant producing all island's water needs from seawater/rainwater, staff village with voluntary conservation groups, and, in the hotel, underground service tunnels to minimise pollution hazards and solar-powered water systems.
Resort, according to one report, has been blended into the natural landscape ‘almost to the point of camouflage’.
•Sukothai Hotel , Thailand: low-rise building using native Thai species and landscaping outside, local sources and crafts inside.
Live orchid plants used rather than imported cut flowers, full recycling programme includes selling unused food to local farmers and wrapping goods in paper, if necessary, rather than plastic.
in person
It's time for women in this industry
says David Coubrough
‘Equality is a trendy buzz word, an empty promise’— who says?
A recent survey of 50 management experts who's conclusions have just been published in a new Women in Management report.
The hospitality industry would appear to be little different, plenty of women involved in the industry, enjoying a majority over men in hotel and catering degree courses and yet the percentage of managers remains heavily stacked towards, generally speaking, the heavily built sex.
So often companies pay lip service to equal opportunities, and, by and large, male and female employers will own up to finding their female employees more impressive, as born out by the report.
And yet when it comes to career development, women are invariably judged not so much by their abilities and achievements, but on assumptions about their private lives, responsibilities and future intentions.
Invariably men are treated as workers, not parents, but women are viewed as potential mothers.
A glance around the London hotel scene shows examples of plenty of exceptional women who have made it to general management; Madelon Boom, at the age of 26, at Hyatt's Lowndes Hotel; Dagmar Woodward at The May Fair Inter-Continental; Doreen Boulding at The Conrad Chelsea Harbour, etc.
The problem is that there are far more male general managers, some of whom are, arguably, unexceptional.
There are no unexceptional female managers.
If all this is beginning to smack of soap box journalism, it is more focused than that.
Portfolio is organising a Women in Management seminar for the hospitality industry on May 13 and this fits into a much broader campaign that has been launched by the Government, Opportunity 2000.
Other initiatives have sprung up, such as‘The Society of Women and Men in Travel’ at a time when the number of women directors of PLC companies has actually decreased.
Progress, what progress?
Even the Prime Minister has posed the question, ‘Why should half our population go through life like a hobbled horse in a steeplechase?
The Portfolio seminar features several leading figures from both the industry and outside as speakers who will attempt to change the impression that successful women in senior operational roles in the industry need to be single, or divorced, childless and generally married to their work.
If this is the price to be paid, the ridiculous female/male ratios have an eternal preservation order placed on them.
The old adage that those who try hardest succeed furthest should be made to apply.
Just as age factors can produce glass barriers, women experience glass ceilings.
Often the reasons for being passed over or failing a job interview will not be properly explained.
The fact that a woman, Margaret Thatcher, smashed the biggest glass ceiling of all in 1979 and that women have been storming into business and Government with ever more determination and success than before, should point the way for the hospitality industry.
A recent ageism debate brought out some serious points.
For some roles, younger people are deemed by some quarters as more suitable, just as in the theatre a certain role will require a certain age range to portray it.
But much more importantly, the view was successfully expressed that you need experience, particularly in a recession.
A 32 year old manager may be full of vigour, enthusiasm and malleable but a 52 year old manager has been through a couple of recessions, knows the ropes and cap pull a few more rabbits out of the hat.
Similarly the admission in the Women in Management report that most employers view women as, generally speaking, more impressive than men, should be regulated in promotion and career opportunities.
I am fortunate at Portfolio to have two highly impressive female directors.
Are they more impressive than their male counterparts?
They bear favourable comparison and their intuition, perception and consistent attention to detail provides a much needed balance to any group discussion.
David Coubrough is managing director, Portfolio Group of Companies .
Food Safety Update
Government says; Fix your own training
Although the definitive Regulations have still to be introduced, the Government's long awaited Statement — issued in December — concerning the training requirements of the Food Safety Act 1990, has at least partly cleared the air.
Consistent with its overall approach, the Government is avoiding being too prescriptive, preferring to place the obligation on the industry.
Employers must therefore now decide for themselves the extent to which their staff need to be trained, having regard to the nature of the work involved.
A restaurant seating 100 obviously presents a greater risk of food poisoning than does a shop selling only wrapped goods and needs to dedicate commensurate resources to staff training.
Central to this is, of course, the realisation that most cases of food poisoning result from carelessness by food handlers — hence the emphasis now on training.
The requirements relate very closely to the due diligence provisions as contained in the Food Safety Act 1990 and in effect employers have to identify the potential hazards within their business, ensuring that through training, these can then be eliminated or minimised.
All of this is unlikely to present much of a problem to most of the larger operators with their own hygiene and quality control management, although even they will need to ensure that any programme of training and retraining of personnel is controlled and recorded.
Smaller organisations, on the other hand, may well find themselves treading new ground, although the Government is anxious to ensure that there are as few mines as possible to obstruct them.
Reflecting fears from the industry over inconsistency of enforcement, the regulatory authorities and their environmental health officers are to be given guidance on what is reasonable to expect in terms of training, and the wise operator will make sure that his training strategy is endorsed by the local EHO.
The number of training courses available is considerable and will increase.
Caterers now have every reason to ensure that staff are trained to the appropriate level and already there is pressure on the Awarding Bodies to provide a more realistic range of courses than at present.
Perhaps it was too much to expect of the Government to spell out, as many had wanted, who should be trained, to what level and within what timescale.
On reflection, the catering industry may well be much better off as a result of the Government's proposals for a self-regulatory approach, but it all depends at the end of the day on how well it gets its act together, using Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment systems to identify the problem areas.
The wider food industry now has to demonstrate that it is using all within its power to minimise the risk of injury to the health of the consumer.
Whilst the law is designed to give succour in times of difficulty to those who do their best, it will show little mercy to those who are at the receiving end of proceedings who cannot demonstrate that they have given the highest priority.
Graham Aston 
Customer service
A Model for Improvement
By Geoff Pye
There is no doubt that the customer expectations of service have grown significantly in recent years and the whole subject of quality (what the customer requires) has received much attention, from management gurus to front line operators.
As the competitive edge to be gained from the physical product decreases, businesses have turned to the added value given by service to discriminate them from their competitors.
Central to service is the interaction between the member of staff and the customer and here lies a fundamental dichotomy — in many service industries such as hospitality, the employee who has the most important job of serving the customer is frequently the lowest paid, the most unskilled and the inexperienced and with the highest labour turnover.
Management has recognised this and over recent decades has tried various ways to improve this front line contact.
Techniques which have evolved offer the past 30 years, include:
Training individual workers using prescriptive techniques, such as on-job training, or less prescriptive methods such as videos and models of behaviour frameworks.
Influencing the environment in the individual works by training the whole working group, changing the team leader, altering the physical layout, creating a different management style.
Recruiting those with a higher potential for appropriate customer service behaviour.
Setting customer service objectives and measuring performance through ‘mystery shoppers’ or other audit means and feeding back the results.
‘Empowering’ customer service workers through a combination of changing the culture and changing the structure.
All these techniques have been successful in certain circumstances but most have failed to provide the total answer.
It seems businesses have never set out to choose in a deliberate and disciplined way which technique or techniques are likely to be the most effective, given the circumstances and the resources available.
How can businesses decide which techniques will best improve their service?
What are the circumstances that will make one technique more effective than another?
There are no easy answers to these questions, but businesses could benefit by considering the following issues:
Customer expectations
An analysis of what precisely the customer expects can save much time and effort.
Market research is being applied in some sectors which lists the priorities customers expect and also where a business is falling short.
Besides the obvious pointers this gives to where effort needs to be applied, it may also open the possibility of changing customer expectations.
It is well known that dissatisfaction occurs when actuality falls short of expectation.
Although difficult in established businesses, an alternative is to re-create customer expectations rather than change the actuality.
A re-themed and relaunched restaurant can be a good example of this.
The organisation culture
Techniques can fail to meet expectations because they are applied without due regard for the culture of the organisation, for example the currently popular ‘empowerment of the individual’ will not work well in a highly systematic, centrally controlled management culture.
Cultures can of course be changed but it usually takes longer than the organisation is prepared to wait.
The type of transaction
Detailed analysis of the transaction to be influenced will also help.
Market research will identify what transaction or aspect is most important but careful consideration should be given to the character or nature of the transaction, before determining the technique to be adopted.
For example, is the transaction simple or complex?
Does it have a short time span or does it last over a period of time?
Does the transaction essentially rely on one individual or on a team?
Are the customer needs predictable or unpredictable?
Does the successful transaction rely on a strong element of facility or product, or it is purely the human interaction giving service?
Are there implications for branded multi-unit businesses?
What is the quality of staff available.
The nature of the transaction will indicate the most appropriate technique.
Influencing a short, predictable, product-oriented transaction (say purchasing a hamburger at a fast food restaurant) would lend itself to prescriptive training techniques supported by highly specified procedures and standards.
On the other hand, a variable, service-orientated transaction (such as that provided by an international hotel concierge) would best respond to recruitment of the right person in the first place.
Whilst the above may seem obvious, there are many examples over the years of an inappropriate technique being applied with consequent waste of resource.
It is easy to fall into the trap of the seductive powers of an existing technique that sounds fun and has had success elsewhere — beware!!
Improving customer service is complex and fundamental to all sectors of the hospitality industry.
It deserves careful thought, especially when many of the techniques to improve it can be expensive in time, effort and money.
Consideration of the key factors involved and judicious selection of the techniques to be used is a pre-requisite for cost effective improvement.
Geoff Pye is director of human resources, Forte Restaurants .
PUB VALUES
‘WHAT PRICE THE PUB NOW!’
asks Michael Brown
The Brewing Industry was forced, in 1989, to embark on a major three-year reorganisation programme, brought about by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
The Commission ordered the reorganisation to free the ties that existed between the wholesalers (the Breweries) and the retailers (the Public Houses).
The deadline for the three-year reorganisation ended on November 1, 1992.
By this date, most of the large brewery companies affected by the demand for reorganisation had complied and the best estimates indicate that 10,000 public houses have been freed from the control of such major brewing companies as Bass, Allied Lyons, Courage, Grand Metropolitan and Whitbread.
All these major brewing companies were required to release up to 50 per cent of the public houses they owned, in excess of 2,000 outlets.
No one  company is now allowed to own more than 4,500 outlets.
It is fair to say that the disposals ranged widely from the good to the very poor.
Some of the poorest public houses have been closed and some are used now for non-licensed purposes.
Never before has such a large volume of licenced properties been placed on the market.
This unique and unusually large number of disposals has disturbed the market in public houses.
Market indicators show that capital values in public houses have fallen in the past two years by between 50 per cent and 60 per cent.
This decline has been accelerated by the current recessionary economic climate and the resulting falling sales turnover figures.
The average sales price for freehouses and inns peaked in 1989.
On an index scale based at 100 in 1975, the average sale price for a freehouse and inn had risen by 1989 to 622, but since then the index average has fallen to 521 (1991).
It is interesting to not that the values achieved in 1989 were broadly at about three times the turnover seen in these outlets, whereas today, a multiplier of approximately one, to one and a quarter times turnover, is far more appropriate.
One of the desired effects of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission's Beer Sector Report of 1989 was to encourage a more open and competitive environment.
Success can be claimed in this area in the arrival of some new operators in the market such as Centric Pub Company, Marr Taverns, Scorpio Inns, Discovery Inns and Enterprise Inns, whose formation has been to specifically run multiple freehouse operations.
Most of these new management teams have drawn their expertise from earlier times with one or other of the major brewers.
The market in freehouses and inns, in common with other sectors of the property market, has seen a number of defaulting borrowers.
Such defaults have forced a large number of repossessions by bankers and other lenders.
It is inevitable that the enlarged flow of these properties on to the sales market has brought about a further decline in the prices achieved.
Some receivers appointed in such situation have opted to run the businesses themselves, in the hope that given time, the market for public houses and inns will improve.
Eventually such businesses will, on any improvement in the marketplace, be put up for sale, this will have a potential for further depressing the general level of prices.
Leading specialists dealing with public house sale report a revival of activity by private purchasers.
They are clearly attracted by the knowledge that they are able to buy a public house for at least 50 per cent to 60 per cent less than in the hectic days of 1989/90.
The most popular and much sought after public houses are those with a wide range of services, such as accommodation and food, in addition to beers and spirits.
For lenders there is clearly a more desirable proposition in a public house that has a higher beverages or ‘wet’ side than a ‘dry’side, because if someone wants to purchase a pub with a high ‘dry’side, and they do not have much catering experience, then their turnover could diminish rapidly.
During the past three years, a feature has been the establishment of leasing companies set up by breweries, such as Inntrepreneur, Vanguard, and the Bass lease company.
This has brought about an abundant supply of leased freehouses, forcing down the premium that a tenant might achieve in respect of goodwill.
The leases that were granted in the heady days of 1989/90 when the brewery company landlords invited rental bids from tenants, saw them hungrily bidding up to 12 per cent to 15 per cent of the anticipated turnover.
The result today has been a large increase in the percentage proportion of rent in relation to a declining turnover figure.
So what may be expected now that the deadline for disposals by the major brewers has passed?
Sales specialists certainly believe that private freehouses will become increasingly popular.
There are an increasing number of examples of unusual conversions to public houses.
These can vary from an electricity board showroom, a former ballroom, an old watermill, a derelict barn and a bus station.
The development of pub retailing has shown a corrective instinct for seeking to set a purpose built business in the right location.
As we see the supply of free houses diminishing, prices should stabilise.
Better standards of quality in trading accounts have been seen, and the level of profitability has been improving.
Lenders are looking to the level of profits now seen rather than on the prospect of ‘jam tomorrow’.
The new breed of Pub retailers are seeking new prime sites, where as a large managed operation, designed to a specifically targeted market with a minimum potential trade of £15,000 per week, the full advantage of creating an enhancement of site value is achieved.
The advantage of this form of development is highlighted by the success of the recently floated Wetherspoon Organisation, where from a portfolio of 44 trading units, 28 have been developed from unlicensed property and a further 18 sites have yet to be converted.
The financer's view of a freehouse or inn, generally rests on three financial criteria.
Firstly the level of gearing, that is the amount of borrowed funds set against the commitment of proprietor capital or net worth of the business.
A gearing level of more than two is unlikely to prove attractive to the lender.
The second critical area fro consideration is the level of interest cover provided by the profits of the business.
The most usual method of calculation is to determine the net profit of the business ensuring that this amount is the amount of pre-tax and pre proprietor drawings and pre interest charges.
This figure should be a minimum of twice the value of interest charged on all borrowed funds.
The final criteria is applied to the valuation of the business and its relationship to the loan amounts.
Up to 75 per cent of bricks and mortar values on a  foroed sales basis, or up to 60 per cent of the going concern business valuation, to include goodwill, fixtures fittings and stock are yardsticks that are frequently encountered.
The lender will seek a detailed profile of both the borrower and the business proposal with supporting evidence of market research of product, service and competition.
Further evidence of the borrower's management ability, integrity and character will also be sought to conclude the wide scope of lending analysis.
The author Michael W Brown ACIB, a former banker with wide experience in lending and the property market, is a lecturer in banking at Cardiff Institute of Higher Education .
FOR SALE
A Nation's Business
The problems of changing from a forty year old state economy to a free market were presented recently at the HCIMA London Branch German Dinner, held in the University of North London Training Restaurant by Horst Leyer representing HCIMA Germany.
Formerly, East German companies had strong vertical and horizontal integration with activities separate from the core business, and large numbers of employees.
There were no separately managed service industries other than those dictated by the core business such as agriculture and manufacturing.
These governed other activities on behalf of the workers — such as cafeteria, warehousing, kindergarten and vacation facilities.
The average East German was unable to spend his holiday at the Black Sea, as the government-led tourist industry had allocated it to Westerners.
Possibly the company might arrange a holiday at a less attractive resort every seven years.
The immediate effects of changing the system has been characterised by economic difficulties in the new federal states.
Namely a 30.4 per cent reduction in GNP in one year and a rise of 500 per cent in unemployment and a 73.5 per cent fall in exports, due to the collapse of the eastern former Russian satellite state economies.
Treuhandanstalt is an agency withe special responsibility for the economic re-unification of Germany.
Hotels and catering are fifth out of the six industrial sectors.
Created in June 1990 and based in Berlin, Treuhandanstalt has a mission statement to privatise all former state-owned industrial enterprises.
It has a brief dubbed ‘The Sale of the Century’, in which the British Government is one of the major investors.
On completion of all sales, Treuhandanstalt will have effectively have made itself redundant, optimistically by the end of 1993.
The October 1992 review showed the privatisation process rapidly progressing, with nearly one quarter of the former industrial companies privatised including 20,000 shops.
Treuhand, which has its head office in Berlin, also has 15 branch offices across former Eastern Germany, New York and Tokyo, with representatives in other countries.
With the slogan, ‘The Chance of the 90s: Investing in Eastern Germany’, it sets out good reasons why other countries should do so — points already apparently taken up by Britain as a major investor.
There is a skilled motivated and currently under-employed workforce (although unfamiliar with enterprise culture and having Russian as a second language).
The infrastructure is being rapidly upgraded, with the Bundespost investing DM 46 billion by 1997 to expand the telephone network; DM 27 billion for electrical supplies; and DM 10.5 billion on roads and railways.
Valuable incentive programmes are offered by the central German Government, including such motivation as eight per cent on capital equipment total cost, 23 per cent setting up, 20 per cent expanding, 15 per cent for rationalising and depreciation rates of up to 50 per cent on the first year's investment.
In addition to this, there are local governments' reduced costs investment schemes and rapid pay-back methods.
Substantial growth at over six per cent is projected for 1993 and 1994.
A business acquisition can be completed within sixteen weeks, with the Treuhand rationalising it in anticipation of purchase, offering financial advice, cancelling former obligations and providing attractive contractual terms.
LEGAL
Roger Peters points out some of the dangers
DISCRIMINATION comes in many hidden ways
Prior to starting a family, Mrs Price had been a clerical officer in the civil service.
She married when she was 20 and had two children.
She stayed at home and looked after her children doing some part-time work whenever she could.
In 1975 she saw an advertisement for executive officers in the civil service.
As she had worked for the civil service previously, she applied and was sent a booklet which specified an age range for applicants of 17 ½ to 28 years.
Mrs Price was by then 35.
She complained to an industrial tribunal alleging discrimination on the basis of the age range specified and she was successful.
Now, it is well known in this country that sex and race discrimination are unlawful (in Northern Ireland religious discrimination) but that anything else is fair game.
So discrimination against smokers or fat people or people born in February is not illegal.
So how did Mrs Price win her case when she was alleging age discrimination.
The answer to that question can be found in the Sex Discrimination Act 1975.
There are two types of sex discrimination.
The first is direct discrimination, eg the refusal to recruit women because of the fear they may require time off due to child birth and looking after children.
The second type of discrimination, indirect discrimination, is to deal with the more hidden forms of bias.
Indirect discrimination involves some pre-condition or obstacle which, on the fact of it, applies equally to men and women but which in practice less women (or men) can comply with than men (or women).
Such a pre-condition or obstacle may not be justifiable.
An example of indirect discrimination would be a condition that a vacant job will only be given to someone who is at least eight feet tall.
Considerably less women than men could comply with that condition and so, unless the condition is justifiable, the condition is discriminatory.
But back to Mrs Price.
In her case it was accepted that many women in their 20s are involved in child birth and looking after children with the consequences that they are out of the employment market.
It is not until later (perhaps mid 30s) that their domestic commitments change so that they can start to return to work.
So, in her case the age range of 17 ½ to 28 was unlawful indirect sex discrimination because considerably less women than men could comply with the age limits.
Social circumstances have changed since 1975, but it is probably still true that many women are out of the employment market in their 20s and early 30s due to family commitments so that if the facts happened again, the result may well be the same.
In other words, an age range for recruitment of 20s/30s may still be unlawful sex discrimination.
But it is not only the age range of 20s/30s that may be discriminatory.
With modern health care and medicines, people are living longer but that causes its own problems.
Many women in their 40s/50s/60s are involved in looking after and nursing ageing parents so it is quite possible that a specified age range of 45 to 65 could also be indirect sex discrimination.
These age ranges are only discriminatory if not justifiable.
If people over a certain age, or within a certain age group, are required for a specified job for valid reasons, then it is not unlawful discrimination.
But as a general rule, specifying age ranges on recruitment should be avoided.
But it is not only at the recruitment stage that age ranges can be unlawful discrimination.
It can also be relevant throughout employment and when dealing with dismissal of employees.
Miss Marshall had been employed by the Southampton & South West Hampshire Area Health Authority as a senior dietitian.
The Health Authority had a policy of retiring people when they reached the state retirement age.
In 1980, when Miss Marshall was 62, she was compulsorily retired despite her wish to stay on until she was 65.
She had already been allowed to stay on for two years beyond the age when she would normally have had to retire.
A male dietitian would not have lost his job until he was aged 65.
Miss Marshall complained of unlawful sex discrimination and her case went to the European Court of Justice where it was decided that she had been the subject of such unlawful discrimination.
As a result of that case, the Sex Discrimination Act 1986 was passed which makes it unlawful for employers to have different compulsory retirement ages for men and women.
There is no fixed retirement age for employees, that is entirely a matter of policy for each employer, but the policy must be the same retirement age for men and women in the same jobs.
So if an employer operates a policy of compulsorily retiring workers at the state pension age, that will be unlawful sex discrimination until the stage pension age is equalised.
To overcome this, some employers operate a policy a common retirement age of 65 but with an option to retire up to five years earlier if the employee wishes.
But using the state pension age as a criterion is likely to result in unlawful discrimination not only on the question of retirement.
One day in November 1985, Mr and Mrs James went into their local leisure centre to use the swimming pool.
Both were aged 61 and were retired.
Mr James had to pay to swim but his wife got in free because the local council who ran the centre had a policy that anyone of state pension age did not have to pay.
Mr James claimed that this was unlawful sex discrimination and his case went all the way to the House of Lords.
The decision was that it was unlawful direct discrimination because Mr James had been treated differently than if he had been a woman.
The importance of that case in the employment context can be seen in the following example.
Suppose a company has a training policy that women over 50 and men over 55 will not be reimbursed correspondence course fees because the company does not want to pay for training unless it can get at least ten years benefit from that training.
Such a policy is clearly unlawful discrimination under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 because it differentiates between men and women, even though it is based on the unequal state pension age.
So while it is true to say that discrimination on the grounds of age is not unlawful, that is not the complete picture.
It is still important to see if specifying an age range could be indirect discrimination and it is important to bear in mind that differential age criteria are always likely to be direct discrimination even if it is based on the unequal state pension age.
Packages tied up in string
The idea behind the Package Travel, Package Holiday and Package Tours Regulations 1992 is good — it is to protect holiday-makers who book a packaged holiday.
But there are two spin-off implications for hoteliers.
But first, let's look at the main points from the regulations:
•Package brochures must set out certain information which is not only the obvious (price, what is in the package, etc), but other more mundane, but very important, matters such as how and when charges may be made/surcharges imposed, etc.
Package contracts must be in writing and must also contain certain matters — included in these are the situation where a minimum number of customers must book before the package is on — the minimum number must be specified and the deadline for cancellation (due to that number not being achieved) must be stated.
Arrangements must be in place so that deposits are protected in the event of the insolvency of the package organiser.
These arrangements may be by one of three methods:
Bonding to an approved organisation (eg ABTA );
Insolvency insurance; and
Paying all pre-payments into a trust account from which they cannot be withdrawn until the package has been provided.
Now all of that is sensible enough for the holiday-maker taking his or her annual two weeks in the sun, but like many packages, there are strings attached.
The first spin-off effect arises quite simply because of the difficulty of defining exactly what is a package holiday or tour.
It is a bit like trying to describe to a blind person what is a horse and distinguishing it from a bull.
The regulations define a package as any combination of at least two out of the following three elements:
Transport
Accommodation
Other tourist services forming a significant part of the package
The package has to be at an inclusive price covering more than 24 hours, or including an overnight stay.
So, whilst this definition obviously includes jetting off to an exotic resort with a fortnight's stay in a hotel, the definition also catches the hotel which offers an inclusive theatre weekend —one price covering the stay in the hotel and tickets for a show.
A package would also include a bargain weekend comprising rail fare and hotel accommodation and one price and there are many other examples where hoteliers who organise theme events, etc, may be caught.
The effect is that the hotelier putting together such a package becomes the organiser and must comply with the regulations including proper arrangements for the protection of pre-payments by one of the three  permissible methods.
The other spin-off effect of the new law arises from the fact that under these regulations the organiser becomes responsible to the customer for all the component parts of the package.
This is obviously highly desirable if you are booking a holiday abroad and the holiday organiser does not own the hotel but contracts with the foreign hotelier.
As a result of these regulations, you will be able to hold the package holiday organiser for any shortcomings in the facilities and standards of the foreign hotel.
But many package organisers book hotels in this country for tourists to the UK or even domestic tours such as coach tours as part of a package.
The organiser of those packages is now to be liable to his customers for your hotel, its facilities, service, standards, etc.
The upshot is that holiday/tour organisers who book hotels in this country are imposing stringent contract conditions on the hotels and may in some cases be looking for some performance guarantees or such-like so that they have some redress if your shortcomings result in them having to pay up to their customers.
Cooling OFF
Another part of the Food Hygiene laws on refrigeration becomes effective this month.
David Mascord looks at how caterers have coped.
The final element of food temperature legislation came into force on April 1.
The Food Hygiene (Amendment) Regulations 1990 state that from that date, certain high risk foods should be held in refrigerated conditions at or below +5 degrees C.
So how have caterers been preparing for these new, stricter temperature controls, and what help have they received from suppliers?
The catering department at the Dome Leisure Centre, Doncaster, refitted its kitchens a few years ago and, with its suppliers' advice, chose equipment which anticipated the five degree temperature requirements.
It has one main kitchen with four fridges plus a store room with two freezers (one walk-in) and a fridge, in addition to two cafe-style outlets with either one or two fridges.
But of course simply having refrigerators which can hold food at between 0 and +5 degrees C isn't enough.
The legislation goes hand in hand with the Food Safety Act 1990 and a major concern for caterers is the requirement to prove due diligence.
This involves:
Installing a written system for checking temperatures, plus adequate training and instruction on the system for staff.
Keeping records of temperature checks to ensure the system is working correctly.
Building a fault correction plan into the system as well as one for prevention.
Writing down the responsibilities of managers and employees and ensuring they  are acknowledged by them.
‘What we do to show due diligence is to take core food temperatures three times a day and record them in a log,’ says the Dome's catering manager, Michael Huntingdon MHCIMA.
He, his assistant managers and chefs all hold the Basic Food Hygiene Certificate.
For extra safety, temperature readings are taken only by the certificate-holding management staff, which, apart from two chefs, include three assistant managers and two managers of the smaller outlets.
Mr Huntingdon ensures that at least two of these qualified staff are on the premises at all times.
Fresh supplies are delivered in a chilled van and checked to see if they are in an acceptable state, before being put straight into refrigeration.
‘I also carry out random spot checks with a probe at various points during the week, just to keep everyone on their toes,’ he adds.
From April, Mr Huntingdon plans for either himself or another member of staff to take the Advanced Certificate in Food Hygiene as an added precaution.
He is awarded that some caterers are worried about this new stricter temperature ruling but has faith in his staff's ability to stay within the law.
‘I am quite confident in all my staff.
The local EHO was satisfied with our standards during his last visit and our maintenance manager is our health and officer so he also keeps an eye on things.’
One piece of equipment the Dome hasn't had to invest in is a blast chiller since most food is taken from the refrigerator, cooked and served immediately.
However, because refrigerators will not necessarily chill food down to the required temperature, plenty of establishments have become reliant on blast chillers to attain 0 to +5 degrees C levels in a short space of time.
This is a growing trend which meets the approval of EHOs.
A case in point is that of the 100-cover, 19-bed Crown Inn, Westleton, Suffolk.
‘We have blast chillers to pull the food temperature down to the correct level,’ says proprietor, Richard Prior FHCIMA, who spent £250,000 on re-designing his kitchens as part of a £300,000 overall refurbishment programme at the inn.
This all happened before the food temperature regulations were introduced, but Mr Prior is proud to boast that in his view the kitchens go far beyond anything required by law.
MacDonalds Catering Equipment
Williams Chill and Store centre
‘If they re-write the regulations in 10 years’ time, they'll come up with our kitchen,’he says.
Mr Prior has been involved in planning new kitchens while working in major restaurants and hotel groups, so he decided to use all his experience when it came to his own establishment.
Everything in the kitchen is on wheels for ease of cleaning, there are 22 drains in the floor and the stainless steel ceiling tiles can be put through the dishwasher.
‘When it comes to hygiene, we work on the assumption that food brought in from outside is on dirty containers, so we dispense with all outside containers and we use a probe to ensure correct temperatures,’ he explains.
Cheviots dual-temperature refrigerated cabinet.
Apart from ensuring state-of-the-art kitchen equipment was installed and an easy-to-clean environment created, Mr Prior also opted for Comark electronic temperature monitoring equipment in his cold rooms and kitchens.
Sensors in refrigerators, chillers and freezers send temperature data back to a central unit which can take information from up to 20 locations at a time.
All information is documented via a single printer.
In addition, an alarm sounds if the temperature goes beyond pre-set limits.
Bexley Hospital, Kent, meanwhile, hatched a plan to install monitoring devices which are said to emulate the thermal properties of food to give a more accurate core temperature reading.
These ‘plastic chickens’ from Foster Refrigerator send infra-red signals to a portable data printer.
The hospital's sophisticated cook chill system requires a major commitment to due diligence from suppliers like RH Catering Services.
The company had to use a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system to ensure all criteria were met and areas of potential risk were identified and overcome.
Williams new counter refrigeration cabinets.
It appears then that caterers have realised the importance of using the correct refrigeration equipment and of installing a series of  temperature checks.
Indeed most refrigerator manufacturers provide digital temperature monitoring as a built-in feature.
The kitchen at The Crown at Westleton.
While this is a step in the right direction, it is not entirely satisfactory for some.
‘Our equipment doesn't replace good hygiene practices,’ accepts the Crown Inn's Richard Prior.
Like other diligent caterers, Dennis Kane, executive chef at the Royal Moat House Hotel, Nottingham, also monitors the progress of food on every step of its journey through his kitchen, checking core food temperatures on delivery and checking refrigerators with electronic recorders.
But he does not rely solely on technical gadgetry.
He says: ‘We have about 70 fridges here.
I insist we also do a physical check of each of these refrigerators three times a day, manually logging not just air temperature but core food temperature.
‘For all banquets, we do a critical path, analysis,’ he adds.
‘We follow food from the refrigerator to the oven to the blast chiller and to the banqueting fridge, checking the temperatures.’
And just to be on the safe side, Mr Kane and his staff also visit their suppliers' premises from time to time to check conditions there.
He advises colleagues: ‘It is vital to identify high risk products, probe core temperatures and follow a critical path analysis.
Our main preoccupation is to do everything we can to show due diligence.’
PRODUCTS
Chilling Assets
A selection of refrigeration products on the markets
Hubbard Refrigeration has launched an upright cabinet, two door freezer, manufactured by Scotsman, which has a capacity of 620 litres and is gastronorm compatible.
The two doors divide the cabinet into upper and lower sections.
The interior storage temperature can be varied to the buyer's requirements, ranging from -10 deg C to -28 deg C.
A crushed ice machine is also available.
Model CFI ice crusher will turn two kilos of standard ice cubes into crushed ice in five seconds.
For more information contact Hubbard on .
Frialator International has introduced to Britain, refrigeration products from US manufacturer Manitowoc.
Refrigerators and freezers are available in one, two and three door models, offering storage capacities of 23.1, 47.8 or 73.7 cubic feet respectively and containing three adjustable shelves per door.
And all models in the Manitowoc B Series ice machine range feature built-in self-cleaning systems and run on SUVA HP81, a refrigerant which is said to have up to 90 per cent less Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP) than other refrigerants.
For more information contact Steve Snow on .
Refrigerators, freezers, display units, mobile counters, salad and pizza preparation units, and soda fountain units are all part of the Garland Catering Equipment Delfield range of refrigeration products.
Contact Garland on .
The Sadia 2000 cassette from Sadia Refrigeration is a self-contained cassette which incorporates all working components and fits on top of the cabinet.
Easily removable, it allows speedy servicing, Sadia claims, without the need to empty the food compartment, simply by replacing the cassette.
The system also allows the conversion of a fridge to freezer, or vice versa, by interchanging the cassettes.
And Sadia has also introduced a small controller, allowing the user to accurately set the required temperature range.
The mini screen displays temperature and cycle conditions, so the user can scroll back through the  preceding 120 hours for information on the performances and temperature range of the unit.
Permanent records may be printed out using the mini portable printer.
Contact Sadia Refrigeration on .
A range of multi-tiered refrigerated display units has been launched by Grundy Oliver Toms.
Aimed primarily at self-service outlets, the units are available in three sizes — 1200, 1500 and 1800 mm in length — with each unit comprising a display area of three glass shelves and a display well which are chilled by recirculating blown air.
The units comply fully with the latest Food Hygiene legislation governing the temperature conditions for the storage and display of food.
They have an automatically controlled hot gas defrost system, a rapid pull down time and are guaranteed to hold pre-chilled products at a temperature of +5 deg C or below.
For more information contact Mark Bishop on .
Alpeninox has introduced the Pyrenees, and under-counter refrigerated food cabinet.
The compact cabinet has an internal storage capacity of 4.4 cu ft and is suitable for ward kitchens, pubs, clubs and other smaller catering outlets.
For dairy produce, the cabinet has a storage temperature of +1 deg C to +4 deg C. There is also a model with a temperature range of -18 deg C to -21 deg C, designed for frozen foods.
Contact Alpeninox on .
Melform manufactures the range of Thermax insulated containers for refrigerated and frozen food transport.
All Thermax boxes, manufactured of foam injected polyethylene, are made in one complete piece and, the company claims, are totally leak-proof, sturdy, lightweight, compact and easily cleaned.
The company says that the range has a minimal dispersion — no more than 2 deg C per hour — in all conditions.
For more information contact Alan Bishop on .
Caravell UK has introduced a new range of chillers and freezers.
The stainless steel, upright cabinets are available in 600 litre (21.2 cu ft) single door models and 1320 litre (46.6 cu ft) double door models.
Both are fitted with four shelves per door section as standard.
The new freezers have an operating range of -18 deg C to -24 deg C, while the chillers' range is 0 deg C to +8 deg C. Temperature control is electronic with digital readout.
A series of simple push-buttons on the solid state device enables the required temperature range to be set precisely.
For more information contact Kenny Maguire on .