

Comment
Pay and Benefits — New Survey
A new survey for 1993, ‘Pay and Benefits in the Hospitality Industry’, will give the most representative review ever of the payment structure and wage costs in the UK hotel and catering industry.
It will also provide authoritative trends on wages, salaries and employer benefits.
It is being conducted by Greene Belfield-Smith, the specialist hotel, catering and leisure consultancy division of Touche Ross — for the British Hospitality Association (BHA) and HCIMA.
A widespread response throughout the UK is anticipated and the results will be analysed by geographical region to provide even more meaningful data for operators in hotel and catering establishments.
In previous years, Touche Ross has conducted individual surveys for both the HCIMA and the BHA.
All three organisations are now firmly supporting the development of a single survey in the future.
Professional personnel specialists from the industry have been asked to comment on the questionnaire to ensure the survey is asking the right questions.
And the scope of the survey has been extended to cover industry sectors than previously, such as pubs, clubs and public sectors catering.
Details of staff benefits granted within the sectors will also be analysed in depth.
You will find a copy of the questionnaire with this issue of Hospitality .
If you are actively involved in the industry, please take the trouble to arrange for the questionnaire to be completed on behalf of the organisation with which you are working.
By doing this, you will help us to ensure that the results are truly representative of the Association's breadth of membership.
It is important, however, that only one questionnaire is complete for each unit, so if there are other members of the Association working with you, or if you receive another copy via another source, such as BHA's Voice magazine, please agree amongst yourselves and submit only one questionnaire between you.
In anticipation, many thanks for your assistance.
Jeremy Logie Chief Executive 
INDUSTRY NEWS
HOSPITALITY PARTNERSHIP
Initiative brings closer links between education and industry
A major industry initiative was launched by the HCIMA at its annual lunch last month when several operating companies and educational institutes, including Compass, Forte, Copthorne Hotels, Universities of Brighton and Surrey and Chichester College were among the first signatories of a new Charter agreement which will strengthen employer/education links within the industry.
Called the Hospitality Partnership, the Charter will promote closer working relationships between the two industry sectors as the partners agree to a set of standards which encourage commitment to good practice in the areas of student placement; secondment to college and industry; curriculum development; adult training and development; and research.
The signatories of the Charter have accepted responsibility for maintaining the good code of practice and also agree to disseminate the document through their organisations, encouraging their managers to actively participate.
Hospitality Partnership was compiled by a steering group which included representatives from hotels, restaurants, retail companies, contract caterers, colleges in higher and further education and the HCIMA.
‘The Hospitality Partnership will lead the way in strengthening employer-education collaboration within the hotel and catering industry,’ said HCIMA chief executive Jeremy Logie FHCIMA.
‘I am delighted that HCIMA has been instrumental in its formation and look forward to a closer working relationship with our partners.’
Industry prepares to Go Green
HCIMA has published Guidelines for producing an Environmental Policy, as one of its initiatives linked to environmental issues.
It has also set up a working party to consider other possibilities and to study the implications of BS7750, the BSI standard concerned with Green issues.
The Guidelines were introduced as part of the recent launch of the International Hotels Environment Initiative (IHEI) in the presence of HRH The Prince of Wales and attended by hotel representatives from 11 of the leading hotel chains of the world, between them controlling over 11 million rooms.
The IHEI launch included a number of discussion groups, each considering various aspects of the impact of the industry on the environment.
HCIMA is a member of IHEI and chief executive, Jeremy Logie FHCIMA chaired one of the discussion groups.
One of the first projects to be undertaken by the environmental group will be the publication of a manual entitled,Environmental Management for Hotels: the industry guide to best practice .
It will be based on the collective practice of the 11 international chains.
HCIMA's own guidelines include advice on how to write a policy statement and start thinking seriously about Green issues; current legislation; and the new laws which will shortly be coming into effect as a result of the Rio Earth Summit.
Copies are available from HCIMA, price £3 to members, £5 non-members.
Booker award for Oxford Student
Student Julian Tee (right) and his tutor at Oxford Brookes University, Richard Hedges, have every right to look pleased with themselves.
Richard has just received a cheque for £1000 as winner of the Student Award competition sponsored by Booker Fitch Food Services among students on the HCIMA Professional Diploma course.
The competition, which was open to students at colleges across the country, required entrants to answer four mini essay questions relating to course work and the five finalists met a panel of judges where they were asked to give a short presentation on one of the subjects.
The judges were Jill Finney, buying and marketing director, Booker Fitch Foods Services; Jeremy Logie FHCIMA, chief executive, HCIMA; Stirling Gallagher FHCIMA, special adviser to P&O; and Ray Rutherford FHCIMA, course tutor at Thames Valley University.
The runners-up were Daniel English and Alan Medonca, also from Oxford Brookes; Pauline Powell, Brighton College of Technology; and Kevin Topham, Thames Valley University.
Amex forms partnership with hotel association
American Express has formed an Official Card Partnership with the hotel association Connoisseurs Scotland.
The partnership was signed and sealed at Edinburgh Castle by Dr Michael Shea, chairman, Connoisseurs Scotland, and David Cornthwaite, vice president establishment sales, American Express.
The aim of the agreement is to attract additional tourism to Scotland by promoting the quality hotels which are members of the association, to the frequent travelling and high spending American Express Cardmember.
Recovery coming soon, says survey
Recovery is ‘just around the corner’ for the UK hotel industry, according to Horwath Consulting, international hotel, tourism and leisure consultants, writing in the latest Horwath Business Review .
Jonathan Bodlender FHCIMA, chairman, believes that there are clear indications that this summer will see a lot of American visitors to the UK ‘albeit at very competitive rates’.
‘If next year is relatively buoyant, the inherent shortage of hotel accommodation in central London will again be felt by, say, 1995/96…
London will inevitably need more hotel rooms later this decade.’
Mr Bodlender's comments are supported by the results of the ninth quarterly Horwath Business Confidence Survey, which shows that Britain's hoteliers are significantly more confident than they have been for over a year.
And the first Status Report published by Horwath International states that the hotel industry worldwide offers considerable investment opportunities, in spite of the recession which has affected occupancies in some key regions such as Europe, Asia Pacific and the Caribbean.
The report examines the investment and development opportunities in different areas of the world.
President's Diary
June
1 Master Innholders' Dinner, Innholders Hall, London, 6.30pm for 7pm.
25 Mid Anglia Branch Annual Dinner Dance and Student Awards Presentation, Bedford Moat House.
July
7 Executive Committee Meeting,
22 Surrey Branch Tour of Army School of Catering, Royal Navy School of Cookery, RAF School of Catering, followed by lunch, St Omer Barracks, 10am for 10.30am.
23 International Air Tattoo, RAF Fairford, Gloucester.
Guest for lunch.
Award for hygiene book
Highfield Publications and it's book The Food Hygiene Handbook , by Richard Sprenger, director of Environmental Services, Doncaster Metropolitan Borough Council, has been named the winner of the hygiene category in the trade magazine Catering 's Product Awards' Products of the Year 1992.
Sponsored by Gardner Merchant, the award was recently presented to Jayne Sprenger, proprietor of Highfield Publications, by Garry Hawkes FHCIMA, chief executive of Gardner Merchant.
The Scottish version of the book is being used for food hygiene courses by The Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland and The Health Education Board for Scotland.
A Welsh version will also be available soon.
VIP day for Toque d'Or winners
Sarah Osborne (left) and Amanda Lodge (right), from the Colchester Institute, are pictured with their tutor Martin Fordham (second right) and chef Anton Mosimann after being named winners of the Nestlé Food Service 1993 Toque d'Or competition.
Sarah and Amanda competed against teams from Knowsley Community College, Guernsey College of Further Education and Aberdeen College of Science and Technology in the Grand Final, held at Westminster College.
The results were announced at a special awards luncheon at The Savoy and the girls received their trophy in front of an audience of top chefs and leading personalities in the catering industry.
Sarah and Amanda, who are currently studying a college diploma in advanced professional cookery, also received £5,000 of catering equipment for their college, a five-day study tour to Switzerland, a day at The Savoy Hotel with chef Anton Edelmann, and £300 for themselves.
Review of temperature controls follows change of mind
An announcement concerning changes to the Food Hygiene (Amendment) Regulations was received after thee April issue of Hospitality had gone to press and consequently the information on temperature in our Refrigeration feature was, unfortunately, incorrect.
The lower temperature requirements due to become effective on April 1 have now been rescinded.
A more thorough review of statutory requirements in line with the Government concern to reduce burdens on industry has been announced.
The main changes are:
to retain temperature controls but relax those on some products with a short shelf-life;
to allow some flexibility for foods which are partially stable at room temperature within an assigned shelf life;
to increase flexibility on some time limited tolerances which are difficult to apply in practice;
and to clarify which types of fish are covered by controls.
A more thorough review is expected later to comply with the draft European Directive on the Hygiene of Foodstuffs.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Praise for magazine's new look
‘Having recently received the April publication of Hospitality , I should like to place on record the vast improvement on previous issues that has been accomplished.
The copy is full of features and most informative on many relevant subjects.
Please pass on my congratulations to the Editor and his team for what must have been a considerable amount of sustained commitment, in producing such a high quality publication for the benefit of all members and the industry in general.’
Alan Hall FHCIMA General manager Parkam Food Group
‘I think the new Hospitality is a great improvement and is now of a quality consistent with HCIMA objectives.
Well done.’
Fergus A Chambers MHCIMA Depute Director Catering Direct
‘I was delighted to see the new look of Hospitality and read the articles with great interest.
Many congratulations on an extremely well presented and informative journal.
I have no doubt that it will now have considerably enhanced status and authority and will become even more well respected.’
Simon N Davis FHCIMA Catering Audits
‘A note to say how much I enjoyed the new Hospitality .
Interesting, good use of colour, easy to read.
Well done!’
Melvyn Green OBE FHCIMA Consultant to the hotel, food service and leisure industries
Phillip Stoneman FHCIMA has been corresponding with Paul Ride, held in an Iraqi jail.
He has recently received the following letter from Paul:
‘Many thanks for your letter, which my wife Julie brought on her visit last week.
It's good to know people are thinking of me.
You can be sure that your contribution, no matter how small, is part of a larger effort to bring about my early release, and every letter is a valuable and welcome addition to Julie's campaign.
So both in your letter to me and your letter to Mr Deva MP, you are helping to keep the voice of public opinion heard, and I thank you for both.
Yes, the first couple of months of my detention were very difficult, but since my ‘conviction’ and placement in the central prison, with full contact diplomatically, my situation has improved 200 per cent thank you.
I have been shown real ‘good Samaritan’ help by people in prisons here, and without their help I have found things a whole lot tougher than they were.
The ball is now firmly in the British Government's ‘court’, and I hope that pressure from the public will push them into action.
30 under 30
Thirty people from the catering industry are pictured at London's Four Seasons Inn on the Park where they recently gathered to receive their Acorn Awards.
Sponsored by Caterplan Division, CPC (UK) Ltd, the awards are presented to 30 young professionals in the catering industry who have displayed exceptional talent in their career before their 30th birthday.
Caterplan Division's marketing director Rob Nichols, urged the winners to encourage school leavers to look seriously at joining the industry.
‘The catering industry is unique in the challenges it offers young people and every effort must be made to ensure that it plays a central role in careers advice,’ he said.
Guest of honour this year was Garry Hawkes FHCIMA, Gardner Merchant's chief executive, who explained that encouraging training in the industry is one of the central pillars of his own philosophy.
‘To be judged a success is business should only be as a result of consistent, sustained growth,’ he said.
‘Senior management must, therefore, not only be safeguarding today's profits, but look to the long-term to ensure future success.’
Thorpe Park grabs a slice of the action
Pizza Hut manager Rachel Gent, tempts Mike Heath, head of retail at Thorpe Park, to a slice of pizza as Thorpe Park adds another High Street brand to its expanding franchise catering operations.
Following hard on the heels of last year's Burger King's development is Pizza Hut Express, which has recently opened a 120-seater pizza slice operation located in Thorpe Park's Dome.
It is the first time that Pizza Hut has opened an Express slice operation in a leisure attraction of Thorpe Park's size.
Pizza Hut has completely refitted and refurbished the 3,000 sq ft area in the Dome, formerly a coffee shop, with the traditional Pizza Hut awning and style.
Coming Events
June 
16–17
Environmental Auditing in the Hotel Industry, a practical guide to increasing profits by improving environmental performance.
To be held at Botley Park Hotel and Country Club, Botley, Hampshire.
Contact The Department of Leisure & Tourism on .
23
Basic Food Hygiene Course, London.
Contact Zoe Jacobs on :.
29
Quality Awareness Trainers Course, IRPC, Hinckley.
Price £50 per head.
Contact The Marketing Department, IRPC,.
July 
1
Market Testing — Charting a course through the legal labyrinth.
To be held at the Royal Lancaster Hotel, London.
Contact Wendy Chapman on .
6–7
Internal Quality Audit Course, IRPC, Hinckley.
Contact The Marketing Department, IRPC,.
11–14
Internal Autumn Fair, NEC Birmingham.
Contact Alison Ruddell on .
11–14
Prince's Youth Business Trust Trade Fair, part of IAF,.
Contact Alison Ruddell on .
21
Basic Food Hygiene Course, London.
Contact Zoe Jacobs on .
August 
25
Basic Food Hygiene Course, London.
Contact Zoe Jacobs on .
25
Quality Awareness Trainers Course, IRPC,.
Price £50 per head.
Contact The Marketing Department, IRPC,.
Dateline Amsterdam '94
An important Pan European Conference will be staged by HCIMA from March 24–26 1994 in Amsterdam, to disseminate and discuss the findings of the Skills and Knowledge Research Project.
Delegates will include senior executives from hotel and catering companies and leading academics.
Further details will be published in future editions of Hospitality .
Meanwhile, for information and bookings, please call Maria Machado on , or write to HCIMA's head office.
GOVERNMENT must think again over TOURISM CUTS
says Ken Robinson
Following the local government and Newbury election results, the most frequently repeated cliche was that the Government was ‘out of touch’ with the electorate.
Nowhere is the ‘out of touch’ policy more evident than in their intended funding cuts to tourism.
Only a few weeks ago, I was in Newbury talking to representatives of the local tourism industry.
I learned from local hoteliers the staggering statistics that in less than a decade, the number of hotel rooms nearby had increased from 70 to 800.
This reflected the growth expectations for high-tech industry based on the locational advantages of Newbury on the M4 and north-south routes, and the expected benefits from weekend break business from the home market…plus an expected increasing flow of high-spending overseas tourists from London to nearby Windsor and the surrounding area.
Yet the reality is starkly different, with loss-making occupancy levels and recession-restrained spending by the few business and leisure tourists that can be attracted now, at little more than cost, due to the fierce competition in this thin market.
On the day before the Newbury By-election, I, and others, had participated in a very frank exchange of views with representatives of the Department of National Heritage (DoNH), at a seminar organised by the Tourism Society — at which current Government policy was discussed with representatives of the tourism industry.
By the end of the day, there was a sense of frustration and sadness among many representatives of the industry who were present.
Tourism ought not to be a political matter.
There are few party political policies or strategies that apply to tourism.
This was demonstrated clearly in the recent debates in Parliament.
Reading the Hansard transcriptions without knowing the political allegiance of each speaker, it would be hard to tell.
Yet the Commons debate went far beyond the usual slanging match — and although Minister Robert Key tried hard to describe Government policy in the best possible light, serious concern and strong criticism was expressed that alone in the National Heritage budget, the English Tourist Board's (ETB) funding is to be fiercely reduced.
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland continue to enjoy annual funding at around £15 million each — but in England, which receives approximately 90 per cent of the volume and value of tourism, Government seems set on a course of pruning ETB's grant from around £9 million currently to only £2 million a year for national activities by 1995/96.
In prescribing that around 70 percent of the reduced funding goes to the regional tourist boards in England, Government is cutting their funds in real terms.
At the same time, it is forcing the funding towards ‘economic re-generation’, taking this money from existing regional programmes.
The regional tourist boards should now be strongly supporting the need for the national framework, for guidance and assistance that can only come from a central body — yet they dare not speak too loudly for fear that their reduced funding will be cut even further if DoNH reallocates it to the national level.
Why is this policy being effected?
Supposedly the policy National Heritage announced last November without cogent explanation was the result of ‘an internal review’.
Such a process, by new civil servants in a recently-formed department, with no prior depth of knowledge of the industry or its infrastructure, is surely questionable.
The industry deserves better consideration and the country needs the benefits that recovery and growth in our industry could bring but which may well be sabotaged by inappropriate Government cuts.
At the Tourism Society meeting, it was evident that the National Heritage officials have changed their position somewhat since last November.
Now they acknowledge that there is a continuing role for the English Tourist Board at the national level.
How can it be discharged on adequate funding?
Yet, defending the cuts, the Minister claims that most of his department's spending of £1 billion a year on museums, heritage, sports and the arts, directly aids tourism.
A closer look at the DoNH budget reveals extraordinary disparities; including the fact that they will, by 1995–96, be giving more than 10 times as much to each of several central London museums than they are for all the national activities and programmes of the English Tourist Board.
What good is this if core tasks cease?
The  officials' only remaining principal explanation for the cuts in ETB funding is that they are ‘essential economies in the public expenditure budget’.
Yet in the National Heritage department, it is only the tourism funding, specifically to ETB, which, over the coming three years, is to be greatly reduced, while all other areas reflect at least modest growth.
Government has said that now ‘the case for the English Tourist Board is less clear’ and that because of the maturity of the tourism industry in England, Government assistance is no longer justified.
Surely this can only be said by those ministers or officials who (however well meaning) are themselves ‘out of touch’.
The fact that something is wrong with this policy is now being recognised outside the Department of National Heritage, the tourist boards and Parliament.
If the present policies are now reversed, at such little cost to Government, the resultant cost to Government, the resultant cost to the country will be enormous.
The world market for tourism is now so competitive that we cannot afford to let our efforts stall.
Over the last few days I have listened, with fingers crossed, to Conservative politicians saying, yes…of course…they are always happy to reconsider any policy because they want what is best for the country and all members of our community.
There are few more cost-effective ways to invest relatively small sums of money than reinstating the support funding for tourism.
Ken Robinson is managing director, Ventures Consultancy, and a Fellow and council member of the Tourism Society .
interview
the Englishman taking America to Europe
Peter Webber FHCIMA, managing director, My Kinda Town
On more than one occasion, Peter Webber FHCIMA, partner and managing director in My Kinda Town, was invited by close family friends, the Kaye brothers, to help them run one of their many successful high street restaurant chains.
The Kayes gave the industry the Golden Egg, Strikes, Garfunkels and several other concepts we have now probably forgotten about.
‘I would probably been a millionaire several times over by now, had I taken up their offer,’ he quips, ruefully.
‘But at the time, I didn't think the four years I had spent at Westminster Hotel School, learning to make classic garnishes, was right for the Golden Egg.
‘While I was at college, I wasn't sure what I wanted to be, probably a chef like my brother.’
He chose, however, to direct his career toward end of the market — five star hotels.
He cut his teeth at places like Claridges; the Carlton, Cannes; Half Moon, Montego Bay and 18 months in New York as manager of Maxwell Plumb, at that time one of America's most successful restaurants.
Returning to London to work for Grand Metropolitan, he became managing director of Le Coq D'or, was a partner at Le Boulestin and Grand Metropolitan Hotels' group food and beverage director.
In 1980, he took control of 2000 properties on behalf of Imperial Inns and Taverns.
‘It was a wonderful time,’ he says.
‘They gave me £50 million and told me to develop a string of new brands.’
He developed the French brasserie chain, Dome; came up with Sullivans and what is now, 13 years on, one of the leading family restaurant chains, Harvester.
‘Harvester picked up where Berni left off,’ he says.
‘We created things like the farmhouse salad carts, using fresh produce, while everybody else was buying in the frozen varieties.
We put the staff in costumes instead of uniforms and we were the first to really ‘love’ children while other restaurants tolerated them.’
But just as at Grand Metropolitan, Peter Webber had begun to get disillusioned with big business when the company joined with Inter-Continental Hotels, so the appearance on the Imperial scene of the Hanson Group made him even more determined to look elsewhere.
‘I had known Bob Payton for about ten years, since he opened the Chicago Pizza Pie Factory.
He had asked me to go and work with him when he opened The Chicago Rib Shack, but I told him I thought the location was wrong.’
However, just as the former advertising salesman had proved in a back-alley off St James', that location, location and location was not always sacrosanct if you had an exciting and original concept like The Chicago Pizza Pie Factory, so he went on to confirm the theory at The Rib Shack, tucked away in a side street opposite Harrods.
‘Much as I admired Bob Payton and his unequivocal standards, I had also felt I was in too important a position.
It is difficult to separate yourself from your position when you are in a top job and having fun.
‘I was spending money creatively; I made a contribution to the family restaurant market, which is still in place, and which enabled people to have a very good value meal in enjoyable surroundings, for less money.
And I loved it.’
But when the American entrepreneur came looking again, Peter Webber was ready for a move.
‘He was about to open his hotel at Stapleford Park.
He had four restaurants and he needed an organiser.
He is not an organiser, he is a creator.
‘I saw it as an exciting challenge and a chance to be nearer the business.
And even though I had been very well paid in my previous job, this would also enable me to reap the financial rewards of my expertise,’ he says.
So, in 1986, Peter Webber became partner and managing director in My Kinda Town.
His first plan was to take the business overseas.
‘It seemed to make more sense than having Rib Shacks in Reading and Rugby or elsewhere,’ he said.
‘An my experience at Imperial had shown me the growing need in this country to find free-standing sites on the outskirts of towns, away from parking problems and inner city violence.
The better option seemed to be in Europe.’
Paris was first and despite a struggle to get off the ground, the company now has three operations bringing in some £200,000 a week.
Others followed in Dublin, Belfast, Barcelona, Madrid, Bonn, Brussels, Cologne and Tel Aviv.
‘We are the number one chain of ‘American’ restaurants in Europe.
The people love us for the genuine American feel we bring to the business.
Even if they don't like American politics they like the style.
‘We are selling life-style in same way as the Americans sell Levis or Coca Cola.’
While Bob Payton was the creative genius that brought the My Kinda Town style to Europe, Peter Webber believes that his contribution has been to maintain it.
‘They were strong brands when I arrived so I haven't created anything new.
But I like to think that I have kept them up to date.
We now bring in young graduates and train them in every part of the organisation to the My Kinda Town culture.
I have also systemised the business and built an in-depth team which can live without Bob Payton.
‘I would like to think it's a bit like Disney — it keeps going without its creator.’
The latest venture, Salsa!, a Latin American/Caribbean restaurant on the site of the Chicago Meatpackers restaurant, is entirely Peter Webber's concept, however.
‘This is one of the outlets which has proved the location equation to be correct,’ he says.
The restaurant started life as a fish restaurant, Payton Plaice, before switching to burgers.
‘With over 300 covers it was probably too big as a fish restaurant and while it stayed successful for some time as The Chicago Meatpackers, the area around it, in the West End of London, has changed in two major ways.
Firstly there are now lots of others selling a similar product and parking is virtually impossible.
But Salsa! is designed for young people who will use public transport.
The menu is based on shared items, which is a growing trend, there is music and we stay open late.
It has been well received and customers are having to wait two hours for a table on Saturday evenings.
Was there a part of his career that had helped him most in the development of My Kinda Town?
‘Maxwell Joseph, who was chairman of GrandMet, had a powerful influence on my life,’ Peter Webber says.
‘He taught me that is it very hard to make a profit but very easy to let a bunch of people spend it.
You have to run a tight business to make it work.
‘It's all about doing it better and with more style than the next man.
Style and passion are what make people succeed.
‘I love the excitement of the restaurant business.
I don't want to stand in the doorway and shake hands but it's a great feeling to go into one of the restaurants and realise they don't belong to the GrandMet or Imperial, but they are mine!’
Alan Sutton 
People
Only the names have been changed…
It may sound like a case of split personalities but Louise G Torsney FHCIMA and Louise G Pollard FHCIMA is one and the same person.
Louise uses both names for business purposes, Torsney when she is working for the Hygiene Training Consultancy specialising in tailor-made courses for schools, social services and private hospitals; and Pollard in her role as hygiene consultant for B & W Hygiene, which is a manufacturer and supplier to the industry.
In her 20 year career, Louise has been known by both her single and married names so needs to continue using both.
Hopefully, this will help to overcome any future confusion.
Moves and Appointments
Seale-Hayne, faculty of agriculture, food and land use in Devon, has developed a new degree course in hospitality management and appointed Brian Julyan FHCIMA as the new course manager.
The course was launched jointly with South Devon College and Plymouth College of Further Education last September.
Brian has joined the faculty from South Devon College of Arts and Technology, where he was senior lecturer for 25 years, teaching BTEC National and HND courses in hotel and catering institutional management, a course now franchised to the University of Plymouth.
Brian Julyan
Christopher Bond FHCIMA to chairman of The Chester Grosvenor Hotel.
A chartered accountant, he was for 18 years managing director of Allied-Lyons Embassy Hotels Group, and five years managing director of the PROSIT Hotels and Tourism Consultancy.
Max Saunders FHCIMA, a retired group director of catering for Grand Metropolitan plc, is the new chairman of the South West Regional Committee of the Hotel and Catering Benevolent Association (HCBA).
He takes over from Harry Mogford FHCIMA, who had been chairman since the formation of the committee five years ago.
Helen Ayles FHCIMA has taken up a three year contract with the Hong Kong Hospital Authority as chief project manager, environmental and domestic services.
Helen was formerly support services consultant with the International Hospital Group and has also had 23 years service with the National Health service in domestic services management.
Bradshaw Microwave has appointed Lewis Napleton FHCIMA as business development director for Menumaster, having recently acquired Amana and Menumaster.
Lewis started the Menumaster operation in Britain in the 1970s and managed the business for over 10 years.
Steve Pithers MHCIMA to general manager of the newly-refurbished Knutsford Pavilion service area on the M6 in Cheshire.
Steve Pithers
Susan Perkin MHCIMA to front of house manager, Stapleford Park Country House Hotel.
COVER STORY
The last of the London grands?
Alan Sutton visits the new Regent London
London's latest ‘five star’ property is The Regent, which opened quietly at the beginning of the year under general manager Wolfgang Nitschke.
Originally built as The Great Central Hotel to serve the railway terminal at Marylebone Station, it has been restored to its former glory at a cost of £75 million.
It is a return to the capital for German-born Mr Nitschke, who was here from 1985–87 managing The Dorchester, where Regent had a management contract.
He has managed hotels around the world.
His first general managership was at the Frankfurt Plaza for Canadian Pacific and he moved to the Regent Hotels in 1982 to run the Melbourne property.
But the greatest disappointment of his career was when Regent's management agreement with The Dorchester fell through on the sale of the hotel.
‘Regent had 17 per cent of the hotel,’ he says.
‘Every general manager in the company wanted the job but it was offered to me because I had the greatest European experience, so when the owners sold it, it seemed beyond belief.
‘But they bought it for £46 million and sold it six months later for £92 million, and there was nothing we could do about it.’
Regent determined then, however, that it would have a property in London.
The ambition was fulfilled earlier this year, when the building which had been converted to offices for many years, was restored to the splendour which is now The Regent London.
Following hard on the heels of the Langham Hilton and the Lanesborough, another five star property commanding a rack rate between £140-£150 a night in the midst of a recession, might seem out of place.
‘No, it is not a good time to be opening a hotel of this calibre,’ Wolfgang Nitschke agrees.
‘But it was three-and-a-half years in development and nobody could foresee at the start what the economy would be like now.
However, at £75 million it was a very substantial investment and we had to open.’
Even so, he believes The Regent will probably be the last of the ‘grand’ hotels to open in the capital, although he says there is no limit to the room rate, if the product is perfect.
Wolfgang Nitschke in the Regent's Winter Garden
‘My experience at The Dorchester and what I know from the Four Seasons Inn on the Park (Four Seasons recently acquired the Regent Group), shows me that there is a market which appreciates the best service and is prepared to pay £200 a night and more for it.’
That makes America the ultimate target for The Regent, he says.
‘American is vital for London.
Europeans are not used to paying the higher room rates and around £100 to £110 seems to be about the limit.
But Americans appreciate the value of the additional service and are prepared to pay for it.’
If Mr Nitschke is right about the hotel being the last of its type in London, it will be the second time around for the property.
When it was built in 1899, it was the last of the great railway hotels.
Just too late to serve the dwindling numbers of travelling public which had relied heavily on the railways, it remained open for only 40 years, during which time the car came more and more into ascendancy as a means of transport.
It was taken over by the British Transport Commission (later to become British Rail) in 1949 and much of the magnificent original decoration and marble was either taken away, covered up or painted over.
The central courtyard, built originally for coaches and horses, was roofed over, and for a period the ballroom doubled as a volleyball court.
Regent's parent company, the Japanese Hazama Corporation, acquired the building in September 1991 from a developer who had started the restoration work in 1989.
Centrepiece of the hotel is The Winter Garden, an eight storey atrium in the original central courtyard of the building.
Morning coffee and afternoon tea are served here, together with light snacks, and it is already proving a popular meeting place for the ladies of St John's Wood.
The hotel has 309 rooms, including 47 junior suites, a penthouse suite and the Presidential Suite.
The rooms are claimed to be the largest on offer in London, averaging 50 sq metres.
For conference and banqueting business, there is a wide range of venues.
The Ballroom, which has five ceiling-to-floor bay windows, can accommodate 400 theatre-style, 300 for banquets.
It has its own entrance hall which is used for receptions, and also adjacent is The Champagne Room, which can also serve as a pre-function room.
The original smoking room of the hotel is now the Drawing Room which will take up to 200 for a meeting.
And there are three other large function rooms — The Boardroom, The Music Room and the very popular Tower Suite, which has a view through the roof of the restored clock tower.
In addition, three smaller meeting rooms are located close to the hotel's Business Centre.
Chef Ralf Kutzner and a 49-strong brigade service The Dining Room and Winter Garden and there is a basement pub, The Cellars, which attracts local lunchtime trade.
‘I expect 85 to 90 per cent of our business to be corporate,’ says Mr Nitschke, ‘which is a very demanding market, so it is important that we are able to meet all its requirements.’
Making sure it does, puts a high emphasis on service.
The interviews for every job in the hotel were conducted personally by the general manager.
‘I was not just looking for the most experienced people but there were other attributes I wanted to see,’ he says.
‘A welcoming personality and a genuine friendliness are very important.
I put some of the applicants through very stressful interviews to see how they would react.
‘It is most important that they feel good about their work.
I even tell them that if they do not feel 100 per cent, they should not come to work.’
Each new member of staff receives a five page letter from Mr Nitschke explaining what the hotel is about and he still attends the induction programme each Monday morning.
‘It is our way of saying that every guest is important,’ he says.
The hotel has targeted its occupancy for the first year at 55 per cent, which, Mr Nitschke says, is realistic.
It is selling between 100 and 120 rooms a day at present.
‘We are not looking to undercut the market.
We will keep our rates at around £140–£150, which will, I believe, help bring some stability.
But you need to charge that sort of rate to maintain a hotel of this style and size.
If you want a Rolls Royce, you shouldn't expect to buy it at Volkswagen prices.’
ARMED FORCES CATERING
ABOUTURN
Kate McDermid looks at changes taking place in Armed Service catering.
Traditionally, the Armed Forces have represented an excellent training ground for would-be caterers with a yen for foreign travel and challenges of an unpredictable military kind.
That is still the case but, just as the services as a whole are having to come to terms with their most radical structural changes since the Second World War, their catering arms, whether involved in training or feeding personnel, are too.
Two fundamental trends are at work: employee numbers are being gradually but drastically reduced — the Army alone is facing a 30 per cent by 1995; and all three services are coming to terms with their obligation to ‘market test’ support services with the result that a steady trickle of contracts has been going to the private sector since the early 80s.
One physical reminder that change is in the air was the disappearance in April this year of the Army Catering Corps name, after more than 50 years.
Now, along with a handful of other Army support organisations, including the Royal Pioneer Corps and the Royal Corps of Transport, the ACC comes under the umbrella title of Royal Logistic Corps.
This streamlining move to bring all the Army's logistic divisions under a single management structure, based at Deepcut near Aldershot, was, as redundancies resulted, not without its critics.
One positive spin-off was the arrival of the Royal Army Ordnance Victuallers School, which, among others, trains field bakers and abattoir workers and is now happily under the same management as the Army School of Catering.
And, while nothing has been officially announced, change is understood to be being considered for Aldershot's ‘collocated’ catering training schools.
Since the early 80s, when Chatham dockyard — and the Royal Naval cookery school — closed and the Army had spare capacity to offer, all three services have based their catering schools there, operated on an entirely separate basis with the Army as landlord.
A complete merger, while mooted, was never really on the cards as, apart from philosophical and traditional differences, their practical requirements were and are too different.
Training course lengths, for example, vary.
The Royal Navy needs its chefs to know how to bake at sea, the RAF uses local bakers on contract.
The Army needs chefs trained on the field, the RAF requires knowledge of in-fight catering…and so on.
Currently, the Navy runs half its school at Aldershot and the other half at Devonport and is believed to be keen, for financial reasons if nothing else, to re-locate on to one site.
All agree that the building they share in Aldershot, an outdated 60s 12-storey tower block, needs major refurbishment — closing it and moving to the Royal Logistic Corps training centre 20 miles away or converting it to an office block and building a new, smaller Army catering school alongside, are not seen as attractive options.
It any case, although all three services are hopeful numbers can pick up, they are training far fewer chefs than they were a decade ago.
The Army's rolling three-phase military redundancy programme of 30 per cent between 1992 and 1995 has to be mirrored in its catering back-up.
The Army may be seeing a smaller throughput of students, but its four core course levels remain and, ironically, new courses are constantly being introduced to meet changing needs.
The basic chef's course lasts 19 weeks (shortened for those already holding City & Guilds 706), covers fundamental culinary skills and is open to 18–25 year olds.
Entrants then work in a variety of units and can expect promotion within a few years to lance-corporal and corporal.
‘At that point,’ says Colonel Gordon Wilkinson MHCIMA, deputy director, Army catering, ‘they go back to St Omer barracks, Aldershot, home of Army catering since the Army Catering Corps was formed in 1941, to take the 12-week advanced chef's course which prepares them for shift manager level in a kitchen.
Once back in their units, if selected for promotion to sergeant, they attend the production supervisor course which is angled much more towards management.’
In addition, there is an even more advanced seven-week Master Chefs' course, apprentices doing their one-year stint at the Army Apprentices College  and a range of specialist courses for everyone from stewards to VIP household chefs.
As Lt Col Neil Hatton MHCIMA, the school's chief instructor, explained: ‘Regiments send us certain people who may have two jobs — infantryman and ration clerk, for example.
And we often do regimental courses for catering officers going to an out-of-the-way place where there may not be a trained caterer.
The Army may be smaller in size but the spectrum of our work here is getting wider all the time — we even run courses on how to handle contractors.’
As part of an increasingly cost-driven organisation, Lt Col Hatton faces some tough management tasks affecting the entire operation, from length of courses (they are, generally, being tightened up and shortened) to the time, effort and money devoted to training Salon Culinaire entrants, a traditional area of Army catering expertise for which resources are shrinking.
Nevertheless, he is determined to maintain standards.
‘Competing is becoming a specialised line but, if it went, it would be a sad demise.
From the publicity and recruitment point of view and the interface with industry experienced at Hotelympia, for example, the benefits are wide-ranging.’
He is also chasing BS5750 accreditation for the school, a move he describes as a ‘major step forward in military thinking’, and similar is tone to new officers' courses graded at post-graduate levels one and two and the MBA course he is personally involved in, being run in conjunction with Bournemouth University.
The Army is still intensely proud of its catering training.
‘The Army provides excellent training for a young man or woman who wants to be a caterer, particularly a military caterer,’ said Colonel Wilkinson.
‘There are very few craft-based training centres with dedicated training classrooms, where each student, eight or 12 to a classroom, has his or her own stove, bench and drawer.
‘Our training has continued to improve while constantly changing.
While mirroring general eating trends — moving towards healthy eating, for example— we've also had to include new food safety act training.
But we still have to train people to be able to cook under any conditions — a young soldier can often find himself on his own in the field cooking for a given number of people.
The skills we teach can be applied anywhere.’
The business of feeding personnel, meanwhile, is also changing, although probably not fast enough for the contractors eager to win new business.
The market is increasingly price competitive and, as fixed price contracts generally apply with no opportunity to vary labour costs from year to year, particularly risky.
Bob Cotton MHCIMA, public relations director of Gardner Merchant which has 20–30 Ministry of Defence contracts, reports that after the initial flurry of tenders, business has not expanded dramatically.
‘Something like 30 per cent of the contracts the MoD is prepared to let are now operated by contract caterers, and those include facilities management as well as pure catering.
But they're not very evenly spread — the Army, as the largest service, has let more contracts than the Navy or RAF and has been much more positive about the process.
There are lots of opportunities, particularly for bases in the UK, to use contractors or private enterprise to get cost-efficient services.
They are beginning to let more and more hotel-type contracts, which makes sense — if we've got a lot of senior management on a big site, they might as well pick up the housekeeping as well.’
The Forces were potentially a very profitable area, he added, but relationships need to be long-term.
‘An initial contract may be for three years but we have to look further than that.
Setting up contracts, particularly large ones like these, is expensive.’
Richard Coleman, managing directors of Compass Commercial Services, agreed that the MoD was a significant marketplace, although most of the contracts were now being let on a retender basis and a new insecurity in what was already a high risk business had recently presented itself — the application to the public sector of Transfer of Undertakings legislation, when incoming contractors are obliged to retain staff at current rates of pay, terms and conditions, or pick up the redundancy liability.
‘In the past, TUPE has not applied to MoD contracts, but now, following various European legal decisions, it is highly likely that in future it will.
It's a minefield; certainly Government agencies feel very uncomfortable about it but to us it's clear that TUPE will apply.
Our response to tender documents which state that this may be the case is to ask for the detailed information we need to make a liability assessment and that's not always forthcoming.’
Mr Coleman would also like to see labour reviews built into long-term contracts.
‘At a time of high inflation, two or three percent flexibility a year is fine, but if inflation goes up to 12 per cent, you're in trouble and the profit is wiped out.’
Compass has 16 locations, including the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and RAF Northolt.
The Army and Navy have moved significantly down the path towards contracting out and have very few contracts left to be put out for the first time.
The contracts are changing — the MoD itself is looking beyond hotel services to multi-function contracts involving vehicle and radar maintenance, for example.’
Colonel Gordon Wilkinson confirmed that the Army had gone into contract catering in a ‘substantial way’, having let contracts to a variety of both large and small companies, including Gardner Merchant, Compass and Sutcliffe.
In the main, he said, the process of unit cleaning and mess staff being employed by contractors rather than directly by the MoD, had gone smoothly.
‘It's a good relationship and we work closely together.
Overall, the process of becoming a budget-minded organisation has been a learning curve for some of us but has to be the right way to go.’
Group Captain Martin Armstrong FHCIMA, director of RAF catering, said that after much debate, a blueprint of the optimum private/in-house mix for the next decade was in place and that elements of the catering at every RAF station in the UK would be market tested.
Concern for staff was paramount, hence a softly softly approach.
‘We have to be careful that as we shed uniformed staff, it is on a gradual basis to avoid redundancies and to ensure that those who stay will still continue to have promotion prospects.’
Despite inevitable changes ahead, there can be little doubt that the Forces will continue to offer comprehensive training.
As Colonel Gordon Wilkinson puts it: ‘The big thing about services catering is that you never know what's going to happen next.
The possibility of travel is an obvious attraction, as is the added dimension of being a soldier rather than just a chef, as well as being part of a large professional organisation and the camaraderie that brings.
We certainly have no problems attracting good quality entrants.’
BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
Winds of Change at AMERICAN EXPRESS
Alan Sutton hears that technology, new markets and lower charges are closing the gap.
It may seem as if it has been with us forever, but the ubiquitous American Express chargecard has, in fact, only been around for 35 years.
Launched in 1958, the card was originally made of cardboard and was the same colour as the travellers cheques the company had invented in 1891.
Today there are over 36 million cards in circulation around the world.
The introduction of the card was part of the evolutionary process which has begun in 1850 when Wells and Fargo merged to form a company which transported valuables across America by Express delivery — thus American Express.
‘B’ movie fans will know that Wells Fargo's stagecoaches proved a lucrative source of income for the less scrupulous members of the old West who made their living by robbing them.
So the company introduced the travellers cheque, which had no value until it was countersigned.
From transporting valuables came the next step to transporting passengers to Europe by ocean liner.
Offices were established at the destination points to provide a service for the international traveller.
‘Our business was looking after the traveller and our mission was to provide security and peace of mind,’ says John Petersen, vice president of public affairs for Travel Related Services.
The introduction of the card was a further extension of that aim but it required the establishment of a network of businesses which would accept the cards and provide a service to the cardmember.
The network was designed to meet the needs of the international travellers out of America, who, at that time, were those who were likely to use the more upmarket hotels  and restaurants, and so the network was established at the top end of the market.
But the success was such that the local domestic markets, including the UK, were invited to become cardmembers, and the American Express card was introduced in this country 30 years ago this year.
Gold cards arrived in the late 60s (1980 in the UK) for the higher spending members, and Travel Management Services, which links the services of travel agencies to corporate cardmembers, was introduced in 1984.
‘That is the history of what we now called Travel Related Services,’ says John Petersen.
‘You can see from it that as the market has changed, so we have changed our services to meet the market needs.
‘Those changes are still taking place and we have made a number of recent innovations to cater for them.
Despite recession, people still have to travel — particularly business people.
British business spends something like £18 billion a year on doing so.’
The income generated by business travel and related expenses is a fast growing part of American Express — accommodation, subsistence, travel and increasingly the use of the cards for making telephone calls.
Even things like couriers, taxis and other business-related expenses are being charged more and more to the card.
It makes it easier for businesses to management their expenses, whereas cash is often difficult to account for.
‘So we have developed Travel Management Services, which is used by 70 per cent of the Times top 100 companies,’ John Petersen says.
‘Everything is charged to the card, providing an audit trail for the businesses’ financial and cost controllers and supplying management information, which shows whether or not the company is using its resources efficiently and staying within its budget.
‘We also provide businesses with information on hotel rates, enabling them to negotiate with hotel groups for corporate rates.
So the service offers a payment system and a management information system rolled into one.
It is proving a real growth area for our business.’
Company accountants also want more detailed information on the way employees are spending money.
American Express is about to introduce Descriptive Billing.
This gives the cardmember a full breakdown of every transaction — time, date and place — and, in the case of hotel bills, will be able to split food and drink and accommodation from other services.
American Express believes that with more and more businesses insisting that all expenses are paid by chargecard, those who do not accept American Express cards will lose out.
Electronic Data Capture (EDC) machines can also reduce the work-load for hoteliers and restaurateurs.
This is a tape which prints out the information from the till and eliminates the old system of having to write out an individual docket for every transaction.
The company claims that 70 per cent of all charges are now processed in this way and its objective is to make it 100 per cent.
‘It makes everything quicker and saves money so there is a good reason for businesses to switch to EDC,’ says Michael Edwards, hotel director American Express.
‘And we will be offering incentives to encourage them to make the change.’
With businesses looking at cost cutting across the board, American Express has also been targeting a new market.
Broadening its target market from the five star category, it is now looking to the small independent hotel and restaurant, establishments which businessmen are tending to use more frequently.
‘We run into a problem with this market, however,’ says John Petersen.
‘There is a common misconception that American Express is more expensive than all other cards.
A few years ago that may have been true, but over the past couple of years, we have reduced the commission charge by 10–20 per cent.
At the same time, other cards have been doing the opposite, and our major competitor has recently announced an increase of eight per cent.
‘For smaller businesses, the American Express card today will probably cost less than other cards and will certainly not be higher than a bank card.
And as volumes increase, so the price will come down further.
‘We are premium priced and we are not out to undercut others, but we believe we offer better value for money.
‘The main issue for us is to close the gap and we have now brought our discount rate down to the level where the highest anybody pays is 3.95 per cent.’
Operators also now have a number of payment options, he says.
The company has recently introduced a five-day option in response to criticism that they were not paying quickly enough.
All of these new ideas are just the beginning of the innovations to come from American Express, which will continue its mission of closing the gap between its card and those of other companies, John Petersen says.
‘This is not a panic process, it is a systematically controlled, pro-active programme, which is a continuation of the company's evolution.’
John Petersen
Michael Edwards
EDC machines reduce the workload
1000 ways to buy a business…
or how Gardner Merchant's managers saved the day
On December 7 1992, a great sigh of relief ran through Gardner Merchant's offices around the world.
That was the day that Rocco Forte FHCIMA announced the successful sale of Forte's contract catering arm to a syndicate which included 1000 of the company's management team.
It was the end to a protracted period of trauma and uncertainty for the management and employees of the company, which had begun at the beginning of the year when the rumours that Gardner Merchant was for sale had begun to circulate.
Despite denials from both parties, managing director Garry Hawkes FHCIMA withdrew his nomination for presidency of the HCIMA in order to concentrate on business, and a few months later the story circulating was that he had put together a management buyout package.
Compass and ARA then made a bid which was eventually turned down.
Others were said to be interested and the uncertainty continued.
‘It was a very traumatic year for all of use,’ says Bill Toner, divisional director, London.
‘None of us could be sure if we would have a job tomorrow; the uncertainty was preventing us winning new business; and we had looked at the various companies who were rumoured to be bidding for us and didn't like what we saw.’
In the new company, Gardner Merchant Services Group, the managers have an initial eight per cent stake, with the prospect of up to 20 per cent if their performance over the next five years justifies it to the rest of the equity holders.
They are Forte, which has retained 25 per cent and CINVen, which controls pension funds for British Coal, Barclays Bank and British Rail.
Now called chief executive, Garry Hawkes says that the vast majority of the eight per cent share is with the 1000 managers and the middle management group have over 50 per cent.
‘I always felt partial ownership of the business throughout the 16 years I was managing director,’ he says.
‘That feeling is now shared by the 1000 equity holders.
We wanted to include as many people as possible in the offer to buy shares but the other investors insisted that senior management took a significant amount.
‘The shares were divided among three groups of managers — the 50 most senior, some 250 middle managers and the remaining 700 who were running large contracts, or a group of units.
Any shares which have not been taken up will go into a trust for new starters or to allow for people who are promoted to be allocated more shares.
We are also looking at ways to create shadow share schemes or share options which will be available to all Gardner Merchant employees at a later date.’
In cast terms, the eight per cent that had to be found had the monetary value of £2 million and the agreement was that the top 15 executives had to fund half of it — the reasoning being that it is the senior people who will motivate the company and when they have had to put that amount in themselves, it concentrates the mind.
Mind concentration, however, comes with ownership at every level.
‘I didn't go to the stationary cupboard quite as often as I did before,’ says manager of quality and training, Claudia McCabe, one of 1000 managers.
‘I feel more committed to the company now,’ she continues, ‘not just employed by it.
Consequently I demand more of my colleagues.’
PR Director Bob Cotton of MHCIMA relates a similar story he overheard, told by some of the managers about changing attitudes.
‘If they previously became aware of somebody doing something he shouldn't, like dealing with an unauthorised supplier, they might ask themselves, ‘If he can do it, why can't I?’.
Now they go and ask him why he is doing it.’
But changes in attitude go a lot deeper than watching the pennies.
‘There is no dramatic change in the way we do our jobs,’ says senior client account executive for commercial contracts, Chris Gardiner, ‘but there is much more grass roots debate.
And the clients have a greater confidence in us, recognising us as the people who have made it happen.
In turn we are able to tell them that our participation in the management of the company endorses our commitment to their business.’
The managers Hospitality spoke to about the buyout were all convinced that it was the right route for the business.
‘None of us believed that it was right, sensible, logical or professional to split up the company,’ says Bill Toner.
‘The strength of our business is the people and some of the schemes which were being put forward ignored the people.’
‘While I have always felt accountable, I have always run my own division more  or less autonomously and that hasn't changed,’ says Claudia McCabe.
‘But I am now more confident in voicing my views.’
Garry Hawkes says that the company hasn't really changed.
The procedures now operating were already in place, which, he says, is why the banks had the confidence to make the loan.
‘The trick has been to maintain added value and justify those loans,’ he says.
Cost savings have been made in levels of management, although it is claimed that only around 50 jobs have gone.
The structure of the company has been changed to bring the business closer to the customer by moving to a divisional structure, with each divisional director responsible for 150 contracts, and with 18 UK divisions.
Holland is based on three divisions, France has four, America four, Australia two and there are also operating companies in Hong Kong and Japan.
But the parts of the company which the sceptics said would be disposed of, particularly its headquarters at Kenley where it has a training division and research laboratories, have all been kept and will be, says Mr Hawkes.
One area of the business which, according to Bill Toner, has, however, been stood on its head, is the internal communications.
Unit managers want to know how the business is faring, how they compare to the rest of the company and even the rest of the world.
‘There is a much greater thirst for knowledge,’ he says.
They also want to know when they will be able to participate in the share option scheme.
The answer to that will depend on their own performance, because persuading the other investors to part with a further 12 per cent of their equity will only be possible if they are going to get a good return on it.
A few of the one thousand
HOW DOES YOUR BUSINESS RATE IN TODAY'S MARKET?
asks Steve Marriott
Most owners tend to overestimate the worth of their businesses, especially when seeking a loan for improvements or for refinancing.
In reality, a business — like everything else — is worth no more than the best offer you can obtain at the time of a sale.
In the present marketplace, with many hotels in receivership and many others unable to find buyers, prices remain severely depressed throughout the country.
And just when we are recording the first positive signs of an upward trend in sales and net profit margins we are hit with the financial problems of a major hotel group like Queens Moat Houses.
It is an unwelcome symptom of very tough times.
Nevertheless, in the last few months, our assessors have visited and valued a significant number of hotels whose owners are seeking to obtain finance for extensions and acquisitions.
Among these are managements who, by exercising careful control of purchasing, pricing and marketing, have maintained market share through the long recession.
Businesses such as these are now in a position to move cautiously forward.
While we see a buyer's market in terms of property, it is a seller's market for the financiers.
There can hardly ever have been a tougher time to persuade banks to part with their money.
Not surprisingly, every loan application is scrutinised with the deep scepticism born of sad experience.
The business may have a history of steady growth.
It may show reasonable profitability despite difficult trading conditions.
But a track record of success is at best a measure of past management expertise in fair times.
Cautious lenders tend to discount the past.
It is no proof of future potential.
They look for positive evidence that the business is soundly based and a good lending risk.
The value they place on your business is more likely to rest on an independent assessment than on your balance sheet and projections.
The lender will almost certainly instruct (or require you to instruct) a specialist firm of appraisers to make an inspection and issue a report.
It is important to understand what the assessor will be looking for when visits your premises.
He will have broad experience of the industry.
He may have been a manager or even an owner before becoming a business valuer.
And he is backed by a team that has information on thousands of similar operations, including others in your area of operations.
The overall quality of the operation, and therefore its current value as a lending risk, is assessed by the valuer from every relevant viewpoint — the calibre, presentation and situation of the premises, current and potential competition, likely or possible changes in the local development plan, possible changes in the demography of the area and other commercial considerations.
He will look at the premises as a whole, the fittings, facilities and equipment.
He will examine the profit and loss accounts and assess the current trading position from all available sales and purchasing information.
From the accounts he will make careful note of the overheads, staffing provision and wages.
The inspection is thorough; it excludes only a structural survey, unless this is subsequently felt to be necessary because of apparent defects.
An accurate valuation as a going concern is as much in the interests of the owner as of the lender.
The lender wants to know the business' present resources, the quality of management, marketing awareness and evidence of promotional skills.
The loan applicant needs assurance that his proposals for future operations are soundly based.
A key factor in valuing any business is location.
These days, with the public becoming unusually price sensitive in every sector of the marketplace, the measure of competition is specially critical.
Computer-held data of previous inspections in the area provides an otherwise unobtainable assessment of the strength of competition in the hotel's catchment area.
Hundreds of such inspections are made every year from which it is possible to compile an overview of trends in the marketplace.
In total, this presents as accurate a picture as possible of national, regional and local values.
It is important to stress that the valuer's role is entirely independent.
His report would be of little value otherwise.
Potential purchasers also commission reports, usually as a means of verifying the supposed value of a business that interests them.
Let us end with a cautionary tale.
The prospective purchaser of a country house hotel instructed a local surveyor who valued the business as a going concern at £3.75 million.
The bank asked for an independent appraisal.
The assessor's enquiries revealed a disturbing history of trade and of failed planning permissions.
In consequence the market value of the business was assessed at £1.25 million.
Unfortunately, the bank's clients had already exchanged contracts at £3.5 million.
Steve Marriott is an assistant director with business appraisers David J Pinder plc.
Beware of over-valuing
warns Dries de Vaal
Much of the hotel industry's present problems — in addition to reduced volumes and spend levels — are connected to over borrowing during the 1980's.
In other words, many hoteliers are faced with debt burdens which are too high.
How did this happen?
How is it that banks lend all this money?
Surely, bankers are cautious people and only lend if they are satisfied that there is sufficient security to cover the debt?
Well obviously not quite.
What happened in the over heated (property) market of the 1980's was this:
•many banks forgot their traditional cautions in their head on scramble for increased market share; and
•many valuations (independently prepared of not) weren't worth the paper they were written on.
During this time the banks in many instances relied on valuations prepared on the basis of market comparables.
The valuer would seek evidence of actual transactions having recently taken place, make a value judgement on the hotel to be valued and then mark the hotel's value at, or either side of, the average market evidence.
In a heated market, invariably the value placed on the hotel would tend to be higher than historical information.
Thus, in-built inflation and an even more heated market.
If you borrow against inflated values, you over-borrow in the sense that available cash-flow will (ultimately) not service the debt.
Hence the industry's present problems.
A valuer who knows what he is doing will value on the basis of one key criterion: available future cash flow.
That in turn, requires the valuer to accurately estimate the hotel's future earnings potential, having regard — amongst other things — to historical trading performance, the competitive position of the hotel, anticipated future influences on the hotel's performance (eg new competition, local infrastructure changes, etc) and market conditions.
•Dries de Vaal is a partner in Touch Ross, GBS division .
EC DIRECTIVE
Unravelling the Package
Pam Legate reports on how hoteliers are coping with the new EC Package Directive
According to Consort Hotels' David Sankey, the EC Package Directive (Package Travel, Package Holiday and Package Tour Regulations 1992), which came into effect on April 1 (Hospitality , April 1993), is a reminder of the early days of VAT.
‘It will be a year or two before we are comfortable with the Directive,’ he says.
‘Like VAT, it seems complicated, but as time goes by, we will accommodate its requirements without regarding them as intrusive.’
Meanwhile, many hoteliers are still puzzling over the more confusing clauses, vowing not to be the first to test them through the courts.
‘There's a lot of ambiguity, so we have erred on the side of caution,’ says Caroline Burrows of Swallow Hotels, a leading grass-roots authority on the Directive, having studied its implications from every angle following a seminar run by the Department of Trade & Industry (DTI), Trading Standards and ABTA.
‘We couldn't find anyone to bond us in time,’ says Mrs Burrows.
‘Applying to ABTA would involve hefty costs, as cover would offer us a lot we didn't need, and the British Hospitality Association's bonding arrangements were not in place before the April 1 deadline.
‘Insurance was another option, with one company offering cover for £1 a head for British guests, £2 for overseas visitors; but that required completing a detailed insurance form for each individual — an administrative nightmare if high volume is involved.’
So Swallow chose to follow the Trust Fund route initially, as that seemed to be the most cost-effective interim solution.
‘We prefer to have working capital rather than interest from money held in a Trust account, so we expect to apply for a bonding arrangement in the future,’ adds Ms Burrows.
Swallow's Breakaway packages often include transport (the company has a British Rail licence to sell tickets), as well as admission to tourist attractions.
‘We now need to have good communications and contracts with tourist attractions, so we know exactly when they are open and if they have to close for any reason,’ says Ms Burrows.
‘We have also changed the way we subcontract entertainment.
If we say are providing a band for dancing, we are liable if they let us down.
So hotels have to avoid unreliable entertainers, and we are having to think about standard contracts, not flexible agreements.
‘Another potential problem is with groups.
A coach operator may book accommodation and sell the hotel in his own brochure using his own copy.
We have to state in the contract that we are not liable for misrepresentation in a third-party brochure.
We have increased our own public liability cover to £50 million in case we have overlooked some small detail and a guest sues.
‘Guests should receive written terms before a deal is finalised, so telephone bookings can be a problem.
We have to take more time to explain clearly what they are getting and paying for.’
Many short breaks are not affected by the Directive, but the Trust account is essential at Christmas and New Year when deposits are taken, lodged in the account, and paid out once the holiday ends.
Swallow has chosen not to increase prices, despite extra work involved.
Opening a Trust account seems to be the route favoured by many hoteliers.
‘It was the only practical option,’ says Mark Ryder of Jarvis Hotels.
‘Insurance was hard to come by and there was no bonding to suit a UK operation as ABTOT (the Association of Bonded Travel Organisers Trust, run by Travel & General Insurance plc) did not have DTI approved-body status in time.
We have applied to them for bonding and may choose to move down that route instead.
‘Our Embassy Leisure Breaks offer transport and some tourism services but the Directive is confused at the margins.
Take murder weekends: the DTI says they fall outside the regulations, but I don't believe that.
If they are not a substantial part of a weekend and a reason for travel, what is?
We chose a Trust account to cover every eventuality.’
Best Western also opened a Trust account for packages operated on behalf of members of the independent hotels' consortium.
Consort Hotels decided to drop activity breaks, which made up a tiny part of its market, and rebranded the product as Consort Freedom Breaks, with improved rail-inclusive packages covered by a Trust account.
‘As a consortium, we have no heavy capital to put into a bond,’ says Consort's David Sankey.
As the deadline passed, Mount Charlotte Thistle, operating Highlife Breaks at more than 230 hotels, including 100 belonging to Queens Moat Houses, was weighing the Trust account option against ABTOT bonding.
‘ABTA requires an operator to bond total turnover whether it falls within the scope of the Directive or not,’ says Highlife's Hilton Pyle, ‘and we don't dabble in client insurance, as more than 80 per cent of sales are from travel agents, and we don't want to take away their premiums.
Conforming with the regulations will only increase costs by 7p to 8p per passenger.’
Hilton National hotels has an extensive programme of special interest and sporting breaks which they are covering through insurance.
Director of public relations, Linda Moore says: ‘Rates are pegged at last year's prices for most holidays, with special interests up slightly, but not as a result of the Directive.
ABTA bonding is more suitable to big operators, and Trust accounts mean hotels don't get the money until the holiday is over.
The BHA plan was not in place to meet the deadline, but it's something we may consider in the future.’
Small Luxury Hotels of the World will be appointing a tour operator to provide worldwide breaks, including transport, to its 90 properties worldwide; and Forte, which was already seeking ABTA bonding for a new programme of flight-inclusive packages to overseas hotels, decided to include UK breaks in the bond, scheduled for early-summer approval.
Until the bond is finalised, Forte clients are covered by temporary insurance.
Hilton National has a special interest package covered by insurance.
INTERNATIONAL
A Taste of Traditional Japan
Travel companies are featuring Japan more and more as a destination in their brochures, and more foreign visitors are encountering the Japanese way of hotels.
Hotel chains in Tokyo, Osaka and other large cities enjoy over 90 per cent occupancy, as visitors use the western-style hotels as ‘urban resorts’.
Despite the Gulf War dealing a major blow to the Japanese hotel industry, new hotel construction has not been  affected much by short-term influence.
According to the latest figures monitored by the Japan columns of Weekly Hotel and Restaurant , there are plans for 533 new hotels.
Most active construction is coming from the smaller chains and operators like Quality Inns.
Another major trend is the construction of hotels as a part of resort developments and ‘community hotels’ in the suburbs.
The paper Nihon Keizai Shimbun reports a promotion by the leading travel companies towards Japan's more traditional hotels.
Over the past ten years, three styles of traditional Japanese hotels have increased their public profile to westerners — the minshuku (private homes offering lodging service), the pension (usually at resorts catering for sporting activities), and the traditional ryokan.
To encourage the placement of more foreigners in these locations, the Tourist Centre of Japan has set up a Reservation Centre.
Some 300 minshuku are recommended to foreigners by the Japanese National Tourist Office (JNTO) who also advise on pension selection.
Undoubtedly, however, the ryokan is the best way to experience traditional Japanese lifestyles.
For the ryokan represents the essence of things Japanese — atmosphere, customs, traditional arts, and, fundamentally, the conventional Japanese way of life as engendered from past centuries.
Today there are some 80,000 ryokan in Japan, of which 2,100 belong to the Japan Ryokan Association.
Rates are in the upper range of 12,000–20,000 yen (£102–£170) including two (Japanese) meals, but exclude tax and service charge; the lower range is around 6,000 yen (£51) per person per night.
Ryokan are typically wooden structures up to three stories.
The newer constructions, however, are being built to six to eight stories high of ferro-concrete; may of them having central air-conditioning and western-style toilets and private bathrooms.
Single rooms are not usually available, but exceptions can be found in ryokan like the Yoshi-Ima.
Maid service is a part of the package.
Management training for ryokan operators and staff is more and more geared for western guests' needs and comprehension.
To date, most ryokan have a communal bath (for separate sex bathing) and many of the Japanese onsen (hot spring resorts) are ryokan built on a hot spring site.
The typical leisure wear at the ryokan is a blue and white cotton robe known as a yukata provided by the management.
Training is so geared to non-Japanese guests that visitors need not worry about embarrassment through misunderstandings of the Japanese lifestyle.
Indeed, some managements issue guides in English (with diagrams) on how to cope with Japanese-style toilets and baths.
(Special ‘toilet slippers’ are provided).
The Tea Gardens at Ryokan, Kyoto
Above: Ryokan: welcoming baskets for guests.
Below: the frontage of Ryokan
A few house rules differ from those of western hotels, but management presence is always around to help.
On arrival, guests take off their outdoor shoes at the ryokan entrance and are supplied with slippers; shoes are handled by the management (ie, placed at the entrance for you to leave), and for walking within the ryokan garden, they supply sandals or traditional geta (wooden clogs).
Once inside, the maid  will slide back the fusuma (paper-panel door) and the slippers are left at the door.
The room will be furnished with tatami (mats) for walking over in bare feet or socks/tights and seating is on zabuton (large cushions).
The room will be sparsely furnished with a tokonoma (alcove for a kakemono, scroll, or flower arrangement) and a series of shoji (paper sliding screens) over the windows.
During colder weather, the management supplies a tanzen (outer garment) to wear over the yukata.
Nowadays ryokan supply guests with a small suite including private bathroom separate toilet (western), a small dressing/undressing room, and often a narrow wooden porch looking out on to the garden where there is the only reminder of western custom, a small table and two easy chairs.
Each evening the maid will lay out the futon (sleeping quilts) directly on the tatami, with makura (pillow) and mofu (blanket).
Small Ryokan tucked into steps.
The market aimed at by ryokan owners and managers is the Japanese who want a home from home, and westerners who wish to sample traditional Japanese life.
The overall facility is quietness and staff are trained to be unobtrusive.
On arrival the guest will be offered ocha (hot green tea) with a Gomenkudasai (‘Excuse me for the intrusion’) and several pieces of omanju (rice cakes).
Registration is usually conducted in the room after tea.
Then comes such enquiries as when you wish to take your bath and be served what, and when, for dinner.
The initial dialogue too, includes queries about when you wish to retire and what you require for breakfast.
The management usually supplies towels, soap, toothbrushes wrapped in cellophane, toothpaste, razor and comb.
In recent years, companies such as the Japanese Inn Group have grouped together ryokan, family-run minshuku and pension, to contrast price, facilities and accommodation available; within the group each outlet is also described by location (Japanese addresses are almost incomprehensible to westerners) and construction (concrete, wooden building, number of floors.
Although the minshuku of recent years have improved their western visitor facilities, they tend to be still family-run without the refinement of modern hotel management training for their staff.
Minshuku are the best bet for the budget travellers with ryokan-style floor sleeping accommodation.
Privacy is very much less at minshuku, and there is less likelihood too of English-speaking staff.
Minshuku range from traditional wooden farmhouses with an irori fireplace built into the tatami covered floor, exposed beams and thatched  roofs to concrete, plastic and plywood family homes.
Minshuku also pose problems for westerners who wish to have a western-style cooked breakfast and coffee.
Only a few minshuku are geared to this and a Japanese breakfast of salted fish, rice and miso (soup) is all that is available.
Any management training that has been available for ryokan has been almost entirely ‘in house’ up to now, although the whole area of hotel management training is being rethought in Japan.
Of the hundreds of universities in Japan, only three prominent ones are listed as offering courses geared to tourism: Rikkyo (St Paul's), Teikyo and YSD.
YSD — Yokohama Shoka Daigaku — Yokohama College of Commerce, offers hotel management with a view to‘international marketing’.
Ryokan have a lot of potential for the tired traveller and exhausted businessman, for they offer a total experience of the Japanese way of life for the price of room hire, and allow guests to step out of a complicated world of congestion into a dream world of relaxation, simplicity, tranquillity and leisure.
Raymond Lamont-Brown 
Trainee geishas.
LEGAL
Roger Peters looks at licensing and VAT
Licensing laws set for yet another change
Hardly have the changes brought about by the Licensing Act 1988 settled in and all the guest beer and such like innovations from the Monopolies & Mergers Report taken effect, than more changes are in the air.
The latest Government proposals will do a lot more than just tinker with the existing liquor licensing laws in England and Wales, although the Scots will be pleased to hear that their licensing system is being used as the model for some of these proposed changes.
Apart from a proposal to do away with the Sunday opening polls in Wales from 1996, the suggested changes come under three headings:
Applications for full and off Licences
At the present time, apart from Part IV Licences (Restaurant and Residential Licences), the Licensing Justices have complete discretion as to whether or not they grant or renew a drinks licence.
This discretion has attracted much criticism and means licensing practice differs from area to area.
The Government suggests that in future, the grounds for refusing a full on licence should be limited to:
a)
the applicant is not a fit and proper person
b)
The premises are not suitable
c)
The use of the premises could cause public nuisance or disorder, or
d)
The locality has sufficient licensed premises already.
and that renewal should only be refused on those ground excluding (d).
This would bring the law in England and Wales into line with Scots law.
But the last ground, the ‘need’ for new licence premises, is questioned and the Government seeks views as to whether the question of ‘need’should best be left to market forces.
The Government also envisages that the same grounds and procedures would apply to off-licence applications.
Children's Certificates
The law concerning children on licensed premises is unsatisfactory in many respects.
There are rules prohibiting sale of alcoholic drinks ti, or for, young people under 18 years of age, but different rules apply to the sale of beer, cider, etc, to accompany a meal for a young person aged 16 or 17.
Children under 14 are not permitted in bars except when passing through the bar to get from/to another part of the premises.
That raises the question of what is a ‘bar’?
The result is inconvenience and confusion to families who wish to visit licensed premises.
To overcome this, the Government suggests a system, similar to that now operating in Scotland, under which children accompanied by an adult can be in licensed premises which have a Children's Certificate where food and non-alcoholic beverages are also available.
That proposal, however, creates its own problems.
In particular, what hours would be applicable to children and should they only be there if they are eating a meal or snack?
And should the conditions about availability of, or taking of, food be national or for the local Licensing Justices to attach as appropriate when granting the Children's Certificate?
The Government suggestions, in principle, are for a system of Children's Certificates to be granted by Licensing Justices but the Government invites comment as to whether food should merely be available or if children should only be admitted to certificated bars in order to eat a meal.
The Government also seems to favour a cut off time of 8pm, after which children should not be in a bar, but seems open to persuasion as to whether the Licensing Justices should have power to extend that time.
Cafe-style premises
The final proposal from the Government is for a new type of licence for continental-style cafes where all ages would be admitted whether taking a meal or not.
The suggestion is that accompanied children under 14 would be allowed on the premises until 8pm but the prohibition against sales to those under 18 would still apply.
The new category of licence would not be treated as a Part IV Licence except that the question of there already being sufficient licensed premises in the area would not be a factor for consideration in an application for a cafe-style licence.
The consultation paper is available from the Home Office () and the consultation period expires on June 30 1993.
VAT and no-shows
No-shows are, and always have been, a problem.
Increasingly, hotels and restaurants are imposing deposits, reservation fees or cancellation charges to cover themselves against the revenue lost through this loss of business.
But the VAT impact on these charges are different for each that is made.
The industry needs to be clear:
A deposit is an advance part payment.
If the guests take the room, they pay only the balance.
If not, or if they cancel, then they forfeit the deposit which means that the hotel does not refund the money.
VAT is payable on a deposit when it is received.
If the guests take the room, then VAT is payable on the balance when the room is taken.
If the room isn't taken, the hotel keeps the deposit and the VAT already paid to Customs and Excise can be reclaimed.
A reservation fee is a charge made to guarantee availability of a room.
It may or may not be deducted from the room charge.
Such a fee may be charged by the hotel or a reservation or booking agency.
Similarly, VAT is payable on a reservation fee when charged but there the similarity ceases.
The reservation fee is not security for not showing up, it is a payment for reserving the room.
The effect is that if the customer doesn't show up, the VAT already paid to the Customs and Excise cannot be reclaimed.
A cancellation charge is made when a customer cancels or doesn't show up.
Such charges are totally outside the scope of VAT altogether because they are not charges for goods or services.
In some industries, a deposit is taken as security for the return of goods hired out.
Such a ‘security deposit’ belongs to the customer and is returned to the customer when the goods are returned.
The money doesn't belong to the hire business and this type of deposit has no implications at all.
Such security deposits are not relevant to room hirings.
Two recent cases have shown how hotel deposits and reservation fees can still cause VAT difficulties.
The first case is Commissioners of Customs and Excise v Moonrakers Guest House Ltd 1992.
A deposit of 10 per cent was charged at the time of booking.
If a booking was cancelled and not relet, the deposit was forfeited.
But if the accommodation was relet, the deposit was returnable.
If the guest took up the booking, the deposit was part payment of the full price.
Moonrakers Guest House Ltd disputed liability to account for VAT on deposits when received on the basis that the company treated such deposits as belonging to the customer until either cancellation or the time of letting.
In other words, they dealt with such deposits as if they were equivalent to ‘security deposits’.
The court decided that treating accommodation deposits as ‘security deposits’ was wrong.
When the deposit was received, it was an advance part payment received by the business and did not belong to the customer.
Accordingly Moonrakers Guest House Ltd had to account to the Customs and Excise for VAT on deposits in the tax period in which they were paid.
The second case is Commissioners of Customs and Excise v Bass plc 1992.
The hotel operated a policy of re-letting rooms if not taken up by 6pm, but if the customer paid a separate charge, the room could be kept for the customer after that time.
These separate charges were reservation fees for guaranteeing the availability of rooms after 6pm and were not deposits.
Accordingly the court decided that VAT was payable on these charges and could not be reclaimed from Customs and Excise if the customer did not show up to claim the room.
Understanding the legal effect of payments is important because of the need to make sure that VAT is correctly accounted for to the Customs and Excise and to understand the circumstances in which it may be reclaimed.
A question of law
Legal correspondent Roger Peters answers your queries
Q I know that stock is going missing from the stock room and I've tried to prove who's doing it by various means without success.
I have narrowed it down to one of two employees, both of whom work in the kitchen.
I can't prove which it is (or even if they're doing it together) but I can't allow it to go on.
What should I do?
A The problem is not uncommon.
In your situation, as both employees work in the kitchen, it might be possible to monitor the situation, eg checking on stock after each shift, etc.
What you must do is carry out as much investigation as is reasonably possible to narrow it down to one suspect.
If, despite such investigation, you are still left with two suspects, then you should go through the disciplinary procedure with both of them, including interviewing both, giving an opportunity for one to own up, etc.
At the end of the day, if, having done all this, you are convinced that one of them is dishonestly taking stock but you cannot find out which one, you can dismiss both.
They will both claim that they were unfairly dismissed because the other was the culprit but that is not the issue.
The question for an Industrial Tribunal is not whether one of them was innocent but whether you carried out such reasonable investigation as you could and you reasonably believed it was either or both and dismissed them both because of that belief.
If that is shown then the dismissal is fair.
Q I am a restaurant proprietor.
The restaurant is on a lease and I understand that when the lease ran out there was a law which entitled me to a new one.
The lease runs out in two months time but the landlord has told me that I am not entitled to a new one because the lease is an excluded one.
Can you throw some light on it?
A The law in England and Wales is in the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954.
The law in Scotland is different but there are similar provisions applying there in Scotland.
The scheme of the 1954 Act is that if the lease is more than six months (which is presumably the situation in your case) and the premises are occupied for the purposes of your business, then the lease does not automatically come to an end.
It can only be brought to an end on or after the date it runs out by a notice in a prescribed form, served by either the landlord or the tenant.
Once the notice has been served, the tenant has the right to apply to the Court for a new general lease and the Court will grant a new lease of up to 14 years unless the landlord objects on one of the few grounds for objection set out in the 1954 Act.
So you start off on the basis that you will be entitled to a new lease under the 1954 Act provided you take the necessary steps within the time scale set out in the Act.
But the Act may be rendered inoperative if, before the lease was granted, the original landlord and original tenant agreed that the Act would not apply and obtained a Court order to that effect.
In your case, what I suspect the landlord is saying is that the lease is excluded from the operation of the 1954 Act because there was a Court Order before the grant of the lease.
You should ask the landlord for a copy of his evidence that the lease has been excluded from the 1954 Act and/or perhaps consult your solicitor.
Send your legal questions to Roger Peters at Hospitality ,.
EDUCATION
Open Learning Database for NVQs
by Robin Hardwick
One of the Confederation of British Industry's (CBI)‘Lifetime Targets’ for education and training is that, by 1996, 50 per cent of the work-force should be aiming at NVQs or units towards them.
A moment's thought soon shows how difficult it will be to achieve this if conventional training routes are followed!
NVQs are different to any conventional qualifications however:
They are output oriented, in that they are based on what individuals can do in their work, rather than what they know.
They are not linked to a particular course or to a particular method of study.
Through the ‘assessment of prior learning’(APL), they allow for those skills that an individual already possesses to be recognised (no re-inventing the wheel!).
The last point means that individuals need only be given training in those areas in which they have a skill shortfall.
Occupational Standards
The HCIMA, along with the Hotel and Catering Training Company (HCTC), has identified standards of competence for those in supervisory and managerial positions (levels 3 and 4 in NVQ terms).
These standards, along with those for levels 1 and 2, are the basis for a range of vocational qualifications in the catering and hospitality industry and licensed trade.
An increasing number of people in the industry are working towards those qualifications.
One problem remains, however — how do you find training that is geared to the needs of the individuals?
Where can you get training on one particular area of competence, or on the particular combination of competences that staff and managers need?
Open learning provides a flexible solution to many of those problems.
There is an increasing recognition that a well-developed package of study material can provide quality learning that will fill a training need and interest the learner.
Not only that, open learning is often as cost-effective (if not more so) as traditional learning methods!
But how can you find out about suitable open learning material?
Matching Programme
The Department of Employment (DoE) recognised that there was a lack of objective information about open learning material, and particularly about the extent to which an open learning package covered a given area of competence.
Now in its third year, the Matching Programme is filling that gap.
A series of computer databases has been produced, matching open learning material to the occupational standards for different sectors of industry.
Each database contains information on the material available — titles, authors, publishers and so on, along with details of price and where to obtain the material.
There is also a description of each package, in terms of its learning objectives, how it is structured, target audience and the qualifications that it can help towards.
The core of the database, however, is an analysis of the extent to which material covers the occupational standards.
Each package is independently analysed by two individuals, chosen not only for their specialist knowledge of the industry but also for their understanding of open learning techniques.
A common rating system is used, in which a package is analysed against each element of competence in the standards (elements of competence are the ‘building blocks’ for NVQs).
A ‘C’ rating, for instance, would indicate comprehensive coverage of an element, while a ‘K’rating shows that the package is geared more to underpinning knowledge than to competence itself.
The result is a database on which you can search for a favourite author or publisher, or search for packages that give you the required level of coverage of particular elements (or units) of competence.
No specialist knowledge of computers is needed — there is a series of menus to help you select what to look for, and a ‘Windows’ version of the database is soon to be available.
Hospitality Industry
The database for the catering and hospitality industry was being completed during May and should be published in late June.
There have been two separate projects, one focusing on food preparation and cooking, the other covering accommodation services (reception, housekeeping, etc).
The work was guided by a Steering Group, on which there were three representatives of the projects, the DoE, HCIMA, and HCTC.
The database (there are a range covering, for example, management, clerical skills and accountancy, as well as industry-specific areas) can be used on any IBM compatible PC with 640K RAM.
Purchasers to date have included colleges and TECs, who use them to inform and advise individuals and companies of what material is available.
Each database costs £17.43 (inclusive of VAT) and can be ordered from SCET,;.
BEDROOMS
Under Cover
David Mascord looks into the bedroom
No matter whether a hotel offers full leisure centre facilities and a la carte restaurant or simple no-frills comfort, the main reason guests are there is because they need a room for the night.
So what makes a good bedroom in the eyes of hoteliers and what do their guests expect?
What qualities should you look for in a hotel bed — and, apart from the bed, itself, how important are those little extras like hairdriers, giveaways and mini-bars as a way of adding value in a highly, price-conscious accommodation market?
Interestingly enough, even with a wide range of prices and types of hotel-style accommodation available, it's probably fair to say that the majority of guests expect en suite bathroom facilities as standard.
Of course, en suite has long been  de rigueur (if you'll pardon my French) in hotels nationwide.
However, the evidence in the expanding pub, inn and budget accommodation market indicates that even here — where prices can start at 20–25 per night for bed and breakfast — people want private bathroom facilities in the room.
This trend is evident at freehouse The Six Bells Inn, Bardwell, Suffolk, which, in addition to its pub and restaurant, has eight bedrooms each with en suite bathrooms.
Guests pay £25 per person for bed and breakfast in a double room with bath or shower, TV, tea and coffee facilities and telephone.
Licensee Richard Salmon says: ‘En suite is an absolute essential and business people expect to have a phone in the room.
Once you're offering accommodation, you're in a national market: I feel that we are in competition with any two-star hotel.
‘The problem that smaller places like ours face is branding — people can go somewhere like Travelodge or a Travel Inn and they know exactly what they are going to get.’
Even in budget accommodation operations like Forte's Travelodge, a fully-fitted bathroom is standard in the brand's 3,400 rooms.
Bedrooms on a budget at Travelodge.
At the very least it seems guests like to have the choice.
‘I do think more people want en suite bathrooms but rooms without these facilities are obviously cheaper — so it depends on what people want to spend,’ says Alison Hewitt, co-owner of 17th century coaching inn, the White Hart Hotel, on the Wold, Gloucestershire.
The hotel has seven bedrooms of which three are en suite.
As far as Hewitt is concerned, at the very least guests expect cleanliness at a good price.
‘People definitely want the basics,’ she says.
‘Hotels like this never used to have things like tea and coffee facilities and colour TV but now it's expected.
We don't have items like hairdriers in each room, but they are available.
Even American tourists who are used to all mod cons accept the fact that we can't offer absolutely everything.’
Comfort is the key word for Hewitt.
And, while everyone has their own idea about what a comfortable bed is, she does her best to make sure mattresses are maintained and are regularly replaced — usually every couple of years.
But apart from basic maintenance like turning mattresses regularly — every three months, experts recommend — what should a hotelier look for in a good quality hotel bed and what is its average life expectancy?
‘If a bed is in 365 days a year use, it could last for three years or maybe more,’ says John Mott of supplier Airsprung Furniture.
‘In tourist areas where there is more seasonal trade, a mattress could last seven or eight years.’
Mott accepts that all hoteliers are governed by cost but emphasises that, as with most purchases, you get what you pay for.
‘The quality, the type of spring unit and of course flame retardancy all influence cost.
You could buy a platform bed with no springs, for example, but it doesn't last as long,’ he says.
But what happens in the case of chain hotels which already offer comfortable, quality furnishings and a number of accessories and facilities as standard?
With every potential guest looking for good old VFM (value for money) these days, how can they offer extra value?
Up to 90per cent of the clientele at the Holiday Inn, Maidenhead/Windsor, is made up of businessmen and women, some of whom don't check in until 10 or 11.00pm.
‘Our guests are looking for a comfortable, clean bedroom first of all,’ says sales manager Joanna Honey MHCIMA.
Regular Holiday Inn guests also get added extras.
‘We do try and do things a little differently for them like giving them complementary fruit and maybe upgrading them to an executive room.’
Added value is created in executive rooms by offering a larger bed in a larger room, a mini bar, complimentary orange juice and mineral water, bathrobes, satellite TV and a high level of decor and soft furnishings.
According to Honey it's these little touches that make a big difference.
‘People also want to feel more at home which is why facilities like tea and coffee, perhaps a minibar and, in some of our hotels, satellite TV, are widely expected.
‘While we can never offer a real home from home, guests come knowing that they can get some of the comforts of home — like being able to make a cup of tea or have a drink without necessarily having to come downstairs or order room service.’
With extra bedroom accessories becoming accepted as standard throughout the hotel industry, it's the personal touch and a thoughtful approach towards guests that will be of the highest value.
The recent growth in ‘budget bedroom’ accommodation has been a boon for business people, families or tourists on a budget.
In pure marketing terms, the concept is basically a bedroom product in association with a ‘host brand’ restaurant, rather than being part of a hotel.
In the case of one example, Forte's Travelodge — which now has outlets in 94 locations nationwide.
According Travelodge Development Director Don Coope MHCIMA, whose brainchild the concept was, the principle behind the idea was to remove the high level of bedroom management common to hotel-style operations.
Instead Travelodge offers a standard room which could be used for single, double or family occupancy with guests paying their £31.95 room charge up front.
So what do guests get for their money?
All rooms are 6 metres x 3.5 metres and have the following standard features:
Fully fitted bathroom with heated towel rail
5ft queen-sized double bed
single sofa bed
drawer front 5ft 3″ x 2ft 9″ occasional bed
TV/radio/alarm clock
Tea and coffee making facilities
fitted sheets and duvets
spare sheets and duvets for sofabed and occasional bed
Coope's initial research found that people expected en suite facilities, tea and coffee making provisions and a TV but, unlike large hotels, none of the rooms have telephones.
‘We don't have telephones because our research showed that the average business person makes perhaps only one phone call from their room — probably to tell their wife or husband they've arrived.
‘We are looking at offering a telephone which operates on a card swipe system and this is on experiment at the moment.
But research indicates that guests are no more or less likely to use a phone when one is available in the room.’
PR0DUCTS
On or under the cover
Products for bedroom or dining room
The Lane range of Guest Courtesy Products, available ex-stock from You're Welcome Products and their distributors, has been completely redesigned, with the new look featuring a variety of coordinating colours in marble effect with a gold print.
Some of the sachets feature a new high-gloss, waterproof finish.
The product range includes finger wipes, shoe shine, shampoo, bath gels, shower caps, and sewing kits.
All the products can be personalised to the client's exact requirements.
For more information contact Keith Roberts on  .
Health, cleanliness and comfort are of the highest concern in the selection of the beds and pillows for the hotel sector.
The Slumberland Health Seal Range, with Intervent, has been born out of the relationship between Slumberland and W L Gore and Associates, and much of the technology relates to this successful and clinically  trialled allergy programme.
The bed range features the unique Intervent microporous membrane allowing full wipe down and sanitisation of the sleep surface.
Combining this effective barrier to virus movement with Slumberland's unique Posture Springing system, has offered the hotel guest the hidden comfort of over double the number of essential supporting springs and the reassurance that their health and well being is being cared for.
For more information contact Slumberland on  .
Lancasters , the family company specialising in stainless steel cutlery for the catering industry, claims to be able to get any size order, large or small, which can be placed by phone, delivered to the customer within 24 hours by Securicor, with a full money-back guarantee.
And Lancasters provides a Cheap ‘n’ Cheerful standard range, said to be ideal for institutional catering, cafes and bar snacks.
And for the restaurant and hotel, a range is available in five traditional patterns — Bead, Dubarry, Kings, Jesmond and Harley.
For further information contact Janet and John Emanuel on  .
Decor Style has added barpleat to its range of skirtings.
The new product has a drop of 85cm (33½ ″) so the skirtings can be used on bars and counters which are taller than tables.
Available in pearl white, barpleat skirtings feature 1½ ″ pleats.
They are designed for single use, but because they are made of formed fabric, they give the appearance of linen.
Packed five per case, each skirting is 4m (13ft) long.
For more information contact Judi Bailey on  .
The Apilco range of French porcelain, available from F Trauffler , offers three basic shapes — Bistro, Trianon and Opera — all designed for high performance and, the company claims, combining durability and versatility with attractive styles and colours.
Apilco is said to be safe for use in the oven, microwave (those without metallic binding), freezer and dishwasher.
Trauffler also offers personalising services and will quote on putting a logo or company name on items.
For more information contact Malcolm Singer Associates Ltd on .