

Missing Persons: pre-enrolment wastage from science, maths and engineering courses
by Kevin Lowden, Pamela Munn, Candy MacDonald
Recent years have seen considerable emphasis on attracting adults to higher and further education.
Much of this has been targeted at courses in science, mathematics and engineering.
Little research has studied adults who got to the stage of applying to do a course but who then did not enrol for it.
This Spotlight reports on a survey of 94 adults (defined as people aged 20 or over) who fell into this category and looks at what — if anything — providers might do to pick up on the original expression of interest.
Adult applicants can be divided into 3 broad groups:
1
to a particular institution and who go on to enrol there
2
to a particular institution but who go on to enrol elsewhere either on
a)
similar courses in terms of level or content or
b)
different courses in terms of level or content
(We have called both these sets of individuals ‘migrants ’)
3
to a particular institution but who do not go on to enrol there or anywhere else (we have called them ‘non-enrollers ’)
There is an increasing body of knowledge about the first group but little about the other two.
This study looks only at the latter two groups.
The study set out to investigate:
reasons for applying to a particular institution
reasons for applying to a particular course
whether applicants enrolled on a course elsewhere
barriers to enrolment and strategies for removing these.
The findings, described below, suggest the need for:
diversity of provision, for example, different modes of provision to widen access
increased financial support and advice for adult applicants targeted at those experiencing financial difficulties.
Again this would increase access to courses
short, introductory courses which provide the basics needed for a course, or refresh subject knowledge.
Such courses in mathematics were mentioned.
However, it is important to note that over half the applicants in our survey had enrolled for a course though not the one we were tracking.
Not surprisingly adults, like younger students, will ‘shop around’ for courses and institutions which appear to offer what they want.
The research
This survey was part of a two year research project on adults doing science, mathematics or engineering courses in further and higher education funded by the Scottish Office Education Department.
The main focus of the project was a qualitative study of what helped adults cope on  these courses.
The survey reported here was the other strand of the project and addressed issues relating to adults' pre-enrolment to these types of courses.
Clearly, within available resources it was not possible to contact all adult applicants and enquirers about all courses in Scottish colleges and universities.
We focused on enquirers to courses in science, mathematics and engineering and on those who had completed an application for a course but who for one reason or another had not enrolled for it.
Unsurprisingly, since some institutions have literally thousands of enquirers, records are seldom kept of those who do not follow up an enquiry with an application.
It is therefore, very difficult to follow up adults who have enquired about courses but not actually applied.
Most of the information available from institutions from which we could sample concerned adult applicants rather than adult enquirers .
This mean that there were only 18 enquirers in our sample (19%).
Since, however, the types of response given by these enquirers did not differ significantly from applicants, we have grouped them with the applicants for the purpose of the analysis.
The term ‘applicants’ refers to all respondents in discussion of the findings.
The sample of applicants to science, mathematics and engineering courses were drawn from ten institutions, four colleges of further education and six higher education institutions.
In all, 94 applicants were interviewed by telephone.
More responses were from adults who had applied to higher education courses than further education (66% as against 34%).
This, together with the self–selecting nature of the sample, means that while the findings can aid understanding of the factors involved they cannot be generalised to the wider population.
The findings
Before discussing the findings in detail, one is worth highlighting: of the 94 applicants, over half, 54% were what we have called migrants.
That is, while they did not start courses at the institutions we studied, they did go on to take a course elsewhere.
For 27% of the applicants (25 people) these were similar courses.
For 28% of the applicants (26 people) the courses were different in terms of content and/or level.
These migrants differed in some important respects from the 46% of applicants who were non–enrollers,(those who applied to a particular institution but did not go on to enrol anywhere).
These differences are discussed as appropriate below.
Reasons for applying to particular institutions and courses
The dominant reason for applying for a particular course was vocational (see Table 1).
In many ways this is hardly surprising given the nature of the courses we chose to study.
However, self development and personal interest factors (eg, to gain confidence or for mental stimulation) were greater than expected — it is more usual for humanities and social science courses to attract these kinds of comments.
It is interesting that non-enrollers were more likely than migrants to cite vocational motives.
In the absence of more detailed evidence we can only speculate whether the more vocationally, or instrumentally, motivated applicants are, the less willing they will be to consider other, alternative courses and institutions if they do not get on to the course they wanted.
Perhaps, in contrast, migrants are people who are willing to consider a wider range of course options because they are more likely to see broader gains, such as personal development, from participation.
The migrants may be the types of applicants who are more willing to ‘shop around’ for courses, applying to more than one.
They may be less likely to be put off enrolling on alternative courses.
This could be followed up by subsequent research, possibly by comparing whether the migrants apply to more courses and institutions than non–enrollers.
However, as we shall see, we do have firmer evidence  to suggest that non-enrollers are more affected by external barriers such as financial and personal circumstances.
We were able to ask the 83 applicants who mentioned vocational motives as being one reason for their interest, albeit not necessarily the main one, for more detail (see Table 2)
Of course, these categories are not mutually exclusive.
Migrants were more likely to say that a course would help them change career direction or, if they were currently unemployed, help them get a job.
The difference is hard to explain as there was no difference between the two groups in terms of whether or not they were employed at the time they enquired about the courses.
Let us now look at the migrants more closely.
What factors influenced them to look elsewhere to do their courses?
Reasons for choosing another institution and course
Migrants gave three main reasons for not having taken the course at the institutions involved in our research.
These reasons were, in this order:
reputation — the preferred institution was felt to be of higher quality
course content — was seen as more appropriate elsewhere
location — the preferred institution was usually closer to home.
These reasons were given in response to an open question and more than one reason was allowed.
Perceived reputation of institutions and the suitability of course content obviously have implications for the marketing policies of institutions.
The importance of doing courses at an institution closer to home is not surprising when one considers adults are likely to have commitments which limit their ability to travel long distances or stay away from home.
However there are also implications for provision policies.
If adults are not able to travel far to attend courses, any reduction in the range of courses in terms of subject content, levels (eg HNC, degree) and modes of study provided in a geographical area could result in some subjects being to all intents and purposes inaccessible to adults.
It is worth looking in more detail at the 26 applicants who did a course that was quite different from the one they initially applied for.
It is noteworthy that more than half did equivalent or higher level courses than those they applied for at the institutions we covered.
These ranged from switching to Highers in non-science subjects when the original intention had been SCE/GCE science to a degree in building and surveying when the original application had been for a place on an access course in science and technology.
The vast majority of these migrants stayed broadly within the science, maths and engineering fields.
Only two switched to social science or humanities.
Non-enrollers' reasons for not doing the courses
45% of the respondents were non-enrollers, of whom 14% lacked the entry qualifications to get onto the courses we covered in the study.
For the remainder of the non-enrollers, the most important reason for not doing the courses was:
financial difficulties (46%)
childcare or other domestic responsibilities (11%).
In the case of those who gave financial difficulties as the main reason for not doing a course, specific  responses included ‘couldn't afford to lose income’ or that ‘course fees were too expensive’.
For those citing domestic responsibilities as the most important reason, specific responses were usually childcare demands and being the only wage earner in the family (which also overlaps with financial difficulties).
In contrast to non-enrollers, migrants did not stress financial or domestic factors as reasons for not taking up courses in the institutions studied.
It does appear that the non-enrollers were more likely to be affected by personal circumstances than the migrants.
However, we must be cautious in drawing such conclusions.
It is possible that the migrants understated such factors because they had actually gone on to do courses.
Financial difficulties and childcare /domestic responsibilities, have been shown in other research on participation to be fundamental barriers.
By fundamental barriers we mean those difficulties, which usually arise from a person's personal circumstances such as lack of money or having to look after dependants.
These are so overwhelming that they stop adults going on to do the courses they applied for or enquired about.
Other problems, such as academic ability or entry requirements, became secondary if the adult cannot afford to do the course or find the time to study in the first place.
Other reasons given for not doing courses were varied and were only cited a small number of times.
The most common were ‘changes in employment’, most notably ‘gaining employment’ and ‘course content being seen as too difficult’.
While a lack of entry qualifications did not rank as the most important reason overall for not doing a course, the 14% who did need entry qualifications may suggest that some of the non-enrollers had insufficient information about the courses they were applying to and, consequently, applied to courses for which they had insufficient entry qualifications.
If this were so, it suggests the need for good quality pre-entry information and advice so that adults are aware of the academic demands of the courses and of progression routes to their preferred courses.
How could providers help adults?
This leads to a consideration of what would encourage participation.
Both migrants and non-enrollers believed more could have been done to help.
Just over half (55%) of all applicants said that something could have been done to help them.
Their main suggestions for help are listed in Table 3.
Given the marked difference between non-enrollers and migrants in regarding financial considerations, it is not surprising that non-enrollers were more likely to want more financial support and financial advice.
In terms of general guidance needs, migrants were more likely to suggest this, as well as general introductory classes to particular courses, as a form of pre-course preparation.
Non-enrollers were the only applicants to want a different mode of attendance in the course they had applied to.
While we can not be sure why, it may be related to their greater  likelihood of having financial difficulties and need for more financial support.
Our other research has shown that some adults would prefer not to take up a full-time course and so lose the income from a full-time job.
This would seem particularly likely if the adult is facing or already has financial difficulties.
For these adults, evening courses or open learning would be a more preferable way of studying.
Intentions for the future
It is encouraging to report that interest in the education system was buoyant with 50% of all applicants planning take a course in the future.
Many of these hoped to start this course in the next academic session (46% of enquirers) and 58% of those who said they wanted to do a course in the future had made enquiries about it.
More non-enrollers than migrants said they intended to do a course in the future (63% compared with 40%) and the non-enrollers were also much more likely to say they wanted to start the course very soon and had made enquiries about it.
(As migrants were already on courses they may be less likely to be thinking of taking up another one at present.)
It is heartening to see that the non-enrollers have not been put off future participation, especially when it seems many have had difficulties arising from personal circumstances.
The main ways these non-enrollers said they would surmount the earlier difficulties were to save money and to get more qualifications.
Migrants who said they did not want to do another course or were unsure, generally said that they wanted to finish the current course before considering anything else.
Others indicated that they did not need any more qualifications for progress at work.
The non-enrollers who did not want to do a course in the future gave a variety of responses but financial factors, not needing the qualification at work, and being interested only in the ‘target’ course were their main reasons.
However, the number of individual responses in each category was low.
Those applicants who wanted to do a future course were interested in a diversity of courses including advanced science, professional qualifications (eg, teaching, social work), computing, advanced engineering, business studies and electrician courses.
Implications for institutions and policy makers
As we said at the outset, these findings are not generalisable, but they are illuminative.
This discussion concentrates on implications based on strong consensus emerging from our small sample.
That many of the findings here are similar to those of our other work on adult education, we feel adds to the value of what we report from this study of applicants.
The main implications for institutions and policy makers are:
diversity of provision is important, for example in content and mode of attendance.
The non-enrollers were more likely to want different modes of attendance.
All of the migrants saw locally provided courses as attractive.
As adults often have commitments which limit their ability to travel, any concentration of subject provision or types of courses in particular institutions may make some subjects inaccessible to adults.
more financial support and guidance.
It would seem that there is a demand for such assistance as 1 in 5 of all applicants said that they did not go on to take the course because of financial difficulties.
Of this 20%, the non-enrollers were more likely to have had such problems.
Such support might include: more concessions, flexibility in payment of fees etc, and guidance on the financial implications of doing a course and where to get help with financial problems.
These strategies would be most usefully targeted at those applicants experiencing financial difficulties.
In the context of this study, these would be the non-enrollers.
public image of institutions and their courses.
Perceptions of institutional quality are obviously important to migrants.
Our evidence suggests that adult students are concerned with the apparent quality of an institution and its courses when making decisions about where to do a course.
From another, more qualitative part of our research on adult participation in science courses we have seen that, particularly for those adults doing courses for vocational reasons, the perceived ability of an institution to get students through courses successfully and into good jobs is very important in selecting where to study.
Given the dominance of vocational motives, these adults are especially interested in the employment destinations of previous students and indeed in the links with employers which colleges and universities have.
Much of this information is picked up by word of mouth from previous students and workmates.
Positive but accurate  information about the quality and successes of institutions and their courses, if publicised by providers, could be of value in their marketing strategy.
wider guidance about courses.
The need for general, as opposed to financial guidance was the next most commonly cited request for support (34%).
Unfortunately, we do not have more detailed information about the areas this guidance should cover.
We can speculate that pre-entry information and guidance is important.
That non-enrollers were more likely than migrants to say that they hadn't done a course because they needed other qualifications could imply ignorance of entry requirements.
It seems very important that adults are made aware of entry requirements particularly when applying to science courses.
Wider access for adults is being advocated but, compared with courses in the arts or social sciences, many science courses appear to be less flexible in their entry requirements.
Often maths and English are required to certain specified levels.
Clearer, comprehensive and more accurate advertising and pre-entry information might help avoid some adults applying for courses for which they are unqualified.
Systematic referral to other institutions or agencies which could help adults get the appropriate qualifications or advise them on what to do next might also encourage such enquirers.
preparatory courses.
There would seem to be a demand for short courses and classes to prepare adults for their intended course.
An important area here might be courses in mathematics which is often a key part of the science and engineering courses.
Such courses could teach the basics students will need or refresh existing knowledge.
As we have seen, it was encouraging that over half the applicants, while not taking a course at the institutions in our study, did take up courses at other institutions.
There were also intentions, particularly from the non-enrollers, to take a course in the near future.
However, the findings of this study show there is no room for complacency.
There would appear to be scope for institutions and policy makers to reduce barriers to participation particularly for the financially disadvantaged.
Our suggested strategies for improvement obviously have a price tag but such support may well seem desirable given the current consensus in education and government in favour of widening access, particularly for less advantaged groups.
Acknowledgement
We are grateful to the adults who were kind enough to participate in the survey and to those working in educational guidance who helped identify our sample.
This spotlight is a summary of the findings of a survey which was part of a project, conducted by SCRE, entitled The Needs of Mature Entrants with Special Reference and Technology Subjects .
The project, which was funded by the Scottish Office Education Department, ran from January 1990 to January 1992.
COPYRIGHT
SCRE Spotlights may be photocopied, for use within your own institution.
Copyright 1992 The Scottish Council for Research in Education.
The views expressed in these papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of SCRE.
Printed and published by the Scottish Council for Research in Education, 15 St John Street, Edinburgh, EH8 8JR, October 1992.