

Editorial
What counts as research?
This issue of the newsletter offers a slightly different view of educational research.
Most of the articles focus on the social and personal circumstances of pupils, reaching towards elusive but crucial contexts which contribute to increasing understanding but which can be lost behind statistics and attempts to categorise information.
So, friendships and the part they play, what counts as truancy, what makes a classroom more or less biased, figure in the following pages, together with a consideration of what research is.
A key characteristic of research is that it is public.
To judge by the mushrooming of research networks in Scotland — adult education, gender, and for teacher-researchers — researchers need never be lonely once they have decided on the category into which they fit.
And that should be good not only for researchers but also for research and those who rely on it to help in improving the education they give, and receive.
Am I doing research?
, Director of SCRE, reflects on ‘what is research?’ in an article which originally appeared in Observations, the bulletin of the Scottish Teacher Research Network
TEACHER-RESEARCHERS sometimes feel the need to apologise for the studies they undertake, as not being ‘real research’.
Often this is quite unnecessary, since what they are doing is as genuine research as any.
But that isn't to say that doing research is like breathing — you do it all the time without realising.
Research, although it takes many forms, has recognisable characteristics.
My purpose here is to try to identify these, hopefully without too much over-simplification or bias.
My favourite quotations on ‘what is educational research?’ come from .
His answers were: ‘Systematic activity that is directed towards providing knowledge, or adding to the understanding of existing knowledge, which is of relevance for improving the effectiveness of education’, later expressed more succinctly as ‘systematic activity made public’.
Between them, these statements identify three characteristics at the heart of educational research.
First, it is systematic .
This doesn't mean that it has to be quantitative, but rather that there is a clear relationship between the understanding being sought and the information collected, or selected for review, so that there is no inbuilt bias which would prejudge the outcome.
Second, it is purposeful , directed towards improving the effectiveness of education.
The purpose is generally expressed in terms of research questions, which have a key role in planning research (see  & ).
Third, it is made public, ie,shared with others who may be able to use the findings or build upon them.
Sharing can be through meetings and conferences, but a written report is obviously more easily accessible to others.
Both oral presentation and writing, however, have an additional function in helping the researchers to sort out and understand their findings in order to be able to communicate them.
A reason for teacher-researchers feeling apologetic about their work can arise from a myth about the differences between ‘teachers’ research’and ‘researcher's research’.
It goes along the lines that ‘researchers’ research’is all about ‘controlled experimentation within a psycho-statistical paradigm’— to coin a jargon or two — and expressed in just this kind of language.
That might well have been true in the early 1960s but not in the 1990s, so let us not revive a distinction which has thankfully been eliminated All kinds of research in education have gone far beyond this narrow form.
A more important aspect of this distinction lingers, however — the relationship of research to theory.
The word ‘theory’ is too often contrasted with ‘practice’and thus interpreted as being remote from real classroom and schools.
Hence the misconceived view that researchers' research is theory-based whilst teachers' is not.
Theory is essential to any enquiry.
Without a theory (meaning initial ideas about what is going on) there is no basis for deciding what information may be relevant.
The knowledge which research provides is most useful when it goes beyond a description of events to provide a basis for future action.
As a scientist by training, I see an interesting similarity between the way in which knowledge is developed in science and in educational research.
This is not in terms of methodology, I hasten to add, for I learned by first-hand practice in the late 1960s that the application of scientific methods of investigation in the so-called ‘agricultural-botany’ model had little value in developing understanding in education.
Since that time, not only have views of education and educational research changed, but so have views of science.
So it is in the nature of the enterprise as currently understood, and the status of the produced knowledge, that I find the parallel.
Science is no longer characterised as being about objective truth, about ‘proving’ things, being value-free.
Instead it is now recognised as a human activity which seeks to advance understanding of the world around, through building upon previous knowledge and understanding.
The knowledge it produces at any time is tentative and always open to challenge by further evidence.
Scientific ideas and theories are accepted for as long as the known evidence supports them.
The same can be said of the activity and products of educational research.
We have to recognise it for what it is; to see it as a way of generating understanding and knowledge, yielding ideas and theories which are accepted for as long as they help our understanding of evidence, but which are constantly superseded and changed when new evidence is obtained which conflicts with them.
There is no end to this process; no ultimate truth or understanding of either education or of the scientific aspects of the world around.
From this comes a view of educational research as starting from present ideas and knowledge, using these to develop questions which focus the collection of information in a systematic way, and leading to their modification or reconstruction in the light of new evidence.
The new understandings then become the basis for further activity — and so on it goes.
But note that each cycle depends on communication of emerging ideas to those who can use them; hence the importance of telling others about one's findings and ideas and of finding out what others have reported about one's own current concerns.
SCOTTISH EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATION
The first of SERA's seminars for 1993 is planned for April at Napier University as an important step in launching a research network (see below) The Gender in Education Network currently being established hopes to draw on a wide range of expertise from a variety of institutions.
The Third SERA Teacher Researcher Conference will be held on  at Stirling University.
The title is Supporting Teacher Research .
These one-day conferences to enable teacher researchers to discuss areas of research interest and other relevant matters.
Together with the Annual Conference to be held at St Andrews at the end of September, SERA promises an action-packed year.
Whatever your interest in research, SERA has something to offer.
Interested in joining?
Please contact: at SCRE for an application form.
SUPPORTING TEACHER RESEARCH
The Third SERA Teacher Researcher Conference takes place at the University of Stirling on .
It is designed to provide an avenue by which teacher researchers can discuss, both formally and informally, areas of research interest.
Another important focus is the process of doing teacher research.
This particular conference also addresses the way in which teachers can be supported in their research.
How can education authorities assist?
How can university personnel be involved to support research carried out in schools by teachers?
These are some of the questions to be addressed at the conference.
Conference fee — £13 members of SERA, £14 non-members — this includes lunch, tea and coffee.
For more information con tact:
Changes at SCRE
AUTUMN 1992 SAW notable changes in the membership of the Board of the Scottish Council for Research in Education.
Of the 26 members, the terms of office of no less than seven came to an end.
Retiring members included the Chairman, of  who had been in post since 1984, seeing the Council successfully through a record number of reviews of its work, ways of working and reconstitutions.
The new Chairman, one of three nominees to SCRE appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland, is  Principal and Vice-Chancellor of Heriot Watt University.
He is well known for his interest in teaching and learning in higher education, especially through the possibilities offered by what used to be known as ‘new’ technologies.
who graduated in electrical engineering from Glasgow University, returned to Scotland from Cambridge in 1989.
RESEARCH NETWORK options
Two new networks get underway this spring.
Adult Education Research
The Economic and Social Research Council has awarded a grant to the newly established Adult Education Research Network to enable it to organise a series of seminars over two years, beginning in January 1993.
The network offers meetings, publications and contacts.
Three half-day meetings a year will be held in different parts of Scotland.
Primary themes will be:
gender
access
life style
quality assurance
research methods
Summaries of the papers and news about adult education research will be circulated twice a year in a newsletter.
Details from  at SCRE or  at Edinburgh University.
Gender and Education Launching a Research Network
Conference: 21 April 1993
This one-day conference is being organised jointly by Napier University Enterprise Centre and the Scottish Educational Research Association.
Its purpose is to disseminate the findings of current and recent Scottish research on gender issues — throughout education — and to launch a research network.
Fee £25 (including lunch).
Applications to   by 19th March 1993,
Launching of Scottish Affairs.
Scottish Affairs is a new quarterly journal, replacing The Scottish Government Yearbook .
It is edited by .
Among the editorial advisors is educationalist  (Moray House).
Its purpose is to stimulate debate and research about Scotland.
It carries articles not only from academics, but also from journalists, public servants, and freelance writers.
The aim is to provide a link between the various places where Scotland's future is discussed.
Submissions from teachers, administrators, researchers, and others in the education service are very welcome, and should be sent to  at CES.
Subscriptions cost £20 per year (£35 for institutions), and should be sent to ,.
FOCUS 1
‘Peers and friends are not the same thing…’
THE IMPORTANCE OF FRIENDSHIPS
THE YOUNG PEOPLE'S Leisure and Lifestyles project based in the Department of Education at the University of Aberdeen has just completed a seven-year study.
One of the many topics covered by the research team was that of friendships and their importance to adolescents.
ALTHOUGH relationships with parents determine in large measure our longer-term preferences, attitudes and values, during adolescence it is often relationships with friends that cause most concern and which pre-occupy the thoughts of young people as they grow up.
Friendships are based on a completely different set of structural relationships to those with parents.
They are more symmetrical and involve sharing and exchange.
Friendships are important to young children but there is a change at the beginning of adolescence — a move to intimacy that includes the development of a more exclusive focus, a willingness to talk about oneself and to share problems and advice.
Friends tell one another just about everything that is going on in each other 's lives…
Friends literally reason together in order to organise experience and to define themselves as persons.
The role of friendships
In adolescence friendships normally exist within the larger social structure of peer relationships.
In this larger social setting each adolescent has a particular role to play and is usually aware of their own status within the group.
Close friendships are not independent of such status.
Popular or successful youngsters stick together.
Those who are not ‘in’ do not mix as frequently with those on the periphery of what is acceptable to the group.
Whereas the standards and styles set by the peer group can set highly influential markers around acceptable and unacceptable behaviours for young people it is in individual friendships that young people find support and security, negotiate their emotional independence, exchange information, put beliefs and feelings into words and develop a new and different perspective of themselves.
Data from the YPLL project indicates that young men and young women use and view friendships in quite different ways.
For instance, as far as young women are concerned, we can trace the development of friendships through an early adolescent period when emotional commitments are minimal and the focus of friendship is common activities, a period in mid-adolescence when young women become most anxious about being rejected or excluded from a same-sex friendship.
There is strong emphasis on loyalty and support at this stage:
‘…
People should remember that you need attention too, and not ignore you and sneak away from you, People who sneak away from you cannot really be your friends in the first place.
Sometimes friends gang up on you.
So you have to make another friend in another class.
That is not pleasant.
I should know…
Friendships become easier for young women in later adolescence as they develop a clearer sense of self identity.
Young women of this age show a high regard for each other 's individuality and a greater ability to tolerate differences.
Young men's friendships rarely achieve the depth of intimacy of young women's.
Larger peer groups — the boys’ or ‘the lads’— often appear more important to them than individual friendships.
Young men in middle adolescence describe their friends to researchers in the YPLL team in terms similar to those used by pre-adolescent girls — failing to see emotional support, closeness or security as important qualities of a friendship.
Apart from these general trends, the YPLL data also reveals interesting social class differences between youngsters.
Young people from working-class backgrounds, for instance, are more likely to spend time with a boy/girl-friend whereas young people from G middle-class backgrounds continue to move around in mixed sex groups for a longer period, perhaps anticipating an extended period of dependence on parents as they head for further or higher education.
The role of the peer group
Peers and friends are not the same thing.
Peer groups appear to have a dynamic role, the function and influence of which shifts across adolescence.
The adolescent uses the peer group to evaluate the perspectives of others, while developing his or her own values and attitudes.
Styles of dress, hairstyles, musical interests, speech and language use, leisure activities, and values are among the characteristics that teenagers appear to learn, in part, by watching and comparing themselves to others in their group.
further, teenagers learn methods of handling social relationships by observing and imitating peers.
The influence of the peer group appears to be particularly marked where parental influence is not strong.
Of course, being liked, accepted and defining one's role within a social group are important features of life at any age, but because peers play such an important role in the lives of adolescents, social acceptance is an urgent concern for most young people.
Young people in the YPLL study were asked to identify from a list which items they felt influence popularity and unpopularity amongst friends.
From this question we discovered that young men are more likely to regard being like their friends in behaviour and appearance and physical attributes as important, whereas young women are more likely to value qualities in the personality of their friends, like honesty, cheerfulness and so on.
The importance attached to attractiveness declines throughout the adolescent years.
Lastly, there are class-based differences.
For example, amongst both boys and girls, more importance is attached to qualities such as ‘a good personality’ and ‘being oneself’by young people from middle-class backgrounds.
These findings highlight the importance of peer pressures in adolescence.
The peer group gives out clear signals to its members both about style and about fundamental values and perspectives.
Conformity to the group is the price that has to be paid for approval and acceptance by peers.
Alone and lonely
Once set of findings from the YPLL project included evidence of a concern with personal loneliness and the absence of confidants among a substantial number of adolescents.
Though adolescence is generally a time of intense sociability. it can also often be a time of intense loneliness.
Being with peers and friends does not necessarily solve this feeling of loneliness.
Adolescents are notorious for their frequent shifts in mood, frequent periods of rumination over relationships and identity, and time spent alone.
In the YPLL survey a sixth of adolescents reported spending a lot of spare time on their own.
This issue was followed up in qualitative interviews with a panel of young people, for while we cannot make a simple equation between aloneness and the experience of social and psychological difficulty, young people do seem to need to interact with friends in resolving some of their conflicts.
We found clear differences between the ways in which boys and girls cope with problems.
For instance, the panel members in the YPLL study were asked to respond to a number of statements about what they would do if they had a problem.
Confiding in a friend when unhappy or worried tended to be something which young women rather than young men were inclined to do.
The more negative and distressing aspects of friendship are rarely examined in the literature on adolescence.
By way of exploring this neglected area members of the YPLL panel group were invited to talk about problems experienced with friends.
Such discussions highlighted the significance of arguments and broken friendships.
Asked about what might spoil a friendship, the breaking of a confidence and (for boys)‘stealing’ another person's girlfriend were considered particularly disloyal.
Young people are not alone in having problems with friendships, but the psycho-social issues that confront adolescents make it more certain that such difficulties are likely to be of concern to them.
Adolescents can be highly egocentric.
They sometimes find it difficult to see other people's point of view and to interpret other people's behaviour.
They can be touchy and hypersensitive to rejection, and their social skills are, as yet, underdeveloped.
Equally, at times, adolescents feel the need to ‘escape’ and to be on their own.
The YPLL panel study asked young people: Where do you go and what do you do if you just want to be alone to think?’
The answers highlighted young people's desire for a private place of their own.
The overwhelming response was to escape to the bedroom:
‘In my room — close the door, ask not to be disturbed, and put on some soothing music, sit on my bed, relaxed, and think…
Another young person disclosed:
‘I stay in my room and if I'm feeling troubled about something I write it out on paper and that helps me to work things out.’
Others went out:
‘I go down to the swing park and swing slowly on a swing.’
Other places frequently mentioned were walks in parks or woods.
A number of young men mentioned going off on their bikes to get away from it all, and amongst older adolescents driving around or driving out of town and parking to view the scenery were popular ‘escape’ mechanisms.
As the individual adolescent seeks to grow more independent of the family, peer groups and friends become important points of reference.
They provide social contexts for shaping the day-to-day behaviour or adolescents, and encourage conformity to norms and values.
Despite much popular mythology about ‘the generation gap’, such standards are startlingly similar to parental values, though the similarities are masked by different youth styles or expressions.
Such groupings clearly have a development potential in enabling young people to make the social adjustments necessary for them to operate in adult society.
Educationalists concerned with young people have begun to pay much more attention to the concept of ‘peer education’— for example, in relation to smoking, drug or HIV programmes (eg Smokebusters or Fast Forward in Scotland).
How much attention do these programmes pay to the real dynamics of peer group pressures as they ebb and flow across adolescence?
For further information about the study and details of publications relating to it contact  .
NEW RESEARCH
FORUM on Educational Research in Scotland
PRIORITY AREAS FOR EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
While not the only organisation to commission educational research within Scotland, the Scottish Office is a major funder.
By the time that you read this, the Scottish Office Education Department will probably have published its ‘call for tenders’— the list of those areas which it has identified as its priority for funding in 1993.
The appearance of this list marks the transfer of hectic activity, at least for a time, from within the SOED, where the specifications are drawn up, to those institutions and individuals interested in ‘winning’ the research contracts advertised, who now have to notify interest and submit proposals for carrying out the work.
Selection interviews are generally carried now in the early summer to permit research to start in autumn (freeing the staff of the SOED's Research and Intelligence Unit to concentrate on identifying and preparing next year's round of research priorities…).
When the Forum for Educational Research in Scotland was inaugurated in 1986, one of the aims was to provide a way in which teachers and others working in education could contribute to the identification of priorities for educational research.
The Forum has tried to collect views through a biennial request to individual organisations and associations to bring forward suggested areas for research but this did not prove fruitful.
In 1992, the Board of the Scottish Council for Research in Education, which contains nominees from a wide range of Scottish bodies with an interest in education, agreed to consider priority areas for research and to prepare a brief paper each year.
The SCRE Board discussed priority areas for educational research in September 1992.
The following four areas were considered of highest priority for attention:
Quality in the context of school effectiveness/improvement
Learning and teaching at all levels
Factors associated with school and class size
Implications of differentiation for school structure
There was less consensus about following six areas but they were considered important for future research:
Quality in higher education
Impact of national and regional policies on the professionalism of teachers
The operation of SVQs and other vocational qualifications
Effect on parents, pupils and schools of policy changes in education
The relationship of research to policy changes
The work of the inspectorate
A short paper describing the priority areas is available from SCRE.
It was submitted to SOED as one of the inputs to its selection of research priorities for 1993.
In the future, the list agreed the previous year will forma basis for reviewing and updating areas of priority.
RESEARCHERS
Share research as it starts and whenever there is something to say by contacting SCRE Information Services.
SCRE acts as a central dissemination and reference point for all Scottish educational research.
In order to provide a comprehensive service we need a steady flow of information to us.
It would be appreciated if researchers would make a habit of sending information for the Newsletter and the Research Database.
This is what we need:
New Starts:Project title/Funder and funding/Duration/Principal researchers/Scope note.
Reports:A copy of the report for the library (two would be even better…) from which we can take bibliographic information for listings.
Please include detail of the price and where  it's available from.
If you can't send a copy, the details would be better than nothing!
New Starts
Glasgow Polytechnic
Information Seeking Skills
This project, undertaken by the Library, aims to develop the information seeking skills of students and monitor their transference to the workplace.
It is part of the Polytechnic's Partnership for Quality Initiative , a programme designed to change the Polytechnic from a teaching to a learning organisation which will involve all students, staff and also employers.
The project will assess existing courses on information seeking skills organised by the Library and design new methods and materials for future courses.
In addition to evaluating information skills requirements in particular departments (Management and Biological Sciences), it will study the information needs of employers.
SCRE
Entry Requirements in Higher Education
The aim is to identify the formal published entry requirements for a sample of faculties/courses, covering both general entry requirements for each institution and the faculty requirements.
It also aims to clarify the application of these rules and describe any arrangements for exemption from parts of courses for candidates with certain qualifications, eg HND or GCE ‘A’ levels.
Finally it will provide an indication of the incidence of special classes in HE to bring candidates up to an adequate level of attainment to cope on the mainstream course.
Understanding Values Education in Primary Schools
This study will explore the kinds of values taught, explicitly and implicitly, in primary schools; explore the ways in which values education takes place; and investigate teachers' and pupils' perceptions of the purposes of values education.
FOCUS 2
Some of our pupils are missing…
and  argue for schools to examine PATTERNS OF ABSENCES as attendance rates alone do not say enough…
THE PARENTS' CHARTER proposes that schools should provide information to parents about levels of attendance and truancy.
This will help parents ‘to compare schools — and make sure your own child's school is providing the standards [parents]are entitled to expect.’
(p8).
Will it?
Recent SCRE research suggested that attendance rates on their own are an imperfect measure and that truancy rates can conceal more than they reveal.
Attendance rates
As far back as 1977, the Pack Report on attendance and truancy highlighted the limitations of attendance rates for measuring pupils' attendance.
Attendance rates are calculated by dividing the number of openings in the school register by the number of pupils present.
For example, a school with 100 pupils which registered them twice daily would have 200 possible attendances per day in the register and 1000 possible attendances per week.
An attendance rate of 90%, however, does not mean that 10% of pupils are absent: the missing 10% could come from a small minority of pupils with lengthy absences — the same ten pupils absent for the whole week — or from a higher percentage of pupils with brief absences — fifty pupils absent for one day over the course of the week.
Attendance rates by themselves do not say enough.
It is also important for schools to investigate the numbers of pupils absent.
Once they do this, teachers can detect patterns in absence in terms of, for instance , particular days of the week or year groups.
If patterns emerge then the school can start to explore causes of absence and perhaps remedy them.
This brings us to the question of truancy.
What counts as truancy?
SCRE carried out two surveys of the same 50 secondary schools, in June and November 1991, as part of a wider ranging exercise on attendance.
The Scottish Office Education Department (SOED), for whom we carried out the work, was especially interested in truancy levels.
The first thing we had to do, therefore, was to determine what counted as truancy.
Pupils' non-attendance at school can be authorised or not and there are many reasons for pupils' absence — illness being the most common.
We decided, therefore, that it was pupils who were absent without authorisation or explanation from parents who would be defined as truants.
Our findings showed that about one in three pupils had been absent from school at least once during the survey weeks.
Of these, however, 11% (June) and 7% (November) were classified as unauthorised.
When we asked staff to look closely at these figures, it turned out that about half in each case, 5% (June) and 45 (November), were what the staff would classify as ‘real truants’.
The other unauthorised absentees were a mixture of small numbers of ‘ghost’ pupils, wrongly on the register, or pupils in trouble and out of school — but they were largely pupils for whom some authorisation was expected.
The high percentage of absent pupils came down to a small percentage of unauthorised absentees as the diagram shows.
Condoned truancy
The schools were quick to point out to us that they regarded these figures for truancy as an underestimate.
Headteachers stressed that some parents would condone their children's absence and provide bogus explanations for it.
They would write a note claiming, for example, ‘Debbie was off because she had an upset stomach’ when, in fact, the children were perfectly well.
Condoned truancy applied to some parents in disadvantaged areas for whom their children's regular attendance at school came as a low priority as against other concerns.
However, it could also apply to parents in the ‘leafy suburbs’, particularly in June, when older pupils could convince their parents that ‘nothing much was happening’ at school and persuade them to condone non-attendance.
A further problem was the tendency of some parents to take their children on holiday during term time.
While this was not seen as condoned truancy, headmasters warned that it was sending signals about the relative lack of importance of regular attendance.
Knowledge of pupils and contact with parents may help guidance staff and school management to decide which absences are condoned and which are genuine but no foolproof method exists.
If the school's overall attendance rate is poor, then the school may well suspect a high level of condoned truancy.
However, looking at the actual absentees to detect patterns in terms of year groups or days of the week, for example, is also vital in detecting condoned truancy.
Once identified, schools worked hard with parents to win them other to trusting the schools and encouraging attendance.
It is a long haul for schools.
We had examples of parents trusting schools to the extent of giving truthful rather than cosmetic reason for absence (‘Susan had to go with her granny to collect her pension’)— but keeping the children off nonetheless.
Tackling truancy
Schools reported using a range of strategies to tackle absence from school.
One of the most important was getting across to pupils and staff that good attendance was a high priority.
Having a senior member of the management team actively involved in analysing attendance and being seen to be taking action was an important aspect.
Headteachers reported that a general drive on attendance helped.
No school thought it had the perfect answer and all stressed the need for constant awareness of the problem.
Attendance rates and truancy levels as performance indicators for schools are only part of the story.
For these to be useful to schools, teachers need to find economical ways of distinguishing authorised from unauthorised absence, of distinguishing ‘real’ from condoned absence and to look for patterns of absence taking actual pupils as the starting point rather than a more generalised attendance rate.
A poor attendance rate can signal condoned truancy but it needs to be used with other measures of attendance, and on a regular basis, to help schools to improve pupils' attendance.
Pupils can find school unattractive for all kinds of reasons.
To combat truancy schools need the active co-operation of parents and good information about patterns of non-attendance.
Is it too fanciful to suggest that once schools know why pupils do not want to come to classes, teachers can set about making school more attractive for at least some of the disaffected?
Acknowledgement
We are grateful for the ready co-operation and forbearance of the headteachers who completed two long and details surveys on pupil attendance.
Without their goodwill and that of their staff who assisted in compiling figures, the research would not have been possible.
We are grateful to staff and pupils in the six schools who spared time to be interviewed.
HM Inspectorate helped in various ways and Statistics Division, SOED drew the sample of schools at short notice.
Responsibility for the content of this article, nevertheless, resides with the authors.
A fuller account of the research is given in SCRE Spotlight 38 Truancy and Attendance in Scottish Secondary Schools.
When is a Truant not a Truant?
Pupils' thoughts on attendance:
‘I don't get on with the teacher.’
‘My wee cousin gets kept off on Thursdays to help my granny go to the shops.
She winna go oot on her own.
My auntie writes a note or she phones the school.’
‘I didn't come in because it was science and I don't like it.’
‘I kept sleeping in, and I didn't want to come in late because you get a row or a detention — so I just stayed off.’
‘It's great being in the arcade and knowing you should be in maths!’
‘My mother disnae like it, but what can she do?’
‘I stay off school to avoid getting hurt — there's been some bad fights here.’
‘I have to walk to the bus stop, and when I wait for the bus there's some of them slag me off and they push you about.
I don't want to go in.’
‘School is boring.’
On the other hand:
‘There's this laddie in my year, he canna read or write and the teachers pick on him, except Mr X, he's good and disnae make a fool o’ him and helps him wi' forms and things.
I widnae come to school if I was him, but he's aye school…
If he cannae read or write by this time, what's the point?’
RESEARCHING TEACHERS
The Scottish Teacher-Research Support Network
The Scottish Teacher-Research Support Network was set up just over a year ago to support teachers who want to undertake research in their own schools, colleges or classrooms.
The network has established a newsletter (Observations ) which appears twice a year and a database listing the names, addresses and research interests of members.
Registered members receive updated contact lists twice a year.
The hope is that the network will not only extend the contacts of teachers who are already members of local teacher-research groups, but enable those in areas where no group exists to get together.
However, joining doesn't mean that you have to be doing research, registration is open to those who are ‘just interested’ or ‘thinking about it’.
The Network also welcomes registration from experienced teachers willing to share their expertise with others.
SCRE Practitioner Award
One aim of the SCRE Practitioner Award is to encourage teachers who start out to do small-scale research to press on and, despite pressures of time and other demands, to analyse the data, evaluate the weight of their conclusions, write up a report and communicate the outcome to others.
Surmounting these hurdles is something the two winners of the award in 1992 have in common.
They are otherwise relatively unlike.
One is a primary teacher who was interested in the mental processes of children tackling simple addition.
Rather than asking children to describe what they did, he chose to focus on the time pupils took to record answers, using a keyboard.
The other, a secondary teacher, with an interest in possible gender bias in the classroom, observed four of his colleagues teaching classes in four curriculum subjects.
Brief accounts of their work are given below.
Comments and enquiries to the individual authors, please, NOT to SCRE!
Exploring Hidden Processes: what goes on in the heads of pupils doing simple addition calculations?
I WAS INTERESTED in how children add two numbers together especially those children who are expected to do the calculations in their heads.
One method of investigating this area has centred on the time which children take to give the answer to a range of simple sums.
Using correlation techniques it can then be seen what feature of the sum best predicts response time.
From this, assumptions can be made about the internal processes required to find the answer.
Research has found that in sums of the ‘x+y’ type, most children at some stage in their development identify the larger of the two numbers and then add on the smaller by counting on in steps of one (eg 3+7=7+1, 8+1, 9+1,10 ).
The major exceptions are ties such as‘1+1’, ‘2+2’(in other words any number added to itself) which are solved quickly and without any adding on of steps.
It is suggested that the answer to ties comes straight from long-term memory.
The study set out to look at responses of Primary 7 pupils to simple addition problems.
Four pupils were involved.
Previous studies had done little to look at differences between children of different abilities.
This study looked at the responses of more and less arithmetically-able pupils.
Underlying this, was the idea that if the more and less able pupils used different strategies these could be identified.
This might then allow the teacher to intervene to encourage effective strategies.
Four children, two more able and two less able in arithmetical ability, took part.
Each ability grouping consisted of a girl and a boy and was based on the results from a weekly arithmetic exercise in the 6 weeks prior to the study.
Measuring the time taken reliably was obviously important.
In adding two single digits, the answers can range from 0 to 18.
There has been some difficulty in producing a response panel sophisticated enough to allow for this range whilst still being easily understood and accessible to a child.
The use of a concept keyboard and a BBC micro-computer allowing timings in hundredths of seconds overcame this difficulty.
Each child performed two tasks.
The first familiarised them with the response keyboard.
The second consisted of one presentation each of all possible pairings of the digits 0 to 9, including reverses (eg 1+9 and 9+1) and ties (100 sums in all).
These were presented in the form ‘x+y’.
Pupils were told to press the corresponding answer area on the concept keyboard as quickly as they could.
For all the children, the best indicator of response time was the size of the smaller number involved in the sum.
As this increased, response time increased.
This suggests that both groups of children were adding on to the larger digit a number of steps equal in value to the smaller digit.
Hence there was no difference between  these more and less able children in the strategy they used to add.
However, there was considerable difference in the speed at which they calculated.
The two more able children had counting rates of 11 and 13 hundredths of a second for each step respectively.
For the less able children this increased to 39 and 51 hundredths of a second.
So, in this study, the more able children added on steps in addition at 3 to 5 times the speed of the less able children.
The speed of  of a second per counting speed is much quicker than any known counting process.
This suggests that this counting on of steps takes place at an unconscious, neural level.
I found that for tie problems such as‘1+1’, ‘2+2’, response times were very quick and similar for the more and less able children.
This supports the idea that for both groups of children ties were solved direct from long term memory without any counting.
For younger children there is a suggestion that these ties are useful number bonds to introduce to the slow learner.
They may also serve as a useful basis for all children for heuristic strategies, that is, in producing the answers to unknown facts from known ones, for example 8+7= (7+7) +1.
This study looked at addition sums of a very elementary level which the Mathematics 5–14 document suggests should be attained at Level B or by most pupils in primary 4.
I was surprised that, at this level, mental processing appeared to operate at a speed 3 to 5 times slower for less able primary 7 pupils.
There is evidence from areas such as reading that if a greater amount of processing time is required for basic tasks there is insufficient left for more complex comprehension.
In arithmetic and mathematics this deeper comprehension would certainly be required for more complex problems.
Overall, on the basis of this small study, it would seem that at least less able (and possibly a larger group) of Primary 7 pupils could benefit from revision of elementary number bonds.
Gender bias in the classroom?
describes a study carried out to observe classroom practice within the framework of equal opportunities, and points to possible dilemmas for the teacher
THE PURPOSE OF the study was to see whether gender differences existed in a range of formal and informal exchanges between teachers and pupils according to gender.
The four subjects chosen (English, maths, history and geography) represented key subjects were communication skills are widely used and teacher-pupil dialogue at its greatest.
The number of pupils and subject teachers were as follows:
English
Maths
History
Geography
Teacher
Female
Female
Male
Male
Girls
12
10
10
11
Boys
13
13
12
11
The study involved 4 teachers each teaching a difference class.
Each was visited o two occasions in the course of one week (each period being 55 minutes long).
This totalled 440 minutes observation time.
Teachers were told that I would be observing pupil communication but the exact focus was not specified.
A pupil observation checklist was prepared on which originally, seating plans were included but on advice, largely concerned with difficulty of interpretation, this was removed.
However, distribution of pupils in the working areas, whether at the front of the room or at the rear, would make an interesting study on gender bias in the classroom.
THE CHECKLIST
Class Administration — activities that usually take place at the start of a lesson — settling pupils, giving general instructions, giving out material.
These items were also recorded when the class was prepared for dismissal at the lesson end.
Lesson Core — Observations here were made during teacher input of content — if male or female characters were discussed, eg in a Kestrel for a Knave , or examples used to illustrate a principle.
Questions asked of — refers to occasions when a teacher directed a question at a specific boy or girl usually by name but often taking one volunteer from many hands up.
Questions asked by — refers to the occasions when a member of the class asked the teacher a question directly, either to repeat instructions or to clarify the teaching point.
Tasks allocated to — records the distribution of activities such as giving out books, going errands or within the class organisation eg group work tasks.
Discipline of — refers to occasions when the teacher reprimands a pupil.
Often this would be a simple corrective instruction like ‘turn round’ or ‘get on with your work’.
Only instances directed at individual pupils were recorded.
Other transactions — this was included at the planning stage to allow for transactions that might not be predicted.
It turned out to include many, mainly informal, transactions eg advice on redrafting work, words of praise; informal questioning to assist understanding; humour; praise encouragement to finish work, advice on presentation and layout.
Results
The raw scores for each category were statistically adjusted to represent an equal number of girls and boys in each class.
These were then calculated as percentages to allow direct comparisons.
In every category, in each subject observed, the boys had greater scores than the girls.
Boys dominated the transactions or ‘male’ issues predominated, in one situation by 80% to 11% (class administration maths).
In English, the text studied was A Kestrel for a Knave .
The central character is a young boy.
Other characters include his half brother, two male teachers and the male head teacher.
All the other pupils are boys.
The only female character  is Billy's mother, who is not regarded as a good mother, neglecting her youngest son and having a succession of boyfriends.
In History the topic was the growth of the railway system in Victorian England.
Despite a queen on the throne, the main coverage focused on 15 males and several trains, one being the Flying Scotsman.
Male characters included Napoleon, the Duke of Wellington, George Stevenson, William Huskisson, Lord Derby, Richard Trevithick and Roland Hill.
All of these famous or pioneering gentlemen are household names in history.
Transactions which were closest, but with boys dominating teacher time, were ‘tasks allocated’ in maths and geography (class administration) with the same percentages (boys 57%, girls 43%).
It seemed that boys were entrusted with the majority of off-task or on-task jobs, including taking absence slips to the office.
Working technical equipment seemed to be a male preserve.
As did discipline, or rather indiscipline, where an overwhelming number of instances of indiscipline focused on boys.
The observation checklist did not record the length of time each transaction took.
On average, however, there seemed to be little difference in the time devoted to boys and girls on each occasion.
There was a general and overall bias towards boys in the verbal exchanges in class, and in the content of lessons observed.
This was true across different subjects and different types of transaction.
Discussion
This was only a small-scale study but the results are so striking that it is worth speculating on some of the possible causes of gender bias in the classroom.
Subject Content : In the category ‘lesson core’, maths and geography showed no gender bias whereas English and history did.
Could some subjects be more prone to gender bias than others, eg maths, science, geography and technical education are perhaps more abstract, analytical and less about relationships and people.
However, while history, modern studies, English, home economics and social education may offer more opportunities to focus on people, personalities and social issues specific topics will also reflect the general nature of society throughout its development.
This may allow male issues to dominate.
There is then the question of the selection of topics for these courses — should teachers avoid significant historical events simply because men predominate in them?
Pupil Gender : It is well documented that boys get into more trouble in school than girls and that boys are generally more assertive and visible.
The results would suggest that the behaviour of boys influences teacher bias towards them.
Rather than starting off with a blank sheet towards all class members, it may be that because of natural assertiveness, boys dictate a particular kind of response from teachers, quite independently of the details of the situation.
In the area of questioning, it may be that boys assume they know the answers because in society men have traditionally taken the lead and are seen in positions of authority and superiority.
These positions are usually filled by clever people, allowing both boys and girls to draw wrongful conclusions.
It may be that boys tend to ask almost twice as many questions as girls, not just because of natural assertiveness but also because of the position society allocates to the male.
Even in the home the male is given precedence in many obvious and subtle ways.
Having been nurtured in this way and observed adult males receiving the same treatment, boys may expect similar preferential treatment and where it is not offered automatically, demand it as a right.
Reinforcing this pattern may be the fact that girls in class fall into a role they assume to be the natural order, taking second place to boys.
Teacher Gender : The sample of teachers in this study, two male and two female, is too small to draw conclusions about how the gender of the teacher affects bias in transactions with pupils.
However, in the study, it made no significant difference whether a male or female teacher directed class activities.
Boys still scored higher in all the categories.
This is an area which offers scope for future study and investigation.
Schools have adopted several tactics to raise awareness of bias.
Teaching material is scrutinised for equal representation of gender in illustrations and text.
Class composition and exam results are monitored.
Entry to professions and further education is documented and analysed.
Workshops are held to draw awareness to stereotyping.
In many cases these activities have promoted gender-neutral policies and perhaps in the long term will have a major impact on some aspects of gender bias in schools.
However it may be that a problem remains at the point of delivery of the curriculum — the interface between pupil and teacher — and that gender bias and stereotyping are being reinforced period by period.
Further research on classroom exchanges would assist in determining where problems are and what steps ought to be taken to eradicate them and promote a gender-neutral environment in our classrooms.
Schools reflect society and the teachers in this study are likely to reflect practice elsewhere.
Certainly these results should in no way be seen as a criticism of their teaching.
I am grateful to my colleagues not only for their cooperation in the study but also for their agreement to publish the results.
RESEARCH ROUNDUP
CES Edinburgh University
Recent Publications
A comparison of methods currently being used to evaluate schools in Scotland statistically () Contribution to CES conference on the practice of evaluating schools in Scotland, August 1992.
The paper concludes that none are satisfactory, and indeed that no statistical method can provide a satisfactory tool for holding schools accountable.
Social Research and Social Reform: essays in honour of A H Halsey (eds  and ) Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Chapters by  and , and .
Multi-Track and Unified Systems, and Upper Secondary Education in Scotland: an analysis of two debates ().
From CES.
Modular Strategies for Overcoming Academic/Vocational Divisions: issues arising from the Scottish experience ().
From CES.
Social Class in Scottish Education ().
In:Class, Race and Gender in Schools (eds  & ) published by SCRE.
Discusses the effects of social class on educational experience, and the complexity of measuring the relevant features of class in this context.
Regionalism among entrants to higher education from Scottish Schools ().
Analyses the choice of local higher-education destination by Scottish school leavers, 1963–1990.
While localism has declined, specially in the north-east and the south-east, this has not been accompanied by a rise in the proportion of students leaving Scotland.
Thus there has been a ‘nationalising’ of the higher-educational experience of the prospective Scottish middle class.
Scottish Languages and Scottish Identifies ().
Contribution to the first issue of Scotland's Languages ,(journal of the Scottish Association for Language, Teaching English and Research).
The article argues that recent debates in sociology and socio-linguistics have concluded that Scottish identity and culture are fluid and multi-faceted, a matter of choice, not of inheritance, imposition, or exclusion.
Such themes place Scottish studies at the head of urgent European concerns, at a time when cultures are often thought of as monolithic, and when cultural exclusivity is a source of often violent conflict.
Enquiries to  
Scottish Educational Review
Glasgow University
A common criticism of academic journals in education is that the articles they contain are remote from the concerns of classroom teachers.
This failing, it is suggested, is often compounded by the use of obscure, abstract terminology which teachers simply do not have the time (even if they have the inclination) to penetrate.
I do not share the view that theory and practice in education are opposites — the ideal situation is one in which good practice informs theory and good theory provides new insights into practice — but I certainly think that the ability of academic writers to communicate clearly, in ways that speak to the experience of practitioners, is vital.
It is hoped that the articles in the latest issue of the Scottish Educational Review  (November 1992) meet this criterion.
Certainly a number of them address current developments in Scottish education which are either affecting classroom teachers already or are likely to do so in the future.
There are two articles on the 5–14 programme.
examines the model of pupil progression which underlies the programme, giving examples from Mathematics, English and Environmental Studies to illustrate his argument.
There is also a critical analysis of the paper Religious and Moral Education 5–14 by .
The Howie Report receives details scrutiny from , who explores the different messages it contains and relates them to Scotland's past and future.
And  and  of the SOED discuss the topic which everyone is having to come to terms with —‘Educational Audit, Performance Indicators and School Improvement’.
We hope that this menu will encourage more people in schools to sample the journal.
As an incentive, we are making a special introductory offer of a reduced subscription to schools — £18.00 instead of the normal institutional rate of £25.00.
Details from ,
SCRE FINDINGS
SCRE Research Report Series
The Dental Training Guide: an evaluation
Vocational training schemes aim to provide new graduates with the opportunity to refine their technical skills and develop a ‘dentist's persona’.
The Training Guide was developed to support the one-to-one training relationship between the recent graduate, the trainee, and the experienced general practitioner who had assumed the role of trainer.
The evaluators found that the guide was less well used that it might have been and consider ways in which a guide might fit into the ‘socially-oriented’ structure of the training year.
SCRE Research Report 42. £5.00.
Furthering Education?
Links between schools and further education colleges in Lothian
This report one of a series commissioned by Lothian Region considers ways in which colleges have made input to the education of pupils still at secondary school.
These include ‘work simulation’ for all pupils in S3, the option to spend a week following a course of their choice and the option to attend college on a regular basis throughout one school term.
The report highlights the importance of pupils, schools and colleges being clear about the purpose of school/college experience.
Aspects of links such as format, timetabling, curriculum linkages and liaison are discussed from both the school and college perspective.
The report also considers why pupils do and do not take up optional courses.
SCRE Research Report 41, £5.00.
Missing Persons: pre-enrolment wastage from science, maths and engineering courses
Adults considering enrolment on further or higher education courses ‘shop around: with various factors in mind so that failure to enrol on any specific course does not necessarily equal a rejection of the idea of further study.
These are two of the messages which emerged from a small-scale survey of individuals who made enquiries about courses but who did not appear to follow up earlier expressions of interest.
The study formed part of a larger research project on adults and science/engineering courses.
The report discusses the implications for colleges and policymakers of factors important to potential students.
Spotlight 36.
Single copies free.
Training and School Board Members
When school boards were set up it was anticipated that members would require information and training to carry out their new functions.
A range of materials was developed.
This paper summarises a study of take-up by board schools of training opportunities, and suggests ways of encouraging boards to give training higher priority and of providing support for their efforts.
Spotlight 40.
Single copies free.
Latest Spotlights from non-SCRE Research
Sharing Action and Evaluation: parents and staff working together in early education
A recent research project into extending staff-parent partnership took place in nursery settings.
The aim was to establish ongoing ways of working and of involving parents in evaluation as well as to make the nursery experience as good as possible.
This Spotlight describes the process of tapping into parents’ views and of taking account of these.
The staff found this difficult but rewarding.
At the end, the headteacher commented: ‘There is a new sense of direction and purpose in our work with parents and in our daily sessions for the children.
Everyone in the nursery, children, parents and staff have benefited from ‘doing research’.
We hope that sharing this experience will encourage others to strengthen the bond with parents and to establish a working relationship which deepens mutual respect and understanding of each other 's worlds.’
Spotlight 37.
Single copies free.
Short-term Secondments: a study of educational transitions
Secondment of staff between different sectors of the educational system can offer benefits to individuals and organisations but can also prove traumatic.
In 1991–92 the authors carried out a study to explore the experiences of staff on secondments.
The aim was to draw together good practice and make recommendations to enable organisations manage secondment effectively and provide secondees with the support necessary to enable them to contribute fully to their new jobs and to their old, once they returned.
Spotlight 39.
Single copies free.