

THINK AGAIN
The Human Communication Research Centre (HCRC), based at The University of Edinburgh and funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (UK), adopts a novel interdisciplinary approach to the study of human information processing, particularly the processing of linguistic communication.
Computer scientists, logicians, linguists, psychologists and biologists from Edinburgh, Glasgow and Durham Universities collaborate to understand human information processing in terms of computation.
HCRC Director,, invites us to consider the ‘human computer’.
For many people, ‘human’ and ‘computation’come from opposite ends of their thesaurus.
Computers are engineers' boxes which process numbers (and maybe letters) in just the ways that humans find most difficult.
Humans are emotional beings who excel at misunderstanding computers.
But in the last half century, our concepts of computation have been generalised so that it is useful to regard people's processing of information as computations themselves.
Within this enlarged idea of computation, people are computers.
They are computers of immensely greater sophistication and a different type to engineers' boxes, but computers nevertheless.
People are sensitive to acoustic patterns impinging on their ears when someone speaks.
After some education they turn these patterns into print, or reverse the process, turning print into acoustic events.
In 1950, when the Haskin's Laboratory was set up at Yale University, it was thought to be a 5 year project to produce a box which could perform these two computations.
However, it had not been realised that we process speech as much by our expectations as by our sensations: it is easy for us to hear the same acoustic signal as ‘It's easy to recognise speech’ or ‘It's easy to wreck a nice beach’according to context.
40 years on, linguists, psychologists, engineers, computer scientists know each other better and also have learnt why solving the general version of this problem is still years away.
40 years on there is also a multi-million pound ‘speech technology’ industry.
The numbers you request from directory enquiries are read out to you by a speech generating computer (other than a person).
This industry sells engineered solutions to restricted parts of the general problem.
Similarly, people can read a paragraph and employ the information it contains to answer questions, solve problems, plan action, translate into another language, or to precis.
These computations were not seen as hard to explain until engineers tried to programme the newly available ‘computer’ to perform them.
The 1950s machine translation programme which turned a visiting general's test sentence ‘The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak’ into Russian and then back into ‘The steak is wonderful but the whisky is lousy’is probably apocryphal, but nevertheless all too plausible.
Human computation is wonderfully sensitive to context; it captures the spirit in the message and turns it into the appropriate letters.
Human beings can hear or see or feel ‘noisy’ signals in particular places and times and use their expectations about the ‘there and then’into a perception of what signals mean.
Engineers have found that this robust perception of noisy patterns in context is the most difficult sort of computation to engineer in their products and these human abilities are the more miraculous the more we try to simulate them.
Of course, these are not the abilities which we pride ourselves upon, and we are much more likely to be impressed by the few things which computers do well which we do badly.
Calculating mathematical functions or remembering meaningless patterns of digits are things at which engineers' boxes excel and which human beings do not.
Human computation is as incompetent (measured by engineered computer standards) as it is miraculous.
One practical goal must be to marry these two styles of computation so as to gain the best of both.
One of the central problems of machine text understanding is decoding continuity markers in prose, most notoriously pronouns.
This is another problem which surfaced from  engineering attempts, but also makes itself evident in authorial blunders — the civil defence poster caption ‘When a hand-grenade lands near by, don't lose your head.
Put it in a bucket of sand and call the police’ is illustrative.
The computer, which of course doesn't find it at all funny, needs to guess what it is, and needs to rely not just on sentence structure but also on general knowledge about heads, grenades and buckets of sand — general knowledge that computers don't have unless it is built in to them.
Building it in is hard because the amount of knowledge which is potentially relevant to decoding each pronoun, is extremely large.
Continuity is just as important in dialogue as in monologue.
HCRC has created a unique database of conversations between pairs of people engaged on a cooperative communication task involving the transmission of information about routes.
What is unusual about this resource is that at each point in the dialogue it is known what idea the speaker is trying to express, and what information the hearer has which provides the context for its understanding.
The data is coded at levels all the way from acoustic features to the intentions of the participants.
This makes it possible to study subtle processes of coordination: for example, when words are repeated they are generally pronounced less clearly after the first time, but only if they are being used to refer to the same thing.
Hearers actually use this unclarity as a clue to the speaker's intentions.
This programme of research has already brought to light unnoticed phenomena of children's different abilities to communicate in the classroom.
The database, available on CD, is being used by industrial speech technology researchers to design commercial systems.
It is a commonplace that natural human languages are vague whereas computer languages are precise.
So much the worse for human beings?
So much the worse for computers?
Another project seeks to understand precisely the vagueness of natural language, not only so that we can communicate better with computers, but also because vagueness is a valuable commodity for computation in general.
An easy party-trick demonstration is to take a paragraph and replace all the occurrences of most, many, few, lots, several, hardly any etc. with percentages.
This reveals that these words do not just carry information about proportions but also about speakers' expectations, and even speakers' expectations about hearers' expectations and so on.
Imagine booking an airplane ticket and trying to decide whether to book APEX now, or to wait until plans are firmer.
Being told (perhaps by an automatic booking system) that there are 31 seats left is much less informative than being told that there are a lot or few, unless you have information about sizes of planes and expected booking rates.
The system for expressions of vague information built into human languages is of great subtlety and precision and if we can unravel its complexities, engineers will be only too happy to make computers vague.
HCRC is not just concerned with language but also with graphical communication, and particularly with combinations of language and graphics.
Complex communications are rarely completely without graphical support, and graphics are rarely used without any language at all.
One project looks at the diagrammatic system which Euler, the great German mathematician, invented in the eighteenth century to teach a German Princess syllogisms, and which is still the basis of much teaching of elementary logic and mathematics.
We are interested in a general theory which will explain why these diagrams help.
It turns out that the system depends on some subtle and hitherto unnoticed peculiarities of the logic, in combination with general features of graphical representations.
This project will now generalise its findings to the graphical teaching of more powerful logics and to the choice of media of expression in the design of computer interfaces.
HCRC is one of several departments in the University interested in ‘neural networks’, a style of computational architecture which is inspired by psychology and neuroscience but which engineers are now incorporating into their artefacts.
Instead of a single central processor autocratically controlling  a whole computation, large numbers of autonomous computing units cooperate to arrive in a communal state which reflects the outcome of the computation.
Something like these mechanisms must explain how the brain can compute results about distorted contextually determined patterns so fast on the basis of cells which perform hundreds rather than millions of operations per second.
The study of neural networks has brought together researchers from physics, electrical engineering, pharmacology, neuroscience, psychology and artificial intelligence because it applies the methods of the natural sciences to the study of cognitive systems.
Neural network models of human working memory are behind our theories of stylistic structure and of graphical usefulness.
So what has come to be called ‘cognitive science’(the science of knowledge) is intertwined with cognitive engineering.
But cognitive science is not merely about information technology.
Many of its problems are direct descendants of the central problems of philosophy.
Cognitive science amounts to the adoption of methods and technology developed by the ‘natural sciences’ and mathematics for an attack on these problems of understanding human existence.
Some people react to the notion that a human being might be understood as a computer of a certain sort as demeaning of what is special about human beings.
This might be less so if they realised how impressive human beings are when submitted to computational analysis.
Science can try to understand what happened in the first half billionth of a second of the life of the universe.
Science can try to understand what computational change turned a chimpanzee into a conscious human being.
Which question is more important to our understanding of ourselves and our position in the universe?
Which answer will help us most to ensure that life can go on on this planet?
Which is more relevant to our economic well being?
Readers will have their own answers.
We hope that both questions will be pursued with equal vigour and no doubt they will turn out to be unpredictably related to each other.
But neither is more scientifically fundamental.
KIEV: DOUBLE VISION
Writer, journalist and Edinburgh graduate,, lives in Edinburgh's twin city, Kiev.
He reports on a city where fact and fiction merge:
Opposite the Ukrainian President's office in Bankova Street, Kiev, lies a curious building.
The dull brick it was originally built in has been encrusted with sculpted mermaids, studded with life-size rhinoceros heads, and given ramparts of giant frogs.
People will tell you two different stories about how this came about.
One group tells you that the nineteenth-century owner, a wealthy merchant, had a beautiful daughter who drowned in an accident in a nearby lake.
The others say the owner was a concrete salesman who wanted to use these fantastic sculptures to demonstrate the possibilities of his product.
It's virtually impossible to know which of these stories is the true one, if either of them is.
The discontinuity of history in Kiev is too acute.
The attitude to make-believe and truth in the capital city of post-communist Ukraine is too relaxed.
The same goes for Kiev State University, one of the massive neo-classical buildings with which Kiev abounds.
It is painted a livid blood-red.
Some people tell you this is to commemorate the massacre of radical students in Tsarist times; others that it was simply the whim of the original architect.
Even as they dodge through the traffic clogging Kiev's main street, Kreshchatik, pedestrians will assure you that it is no longer possible to buy petrol.
Leaning against a fridge groaning with comestibles, your host tells you there is no food to be had.
Kiev will be looking for a touchstone of reality for some time yet.
Citizens who had the orthodox Soviet version of Ukrainian history rammed down their throats for decades are now being told a completely different version, arguably also coloured by the political prejudices of its authors.
The Russian language, for so long dominant, is being displaced.
Official signs, street names and the names of metro stations are in Ukrainian.
But the tongue of the streets is still Russian.
Civil servants speak Ukrainian to visitors and talk in Russian among themselves.
No wonder there is confusion.
Many other languages have been heard in Kiev since it grew up on the banks of the river Dnieper, a waypoint on the waterborne merchant route between Viking Scandinavia and ancient Byzantium.
In the tenth century the Kiev merchants used to half-drag, half-row their small boats, monoxyla, past the Dnieper rapids on the way to the Byzantine markets, constantly menaced by the ferocious Pecheneg people inhabiting the southern steppes.
The Kievan prince Vladimir chose the Greek version of Christianity over Islam and Roman Catholicism because his ambassadors reported that the Greek ceremony was the most beautiful.
The Slav-Greek-Viking metropolis was capital of one of the greatest states in medieval Europe: it was all but destroyed in 1240 by the Mongols under Genghis Khan's grandson Khan Baty.
Six years later a papal envoy passing the city reported scarcely two hundred houses still standing, with human bones scattered across the countryside.
From that time to this Kiev has evolved, like Naples or Boston, into both a great and a provincial city.
Great in terms of size — three million people live there today — its architecture, its place in history, its potential role in world events.
Provincial in its self-absorption, its amenities, its overshadowing by another capital, in this case Moscow.
Since the long years of the Pax Mongolica ended many banners have fluttered over Kiev, almost impossible to defend in its position on the fertile flatlands east of the Carpathians.
The Lithuanians came, the Poles, the Imperial Russians, the Imperial Germans, the Bolsheviks, the Nazis.
Writing about the immediate aftermath of the 1917 Russian Revolution, the Kiev-born writer Mikhail Bulgakov recalled: ‘I can say only one thing for the moment — according to the calculations of the Kievans they had 18 changes of power.
Several of the travelling memoirists have counted 12; I can state with certainty that there were 14, ten of which I experienced personally.’
Somewhere between the Mongols and the present day the lands to the north of the Black Sea acquired the name Ukraina, which means ‘at the border’.
In all this time Kiev itself was in the hands of the short-lived Ukrainian Republic for only a few months.
Otherwise it was a Russian-Jewish centre, a city of the Russian Empire, where Russian history happened.
It was here in 1911, for instance, that the ruthless, reforming Russian First Minister Peter Stolypin was gunned down by a Jewish police agent in full view of the Tsar, at a gala opera night.
‘Stolypin, who was standing with his back to the stage, turned towards Nicholas, his Imperial master, made the sign of the cross, and fell, mortally wounded’ as Edward Crankshaw described the scene.
At the beginning of the twentieth century there was scarcely a single family resident in Kiev who spoke Ukrainian as their first language.
The Ukrainians were the peasants in the countryside and small towns around Kiev.
They worked and waited, singing their Ukrainian songs and writing their Ukrainian poems, nursing their history, and began over the years to drift into the city.
Now at long last the city is to become a Ukrainian one, and a genuine capital.
But because it is Kiev it looks as if many truths, many pasts, will continue to co-exist there side by side.
Images of Lenin are everywhere.
Look at some of the ornate stucco work on those elegant nineteenth century town houses; it turns out they are hammers and sickles, ordered by Stalin to show that whatever the capitalists could do, communists could do too.
The huge, ugly steel arch built in Soviet times to commemorate the union of Russia and Ukraine stands untouched at the end of Kreshchatik, though the union is no more.
There is no rush to dismantle it.
Rather than take it down, perhaps future generations of Kievans will blur the fact of what it stood for, with some typically romantic yarn — that it is a monument to rainbows, for example, or the antennae of a UFO-detecting device.
If a confused city has to have its fictions, let them at least be interesting ones.
IMAGE PROJECTION
Screen Industries Officer for Lothian Region and Edinburgh District Councils, puts forward Edinburgh's case as a film and TV location.
Is there, for you, a true picture of Edinburgh on film?
There is a limited selection from which to choose.
From the Hollywood treatment of Greyfriars Bobby, through Peter Sellers' wonderful Morningside accent in Battle of the Sexes, to Restless Natives in 1985 and, right up to date, Cormorant Films' award-winning Tickets for the Zoo about the despair of homelessness amongst the young.
Perhaps, like me, the unforgettable portrayal of Miss Jean Brodie by Maggie Smith captures perfectly for you the absolute belief in itself that Edinburgh has, in the rightness of her cause and the rectitude of her citizens.
Set against the enduring strength of the city's architecture and way of life, the film reflects an attitude that you would recognise even now in Marchmont and the New Town.
Of course, this is a tribute to Muriel Spark's novel as much as to the film; and this is a key to the moving image portrayal of Edinburgh and its surroundings — film-makers have come to Edinburgh to produce stories which are set here already, generally well-known stories from fact or fiction.
Apart from those already mentioned, there were the various Burke and Hare/Jekyll and Hyde adaptations, the Thirty Nine Steps at South Queensferry and parts of Chariots of Fire at Goldenacre and Inverleith.
(The exception, proving the rule, was Brigitte Bardot's sojourn in Dirleton for Two Weeks in September — not a conspicuous success.)
Films from indigenous writers and producers have also tended to be written about some aspect of Edinburgh, like Bill Douglas' autobiographical trilogy, My Way Home, Jam Jar's Conquest of the South Pole and Tickets for the Zoo.
Significantly, perhaps, none of these has had box office success.
Contrast this with major production centres such as Hollywood, New York, London, where people ‘make films’, about anything, not just stories set in the locale.
Producers use built sets and fake locations to portray the setting of the story — Toronto has made millions of dollars ‘being’ New York, because it is so difficult and expensive to film in the Big Apple nowadays.
In fact, as film-makers have moved out of the studio and on to location, to achieve more realistic impressions of dramatic situations, the attraction of on-location filming into cities and regions has become big business.
While Edinburgh and Lothian's film commission is just two years old, the US based Association of Film Commissioners was founded in 1975, to attract filming away from Holywood.
The first film commission in Britain was set up in 1989 in Liverpool, in response to Mersey Television's need for locations around that city, as they developed drama programmes from their base in Brookside.
The advent of Channel Four in 1982 was the catalyst which was to change film-making in Britain, at least in the regions.
Here was a TV station which did not make its own programmes but, instead, contracted with independent producers — who did not operate from studios in    the traditional sense.
It is no coincidence that the centre of independent film-making in Great Britain is in Soho, around the Charlotte Street headquarters of Channel Four.
Similarly, it has to be owned that film — and programme-making in Scotland, while existing mainly on an axis across the central belt, has its centre of gravity in ‘that other place’ in the West.
Hence, images of Scotland, networked out to the rest of Britain and the world, are generally those of Glasgow.
Under different circumstances, might Taggart have worked if set in Edinburgh?
Perhaps in an attempt to redress the balance around the time of the recent franchise re-application, Scottish Television determined to duplicate its international success with Taggart by setting a similar-format drama series in Edinburgh.
Predictably, they came up with a plot-line set in the professional reaches of the law, rather than in the more ‘artisan’ area of policing.
The Advocates, however, was no Perry Mason and ruffled the Edinburgh legal establishment with its artistic licence and earthy exploration of the downside of the City's public face — prostitution, Aids and social deprivation — contrasted with the cosy self-satisfaction of the educated classes.
The second series of the Advocates was set partly in the University itself.
From the point of view of the regional film office, however, the vital thing is to get Edinburgh on film, in order to present all the faces of the City and the Region to the world.
For not only is the culture of film-making important for its own sake.
The fact of production and the images presented have strong economic implications for the film and television industry and the ordinary citizen.
Consider the promotional film (or, nowadays, video).
There has been a series on Edinburgh, although only one of them, Sean Connery's Edinburgh (1982), was actually commissioned as such by the City Council.
The others were purely personal expressions of the film-maker's relationship with the City, from Waverley Steps in 1947, through Prospect for a City (1967) and Walkabout Edinburgh (1970), to Demarco's Art in a Cold Climate in 1988.
Whether commissioned as a promotional tool or not, the showing of such films has had a major effect on the outside world's perception of Edinburgh.
We do not actually know, of course, if this effect has been good or bad; but the tourists keep coming, potential undergraduates keep applying and  companies do relocate into the area.
Now, of course, the economic value of film has been recognised beyond the image-building aspect.
It has been estimated that up to one third of the production budget of a movie can be left on location.
This consists not only of the direct costs of making the film, such as the purchase of equipment and labour; but also the indirect, tourist effects of spending in hotels, shops and restaurants.
Imagine a $20 million dollar movie made in and around Edinburgh — this could provide a £4 million injection into the local economy.
The effect from there is cyclical.
Money spent on crew and equipment makes for better crew and facilities, makes for better productions, makes for more productions and more money spent on crew and facilities.
Ultimately, we must have a strong, indigenous film production industry so that we can make strong and successful films which will speak of our culture to the outside world with creativity, power and commitment.
A new golden age?
The Edinburgh International Film Festival is the longest running film festival in the world and has experienced many ups and downs.
The present Chairman, Murray Grigor, has himself made and been associated with some of the films about Edinburgh mentioned above.
With its younger sibling, the Edinburgh International Television Festival, the EIFF supplies a focus for the world of the moving image once a year.
While the Festival lives, there is a film culture in Edinburgh; and sometimes it has been barely alive.
However, the future has never looked better.
The number of student films and non-student shorts currently being made is greater than ever before.
The new Scottish Film School opens at Napier next January, to build on existing courses at Napier, the College of Art, Stevenson and Esk Valley.
The new fifth television channel, wherever it is situated, will open up further opportunities for programme-makers when it starts up at the end of 1993.
Both the bid for Channel Five and plans for the new Teleport to be operated at South Gyle, carrying signals for both Television and Telecommunications via satellite, cable and fibre optic lines, are well advanced and require the continued integration of technologies to carry on the task of promoting Edinburgh as a centre of excellence in the new media.
And this includes one of the most exciting developments of all — the advent of local, city and community-based television.
The training ground and low-cost facilities which this will provide will allow access for just about anyone to the means of moving image expression.
Meanwhile, the latest piece by one of Scotland's most respected film-makers of the old school, Margaret Tait, is in production with Viz Films of Inverkeithing.
This is Blue Black Permanent, a full-length feature for Channel Four and the first drama feature to be supported financially by the City itself.
It will show Edinburgh life and Edinburgh backgrounds quite tellingly; and in a very different context from Tickets to the Zoo.
The University and Industry
…
Edit briefing
The University of Edinburgh's commercial arm, UnivEd Technologies Ltd, is the one-stop entry to its core industrial liaison activities.
Set up by the University in 1984, UnivEd is the first point of contact for industrialists seeking to exploit the University's top-class resources of staff and equipment.
UnivEd's range of services to clients in industry, commerce and government covers research and development, consultancy and training.
In all three areas, the University of Edinburgh operates at an international level, transferring skills and technology to companies and organisations world-wide.
On the R&D front, UnivEd negotiates contracts for basic and applied research in key sectors such as Information Technology, Healthcare, Environmental Studies and Biological Sciences.
A fine example of collaboration is the establishment, with Syntex Pharmaceuticals, of the Clinical Research Centre at Edinburgh's Western General Hospital.
In the Centre, staff from Syntex and the Faculty of Medicine evaluate cardiovascular drugs and carry out research on circulatory physiology and pharmacology.
BT is supporting a major research project within the University's Centre for Speech Technology Research to design and test computer generated dialogues for more efficient and flexible automated telephone services.
The aim of the work is to help computerised services — such as telephone banking — handle real dialogues with a human caller, by investigating the types of questions, answers and other features which will produce successful transactions.
More and more companies and organisations recognise the benefits of buying in world-class expertise on a consultancy basis.
A recent unusual match of consultant to client is the work carried out by the University's Centre for Field Archaeology for Shell Chemicals UK Ltd.
A team from the Centre assessed the route to be taken by Shell's North Western Ethylene Pipeline to determine how archaeological sites close to its path — from Grangemouth on the Firth of Forth to Stanlow in Cheshire — might be affected by the proposed construction work and how potential damage might be mitigated.
The University, through UnivEd, is a major provider of high-quality training, updating and reskilling for Scottish, European and international industry, commerce and government, with a comprehensive programme of courses, seminars and conferences presented by some 2,400 academics — acknowledged experts in their particular fields.
These include microelectronics, veterinary science, law, fire safety engineering and information technology.
The University and Motorola University of Schaumburg, Illinois, recently signed a collaborative agreement on the development of training materials and methods for use both by Motorola in its electronics companies around the world and the University of Edinburgh in undergraduate and postgraduate programmes.
Another of UnivEd's functions is the formation of campus companies through which products and processes discovered by staff can be developed commercially together with industrial partners.
A number of these are housed in the Edinburgh Technology Transfer Centre, a joint venture by the University and Edinburgh District Council.
For example, a world breakthrough in the design of an image sensing chip by staff in Electrical Engineering has been marketed by a campus company, VLSI Vision Ltd, to an industrial partner, Automated Security (Holdings).
The end product is an award-winning security alarm system based on the innovative technology of fitting all the components of a video camera onto a microchip.
The University is one of a number of higher education institutions in the UK taking part in the Department of Employment's Enterprise in Higher Education Initiative which from 1 April 1992 has, in Scotland, become the responsibility of Scottish Enterprise.
Now in the third year of a five-year contract, The Enterprise Centre is funding 43 projects, with the active support of a growing number of Employer Partners, throughout the University.
The aim of the projects is to bring about change in the degree curriculum which will encourage students to develop qualities and skills which extend beyond the specialised knowledge of their degree courses.
Graduates on leaving University have to be capable of a DEGREE PLUS, where PLUS is: Planning and managing change; Leading and motivating people; Utilising resources and numerical skills; and Self-development for life-long learning.
To encourage the development of these skills the Enterprise Projects involve: developing team and group work; self-directed learning; communication skills; case studies; work experience; and career planning.
Support is given to the staff involved by providing the Academic Link programme with places on in-house company training courses.
Very much in tune with the work of The Enterprise Centre are the Insight into Management Courses organised annually by the University's Careers Service in association with the Careers Research and Advisory Centre (CRAC).
They bring together students and young managers from over 100 leading UK companies in a series of simulated work situations and case studies, aimed at giving students an appreciation of management functions, problems and decision-making.
GEC Ferranti, British Gas, Procter and Gamble, Logica and Scottish Widows are just some of the major companies backing the courses.
FAST TRACK
In the year of the 25th Olympiad and the 90th anniversary of the birth of the legendary Olympic Gold Medallist Eric Liddell, athletics coach Margot Wells, whose husband Allan took the Olympic 100m gold in Moscow, looks at life in the fast lane, in 1924,1980 and now.
In 1924 most of the athletes in the British team were students or people who could afford the privilege of running for their country .
Even so, they were still the poor relations when it came to wearing tracksuits or ‘sweats’ as the Americans liked to call them.
In the case of the British, it was off with the cricket sweater and down to your marks.
In 1980 when Allan Wells won a Gold Medal at the Olympics I looked at the British tracksuits and thought: well, nothing much has changed in 56 years!
Except, that is, the people who were taking part and the level of commitment required to win in 1980 as opposed to 1924.
It was not that the athletes who won in 1924 were any less determined or committed in their approach.
The world of athletics had changed so much in that time, and has changed since 1980.
Probably the easiest way I can explain to you how athletics has changed since Eric Liddell won Olympic Gold in 1924 is to ask you to put the situation in a modern context.
For example, if Linford Christie were a man of such deep religious beliefs that he would not compete on a Sunday and subsequently found out that a qualifying round of the 100m was to be held on a Sunday, he would have to think long and hard before deciding to run the 400m.
In today's world he would probably choose to run only the 200m and not the 200m and 400m as Eric Liddell did.
For a start, as there were not nearly as many competitors, there would have been fewer qualifying runs.
In Barcelona, Eric Liddell would have to run two rounds of the 200m, followed by the semi-final and the final the next day.
Often as not, the qualifying rounds for the 400m coincide with the final rounds of the 200m and this would weaken his chances in both events.
Not only that, he would know well in advance the order of the programme, and consequently would have altered his training dramatically to account for the extra distance.
If he still opted to run the 400m, he would probably make it through to the semi-finals, but he certainly would not win.
Today's athlete has to specialise in one discipline in one sport in order to achieve success at the highest level.
A top-level sprinter could not be a top-level  javelin thrower and even less possible is it that he could reach the top in another sport as well.
The modern-day athlete is now a full time professional.
Even since Allan Wells won the Olympic 100m in 1980, things have changed.
Today's world-class athlete no longer needs to have a full-time job to support his or her athletics.
In the days when Eric Liddell ran, athletics — while no less competitive — was more of a hobby than a profession.
The number of people taking part in the sport was restricted by money, opportunity and desire.
Now there is no lack of opportunity, no less desire and the money — no longer a restricting factor — is now a motivating factor.
The one thing that has not changed is that in order to gain success at the very highest level the athlete's training has to be geared to the specific needs of the event.
In 1980, Allan Wells took six months off work to enable him to train twice a day.
As he had a full-time job, he had to push an exceptional amount of training into one session.
Having the time off allowed the quality of both sessions to be even higher.
If the film ‘Chariots of Fire’ is to be believed, Eric Liddell did most of his training running up and down Arthur's Seat in between preaching and racing.
If this was the case, the man must have been a remarkable athlete, as well as a remarkable man!
Allan Wells' training consisted of speedball training and gym circuits, hill running, bounding and specific sprint training on the track.
In fact, the only similarity between the film and Allan Wells' training was Harold Abraham's high knee stepping drills — and we thought that exercise was invented by Don Quarrie!
It is a great achievement for any Scot to win an Olympic Gold Medal, no matter when it is achieved and no matter in which event.
With modern-day technology it is getting harder to achieve all the time, but there is one common denominator in the case of Eric Liddell and Allan Wells, and that is the fierce determination to win and the intense pride of doing it for Scotland.
The Eric Liddell Foundation Development and Training Camp Edinburgh
23 August to 3 September 1992
Launched on St Andrew's Day 1990, the Eric Liddell Foundation is the inspiration of Scots-born, Hong-Kong based civil engineer Charles Walker .
The idea of marking the site of Liddell's grave at Weifang in China, and establishing the Foundation came to him while researching a book on Liddell.
The Foundation's objectives are a greater awareness of mankind, and educational and sporting excellence in young people.
It aims to encourage young athletes from Hong Kong, China and Scotland, who might not otherwise reach their full potential, by bringing them together through their respective Amateur Athletic Associations.
The first Development and Training Camp organised by the Foundation was held in Hong Kong last September.
The second camp will be hosted by the University of Edinburgh and the Scottish Amateur Athletic Association from 23 August to 3 September 1992 in Edinburgh.
Twenty-four young people — four each from Scotland, China and Hong Kong, as well as South Africa, Japan and Canada — will learn and train together, and share one another 's cultures.
All the countries involved have connections with Eric Liddell.
Once again, the Ian Charleson Memorial Award — named after another of the University's graduates, who portrayed Liddell in the film ‘Chariots of Fire’— will be presented to the participants contributing most to cross-cultural links.
Eric Liddell's dedication and ideals are thus commemorated in a living, positive way.
For further information on the Foundation, please write to: The Eric Liddell Foundation, Hong Kong Bank International Trustee Ltd, 2/F China Building, 29 Queen's Road Central, Hong Kong.
Eric Liddell was born in Tianjin, China in 1902.
He was sent back to Scotland to be educated, completing his formal education with a science degree from Edinburgh University.
While there, he was capped as a Scottish Rugby International.
At the 1924 Paris Olympics Liddell decided to withdraw from his chosen distance, the 100m as it would have meant competing on a Sunday.
Instead, he was asked to train for the 400m, and won in world record time.
Liddell later returned to China as a teacher and missionary where he was interned by the Japanese at a camp in Weifang.
He died from a brain tumour on February 21, 1945, and was buried in a small garden on the camp.
The site is now marked by a Mull granite memorial stone, erected through the efforts of the Eric Liddell Foundation.
AN EDITOR'S TALE
As old age creeps on I occasionally reflect, in that pious way that is one of the perks of advancing years, about those things in my education which proved to be of most use in later life .
I left school at the age of 17, anxious to get into the wider world, and without much thought went to the university of my home town, at that time a pretty universal habit.
Maybe I was too young because I fear I was not an assiduous student.
Too much time was spent on student journalism and other pursuits and too little on the books.
Yet the clutch of Highers and then the Ordinary MA with which I eventually emerged turned out to be a pretty useful preparation for a life in journalism.
I spent a few years on The Scotsman and then to Thomson House to join The Guardian soon after it dropped the ‘Manchester’ from its title and started printing in London.
The paper was full of formidable brains.
Some of the leading members of staff of that period went on to become directors of international institutes or occupy high positions in academic life.
Yet I found that the breadth of my Scottish education stood me in good stead in the work of assessing and editing material from the whole agenda of a serious newspaper.
At university I had done Moral Philosophy, English, French and German.
I had even studied Geology as my science subject and although I was cack-handed and obtuse when it came to the practical side had enjoyed the theory well enough.
(I now discover that doctrines then prevalent, for example about mountain-building, have since been discarded).
To the late Dr Melville Clark, the Reader in Rhetoric, I owe the discovery that I had some talent for editing text.
In one of his class exams he set a test in which he had jumbled the sentences in a passage of prose.
I found that I put them back into their correct order with ease and, for the first and last time, achieved some distinction in the marking.
It became clear to me that Dr Clark did not understand journalism, however.
He used to say that nothing could be more ludicrous than going to a football match and then reading somebody else's account of what you had already seen.
I later learned that those who would be most keen to read such an account were precisely those who had been at the game.
To our philosophy teacher, Professor John Macmurray, I owed the perception that my chosen trade was a treacherous one if what you looked for was strict objectivity.
The professor, who was greatly respected and whose classes were much enjoyed, used to stage an experiment.
A dramatic event would be played out in front of the class — for example a man would run in pursued by another.
There would be a fight and a chase.
The class would then be asked to write an account of the incident and Professor Macmurray took great pleasure in pointing out that not one version tallied with any of the others.
I comfort myself with that recollection when dealing with complaints about my own paper, very much part of a modern editor's work in an age when our readers have become more critical and more discriminating, but Professor Macmurray's insights have helped me to distinguish between those complaints that flow, as they sometimes do, from a different subjective interpretation of a given body of facts and those that arise from a straightforward error on our part.
Knocking around the university, and living a little on my wits, I also learned, in the student press, something of practical value for my future career and something of the university of life.
The value of a practical education I was to see strikingly illustrated on The Guardian.
One day a story was received about a betting coup at Dagenham Greyhound Track.
It was clearly an excellent and interesting yarn.
The trouble was that none of us could understand it.
I hawked it around the great Guardian brains, chaps with double firsts from Oxbridge, and none could help.
At length the Head Messenger, a man from East London of some presence but little formal education, stepped forward: ‘Perhaps I can help you, gentlemen,’ he said with a deferential cough.
He then proceeded to explain the sequence of the coup with admirable lucidity.
We rewrote the story and it was duly published.
At the university I also learned the valuable lesson, not to waste my time playing billiards.
I spent too many hours with my friends in a rather dingy salon in, I think, Marshall Street.
It was heated by a stove from which a heavy iron pipe ran up all the way to the roof.
One afternoon I completed another unsuccessful attempt at a cannon: I had no sooner moved away than the pipe crashed down exactly where I had been standing.
It was a warning from the man upstairs.
Since that day I have never spent much time at the green table and, once I got out into the world of journalism, worked hard at it.
I feel great gratitude now to all those teachers who were so patient with the immaturity of youth.
In particular, I feel a particular debt to those at the Edinburgh Academy who taught me how to write precis.
The discipline of distilling the thoughts of others into your own words seems in retrospect about the most useful thing on the curriculum.
And the ability to express yourself forcefully and clearly, to be able to master the sense of an issue and convey it to others, is an enormous help to any career.
It is by no means a universal facility.
When I was young there was a tension between the Arts and Sciences.
My father, a cultivated man in every other respect, nursed a strong contempt for science which rubbed off on me and, I suspect, went right back to the Darwinian controversies of the nineteenth century, for he was the son of the manse.
Even today, with the growth of computers in every branch of business, it is rare to find a computer man who can explain himself in simple English.
And, I believe, science courses continue to be undersubscribed in our universities.
I do not know if scientists are taught to write precis or if arts students are still made to study a little science.
If not, it is their loss, for it is the catholicity of the education to which I was exposed that I have come most to value.
It is a part of the Scottish tradition which seems very much worth preserving.