

ANIMALS AT work
spots the leopard.
The University of Edinburgh's most famous dropout, Charles Darwin, pointed out that human beings are descended from animals.
A discipline has since been founded on the idea that human behaviour is genetically controlled, a hybrid of sociology and biology called sociobiology.
Sociobiologists discuss genes for male chauvinism, feminism, communism and perhaps even belief in the tooth fairy, with the solemnity once reserved for debates on the number of angels that can dance on a pin head.
I have gone further, and combined sociology with ecology in the science of socioecology.
Socioecology assumes that any ecological opportunity (technically known as a niche) exploited in the wild by animals after billions of years of evolution will be filled in a couple of months in a work environment.
The parallels between the work environment and a natural ecosystem will lead to similar responses, and intelligence is vastly quicker than natural selection.
In ecosystems, plants are consumed by herbivores, which are in turn consumed by carnivores.
Socioecology regards the plants as the work, the herbivores as the workers, and the carnivores as the management.
PARASITE
Just as farmers accidentally produce opportunities for diseases and parasites, so work environments are exploited in ways management did not intend.
Parasites provoke difficulties, and thrive on the resulting confusion.
Parasites may point out that the filing system is antiquated, and volunteer to sort it out.
They create a filing monstrosity that only they understand.
They'll explain it to anyone, anytime, but somehow it turns out that the other employees must go to them if they want anything.
HIBERNATOR
Hibernating animals sleep through the winter, when food resources are scarce.
A similar process is aestivation, when animals escape hot, dry conditions through torpor.
Office hibernators are sporadic attenders, preferring to hibernate at home (or aestivate on hot beaches).
Hibernators can be recognised by frequent, short illnesses; by regular hold-ups on their morning train; and by the frequency of their grandmothers' funerals.
Hibernators have at least one, sometimes as many as three, untreatable ailments such as back pain, sinus trouble and migraine.
POSSUM
Possums and some other creatures evade predators by playing dead.
Human possums avoid conflict by agreeing with whichever side is talking to them at the time.
They avoid making enemies, and so cut down on threats to themselves in the office jungle.
Possums are mostly an annoyance for co-workers, who learn not to rely on them.
Unfortunately, possums are sometimes promoted into positions of authority, when they are a danger to everyone, because they neither sort out squabbles or misunderstandings amongst employees, nor do they support them against outside threats.
HERD ANIMALS
Herd animals find strength in numbers.
They are the drawing office, or the secretaries, or simply the people in the Phase 4 building, noted for its poor heating and ventilation.
Individually, they are normal, but once together, the herd mentality emerges; they charge off together, or form a defensive circle (like musk-oxen).
Herd animals see themselves as put-upon; everyone takes advantage of them and the herd is their only chance to stay equal.
Sometimes they have a point.
The Phase 4 building does have awful heating and ventilation.
The secretaries are expected to produce copy from illegible scribbles, but get little thanks and no status.
Their strategy is based upon the idea that the boss has only a limited amount of sympathy and benefits to go round, and that their herd's problems should have priority.
They realise that the squeaky hinge gets the oil, and there is no virtue in suffering in silence.
Instead, they bray.
TERRITORIAL
Some animals defend a territory against all threats, marking the territory to warn off rivals.
While they don't actually scent-mark their territory, office territorials use a similar approach.
Their possessions are always marked with their initials.
They have their own stocks of pencils and pads and batteries and rubbers.
Don't ask to borrow their pencil, and keep an eye on your own possessions.
Otherwise, you may find that, within microseconds, they have been indelibly marked with the territorial's initials.
Territorials surround themselves with briefcases, calendars, and large bushy plants.
They hate open-plan offices.
Animals become territorial because they get something in return for their effort — food, for instance.
In the office, a choice desk location by the window or near the coffee machine may be worth defending.
Often, however, territorials defend areas with no intrinsic importance, a behaviour with no adaptive value, a relic from the past.
SPECIALIST
Specialists know all there is to know about the Type 48-x, and can use it better than everyone else, and everyone benefits from their advice.
There are rewards in specialising: being indispensable.
There are penalties in specialising: if evolution takes the niche away (when the Type 48-x is scrapped), specialists may become extinct (or redundant, as socioecologists call it).
This is a particular danger in the modern office environment, as technology gallops ahead.
Fortunately, humans can plan ahead.
Clever specialists start researching the Type 50-x the minute the Type 49-x has been installed.
PREDATORS
Predators form the top part of the ecological or office pyramid.
They don't do the work, but benefit from the hard work of others.
Predators have their own strategies: the chaser, the trapper, and the pouncer.
Chasers set tight deadlines.
They then chivvy their prey, continually asking how the work is going, and when it will be ready, and whether it will meet the deadline.
If the deadline is failed, the prey is showing weakness which spurs the chaser to attack; criticism is loud and unforgiving.
Success in meeting the deadline means a stiffer one next time.
Trappers are sly.
When a piece of work is late they enquire as to their prey's health, and mention an upcoming pay review.
Their prey is kept in a state of constant unease, afraid of putting a foot into a hidden trap.
Pouncers are silent and watchful.
They disappear for days, until their prey is peacefully relaxed, and then they leap, a killing frenzy of teeth: ‘Why haven't you done this, where is that, why are you drinking coffee when you should be working, when will the design be ready, where are the back-up calculations?’
Pure scientists always have difficulty getting funding in harsh economic times.
I suggest that one solution for biologists will be to apply their expertise to the new science of socioecology, and the environment of the office.
There will be plenty of money available from rich companies, just as soon as socioecology becomes as well-established as graphology and palm-reading.
Europe: a common currency?
The Maastricht Treaty is hotly debated, little read and politically charged.
explains its origins and future role in Europe.
The chief driving force behind the moves which led to the Single European Act of 1986 was the perceived need to create a single market in Europe in order to strengthen and develop the economies of the Twelve .
This in turn would create growth and thus employment, and also help industry to withstand the economic challenges posed by the United States, Japan and the East Asian countries.
The astonishing success of the Commission's initiative aimed at achieving a single EC market by 1992 inspired its President, Jacques Delors, strongly supported by the European Parliament and by several governments, to relaunch attempts to create an Economic and Monetary Union.
His report on means of achieving such a Union was adopted by the European Council at Madrid in June 1989, when the Prime Ministers unanimously agreed to prepare for an Inter-governmental Conference on EMU, including the social dimension as an essential element.
From this point, events flowed on unstoppably.
The progressive realisation of the single market was already bringing benefits to industry and commerce in the EC, and industrial leaders began to share the conviction of the Commission and the Parliament that, without eventual EMU, the full benefits of the single market could not be garnered.
Well though the European Monetary System and its Exchange Rate Mechanism were working, economic discipline was lacking in several Member States, causing distortions in the market and upsetting the full and fair play of competition between industries and providers of services.
The interplay of these forces on governments created a strong political will to embark on a course leading eventually to EMU.
While these economic and political events were unfolding, dramatic changes in Central and Eastern Europe were hitting the headlines.
The breaching of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 opened the doors to a series of revolutions in Central and East European countries which, from November 1989 to January 1990, saw the toppling of Communist dictatorships, and their gradual replacement by governments relying in most cases on popular support given at free elections.
Of the Twelve, the then West Germany was the most crucially affected, and its government set about creating the conditions for the unification of the two Germanies.
The aspirations of the democratic governments and the peoples of Central and East Europe to join the EC came quickly to the fore, and the Twelve were pressed to react.
Rising to the challenge, Chancellor Kohl and President Mitterrand at European Council meetings in April and June 1990 argued for, and won acceptance of, the need for a Political Union to complement EMU.
In their view, the EC must be endowed with the ability to formulate and carry out a common foreign and security policy, particularly vis-a-vis the East and Central European countries; the lack of such a policy has unfortunately prevented effective EC action in the former Yugoslavia.
Several governments, particularly from the larger states, sought co-operation on immigration and frontier controls and also closer police collaboration.
The Commission quickly sensed that a Political Union could encompass the Social Charter, now seen as an indispensable complement to EMU, as well as new EC policies and more powers for the European Parliament.
The Parliament itself, staunch advocate since 1983 of a federal European Union, urged that the two concepts of EMU and Political Union should be merged in a single Treaty on European Union, and won the vital support of France and Germany, as well as of a majority of other countries.
Parliament also sought to eliminate the so-called ‘democratic deficit’, by which powers previously exercised by national governments who were supervised by national Parliaments, passed to the unelected Council of Ministers, bypassing any Parliamentary scrutiny, whether by the European or by national Parliaments.
The other motivation for European Union came from the newly-freed countries of Central Europe themselves, who favoured it in the knowledge that only a strong Community, closely knit in a European Union, would have the resources and united will to assist them towards eventual EC membership.
The British Government expressed grave reservations about the proposals for Political Union, particularly the Social Charter, the common foreign policy, new EC policy areas and more powers for the European Parliament.
Its opposition was overruled at this stage however by a majority of the Member States, who agreed to start work on EMU and Political Union in two parallel inter-governmental conferences, which opened at Rome in December 1990.
It was perhaps these reservations which seem to have persuaded the British government to play down its enforced involvement in the Conference on Political Union and to be economical with information about its stance therein.
On the other hand, both the Thatcher and Major governments, especially after Britain's entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism in October 1990, were prepared to discuss their attitude to EMU with some freedom.
It must be clearly stated, however, that few other governments had, since the summer of 1989, made a point of informing either their national Parliaments or their people about the preparations for the inter-governmental conferences or about their progress.
Comment and discussion were confined mainly to financial and commercial circles interested in the prospective EMU, to foreign and economic ministries in the Twelve's capitals.
Nevertheless, the Europa Institute of the University of Edinburgh held a conference in April 1991 to monitor the progress of the inter-governmental Conferences on EMU and Political Union, the results of which were published in May.
In the same month the University conferred an honorary doctorate on Chancellor Kohl who, in a widely-noticed speech, published by the Institute, clearly indicated that his government backed both EMU and Political Union.
Discussions in the Conferences, particularly that on Political Union, were difficult and a series of uneasy compromises in particular fields was struck at Maastricht, some of which have won few supporters.
It can however be argued with cogency that the Treaty remains a bold attempt to enable the EC to match the challenges facing it.
These then are the origins and development of the concepts and proposals which have become the substance of the Maastricht Treaty, but about which the public has been notably ill-informed.
On the one hand, EMU, although the subject of a short-lived scheme in 1970, evolved rapidly from the proposals in the 1988 Delors Report into a closely-drawn, detailed draft Treaty.
On the other hand, Political Union was conceived late in the day, partly in response to the dramatic changes in Central Europe and partly as a complement to EMU designed to placate, if not to satisfy, the European Parliament and those favouring its strengthening.
The Treaty on European Union can honestly be regarded as an attempt to respond, in the medium- and long-term, to the economic and political imperatives of Europe in the 1990s and beyond.
Assuming that it is ratified, what is its relevance in the search for a solution to the problem of the enlargement of the EC?
Before the Danish ‘No’ vote and the narrow French ‘Yes’vote, there was broad understanding that, barring upsets, Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland could, if they so wished, become full EC members in 1995.
Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia (or the Czech and Slovak republics) might then accede in 2000 or soon thereafter.
The Danish and French votes and the financial crisis of September 1992 will probably cause this timetable to be delayed by something like two years; they have also cast doubt as to the continuing will of all the applicant states to become full EC members.
For example, the Swedish currency came under enormous pressure when the pound and lira left the ERM; and polls show steady resistance in Norway to accession.
Nevertheless, all present applicant states wish to join, not the present EC, but the post-Maastricht European Union: a fact for Britons to reflect on.
From the EC angle, only the ratification of the Treaty and steady progress, by way of economic recovery and the growing-together of the Twelve's economies, can give the EC the economic muscle to assist Poland, Hungary and the Czech and Slovak republics to prepare for eventual accession; the enormous cost of achieving German unification is a salutary warning in this regard.
Thus the implementation of the Maastricht Treaty is seen by Northern and Central Europeans as an earnest of the will and capacity of the West Europeans to extend to them the benefits of European Union.
PAST, present AND FUTURE
From October 1993 the University will offer the UK's first undergraduate degree course in Environmental Archaeology.
introduces the science.
‘It was a period of rapid global warming; in response to climatic change, great movements were taking place in the distributions of plants and animals, the great ice sheets were melting and the world sea level was rising quickly.
Human populations were perpetually on the move, constantly prodded by environmental changes…’
This vision comes not from H.G. Wells ‘The Shape of Things to Come’ or some late twentieth century ecological disaster epic, but from a new branch of archaeological science — environmental archaeology.
It describes events which took place in the distant past towards the end of the last glacial period and the start of our own, warm, interglacial epoch.
Archaeology itself is a form of intellectual theft — a discipline which steals ideas and techniques from other subjects to help in its understanding of the human past.
Concepts borrowed from anthropology aid our understanding of social structure, while the techniques of physics enable us to date the past.
But environmental archaeology is possibly the most brazen thief of all.
It is a marriage of convenience between workers in many fields — archaeologists, geographers, geologists, botanists and zoologists — who do not want the barriers of 19th century subject divisions to stand in the way of understanding the way in which the human environment has evolved, the human role in shaping that environment and the ways in which humans gained a living from it.
In consequence this new subject has created ‘something rich and strange’ which is not easily defined.
At core it is concerned with how past human populations met their essential needs — for food, shelter, fuel and raw materials — to live and to reproduce.
It focuses on how human groups lived in the past and the effect these activities had upon the ecology of the landscape.
Recognition by archaeologists of the scale and magnitude of environmental change has prompted the development of integrated programmes of archaeological and palaeo-environmental research.
Typical of such an approach is recent work at Scotscraig near Tayport in Fife, conducted by the Department of Archaeology at Edinburgh in conjunction with the Scottish Archaeological Field School.
The Scotscraig valley is rich lowland agricultural landscape very different from the popular image of Scotland as barren moor, mountain and loch.
While archaeological survey and excavation directed by Dr Trevor Watkins and Caroline Wickham-Jones is beginning to uncover a complex, changing pattern  of human settlement, palaeoenvironmental studies are attempting to draw a picture of the evolution of the local landscape.
This picture is based on evidence derived from studying the shape of the landscape, sedimentary deposits and biological remains.
These biological remains include pollen, plant fragments, seeds, bones, shells, and insects.
When combined with archaeological evidence of settlement distribution, age and function it will be possible to reconstruct something of the lives of people since the first settlers arrived in the area over 7,000 years ago.
Grey silts on the valley floor contain the abundant remains of salt marsh plants suggesting that at that time this was a shallow inlet of the sea.
Flooding resulted from the rapid rise in the world sea level which followed the melting of the great ice sheets.
The land, however, was itself not static.
Formerly burdened by the weight of the ice it had sunk locally; once the ice had melted it started to return, or rebound, to its former level.
As it did so the valley floor gradually rose above sea level.
Marine sediments give way to a dense peat containing tree stumps, branches and roots — especially birch and latterly alder.
These in turn are covered by several layers of stony, sandy soil — probably washed into the valley from surrounding fields — possibly resulting from the first agricultural settlement of the area.
Further evidence of human activity is to be found in the gentle hills which form the northern edge of the Scotscraig valley.
A borehole drilled by hand through the mud and silt filling a former loch basin — drained in the 18th century — yielded a ‘core’ of material which can be studied in the laboratory.
The sequence of deposits suggests that the loch was formed shortly after the melting of the last great ice sheet about 13,000 years ago when the land surface was barren arctic desert.
Moving up the core the sediments change from a blue grey clay devoid of plant remains to a brown silt containing abundant plant fossils.
The detailed study of fossil pollen from these silts enables the reconstruction of the type of plants which were present in the area, their distribution and, by inference, the climate.
A typical pollen sequence from the region reflects rapid post-glacial warming and the colonisation of the area by a pioneer phase of open birch woodland which in turn is subsequently replaced by a dense oak woodland.
Human activity in the landscape is evidenced by several thin bands of course sand in the upper part of the sequence.
These bands of sand are thought to result from the clearance of woodland in the area surrounding the site with resultant soil erosion and the in-washing of soil into the loch from the bare ground surface.
The most likely reason for such sudden removal of woodland vegetation being clearance prior to agricultural cultivation.
In the absence of clear settlement evidence the study of the detailed pollen record will provide critical information on the distribution and nature of human land use — as the pollen of several crops, especially wheat and barley, can be identified.
Such sequences of vegetation change and human impact are typical of many areas and it would not be unreasonable to suggest that no area of the British Isles has been entirely free of human activities or their indirect consequences — the landscape we see today is as much an artifact of human creation as any historical site.
This realisation of the cultural dimension to landscape history has implications for modern nature conservation.
If we wish to preserve a landscape in its present form we must actively direct it towards that end.
A landscape of open moorland, for example, will revert to scrub woodland in a short time if grazing and heather burning are restricted.
Nature reserves must be as concerned with pro-active (as opposed to passive) management as with fences.
Environmental archaeology can therefore throw light on modern as well as ancient ecological problems by providing a set of fundamental ‘base line’ data.
Such information can be  used to test our understanding of how environmental systems work over time spans far greater than those available from written records and modern experimental observations.
What then are some of the other conclusions that can be drawn from the study of environmental history?
Humans live on a dynamic and variable planet.
Records from the deep oceans show that major global climatic and environmental change is nothing new in our history.
What differs now are the causes — not the changes themselves.
If we are to understand the complex relationship between people and the planet upon which they live then it is essential that we understand how it has evolved over time.
All living systems have a history which shapes the way they function today — to attempt to cure environmental ills without understanding their origin would be to operate on a patient without ever consulting the medical case notes.
Environmental archaeology provides evidence to demonstrate that the human environment has changed many times in the past, each change heralding periods of technological, economic and social change as human societies struggled to find new ways to gain a living from the world around them.
The ways in which human groups have responded to change differ considerably.
While many groups evolved successful responses to change, some would appear to have made poor survival choices and in consequence died out.
Equally there is little to suggest that past human groups were any less exploitative of their environment — or any less spendthrift in their consumption of its resources — than we are today.
The assumption that all past societies were well adapted to their environments — noble savages in the garden of Eden — owes more to late 20th century wishful thinking than to reality.
It is simply that their numbers were fewer and hence their overall impact appears less.
There has never been an ecological golden age.
Environmental archaeology is not a replacement for archaeology, nor does it claim to be entirely separate from, or inherently superior to, the more traditional humanities approach.
Rather it is a complementary approach to the human past; one which, by looking at the ways in which people used the land and the effect they had on it throughout human history, can enhance our grasp of how the environment might change in the future.
Some accuse environmental archaeology of being somehow too scientific, of losing sight of archaeology's historical goals.
This is to misrepresent the subject simply as a collection of techniques.
The ecological approach demands that the physical needs of human beings (food, shelter, fuel, reproduction) be placed at the centre of the archaeological quest.
If questions as to how people lived should displace the detached study of pottery and typologies of stone tools at the heart of archaeology then it is surely the study of the human past that is the better for it.
As Mortimer Wheeler once remarked ‘In archaeology we should constantly remind ourselves: we are digging up people not things.’
The University and the Environment
…
Edit briefing
‘All educational institutions have a unique and vital role…
Mass education will be of little value if it simply increases the number of people who are pursuing their own selfish ends.
Education must establish and transmit the values and attitudes which are necessary for the harmonious long-term survival of civilisation’.
The words of the Principal,, to the graduates of 1992, and the fundamental reasoning behind the launch two years ago of the University's Environmental Initiative to imbue staff and students with an awareness of environmental problems and the resolve to confront them through integrated teaching, research and institutional behaviour.
Implementation of the Initiative University-wide lies with four groups: the Energy and Environment Group co-ordinates good institutional practice, including compliance with the relevant legislation; the Environmental Teaching Group promotes teaching and curriculum development; the Environmental Research Group promotes environmental research activity throughout the University; and the Environmental Advisory Group, made up of the convenors of the other three groups and Senior Vice-Principal Barrie Wilson, to whom the Principal has delegated responsibility for the Initiative, oversees the entire project.
Awareness of environmental issues is being introduced into undergraduate teaching, across all Faculties, and not only in those subjects, such as earth sciences, biological sciences, agriculture, geography and ecology, of which they are part and parcel.
The complexity of the problems facing our planet and the difficulty in making any accurate prediction of their future pattern present a valuable opportunity for ‘interdisciplinary’ work — the linking of teaching and research across Faculty and subject boundaries, allowing social, moral and ethical issues to be debated in a scientific context, bridging the divide between the ‘two cultures’.
A recent survey revealed over 200 courses with environmental content; of these nearly 60 were classed as ‘high’,(largely aimed at environmental professionals), and 50 ‘medium’ and 90 ‘low’, that is, courses not explicitly environmental in content, but relevant to the topic.
The Initiative aims to increase both the number of courses and their environmental content.
The University already has a strong record of research on the environment.
For instance, the Department of Geology investigates global ice sheets and climatic change, the Department of Geography examines changes in the vegetational patterns of Amazonian rainforests, the Edinburgh Centre for Tropical Forests (involving the University's School of Forestry) looks at tropical conservation in the developing countries, and the Department of Meteorology, together with groups in Italy, Germany and Greece, is studying the circulation of the Mediterranean Sea.
The Research Group has identified more than 130 academic staff across almost all Faculties whose current research extends to a greater or lesser degree to environmental issues; and many more have expertise which could be brought to bear on environmental problems.
It is the Group's job to consolidate this bank of knowledge and to match the know-how and skill of staff across a wide variety of disciplines to externally funded research projects.
But the University — with some 15,000 students and 5,000 staff — must itself behave in an environmentally responsible manner.
Otherwise, it would be a case of ‘Do as I say, not as I do.’
The all-pervasive institutional environmental policy aims to protect — and minimise the impact of the University's activities on — the local, regional and global environment; provide safe, healthy working conditions for staff and students; conserve natural resources by minimising avoidable waste and pollution; improve energy efficiency and substitute renewable energy sources where possible; avoid the unnecessary use of hazardous materials and processes; promote effective waste management and recycling schemes (especially paper); and encourage the use of public transport.
On the energy efficiency front, expensive internal stair light bulbs at Pollock Halls of Residence have been replaced with more cost-effective compact fluorescent 2D lamps, paying for themselves in 17 months; a 95% efficiency condensing boiler has been installed at High School Yards in place of a traditional boiler with only 60–65% efficiency; in the Main Library 5,000 obsolete light fittings have been renewed by half that number with improved light levels.
The Centre for Human Ecology, with its origins in the late C.H. Waddington's ‘School of the Man-Made Future’ of the 1960s and a long history of promoting environmental awareness within the University, today finds itself at the hub of current ideology.
Its ‘alternative’ views are no longer peripheral, but at the core of common concern for the environment and the University's action programme.
Edinburgh's integrated approach to teaching, research and institutional behaviour on environmental matters leads the way for others in higher education.
KNOWLEDGE plc
The market culture, which has been infiltrating universities for the past decade, has recently gained momentum.
asks whether it's acceptable, desirable, or unavoidable.
Customer satisfaction, planning units, cost centres, the client learning environment and, inevitably, the mission statement: today's universities are full of the jargon and trappings of the market.
Department heads wield budgets with entrepreneurial aplomb, buying units of teaching time from other departments or, as seems likely soon, creating a market to buy and sell slots in a timetable of lecture room space to ensure their efficient allocation.
The profusion of newer universities have taken to offering franchised versions of their courses at further education colleges, while breaking with the tradition that it was unbecoming for a university to do anything so crass as advertising its wares.
Television spots sell soft focus degree courses, corporate images, and job placement rates with the same persuasive skills previously applied to soap powder and politicians.
This is Knowledge plc — a derogatory term coined by Pat Kane, singer, Scottish Nationalist and rector of the University of Glasgow.
His is an angry, radical critique of the changes taking place, arguing that market ideology has pervaded the Scottish universities to the extent that their work has lost its breadth, its pace, its ability to question and its identity.
The move from students to customers may appear to enhance their status within the system.
But, it is argued, those same clients have become widgets, being processed in dramatically increasing numbers through a degree machine.
‘Efficiency is a weasel word,’ claims Kane.
‘It's seeing the university as a factory where people are given identifiable, quantifiable market skills which plug into an entrepreneurial vision of society.
It suggests we input resources so that we get out a functioning professional.
But higher education should be a more exploratory affair and the university more a community of scholars.’
The entire culture of university life has changed, largely due to the way the sector is funded by Government.
And the early signs of that being altered date back to the tough public spending rounds of the early 1980s.
Margaret Thatcher had been Education Secretary a decade before, and was familiar with the soft upholstery of the senior common room at that time.
Long before that, she had been a research chemist.
So she thought she knew the sector, and set her favourite ideologue, Sir Keith (now Lord) Joseph to give the universities a brisk, introductory course in Thatcherite economics.
The academic community in many universities was startled by the ferocity of the cuts, and responded with the most short-term of strategies — voluntary severance for virtually any staff member who wanted it.
The intention may not have been a scorched earth policy, but the effect on some departments was the same.
So there were two key consequences; one was that universities came to see that planning of such change might have produced a better result: the other that vengeful dons denied Mrs Thatcher her honorary degree from Oxford.
As the 1980s wore on and bore down, institutions were prodded into changing over to commercial management structures.
By 1988, principals had effectively become chief executives, with explicit responsibility for the use of public funds.
A thinly-veiled threat of an academic Government inspectorate resulted in more open, external audit of performance in teaching and research.
The University Grants Committee gave way to the Funding Council.
To the Government, ‘grants’ smacked of a dependency culture and central planning, whereas funding allowed for competitive bidding and the allocative magic of the market place.
The UFC tried to get universities bidding against one another for student allocations, by offering to educate them more cheaply than the competition.
The universities did bid for the students, but all at the same top price, and the system was consigned to the UFC file marked ‘fiasco.’
However a rising priority for the Government was a rapid expansion of numbers, which combined happily with the increasing desire of people of all ages to boost their qualifications.
The UFC's subsequent system rewarded those who took on extra students cheaply.
Institutions took the hint, and    began their current binge of rapid expansion.
If Knowledge plc had failed to get in by the back door, it was this that brought the ideology of the market-place marching in the front.
Along with marketing to attract more customers, the management changes throughout the sector have required that senior academics transform themselves into planners, seeking to attract money towards their work, rather than relying on the previous expectation that it would fall like manna from the principal's office.
It is a process which has led universities — some of them at least— to appear to be driven less by the pursuit of knowledge than by the pursuit of funding.
The University of Edinburgh has come late and abruptly to these changes, its collective mind concentrated by the need to change planning systems which had led to the sudden emergence of large, recurring deficits.
From this academic year, faculties have been organised into four Faculty Groups headed by Provosts.
Below these are Planning Units whose heads have overall managerial responsibility for their Units and answer to the Provosts who, in turn, sit on the Central Management Group chaired by the Principal.
According to Dugald Mackie, until recently a senior administrator at Strathclyde University, there has been tension between accountability and autonomy as the introduction of new management systems has worked itself out throughout Scotland.
The old regime believed that such accountability and planning ran counter to the culture of academic autonomy.
In research, the hunt for funds has become not only more competitive, but a highly skilled operation.
Reduction in guaranteed funding for research with each student place has led to senior academics increasingly being required to forsake the laboratory and library to go and press the flesh with research directors on the Government's councils and of the big companies, charities and foundations.
If the results serve as a yardstick, it is a game played very effectively by Edinburgh's lobbyists.
But has all this improved what universities are meant to be doing, or have they changed their role?
Mackie, who has become secretary of the new Scottish Higher Education Funding Council, says it was necessary for universities to be better run.
‘It has provided them with a stronger sense of purpose and mission,’ he says.
‘It got people to sit down and think about these things.
It has become clearer to people what they are there for, and the importance of research and students.
It also enabled them to look more closely at the environment in which people are taught.’
While students may be financially worse off, they are being better cared for and they are taking an increasing part in assessing the quality of their courses.
‘I hope there is far less chance of students getting a bad lecture,’ says Mackie.
Professor Barrie Wilson, Vice-Principal of Edinburgh University, who has been one of those most closely involved with implementing recent management changes, says staff are still mainly concerned with teaching well and doing lots of research.
But they are now more aware that their teaching and research have an effect beyond their own careers and subjects.
They have an effect on their departments and their university as a whole, because comparisons which affect funding levels are now drawn with other institutions.
In reflecting on the cultural change that has come about in Edinburgh and beyond, the professor voices concerns which sound remarkably like those of Pat Kane, not noted for his establishment views.
Wilson fears for education generally, that the market pressures could bring in an entrepreneurial ethos which could change the nature of institutions and leave the morality of the market-place unchallenged.
‘Educational institutions should focus on educational issues.
The market is the mechanism through which we're forced to be competitive.
But we must not let competitiveness be everything, and convey that view to our students’.
He says these new recruits to higher education, entering universities in large numbers are not seeing long-term change towards the market, so much as a reduced staff:student ratio, meaning less one-to-one contact, and larger, less frequent tutorial groups.
Throughout Scotland, academics have seen this stretching of resources coming to dominate the debate on the market, with the strains showing more and more clearly throughout the system: large classes, overflowing libraries, inadequate book provision, reducing levels of student financial support, falling relative pay levels for academics, lowered morale, and less time for research.
According to Professor Wilson: ‘There seems to be a belief that the academic culture is fairly stable and that it will survive however universities are funded.
But this is like the argument about nature and the biosphere: of whether you can mess around with it as much as you like, and expect it to survive.
People have now begun to ask if it may not be as robust as many think.’
SARAJEVO — September 1992
We had been waiting for three days behind Serbian lines.
The siege was watertight.
Nothing was passing into or out of the city.
Then four Serb militia men knew of a way in.
We met in the early morning.
My heart sank to see their faces.
They were all nursing fierce hangovers.
One produced a half gallon flagon of Johnnie Walker Red Label and six little cups.
He said something which I took to mean ‘hair of the dog’ in Serbo Croat then he poured.
It was quarter to eight in the morning.
He and his friends would take us, they said, safely to the edge of the airport and from there point us in the right direction.
A two minute drive of heart stopping intensity, foot flat on the board across the open runway, would get us to the other side.
But first another little drink.
And another.
My stomach turned but needs must.
‘By the way’, he said (glug glug)‘By the way, you know the trouble with all these Muslims?
They are all on drugs’.
But we were in.
One morning they buried three young men here — a Muslim, a Serb and a Croat.
They had died in battle in a Western suburb of the city.
The Muslim, friends said, had been injured by a sniper.
The other two had been trying to rescue him when all three had been killed by a single well-placed mortar bomb.
They had been fighting on the same side in a war which is often erroneously characterised as an ethnic conflict; fighting for what the Serb  guerrillas call the ‘Muslim side’.
All three families — Serb, Croat and Muslim — attended all three funerals consecutively.
The ‘Lions’ Cemetery’, as it is called, is a place of breath-taking atmosphere.
The funerals take place each day at eleven; sometimes as many as fifty at a time.
Hundreds — mostly men, mostly young and mostly in militia uniform — mill around in small groups, in silence, moving from grave to grave.
Here, more than anywhere, in these moments of shared contemplation where the presence of death is so immediate and so visible, do you sense something like a collective consciousness being forged, a powerful combative resolve.
I have spent most of the last year in what was once Yugoslavia, much of it in the beautiful and doomed Republic of Bosnia Hercegovina and it has left me scarcely able to think, far less write about anything else.
I am becoming a ‘Bosnian bore’ of impressive proportions.
The story of Bosnia seems to me to be a betrayal that involves all of us, all Europe; a betrayal of something unique and valuable and worth defending.
In the summer of 1979, at the end of my first year as a history student at Edinburgh University, I, having never been outside Britain, put a pack on my back and, with a great and enduring friend of similar enthusiasm, set out across Europe.
We wanted to see the place where we thought the 20th century had begun.
So we went to Sarajevo.
We visited the spot where in June 1914, Gavrilo Princip had stepped out of the shadowy twisting maze that forms Sarajevo's Turkish old town, onto a broad Austrian boulevard, and shot dead the heir to the Austro-Hungarian Imperial Throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the first shot of the First World War.
The whole thing seemed faithfully in the past, where we could regard it with intense interest, and surround it with historical debate, but where it could do us, and our generation, no harm.
In our teenage imagination Sarajevo seemed a fine and exotic place, where the very architecture spoke of what Europe itself might become.
Its strength was its diversity; this was a great meeting place between East and West and, of necessity open and tolerant and large in spirit, where Turkish, Austrian, Hungarian, Orthodox, Catholic, Jewish and Muslim traditions co-existed.
It breaks your heart to see the thousands here who cling to that idea of Sarajevo, and fight for it even at mortal risk.
To pinch a famous phrase, the road from Edinburgh to Sarajevo is a long one, and I am not sure how I came to be on it.
No-one of my generation set out to be a war correspondent, at least not in Europe, because we supposed that previous generations had disposed of all that and that war in Europe, if it were ever to occur again, would be the kind of war that would leave no-one alive to write about it.
Yugoslavia broke that illusion with force.
You knew where you stood with the Cold War.
Whether you were of the left or of the right, for 40 years, you knew which side you were supposed to be on, and there were few ideological dilemmas.
We have entered a new era with new dangers.
We are groping in the darkness of the post-bi-polar world, looking for a light to cast.
I no longer feel inclined to get half drunk in the morning with Serb militia men.
On that side, they have no need to bury their dead in batches of fifty.