

The President's Message
Space this year is limited and I will not attempt to summarise the rich record of activity outlined in the Annual Report of the Law Society, but briefly consider how the theme of ‘One Profession’ has fared through the year.
Its central importance to the profession cannot be doubted — the difficult task is to secure the balance between the diverse interests that make up out one profession.
In many ways, we seem to be getting there.
On legal aid there is not clear recognition amongst the major commercial firms of the need to deploy much of the substantial funding that they provide in large measure for the profession in the defence at once of the legal aid scheme and of legal aid practitioners.
Equally, litigation practitioners looking for early rights of audience in the higher courts have shown remarkable tolerance of the delays necessarily involved in trying to secure the same rights for solicitors in commerce, industry and the public service.
Again, the profession has been brought to recognise that dishonesty is not just sole practitioner problem and that measures to combat default must relate to all sizes of practice.
Lastly, there seems to be growing general acceptance that improvements in the quality of service to clients, to say nothing of reductions in the cost of indemnity insurance, require the Law Society to lay down standards of practice, practice management and client service for the profession.
But there are still divisive strains.
Intense competition has led in some instances to quite unrealistic pricing and often, in consequence, to an unacceptable deterioration in quality and standards.
The proposals to combat discrimination within the profession have not met with the support I would have hoped for.
Then again, too many young people have been through the finals course, often at considerable financial hardship to themselves or their families, only to find that they cannot be absorbed into a recession-hit profession.
There is much still to be done for our one profession.
We are lucky that the cause of the profession will, in July, vest in a new President, Rodger Pannone, a man of immense energy with a clear vision of the profession's role in society.
For his firm support and that of Charles Elly as Deputy Vice-President, despite other intense pressures on their time, I owe a singular debt of gratitude — as I do to the Secretary-General and all his staff, not least the dedicated private office team who have been such a help to me and to Catherine my wife.
Finally, my thanks to local law societies throughout the land for the warmth of their welcome.
Mark Sheldon
President of the Council 1992–93 
Review of the year
It has been a year of continuing economic difficulty for solicitor and client alike.
Even the largest firms were exposed to the recession, some making large scale redundancies.
As the profession's representative body, the Law Society has had to face the question of how to achieve its strategic aims for the healthy development of the profession over the coming decade, in the absence for most of the year of the promised green shoots of economic recovery.
While the Society's efforts to open up international opportunities show signs of bearing fruit, it is the home climate which gives most concern.
The public funding of litigation remains a core question, on every aspect of which the Society has continued to challenge the Government.
Almost every Council meeting has debated in some way how the profession can face the economic realities of the 1990s while remaining constant to the need to serve law and justice.
The pursuit of excellence
Solicitors must compete effectively to succeed: not just on price, but on the total quality of service offered to clients.
The Council's adoption of the practice management standards initiative in April 1993 provided the profession with a management tool.
The standards set out guidelines against which practices can measure how well they manage themselves.
The Council believes that improving the quality of office and case management will improve profitability and success for practices of all sizes, and for in-house solicitors.
The standards will also assist solicitors in their dealings with major purchasers of legal services, including public bodies, the lending institutions, and major corporate clients.
The Legal Aid Board has accepted the standards as one of the criteria for the grant of a franchise, in place of earlier proposals for its own management standards.
Agreed after comprehensive consultation, this major Society initiative has been backed by a programme of supporting publications and courses to help firms implement the standards successfully.
Their adoption is, however, a matter of choice, in line with Council strategy to keep regulation to a minimum.
Ways of guaranteeing a quality service to clients have also been pursued in specific fields of work.
The Council approved the establishment of a new personal injury specialist panel.
Following the success of the local government diploma, approval was also given to a scheme of training in practice diplomas, priority being given to the development of a taxation diploma for solicitors who wish to advise clients on taxation problems arising out of legal affairs.
For criminal law practitioners, good practice standards were published in January in the Magistrates' Court Guide , a praised new publication which gives practical advice on every aspect of the preparation of magistrates' court cases.
Guidance on conduct and ethics generally was prepared for a revised edition of the Guide to the Professional Conduct of Solicitors , and a complete new set of accounts rules came into force in June 1992.
The other side of the quality coin is safeguarding clients' interests.
The year saw widespread consultation on the issues surrounding the considerable cost to the profession of the minority of solicitors who default.
The Council gave extensive consideration to proposals designed to limit the opportunities for, and the cost to, the profession of defaulters.
A programme of accounts monitoring of ‘at risk’ firms commenced in January, aiming to cover 650 visits per year, and a fraud intelligence officer was appointed, to be based in the Society's Monitoring Unit, Measures to reduce conveyancing-based fraud were also adopted; cards warning on property fraud and loosely given undertakings were circulated.
Approaches were made to lenders with a view to agreeing improvements in their procedures which would reduce the liabilities of the Compensation and Indemnity Funds.
Turning to the conduct of investment business by solicitors, the Society's second yearly report was accepted by SIB as representing the satisfactory discharge of the Society's obligations as a recognised professional body.
Working for profession and public
The whole gamut of legal aid issues has continued to dominate the Society's work.
It became clear from the Government's autumn statement that pressure on public expenditure is likely to get worse rather than better for the foreseeable future, and that any developments must take place within such a framework.
The Society nevertheless contested at every stage the introduction of regulations restricting eligibility for legal aid, believing the results can only deny legitimate access to justice for many people.
Wide publicity for the Society's campaign was gained through the Westminster lobby and the efforts of regional public relations officers.
The Society proposed to the Lord Chancellor various alternatives for cutting the cost of legal aid, and scrutinised other possible sources of funding.
A review of contingency fees was undertaken and research on commercial legal expenses insurance was published.
Every opportunity was taken to shape the Legal Aid Board's   franchising proposals (due to become operative in October).
The Council, however, condemned hints from the Lord Chancellor that franchising may lead to the introduction of exclusive competitive price tendering for legal aid work.
Of immediate concern to the profession was the Lord Chancellor's introduction of standard fees for magistrates' court work.
In the face of vigorous protestation from the President and the Council that this was an unfair and flawed scheme of remuneration, which would lower quality and create mistrust between solicitor and client, and following unsuccessful judicial review proceedings on behalf of the profession, the regulations were set to become law in June.
As to the higher courts, the process to secure wider rights of audience continued.
While the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee accepted the majority of the Society's application last year, negotiations have focused since then on the position of employed solicitors, whom the Society maintains should be granted wider rights alongside their private practice colleagues.
Throughout a painstaking series of consultations with the Committee, the Society has striven to offer a workable system ensuring that all solicitors seeking rights of audience in the higher courts will have all the requisite skills and experience.
Various initiatives were undertaken to promote solicitors' services to the wider public.
In October, ‘Make a Will Week’ ran for its second successful year, winning a PR Week award, and co-ordinated by the Society with widespread and enthusiastic support from the profession.
In March ‘Lawyers for Business’ was launched — a major new project to support businesses and promote the range of legal services available to them.
The scheme offers special membership benefits to participating firms, including referrals of new clients from over 3,000 business advice centres nationwide.
International markets, the EC and the New European Economic Area in particular, are seen by many as key expansion areas, and Society efforts to remove regulations restricting the rights of solicitors to practice abroad continued.
One major achievement was the adoption, by the influential Council of Bars and Law Societies of the European Community (CCBE)— after some 15 years' debate — of a draft directive on rights of establishment under home title.
If the European Commission now bases new law on this recommendation, solicitors will be able to practise in other EC countries without having to be   integrated into the local legal profession.
Pending the introduction of such a law, valuable bilateral contacts were made to safeguard those established solicitors' firms in Brussels and Paris, the major centres of international legal practice in continental Europe.
The CCBE's plenary session was held in Manchester in April.
Further abroad, contacts were nurtured with important developing markets in Japan, China and eastern Europe.
The Society's President made an official visit to Tokyo in March, following up the EC/Japan Conference on Legal Services, a multi-lateral forum seeking to relax restrictions on foreign legal practice in Japan.
Pending the re-establishment of Chinese sovereignty in Hong Kong, the Society has also been anxious to develop good relations with Chinese counterparts, and welcomed a high level delegation of Chinese lawyers to the UK last May.
During the year China permitted the establishment of foreign law offices, a measure from which a number of solicitors have already benefited.
The growing importance of Central and Eastern European markets was recognised through the setting up of new bilateral associations which will encourage relations with the Baltic States and the Ukraine.
Closer to home, the Society was delighted to welcome the Law Society of Scotland in the joint running of the Brussels office.
The Society's motto is to serve law and justice (‘Leges Juraque Servamus’) and the mainstream work of many of its committees is to cope with literally hundreds of Government proposals for changes in the law.
This the Society secured for solicitors conducting investment business exemption from the terms of the EC Investment Services Directive, which would have involved burdensome compliance with associated capital requirements.
The year also saw the Society give oral evidence to the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, and the Council issue a statement on proper access to video recordings of a child witness's evidence.
A major Employment Law Committed report, launched at the House of Commons, recommended legislation to outlaw discrimination on grounds of disability, while the Mental Health Sub-Committee organised an over-subscribed conference on community care.
Scores of responses to Government proposals were made on behalf of the profession, on subjects ranging from enforcement agencies to adoption law, from the use of credit cards to new partnership law, from a new Arbitration Act to court dress.
Company Law Committee work was influential in creating a new DTI-sponsored law reform programme, and the Planning and   Environment Law Committee alone dealt with over 40 separate responses to law reform proposals.
Such initiatives are on behalf of the whole profession, but special interest groups were also accorded appropriate representation.
Two non-constituency Council seats were designated for financial services and for sole practitioner representation, and following a resolution at last year's Annual General Meeting, the Society made an initial pump-priming grant to a newly formed sole practitioners' group which subsequently achieved Law Society group status.
Shaping the future
The year saw the consolidation of the radical restructuring of training requirements which will soon offer would-be solicitors a more flexible route to qualification.
Nineteen full-time legal practice courses (replacing the old finals examination and due to start in September 1993) were validated in the completion of the first round of validations of course providers.
They included the approval of the first combined law degree and legal practice course, which carries a mandatory grant.
Also significant for students with financing difficulties, the first part-time legal practice course was approved, and further exempted and part-time courses are under consideration.
Funding themselves through training remains a problem for many students, given the virtual demise of discretionary grants.
The Trainee Solicitors' Group, arguing that the lack of grants may well limit access to the profession for those without private means, launched a loans and grants campaign and held a mass lobby of Parliament.
A number of contact points were available for students finding difficulty obtaining training contracts (formerly articles) or posts on qualification.
The Society's Careers and Recruitment Service ran a series of workshops, attended by over 350 candidates, giving advice on improving application forms, and interview techniques.
The Society published Positive Steps , a guide for solicitors made redundant (or otherwise re-training).
The Commerce and Industry Group produced a list of training opportunities for employed solicitors (covering articles, work placements and vacation experience).
The Society also worked closely with the recently formed African, Caribbean and Asian Lawyers' Association to provide recruitment help for students from ethnic minorities.
Looking to the medium term, a key consultation paper was   published by the Race Relations Committee, proposing a series of anti-discrimination and equal opportunities measures for all firms.
The first stage of a major study of students embarking on law careers was published by the Society's Research and Policy Planning Unit.
All these activities are aimed to ensure that as more job opportunities become available, the profession will compete successfully in attracting and providing accessible training for the highest quality students.
For legal support staff, regional training courses were set up in the North West and attended by over 500 staff from throughout the region.
Work also began to develop a scheme for training and accrediting clerks who advise suspects in police stations.
Serving members
The Society aims to provide the broad range of its services to practising solicitors at a reasonable cost and in a practical way.
Last November, reduced practising certificate fees for low-earning solicitors were introduced.
All firms were enabled, from September 1992, to pay annual professional indemnity contributions in instalments.
The standard deductibles for indemnity cover were increased too in order to give firms a more direct financial interest in claims prevention.
A leaflet, ‘Where Your Money Goes’, was sent out with every practising certificate, explaining the cost of running the Society, and it is hoped to re-issue this annually.
The Society's information offices dealt with thousands of enquiries from the profession and the public.
For example, the Multi-Party Actions and Disaster Co-ordination Service handled 13 new actions last year including claims against the MOD for alleged unfair dismissal through pregnancy, and dealt with some 2,500 enquiries, many concerning well-known drug product liability cases.
The Society communicates with its members through a number of familiar channels.
The Gazette , despite suffering the continued effects of the recession, generated over £3 million in advertising revenue, and made considerable cost savings in production.
A redesigned format was launched in January 1993 with the dual aim of making the journal more attractive to readers and advertisers.
A variety of other publications were issued, the most complex being the re-launched Solicitors' Regional Directories , in eight geographical volumes listing solicitors by category of work, and widely used by CABx and   other agencies as a primary referral tool.
Other publications included guidance on medical evidence, on acting for children and on using computers, and the second and third editions respectively of the highly successful Conveyancing Handbook and the Directory of Solicitors and Barristers .
A series of information leaflets on the Society's Library service won a Library Association award.
Enquiries to the Library rose overall by five per cent.
The Society also communicated with solicitors directly at regional level and on a variety of courses and conferences.
Both regional offices (in East Anglia and the North West) held successful continuing education courses.
Media training courses run by the Press and Parliamentary Unit continued to attract in numbers lawyers seeking to improve their publicity skills.
Other well-attended conferences included the 37th advocacy training course at Great Malvern, the Solicitor's European Group annual conference in Berlin, the Society's national conference in Birmingham, a company law conference, and a number of Society-organised fringe meetings at all the party political conferences.
The Society is anxious to improve its relations with the profession continually, and is examining through its strategy plan review how best to hear solicitors' views and react to them constructively.
A major review was undertaken of the Society's regulatory functions including practising certificates, accountant's reports and investment business certificates.
This will contribute to the design of a new database system for the Society from 1994/5.
During the year, the SCB relocated from London; Victoria Court in Leamington Spa formally opened on 29th March 1993.
The Law Society's Hall in London continued to provide valuable meeting and dining facilities for members, and the banqueting and functions centre was restructured to provide clients with one-stop booking service.
The Society's information centre and bookshop on the Strand helped some 17,000 callers with enquiries about the profession.
Looking ahead
Two years since publishing Succeeding in the 90s , the Society's strategy plan for the decade, the economy has entered a deep recession, and more difficult and challenging times than could have been envisaged now face the whole profession.
The Strategy Committee has therefore embarked upon a detailed review of the plan, looking at the effects on the profession, of the proposed changes in legal aid, the cost of default, and the importance to both the Society and practitioners of continuing to provide a quality service.
The results of this exercise will be published in the late summer, beginning a new rolling programme to monitor strategic issues year by year.
The Secretary-General's review of the year
The challenge in 1992/93 has been to do more with less; we lost 8% of our establishment when the Council suffered with the profession a substantial reduction in its planned revenues.
We persuaded 99% of our staff to move from a pay system based on Civil Service style grading to one where overall productivity and individual performance were far more important.
This preceded the formal recognition of MSF as a trade union with whom we have had cordial and constructive relations.
The Council is to be congratulated for thinking and acting long term.
Despite the difficult property market, they authorised the acquisition of new Solicitors Complaints Bureau premises out of London, ahead of the final disposal of Portland House.
The calibre of the new staff is impressive and the paybill alone will reduce by more than £0.25m a year.
It is a source of comfort to all of us that most of those not able to relocate have found good jobs.
Having a strategy which is both long and short term is at the heart of the Society's activities.
Sometimes, however, it leads to mixed messages — fierce opposition to unreasonable Government proposals, matched by quiet preparation of the profession for inevitable change.
Encouraging the profession to adopt practice management standards invites the same question about the Society itself.
In most areas it is well ahead but there are some important areas for improvement.
In 1993/94 we shall be looking for more specific ways of measuring the performance of the Society towards its members.
You are already invited in our literature to write to me if you are unhappy about a service provided by the Society and you have been unable to resolve matters with the head of the department concerned.
The determination of individual complaints against solicitors remains the province of the Solicitors Complaints Bureau and its associated committees, who are committed to providing a quality service through BS5750 and beyond.
The continued energy, good humour and loyalty of the staff through a most difficult time have been a major strength to the Management Board and the Council
John Hayes
Secretary-General 
Report on the finances of the Society for the year ended 31 December 1992
Financial highlights
The Society's Income and Expenditure Account for the year ended 31 December 1992 shows a surplus of £3.7m.
This represents a significant improvement over the revenue budget for the year, approved in July 1991, which was based on an estimated surplus of £1.6m.
The programme of re-organisation and expenditure reductions which followed the review of the Society's activities during the Autumn of 1991 has yielded the first full year of financial benefits during 1992 and these are reflected in the increased surplus.
The Society has also continued to improve budgetary control procedures during the year.
The objective is to maintain the level and quality of services provided to the profession, whilst reviewing the level and cost of resources used to ensure, as far as possible, that they are appropriate and cost effective.
One important element of the improved procedures is the introduction of a detailed and comprehensive budget review process during each year.
This is a critical examination, together with budget holders, of performance against budget for all the Society's activities.
The 1992 review resulted in savings of £1.5m in goods, services and other costs against the 1992 budget.
Other expenditure reductions included a financial benefit of £1.3m in rent and rates for 50/52 Chancery Lane following a rent review during the year, and a saving of £0.3m in salary costs from vacancies.
Fees
The Council agreed an increase in the practising certificate fee for 1992–93 from £420 to £480 (14.3%).
The size of the increase reflects the costs in 1993 of several important initiatives which include:
•the first stage of a phased approach to the monitoring of the profession's compliance with the Accounts Rules requirements at a cost of £0.3m;
•the implementation of the Council's strategy to relocate the Solicitors Complaints Bureau to Leamington Spa.
A provision of £0.6m has been made in the 1992 Accounts for anticipated redundancy costs related to this move;
•a practising certificate fee reduction for low income earners and returners to the profession at a cost in reduced income of £0.3m.
Other income
Other income sources were largely maintained despite the continuing recession.
The major financial effect was for the Gazette which suffered a £1.3m drop in income against the original 1992 budget.
However, this was partially offset by related expenditure reductions.
Balance sheet
The increase in fixed assets reflects two major freehold property purchases during the year which took full advantage of the depressed property market.
The Society purchased 114 Chancery Lane in April (adjacent to the Law Society's Hall) and Victoria Court, Leamington Spa in September, both of which are integral elements in the Society's property strategy.
The accumulated fund represents the nominal value of the net assets of the Law Society valued at historic cost.
Audit
The Society appointment new professional auditors, Touche Ross & Co. from 9 July 1992, to cover all the audit requirements of the Society's Accounts.
Compensation Fund
At 31 December 1992 the accumulated reserves of the Fund stood at £29.6m (£13.4m in 1991).
The year saw a continuation in the upward trend in both the number, and the total value of, applications received by the Fund which rose to 2,207 at a potential cost of £58.5m (1991: 1,337, £33.3m).
The value of grants authorised to be paid from the Fund also increased to £16.6m (£13.1m in 1991).
The level of income from recoveries remained steady at £2.6m.
The Council agreed a special levy of £445 in addition to the Compensation Fund contribution for 1992–93.
Future Strategy
The Council have considered and approved a review of financial strategy for the Society to 1997, the main aims of which are to:
•seek to contain future increases in the practising certificate fee to the level of inflation;
•conserve cash and minimise the need to borrow;
•maintain high quality services on a cost effective basis;
•complete the implementations of the property strategy.