

Friends pay more visits to our properties than most people do, and we know that many of you have noticed and appreciated the many improvements we have made.
Our custodians used to be dressed in the same uniform as prison warders and their task was maintaining the monument and its grounds.
We have now nearly completed the change to a new ‘friendlier-looking’ uniform and have established a programme of training in customer care for our custodians and warders.
In addition, much of the grounds maintenance is now contracted out, giving custodians more time to spend with visitors.
We have changed the opening hours of monuments to be more convenient for visitors — Edinburgh and Stirling Castles are now open on Sunday morning throughout the whole year, and this winter we are opening Urquhart Castle on Sunday mornings as well.
We have put a lot of effort into improving the information which is available to our visitors, installing improved information boards at all our monuments.
At the most visited monuments, of course, we have been doing much more.
A fine example is the new visitor centre at St Andrews Castle.
The next big step will be the new exhibition of the Scottish Crown Jewels at Edinburgh Castle, which opens next spring.
The new Edinburgh Castle restaurant has proved very popular, and work will shortly start on the Stirling Castle restaurant, to open in 1994.
Our shops have been outstandingly successful in the last two years and have raised extra money which is ploughed back into our wider work.
We are always interested in knowing what you, as Friends, think about the changes we are making, to help us to do even better in the future.
Holyrood Park — planning for the '90s
HISTORIC Scotland has produced a draft management plan for the 1990s for Holyrood Park, Edinburgh's famous ‘green lung’.
The plan has emerged from a comprehensive study undertaken over the last year, covering such aspects as geology, archaeology, nature conservation, recreation, education, traffic and landscape.
A consultation process is under way and we would like to hear your views.
The study looked at all areas of the natural environment, including the management of the diverse grasslands and associated rare species, for which the Park has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
The advantages and disadvantages of methods such as grazing, mowing and burning were considered, as well as policies for tree planting, erosion and fire control.
Consideration was also given to ways of ensuring that the archaeological and historical interests of the Park are fully safeguarded.
The Park is an important recreational resource for both the people of Edinburgh and visitors to the city, and a survey was carried out of the types of use made of the Park, the perceptions of users and the impact such users have on the site.
This extended to the whole question of traffic, covering access and associated parking facilities for users as well as the use of the Park as a commuting route.
The potential for improving the Park as an educational resource for Edinburgh schools and colleges was explored, as were opportunities for better interpretation of the diverse interests in the Park for all visitors.
As a dominant feature from almost all parts of the city, it was important to consider the landscape value of the Park, both within, in terms of design criteria, and from beyond, in terms of the area's contribution to the wider landscape.
Ideas have been sought from related organisations and the public throughout the project, and the draft management plan has now been sent out for consultation.
It is available for reference at all public libraries in Edinburgh, in Holyrood Park Constabulary Office at the Muster Room, Holyrood Road, and at Historic Scotland reception desk, 20 Brandon Street.
All comments on the Plan are welcomed and should be sent to:.
Dallas Dhu — a dram for all seasons
DALLAS Dhu Distillery, near Forres, will remain open to visitors throughout the winter season from this year onwards.
The Distillery also has a new custodian, Hunter Brown.
Hunter is transferring from Inchcolm Abbey in the Firth of Forth, where he and his wife Rae have been custodians for the last 10 years.
Dallas Dhu, built in 1898 to supply malt whisky for Wright and Greig's ‘Roderick Dhu’ blend, is a perfectly preserved time capsule of the distiller's art.
Visitors can wander at will through the tun room, the malt barn and the still house, and can see the fine collection of traditional tools of the trade and the whisky maturing in the casks.
At the end they can enjoy a complimentary dram while watching a lively audio-visual presentation on the making of whisky.
Visions Re-visited
IN the three decades following the Second World War, Scotland experienced an explosion of building and reconstruction on a scale unknown since the Industrial Revolution, driven by powerful political, social and architectural forces.
This dramatic national movement has, for the past 20 years, been the subject of almost universal vilification.
A group of historians and architects, tired of all the architectural products of this period being dismissed as ‘monstrous carbuncles’, have formed a new society to attempt to redress the balance.
The inaugural conference of the Scottish National Group of Docomomo International (International Working Party for Documentation and Conservation of Buildings, Sites and Neighbourhoods of the Modern Movement), held recently at Glasgow University was attended by 150 delegates from all over Europe.
‘Visions Revisited’, chaired by Kirsty Wark and sponsored by Historic Scotland, marked the beginning of a re-examination of Scotland's Modern building revolution.
Key central and local government figures from the time, including The Rt Hon J Dickson Mabon, the Minister with responsibility for planning and housing during the mid '60s, recalled the urgent pressures for re-housing and re-planning after the war.
Historians and designers evaluated Modern buildings as works of architecture in the context of Scotland's own national architectural tradition.
The conference sparked off one of the liveliest debates ever witnessed at a conference on architectural history, and highlighted the need to reassess this period as it slips into history and, therefore, our heritage.
For further information contact  
Friends Subscriptions 1993–4
Each year we review the cost of Friends subscriptions and take into account the level of admission charges at Historic Scotland properties, the costs charged by comparable organisations in Scotland and elsewhere in the United Kingdom and the service we provide to Friends.
Against the background of next April's increases in the admission charges to our properties and the improvement in the services to Friends this year — for example the new colour magazine and the discount on goods in our shops — we have concluded that an increase is justified.
The reduced rate (for senior citizens and students under 21) will rise by £1 to £10; the rate for senior citizen couples will rise by 50p to £14.
The increase in the adult rate is £1 going up to £14.
At the same time we have decided to calculate family membership at twice the adult rate (£28).
Although this represents a greater increase (£7) than in the other categories, it seems only fair that two single adults should not have to pay more than a family.
However, to ease the transition, existing Friends renewing their family membership for 1993/94 will be charged a special reduced renewal rate of £26.
There will be no increase in the cost of life membership.
The new subscription rates still represent exceptional value.
For 54p a week, a family of Friends enjoys, among other benefits, free entry to all Historic Scotland monuments and, from the second year of membership, to all English and Welsh CADW monuments (with half-price admission in the first year).
There is also the satisfaction of supporting work which will ensure the preservation of Historic Scotland's properties for future generations.
Taking local heritage to school
‘There couldn't be a better time to take up this job’, claims Marion Fry, Historic Scotland's new Education Officer.
‘There is a big focus on the environment and heritage just now and schools are spending much more time looking at their local area.
I don't have to try and ‘sell’ something that people are not interested in — there is a great willingness and interest on the part of teachers.’
Marion sees her job as one of consolidation and development — taking further the work done by her predecessor Kim Traynor and making sure that schools know about it and are happy with the content and direction.
‘We must ensure that the support materials we prepare for teachers are as closely tied in with the demands of the curriculum as possible, especially with the new 5–14 guidelines, and my first priority has been to talk to Educational Advisers throughout Scotland.
As well as the historical interest, there is a wide range of skills and knowledge which can be developed with a visit to one of Historic Scotland's sites as the focus of study, and it is important that teachers are aware of the full potential of any visit.’
Marion makes the point of speaking to Historic Scotland custodians to ask for their suggestions about how they might work with schools.
‘If the custodian works alone on the site, sometimes it is not possible to spend much time with a school party — but they are keen to get good support material they can give to teachers.
Usually they are happy to work with children when they can.’
Teaching support material is now available on the NERIS CD-ROM database to which many school subscribe.
Marion has sent out questionnaires to some of the teachers who have used the site-based school packs which were introduced last year.
‘We have been getting a very positive response,’ she says.
If you are a teacher and would like more information about the education service available, contact Marion Fry at Historic Scotland's head office in Brandon Street, Edinburgh.
Edinburgh rock
EDINBURGH Castle's esplanade, famous as the venue for the Edinburgh Military Tattoo, provided a spectacular setting for three concerts by some of Britain's top musical artistes in September.
Mike Oldfield chose the unique location to perform the world premier of his long-awaited Tubular Bells II.
Violinist Nigel Kennedy and Scottish rock group Wet Wet Wet completed a balanced programme designed to appeal to different types of audiences.
The staging of the concerts is the result of a tripartite agreement between Historic Scotland, the Edinburgh Military Tattoo and promoters Unique Events.
The agreement provides for the staging of three concerts each year for three years.
Historic Scotland's Events Unit is currently investigating the potential for using other properties in care as venues for open-air concerts.
Quality conversion for Paisley's ‘Porridge Bowl'
A quality housing conversion has come at last to one of Paisley's oldest landmarks, the John Neilson Institution, and saved the building from the ravages of rot.
John Knight, Principal Architect, reports.
Anyone who has used Glasgow Airport cannot fail to have noticed the huge domed building dominating Paisley's skyline.
It is the John Neilson Institution, built 1849–52 by architect Charles Wilson, who was capable of creating urban set-pieces on an almost megalomaniac scale.
The classical school building was affectionately known locally as ‘the Porridge Bowl’.
Its cavernous classrooms became silent in 1977 when the school closed.
The structure deteriorated alarmingly until property developers Classical House Ltd approached the local authority in 1990 with an ambitious scheme to create 12 two-storey maisonettes within the shell.
The central circular atrium — the former school assembly hall — with its severe but splendid Italian Renaissance pilasters supporting the dome above, was to be retained and restored.
Stopping the rot
In April 1991, Historic Scotland awarded historic buildings repair grant of £344,000 towards the cost of repairs to the historic shell of the A-listed building.
Unfortunately, dry rot had ravaged much of the atrium and the vaulted entrance hall leading to it, and substantial areas of timber and plaster had to be torn out and replaced.
Also unfortunate perhaps, but acceptable in the context of the building's new use, was the demolition of the Art Deco ablutions block for ‘Boys’ and ‘Girls’wrapped around the west elevation.
However, there was painstaking renewal of the lead covering to the massive dome, involving the removal and replacement of the curious collar of stylized lotus petals.
The developers were also persuaded not to clean the finely-tooled ashlar stonework.
The new maisonettes have turned out to be the most unusual and attractive living spaces.
The architects, Lane, Bremner and Garnett of Glasgow, cleverly adapted the huge sash-and-case windows to provide opening lights in order to cause minimum change to the exterior.
Stylish flourish
A stylish flourish to complete the conversion was the placing of a life-size statue of the Greek philosopher Diogenes, carved by , in the atrium — holding in his hand a porridge bowl in the form of an inverted miniature of the dome above him.
The total project cost was over £1.5 million — money well spent to secure the future of this important Paisley landmark.
In an octopus's garden
Archaeology is not confined to dry land; important archaeological sites also exist under the sea.
discusses the value of underwater archaeology and the question of priorities for funding.
‘It's not about diving into the murky depths in search of treasure — that is just the impression we want to get away from’, insists Noel Fojut, Historic Scotland's Principal Inspector responsible for underwater archaeology.
‘Underwater archaeology is not new.
We have known for years that there are many wrecks which could be of historical value, telling us about the way in which vessels were constructed and, from their contents, about how ordinary people lived in times past.
‘This information is indeed worth treasuring, but it's not what most people imagine when they think about wrecks.
However, there are very few people who know how to survey and excavate underwater, and because it tends to cost so much more than land archaeology it needs to be a very worthwhile site or we have to leave it alone’.
The question of the level of resources that should be invested in Scotland's underwater heritage has come into focus with the rediscovery of an historic shipwreck off Duart Point in Mull.
Since April last year Historic Scotland has been responsible for the protection of historic wrecks within a 12-mile radius of Scotland.
The Protection of Wrecks Act 1973 allows wrecks to be designated, making it an offence to interfere with them in any way without the authority of a licence granted by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The protection is similar to that afforded to land sites by scheduling under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.
Finds from the wreck are covered by the laws of salvage.
The Duart Point wreck was the first to be designated since Historic Scotland took over this function from the Department of Transport.
It is part of an English navel vessel, dating to the mid-17th century.
The visible remains consist of several iron guns and extensive areas of the wooden structure of the ship, including carved softwood panelling.
‘The wreck is important because we do not know just why it was there and how it was sunk’, explains Noel.
‘Those waters were not particularly dangerous — perhaps she was taking part in some way in the ‘pacification’ of the Highlands.
We know a fair amount about what was happening on the east coast of Scotland at that date, but not nearly so much about the west.
‘It is also important because wrecks in Scottish waters are usually just that — complete wrecks.
This one is different.
A lot has been preserved because of the relative calmness of the waters’.
When discovered, the wreck was thought to be another English naval ship, the Dartmouth , most of which lies about half a mile away.
This foundered in 1688 or 1689 and was also recently designated a protected wreck.
However, material recovered from Duart Point suggests it is a different ship, probably wrecked about 1650.
Surprisingly little is recorded about the techniques of ship construction at that  time, and the wreck may provide valuable clues.
With these two new wrecks designated, the total of protected wrecks now comes to four, with the other two lying off Shetland.
Noel explains why the number is so small: ‘When we took on this responsibility it was made clear that there were to be no extra funds specifically for underwater archaeology.
Although that has meant that not much can be done, in principle it is a good idea in that it forces underwater sites to compete with land sites for funding, and tends to keep the attention on the point that it is archaeology we are talking about.
‘I feel that any threatened site, be it on land or not, should be looked at in the same way: that is, will excavating this site advance our knowledge of history in a significant way?
If the site is promising enough compared with all others, then, and only then, would we consider funding an underwater project.
‘At the moment though, with so few experts in this field, underwater sites will come forward for consideration far less often than land sites.
I can imagine that the whole process must be frustrating for marine archaeologists.
‘However, it is my view that underwater archaeology should be treated as part of mainstream archaeology, not as something with its own rules and special funding.
Otherwise, the majority of archaeologists will never appreciate the full value of the information that lies below the waves, and underwater archaeologists will continue to be regarded as, at best, eccentrics indulging their hobby and, at worst , treasure hunters intent on gold doubloons and silver ducats.’
Huntingtower Castle
‘The baronie and place of Ruthven'
Huntingtower Castle, originally known as the House of Ruthven, was for many centuries the home of the Ruthven family.
The Ruthvens increased steadily in importance through the 15th and 16th centuries, reaching the summit of their ambitions in 1581 when the fourth Lord Ruthven was created Earl of Gowrie.
In 1582 the first earl over-reached himself when, in a misguided attempt to gain control over the young king, he and others kidnapped James VI and carried him off to Huntingtower.
Two years later James had his revenge when he had the earl beheaded.
The earl's daughter, Dorothea, seems to have inherited her father's somewhat incautious nature.
One night she found her way to the chamber of a suitor who was staying with the family.
On hearing he mother's footsteps approaching, she fled to the wall-head and leapt across to the tower in which her chamber was situated; the gap between is today known as the ‘Maiden's Leap’.
The final downfall of the Ruthvens came in 1600, when the third earl was murdered while apparently involved in the Gowrie Conspiracy, a mysterious plot to kill James VI.
Following this, an Act of Parliament was passed to abolish the name of Ruthven and Huntingtower was then given its present name.
A house which has been associated with such dramatic deeds might be expected to be broodingly sinister, but in fact Huntingtower is a delightful example of a castle which was progressively adapted to become a fine residence.
Twin towers
The earliest part of the castle is a gate-house tower, which was built in the earlier 15th century and absorbed into a rectangular three-storeyed tower house in the late 15th or early 16th century.
Such tower houses were the most common type of aristocratic residence in late medieval Scotland.
Rather curiously, soon after the first tower-house was built, a second, of L-shaped plan, was built next to it.
This may have been because the lands of Ruthven were divided between two sons in 1480.
At the back of this second tower a long range was added in the late 16th century, possibly to contain a spacious great hall, but little trace of this remains today.
About a century later the castle was again ‘modernised’, when there seem to have been plans to give the two towers a continuous classical facade, although the work was never completed.
It may have been the Marquess of Atholl who planned these works; he had inherited the estates in 1670.
By the 18th century the castle was beginning to fall into disrepair, and in the 19th century it changed hands several times.
It was eventually taken into state care in 1912, and has been open to the public ever since.
The buildings are still roofed and partly floored, affording an unequalled impression of the residence of a late-medieval landowner.
This is especially true of the east tower, where the surviving wall and ceiling paintings are among the earliest and best-preserved of their type to be seen anywhere.
Huntingtower has been cared for by custodian John Forsyth for the last 14 years.
He and his wife Jean live within the Castle, and coexist happily with visiting barn owls, hedgehogs and roe deer as well as the resident bat colony, one of the largest in Scotland and including the relatively rare Natterer's bat.
Mysterious tales
John has some mysterious tales to tell about the castle: ‘Visitors often say that they can smell newly-baked bread in the drawing room in the eastern tower.
They're always surprised when I tell them there is no bread being baked, but that at one time the room below was a kitchen.
‘In the 1930s a commercial traveller staying overnight at the castle informed his host the next day that he had seen an apparition during the night — a young lady with long blonde hair wearing a gown with green silk puff sleeves.
The custodian told him he had seen ‘Lady Greensleeves’, and warned him that she only visited those in danger.
That evening, when crossing the River Tay on the ferry between Dundee and Tayport, he fell overboard and drowned.’
Huntingtower is well worth a visit — make sure you don't miss it!
Christmas gifts — at special prices
IF you still have some Christmas presents to buy, why not pay a visit to the shop at your local Historic Scotland monument and take advantage of the 10 per cent discount available to Friends?
Pictured here is a small selection of items available from the Edinburgh Castle shop.
Special offer for Friends
Scottish Medieval Plainchant from Inchcolm
AROUND the ninth century, various poems and chants were composed in honour of St Columba.
These beautiful Celtic antiphons were preserved by aural tradition until the 13th century, when they were recorded in the Inchcolm Antiphoner , one of Scotland's oldest musical manuscripts.
Cappella Nova, one of Scotland's premier vocal ensembles, have teamed up with Judith Peacock, one of Scotland's leading clarsach players, to record a complete service of Lauds, recapturing the atmosphere of a medieval service on Inchcolm celebrating the Feast Day of St Columba.
The recording also includes a collection of canticles and responsories from other services.
The unique recording represents a ‘first’, both in terms of the music (which has never been recorded before) and in the use of the clarsach to accompany the voices, as it is believed the Scottish monks would have done.
It also features the sound of the original 9th-century Little Dunkeld Bell.
‘Scottish medieval churches were intended first and foremost as the setting for elaborate sung services, and without some appreciation of the music of those services any mental reconstruction of the church as it once was is incomplete,’ says Richard Fawcett, Principle Inspector of Ancient Monuments.
‘This excellent recording by Cappella Nova provides a magnificent insight into the richness and beauty of the monks’ worship at Inchcolm Abbey.’
Entitled Columba, most holy of saints , the recording is available on compact disc on the ASV Gaudeamus label, recommended retail price £14.00.
However, as guardians of Inchcolm Abbey, Historic Scotland has negotiated a special discount for Friends, who may purchase it direct from Cappella Nova for £11.00.
Discs will be posted on receipt of orders.
Postage and packing is free for UK orders, £1.10 for overseas orders.
Cheques should be made payable to ,.
Island experiences — 1993 Study tours
Following the success of this year's Friends tours organised by DA Study Tours, we are featuring two new ones for 1993 — Islands of Argyll from 2–7 May and Bornholm, Denmark's easternmost island, from 7–13 June.
Both tours will be led by historian and broadcaster Dr Ian Grimble and will be accompanied by a member of Historic Scotland staff.
For further details and to book contact  .
Islay, Colonsay, Jura and Arran — 6 days
These islands warmed by the Gulf Stream, are rich in natural history and heritage.
We travel on Sunday from Edinburgh and Glasgow to Kintyre, then by ferry to our base at Port Askaig.
Monday is spent on Jura with its deer, walled gardens and distillery; we return to Port Charlotte to visit the excellent museum with the option of a spectacular coastal walk to Kilchoman.
On Tuesday we view the impressive High Cross at Kidalton and visit the distillery and the round church at Bowmore, then return via Finlaggan and the private grounds of Islay House.
On Wednesday we sail to Colonsay to visit the lovely Kiloran Bay, standing stones and the gardens of Colonsay House with its mysterious symbol stone.
On Thursday we travel by ferry to Kintyre and then from Claonaig to Lochranza where we visit the 16th-century tower house (HS).
We continue south to the important complex of stone circles and cairns at Machrie and Moss Farm (HS).
Dr Sally Foster will join the tour to interpret these sites.
Dinner and overnight at the Glenisle Hotel, Lamlash (all private facilities).
On Friday we visit the Heritage Museum and Brodick Castle Gardens, then return by the 13.50 ferry to the mainland and Glasgow/Edinburgh by 17.30.
The price of £329 includes luxury 20-seater coach, all ferries, dinner, bed and breakfast in twin rooms, entrances but not lunches or coffee stops.
The tour is based at the Port Askaig Hotel, sheltered on the shore by the colourful harbour.
Optional supplements: private facilities, £29; single (standard), £20.
Four rooms are also available at a supplement of £40 (single £58) at the small but elegant Bridgend Hotel a few miles inland (all private facilities).
The Island of Bornholm 7 days
Denmark's easternmost island on an ancient Baltic trade route has a splendid rich heritage and Mediterranean warmth.
We fly to Copenhagen on Monday on the 11.45 SAS flight from Glasgow, then catch the late afternoon flight to Bornholm to arrive in good time for dinner at Svaneke, our base for six days.
Svaneke is a picturesque little town with plenty to see and do.
There are winding streets, museums, half-timbered houses and lush gardens of figs, mulberries, sweet chestnuts and vines.
Three leisurely day tours are included:
Paradise Hills:heather woods and lakes with walks to the ‘Rocking Stones’; the old town of Nesko; the superb white beach of Dueodde.
Hammershus:Scandinavia's largest castle; walks by rocky lakes; old fishing villages and smoke-houses; round fortified medieval churches; Madsebakke — unique iron Age rock carvings.
Townships:Ronne, Bornholm's lively capital; Akirkeby, ancient church and font; Luisenlund Bronze Age monoliths and the rift valley of Ekkodal.
On Saturday we fly to Copenhagen, where we have all day and evening to explore the city.
We stay overnight at the delightful Savoy Hotel close to the Tivoli Gardens and the City Hall.
Dinner is at your choice.
We return to Glasgow by SAS on Sunday morning.
Our hotel in Bornholm is the Siemsens Gaard, a 17th-century merchant's house with a terrace and two restaurants overlooking the harbour.
All rooms have private facilities.
The price of £639 includes scheduled flights, transfers and dinner, bed and breakfast in twin rooms (except dinner in Copenhagen), but not entrances or lunches.
Single room supplement: £89.
Why not extend you holiday by staying on for a few nights in Copenhagen?
Price is £43 per person per night in twin rooms.
Christmas Quiz
TEST your knowledge of Historic Scotland's properties and win a year's free Friends membership, plus one of the following books from our series of colour publications:Scottish Castles, Scottish Medieval Churches, A Queen's Progress, Picts or Scotland BC .
To enter, name the 10 Historic Scotland properties pictured and answer the questions relating to them.
Send your answers with your name, address, telephone number and preferred book choice to:.
The closing date for entries is 14 January 1993, after which a draw will be held and the first three correct entries to be drawn will receive the prize of a year's free Friends membership plus the book of your choice.
The quiz competition is open to Friends only.
The correct answers and the winners' names will be published in the Spring 1993 issue of Welcome ; winners will be notified after the draw.