

JOB RETENTION AND JOB CREATION EQUALLY NECESSARY
The necessity of job retention in healthy profitable industries such as banking and criticism of the failure to deliver on promises made a year ago of ‘several hundred new jobs’ were strong themes at the second Biennial Delegate Conference of the Association held in the Burlington Hotel on Saturday, 24th April 1993.
The public session of the Conference was opened to the media as was the first Biennial Conference in 1991.
As the Association has affiliated to the Irish Congress of Trade Unions in recent months, the General Secretary of Congress, Mr. Peter Cassells was among the fraternal delegates and he received a warm welcome when he addressed the Conference.
A report of his address is on page 2.
The Conference is the forum where Resolutions which were submitted last December and which were discussed at over 50 District Meetings around the country since then were finally put to the vote of the delegates and, if passed, thereby became a cornerstone of Association policy.
Another constitutional function of the Biennial Delegate Conference is the election of a President and Vice-President.
Mr. Leonard Coote, the out-going Vice-President was elected President for a two-year term in succession to Mr. Andy Heffernan who had completed a two-year term.
BEST OF TIMES
For most delegates the interesting part of the Conference is the address of the General Secretary, Ciaran Ryan in a wide-ranging and thought provoking address reviewed the events of the past ‘eventful two years’, looked at current issues and outlined some of the specific issues which the incoming Executive Committee would have to take up, Jobs, their retention and creation were major issues and closely connected was the position of part-time workers in the industry who were exploited in many instances and also temporary staff who were ‘fired and let go and threatened at the drop of a hat’.
The issue of equality had to be looked at very closely and we had already had detailed discussions with I.C.T.U. on equality.
He felt that Congress could be of significant help in the area of branch representative and activist training within the Association.
In a letter to the General Secretary the wife of a member had quoted Charles Dickens in describing the dispute, ‘They were the best of times and they were the worst of times’.
The best people, indeed the future Management of the Banks, were on the picket lines.
It brought out the best in our members and it brought out the best in the trade union movement.
He acknowledged the encouragement given by Peter Cassells and Kevin Duffy of Congress.
It brought out the worst in Bank Management in terms of intimidation.
‘The worst that was brought out in the dispute was brought out in our own — some of our departed brethren’.
There had been a proud history of Managers in the Association.
‘Managers were proud to lead their staff into dispute and out into the streets over the years; unfortunately, very many of them became the pit bull terriers of 1992’.
BLATANT
Ciaran Ryan reported on a case of blatant discrimination in Bank of Ireland, Area West which had recently come to light.
The Management had given special pay increases, ranging from £500 to £1000 to members of staff.
‘By an odd coincidence only 8% of those who had been on strike got increases while 92% of those who had worked during the strike got increases’.
The Labour Court had said in very specific terms that no member who was on strike should be disadvantaged as a result of it.
The matter had been taken up with the Bank of Ireland and he would be recommending to the incoming Executive  Committee that it should be referred to the Labour Court, on the basis that it is gross discrimination.
The case for Bank Assistants was covered by the General Secretary.
He contrasted their lot with what could be achieved by senior people who had the benefit of Share Option Schemes.
Mr. Ryan said that the situation regarding salaries in AIB in Britain would be a joke if it were not so tragic.
An offer last August of 3% for 12 months had been followed by a lengthy period when voluntary severance had been negotiated with the Bank.
When salaries were discussed again last December the original offer of 3% was not increased, but was withdrawn and replaced by a 19 month pay pause.
Reference to a mediator had resulted in the position where not only was the Bank's line confirmed, but we were asked to sit down and negotiate, in effect, more competitive scales.
JOBS
Speaking on jobs and opening hours, Mr. Ryan said that only approximately 100 of the ‘several hundred new jobs’ promised as a result of enhanced opening hours had materialised.
They were part-time and he ‘had no evidence that enhanced opening hours had created one permanent full time career job’.
Referring to the Voluntary Severance Scheme in Bank of Ireland, Mr. Ryan said the IBOA did not oppose a scheme which enabled senior and long serving people to ‘get a well-deserved rest from banking.
They were opposed to the non replacement of jobs.
Regeneration of energy back into the industry was healthy and it created jobs for young people in the industry’.
The Banks had a moral responsibility to retain jobs.
‘Job creation was only one half of the argument.
The other half was that healthy, profitable and viable industries should maintain jobs’.
The General Secretary concluded his address by paying tribute to all key activists within the Association, Branch Representatives, Delegates, District Secretaries, Area Council Members and the Executive Committee.
He paid particular tribute to outgoing members of the Executive Committee, especially Brendan Stevenson and Andy Heffernan.
The delegates accorded Ciaran Ryan a standing ovation.....
Ciaran Ryan, general Secretary, addressing the Biennial Delegate Conference
Section of Delegates
Top table at Biennial Delegate Conference, l. to r:— Tony Arnold, Michael McCormick, Leonard Coote, Andy Heffernan, Ciaran Ryan, Brendan Stevenson, Eileen O'Connor and Larry Broderick
Outgoing President, Andy Heffernan (left) congratulates the incoming President, Leonard Coote
CASSELLS CONGRATULATES IBOA
‘The Banks set out to break your Association, What they did was wrong and some of the things done since then are wrong’, said Mr. Peter Cassells, General Secretary to the Irish Congress of Trade Unions addressing the Biennial Delegate Conference of the IBOA at the Burlington Hotel on Saturday 24th April 1993.
He went on to congratulate the members, Executive Committee and Ciaran Ryan on the conduct of the dispute.
He said that leadership had been shown and the members had conducted themselves in a disciplined manner with pride and dignity.
The 1992 dispute had been a difficult one, especially for people working together and with commitment.
He said that involvement in Association activities should not interfere with promotional prospects or a proper career path.
He said that the Banks must develop trust and respect to avoid further damaging disputes.
He acknowledged that addressing our Conference was an historic moment.
He congratulated the Association on its decision to affiliate to Congress and thereby join with half a million other workers and their families.
1% Income Levy
Mr. Cassells said that 1% income levy introduced in this year's budget ‘is an unacceptable imposition of P.A.Y.E. workers who already pay more than their fair share of tax.
It is doubly unfair because it hits thousands of workers who are earning less than the average industrial wage.
Congress has already requested the Minister to consider withdrawing this extra tax on workers’ incomes.
We consider withdrawal to be the fairest option’.
He said that if the Government insisted on maintaining this levy for the year, it should raise the threshold to at least £245 per week, the weekly average industrial earnings.
‘Effective collection systems should also be put in place to ensure that the levy is collected from any income earners, particularly the self-employed professionals and farmers’.
He said that the money should be used for job creation projects in 1993 with a clear indication as to which projects were funded by the levy..
Peter Cassells, General Secretary of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions at the IBOA BDM
COMMENT
THE WAY FORWARD
The first four months of 1993 have been very busy ones for the IBOA.
All IBOA districts, in towns and cities, have had a Special District Meeting and also a Biennial District Meeting.
In February and March the Special District Meetings made significant decisions that changed the structure of the IBOA.
New District Committees are now in place in both Dublin and Belfast.
The method of election of members to the Special Reserved Seats has been changed.
Many other less noticeable, but just as important adjustments, have been made to the structure of the IBOA.
Biennial district Meetings took place in every District in April.
The future policy of the Association was discussed at these meetings.
Amongst many other items, policy on terms and conditions was decided, policy on equality was discussed and policy on industrial relations matters was also reviewed.
These policy decisions now fall upon the new Executive Committee to pursue with enthusiasm, vigour and zeal.
The new Executive Committee is now poised to take the membership of the IBOA into the future and is charged with the task of navigating the difficult course that lies ahead.
Traditional working conditions and fundamentals are being eroded by the Banks in the relentless pursuit of increased profitability with scant regard for their other responsibilities.
They include a responsibility to staff who depend on their employers for a decent standard of living and a responsibility to the customer who expects a decent service.
The customer pays all salaries, from the Chief Executive to the newest recruit.
Where are the staff that were to be recruited to service the customers during these new extended opening hours?
Staff deliver a quality service to the customer but the big problem is that there is insufficient staff to do the job properly.
Banks have responsibilities to the society from which the profits are generated, such as a responsibility to create employment, or at the very least, to maintain employment.
Every staff member who leaves, retires or ceases their employment of the Bank, should be replaced by a full-time official.
The Banks know the cost of everything but the value of nothings.
Take the value of a hard-working experienced member of staff.
What is the value of experience?
Can it be measured in pounds and pence?
Take the value of bright, enthusiastic Junior Grade staff that has to labour hard and live in hardship.
How can the alacrity of youth be measured?
Take the value of loyalty, loyalty that is being milked as if the national milk quota had to be filled by the Banks.
There should be a SUPER LEVY on this exploitation of loyalty.
But the old cow is running dry.
Bank staff morale is appallingly low, the lowest ever.
Every two years the IBOA is reborn.
The seeds of the last two years have endured a difficult winter, a very cold and wet spring, but the shoots are strong.
The new Executive looks forward to the future, with a stern brow, a firm hand on the tiller and a will to be successful.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS UPDATE
NATIONAL IRISH BANK JOB SECURITY AGREEMENT
On Friday, 23rd April a meeting took place between IBOA and Management of National Irish Bank in order to discuss Job Security.
At the outset of the meeting, the Bank put forward its proposals in relation to Job Security and highlighted the main areas in which it sought agreement with the Association.
In response, the IBOA put forward a detailed position paper to the Bank in order to provide real Job Security for our members in National Irish Bank.
Both sides have now agreed to consider their respective positions and a further meeting has been agreed.
NORTHERN IRELAND SALARIES
The IBOA has a 7% claim in for Northern Ireland Salaries from 1st March, 1993 to 28th February, 1994.
A Direct meeting has already taken place with the Bank, in March and we stated that our 7% claim was negotiable.
This meeting broke down and no progress was made.
The issue was referred up to Joint Industrial Council level and a meeting has taken place under the Chairmanship of Mr. Peter Smith, Q.C.
on 27th April 1993.
The JIC meeting on 27th April 1993 was unfruitful.
Despite quite lengthy direct discussions and several side meetings with the Chairman, it was not possible to progress the issue.
In accordance with our procedures, both parties have referred the salary claim issue to the next stage of procedures.
The ultimate stage of IBOA/Bank procedures is a Tribunal.
The Tribunal consists of three persons, a nomination from the IBOA, a nomination from the Banks and an independent third party chairperson who is nominated by the Chairman of the JIC, Mr. Peter Smith, Q.C.
This Tribunal will listen to both parties' arguments and will make a recommendation on the merits of the claims on both sides.
The Association awaits a Chair-person for this Tribunal and a date for the Tribunal Hearing.
AIB BANK DOMESTIC MEETING ON FUTURE PLANS
The Management of AIB Bank and the Irish Bank Officials' Association had a recent meeting regarding the future plans of the Bank.
This meeting took place under the guise of the 1987 Technology and Change Agreement whereby the Banks are to meet twice a year with the IBOA to discuss their future plans.
The Management of AIB Bank made a substantial, far-reaching and general presentation to the IBOA.
Following discussions, the IBOA requested more information on areas that concerned the membership.
A future meeting has been agreed in order that the concerns of the IBOA are discussed and negotiated.
BANK OF IRELAND COST REDUCTION PROPOSALS
Negotiations are continuing on the Bank of Ireland Cost Reduction Proposals.
A meeting took place on 28th April and another meeting is scheduled for 10th May.
There are many voluntary options included in these Cost Reduction Proposals but there is nothing voluntary for those staff who remain in the Bank and continue to work under extreme pressure at this time.
It is absolutely essential that no member pre-empts these discussions by applying for any of the schemes on offer while these negotiations continue.
The IBOA has put forward several ideas to improve the proposals for Voluntary Redundancy, Early Retirement, Career Breaks and Job Sharing.
Major concerns still remain for the IBOA regarding the Replacement of Staff, Promotional Opportunities, Branch Staffing and the implications for the Branch Network as a whole.
In view of this very heavy agenda for discussion, the Association has requested that the Bank defer the deadline of 14th May for those who wish to opt for the package.
The Management of Bank of Ireland has agreed, without commitment, to consider this proposal by the Association.
BANK OF IRELAND HOME LOANS, HOME IMPROVEMENT LOANS AND BRIDGING HOUSE LOANS
Bank of Ireland recently issued a circular regarding the above loans and has stated that they now wish to take a charge over the deeds of the home and the cost of this charge is to be borne by members of the Association.
The IBOA has serious difficulties with the proposed changes outlined in view of the fact that it would involve additional costs to our membership.
This item has been raised with the Head of Staff Relations, Bank of Ireland and we would hope that an early meeting will take place to discuss this issue
BANK OF IRELAND BANK ASSISTANT PARITY CLAIM
The origin of the Bank Assistant Grade, Bank of Ireland lies in that Bank's Plan for Improved Competitiveness, introduced in 1988.
The Irish Bank Officials' Association has had a claim outstanding since then and it has now reached the stage of the Labour Court.
The IBOA made a full and formal submission to the Labour Court under the chairmanship of Evelyn Owens on 22nd April 1993 regarding the Bank Assistant Parity Claim.
The IBOA is seeking parity for the Bank Official Grade under three headings:— Parity of Pay with Bank Official Grades, Parity of Career Prospects, that is a direct progression to the top of the SBO Scale, Parity of Pension Entitlement.
The delay in the prosecution of this claim has created great dissatisfaction amongst Bank Assistants who have viewed the Bank's blatant stalling tactics with considerable anger.
The IBOA supports its arguments for an improvement in the terms and conditions of Bank Assistants under the following headings:—
Bank Assistants cannot afford to live on their current basic salary.
Bank Assistants are carrying out a broader and more responsible range of duties than those on which their salaries are based.
The Bank Assistant Scale is significantly inferior to Junior Grades in other Associated Banks.
Bank Assistants were assured of positive career development but subsequent events have shown that the Bank is not interested in developing Bank Assistants' careers.
Bank Assistants did not vote on their own terms and conditions.
Bank of Ireland has made significant cost savings with the introduction of Bank Assistants and it is now time to redistribute some of those savings amongst those who most deserve it.
The IBOA awaits the outcome of the Labour Court on this issue.
OFFICER BOARD 1993/95
The new title ‘Officer Board’, replacing ‘Consultative and Advisory Council’ was a decision made at the Special Delegate Meeting in March.
Some of the officer titles also changed.
These changes are designed to provide a more accurate reflection of the roles of the various officers.
The Officer Board for 1993–95 was elected by the Executive Committee at their first meeting on Monday, 26th April 1993.
Two new faces on the Board are Maureen Ronan as finance Officer and Colette Morrison as Equality Officer.
Maureen has the distinction of being the first woman to be elected to the Officer Board to a position other than Women's Special Representative.
Also it could be said that the role of Equality Officer is, by its name, more open to being filled by man or woman than it was when it was known as Women's Special Representative.
The other Officers are Ciaran Ryan, General Secretary, Michael McCormick, Honorary Secretary and Tony Arnold, Honorary Assistant Secretary with special responsibility for Northern Ireland.
These officers have, between them, completed 29 years service on the Executive Committee and 17 years as Officers.
Ciaran Ryan, General Secretary , has been General Secretary since 2nd October 1989.
Michael McCormick, Honorary Secretary .
was Finance Officer for three years, 1990–93.
He has represented Dundalk Area on the Executive Committee since 1988 and has been a member of the Dundalk Area Council since 1985.
He was first elected branch representative in 1983.
Michael has worked in Dundalk branch of National Irish Bank since 1978.
Originally from Monaghan, Michael joined the Bank at Ballybofey in 1977.
Maureen Ronan, Honorary Finance Officer .
a newly-elected Officer, is Mullingar Area Secretary, a position she has held since 1990.
Since 1986 she has been Cavan District Secretary.
She works in AIB Bank, Cavan, where she joined the Bank on 26th June 1978.
Maureen is a native of Donegal and is interested in many different athletic activities.
Tony Arnold, Honorary Assistant Secretary with special responsibility for Northern Ireland , has filled this role since 1985, when it was known as Northern Ireland Special Representative.
He was Honorary Treasurer, 1984–85 and his membership of the Executive Committee as a representative of the Belfast Committee goes back to 1981.
He joined the Northern Bank in 1965 and has spent all of his service in Northern Ireland, apart from a short spell in Drumshanbo, Co.
Leitrim.
He presently works in Donegall Square West branch.
He has been branch representative in most of the branches in which he has worked.
Colette Morrison, Equality Officer , is an Officer of the Association for the first time.
A representative on the Executive Committee of the Dublin District Committee, Colette represented Bank of Ireland, Dublin on the Executive Committee, 1989–1993.
She was first elected a branch representative in 1985.
Colette joined Bank of Ireland in I.T.D. in 1971 and is presently an officer in M.S.U., Head Office.
She has also worked in Operations, Chief Accountant's and Retail Systems.
PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT
Mr. Leonard Coote was elected President of the Association for a two year term at the Biennial Delegate Conference in succession to Mr. Andy Heffernan.
Mr. Ken Doyle was elected Vice-President also for a two year term.
Leonard Coote, President has a record of service to the Association extending back in excess of 30 years when he was first elected a branch representative.
That was in his first branch, Northern Bank, Mohill, Co.
Leitrim.
More recently he is the outgoing Vice-President, a post he held from 1991.
His membership of the Executive Committee has also included two years as a member of the Managers' panel, 1989–91 and three years, 1976–79, as Coleraine Area Secretary.
Besides Mohill, he was branch representative in Larne, Portrush and Limavady.
Manager of the Northern Bank, Trevor Hill, Newry.
Co.
Down, Leonard has been in Newry since 1983.
Since joining the Bank on 2nd February 1959, other postings have included Mohill, O'Connell Street, Dublin, Kisburn, Larne, Portrush, Coleraine and Limavady.
By birth a Cavan man (from Bailieborough), Leonard is married to Pat and they have two grown-up children.
He plays golf and enjoys listening to music and the challenge of crosswords.
Having run his first marathon at 40, he has since completed eight.
Ken Doyle, Vice-President , has completed 17 years' service on the Executive Committee since first being elected in 1973 as Wexford Area Secretary.
He also represented AIB Bank, Dublin 1979–81 and 1984/93.
Other service to the Association has included branch representative in various locations since 1967 and Arklow District Secretary 1971–78.
An Assistant Manager in AIB Bank, 5 College Street, Dublin since February 1981, Ken joined the Munster & Leinster Bank at Arklow on 11th March 1964 and subsequently worked in Research Department 1978–79 and Registrar's Dept. 1979–81...
Officer Board 1993/95 pictured with Leonard Coote, President and Ken Doyle, Vice-President, l. to r:— Tony Arnold, Honorary Assistant Secretary with special responsibility for Northern Ireland, Michael McCormick, Honorary Secretary, Colette Morrison, Equality Officer, Leonard Coote, Maureen Ronan, Honorary finance Officer, Ciaran Ryan, General Secretary and Ken Doyle
Leonard Coote [right], President and Ken Doyle, Vice-President
PENSIONERS' BIENNIAL GENERAL MEETING
The Pensioners' Biennial General Meeting took place on 16th April, 1993 in the Russell Court Hotel and was very well attended.
The chairman Mr. Liam Curran invited Mr. Andy Heffernan, the President of the IBOA to preside over the meeting.
Tributes were paid to deceased members of the Committee especially Mr. R. J. Armstrong, the late Chairman.
The Honorary Secretary read the Minutes of the previous BGM and gave a report of the Committee's activities over the past two years.
Much research was done in connection with the new Pensions Act.
A submission has been made to the Minister for Social Welfare for inclusion in the Act.
In brief we requested that legislation be enacted to preserve the total assets of Pension Funds for the sole benefit of members, that there be equal number of members and employers as Trustees and that members would have the right to oppose Hostile Trustees.
ICTU has agreed to include the first point in their Agenda at their Biennial Conference.
Protests were made to the Minister for Social Welfare regarding Dental, Optical and Aural cutbacks.
The new AIB Pension Scheme was closely monitored and the new Bank of Ireland Scheme is under scrutiny.
The latter will not effect existing pensioners.
The General Secretary addressed the meeting at length and discussed the reorganisation of the IBOA which should lead to a more cost effective service.
There is much satisfaction regarding our affiliation with ICTU.
The support of pensioners during the strike was very much appreciated.
Staff went on strike more for the survival of the IBOA than for monetary gain.
Many who have left the Association already bitterly regret it.
There is great interest in positions on local Committees just now — a healthy sign.
Mr. A. Keaveny suggested the formation of an E.C.
Sub-Committee to deal with pensioners' affairs at times of great pressure on the Executive Committee.
He also suggested that each Bank should have its own Pensioners' Committee.
The General Secretary felt the splitting of Committees leads to problems.
General malaise was expressed at the poor quality of customer service in the Banks.
The Defence Fund was discussed before the meeting ended and adjourned to ‘93’ for refreshments.
YEAR OF OLDER PEOPLE
Pensioners — Are you aware that 1993 is the European Year of Older People and Solidarity Between Generations.
There are many events arranged country wide, for full information contact 28 Merrion Sq, Dublin 2 
From the 9th to the 15th May an Age and Opportunity Week has been organised.
‘Joining Forces’ has been chosen as the slogan for the week to reflect the intergenerational solidarity aspects of the European Year.
Age and Opportunity is working in partnership with Cospoir, the National Sports Council, on the promotion of physical activity for older people, and the Irish Museum of Modern Art to promote the Arts for older people.
The week will be supported by health boards, local authorities, vocational education committees, community alert representatives, arts organisers and voluntary organisations throughout the country.
For a complete list of Age and Opportunity Week events, contact Laura Fargher, Carmichael Hse., Nth Brunswick St, Dublin 1.
FRANK HOLDEN DEFENCE FUND
Pensioner members at their recent Biennial General Meeting came up with a novel suggestion which would enable Pensioner members contribute to the Frank Holden Defence Fund (see March ‘Newsheet’ for details of case) in a manner that would add substantially to the Fund without denting pensioners' cash flow.
The suggestion, which received widespread support, was that members on retiring or resigning from the Bank would allocate all or portion of the sum due to them to the Frank Holden Defence Fund.
It was suggested that some existing pensioners, who may not have drawn the sum due to them on leaving the Bank, could now claim the sum due to them and donate it to the Fund.
Pensioner members who wish to take up this suggestion may do so by writing to the Honorary finance Officer stating when they retired/resigned from the Bank and quote their membership/staff number and, in their letter, incorporate a clear request that all or part of the sum be donated to the Frank Holden Defence Fund...
Section of attendance at IBOA Pensioners' Biennial General Meeting
At Pensioners' Biennial General Meeting l. to r.: Andy Heffernan, President, Ciaran Ryan, General Secretary, Maeve Cribbin, Honorary Secretary Pensioners' Committee and Pat O'C.
Hegarty, Executive Committee nominee on Pensioners' Committee