

BADLY LET DOWN
Bank Assistants' Anger
In March of this year, when their claim was more than two years old, the Association presented the case of Bank of Ireland Bank Assistants in the Labour Court.
Our Bank Assistant members could have been forgiven for entering the Labour Court with some misgivings but with a good deal of hope.
The misgivings might be based on past experience of Labour Court Recommendations in respect of Bank Officials.
The hope might have been based on a number of things.
To begin with, it would have been based on absolute desperation.
The desperation of people who can't afford to live on the pay that they are earning and who look forward to any means of change in that with hope and with optimism because things couldn't get worse.
Or could they?
MORE TANGIBLE REASONS
Many Bank Assistant members who saw the Association's Submission to the Labour Court commented that it contained a case which was irresistible.
The association had also identified very clearly in its submissions to the Labour Court that, whereas its long term aspirations were encapsulated in the original claim, the immediate requirement for our Bank Assistant members is for a real and reasonable increase in pay to meet the urgent needs of today.
A PROMISING CAREER?
More than six years ago Bank of Ireland advertised for school leavers with a high level of secondary education who were intelligent, energetic, ambitious and possessing of a high level of social skills.
Following a battery of aptitude tests, those who were fortunate enough to be interviewed were promised a full time position in Banking with career opportunities commensurate with their ability and commitment.
It was also indicated to them that while on the grade they would perform a limited range of duties as defined in a list which was published at that time.
TODAY'S REALITY
The picture which has emerged over the last five or six years it is very different than the one painted above.
Career opportunities are few and far between.
The Association's assertion in the Labour Court that more Bank Assistants are leaving than are being promoted is an adequate demonstration of this.
Bank Assistants cannot afford to live on their current salaries and, as has been pointed out, a Bank assistant who also happens to be a bread winner would be better off on the Dole!
Not one Bank Assistant is earning a level of income which would qualify for consideration for a loan from any of the Bank's Subsidiaries.
The reality which has emerged in recent years is that those on Bank Assistant Grade in Bank of Ireland are the lowest paid, full-time career Bank Officials in the country.
It is not possible here to chronicle the many other points included in the Submissions to the Labour Court on behalf of the Bank Assistants.
THE FIRST LET DOWN
Bank Assistants can feel aggrieved and betrayed that the Bank declared in the Labour Court that their claim was debarred by the National Pay Agreement, the P.E.S.P. At no time during the previous two years was the P.E.S.P. ever mentioned by the Bank.
Indeed I pointed out to the Court that one year earlier, at the time of the National Bank Dispute, the Bank of Ireland were at pains to separate the Bank Assistant's Claim from the main Claim which they had always stated was debarred by the P.E.S.P.
For the record it should also be noted that the Labour Court was advised that our claim, on behalf of Bank Assistants, was lodged before the P.E.S.P. was agreed as a National pay arrangement.
THE SECOND LET DOWN
Because of the voluntarism of the Irish system of Industrial Relations workers must have trust, faith and hope that the bodies to which they refer their cases for adjudication will give them a fair crack of the whip.
At meetings of Bank Assistants throughout the country, in the past weeks, I have not met anyone who was other than bitterly disillusioned at the outcome of our visit to the Labour Court.
Members point out that the Labour Court ignored our suggestions that the middle ground could be found.
The Court also ignored our members' total rejection of any question of Performance Related Pay.
It should be noted that the Court recognised our members' concern about low pay and lack of career prospects.
What an awful pity they recommended a medicine which had already been emphatically rejected by the patient.
THE WAY FORWARD
The Executive Committee has already endorsed reports of the meetings of Bank Assistants throughout the country.
A way forward has been planned.
The first step is to meet the Bank, to identify our members' depth of feeling on the Labour Court decision and to explore a means of peacefully resolving the issue.
CONCLUSION
Let us be clear.
This problem will not disappear.
A solution must be found sooner or later.
It is in everyone's interest that the issue be resolved now.
Over one thousand qualified, committed and underpaid young men and women cannot be expected to exercise greater patience.
Ciaran Ryan General Secretary.
COMMENT
HARD TIMES
‘I'm a Bank Assistant’, was the first thing she said when she stood up at a recent IBOA meeting.
‘I'm a single parent’, was her next statement.
Finally the young woman stated, ‘I'd be better off on Social Welfare’.
This was the reason she stood up.
This fact is an indictment of Bank of Ireland, an indictment of the Court of Bank of Ireland, and an indictment of the Banking industry in Ireland.
Ebenezer Scrooge would appear to be alive and well and has been reincarnated in the guise of the Court of Bank of Ireland.
A few ghosts might lift the scales from the eyes of the Court of the Bank.
Is there no compassion, no feelings, no sensitivity in the Court of the Bank?
Is the Court deaf, dumb and blind to the plight of its hard-working employees?
Bob Cratchit clerk to Mr. Scrooge has his parallel with the Bank Assistants.
Bob Cratchit, now married with three children, is on such low pay that every so often he considers applying for family income supplement to help out his hard-pressed family.
Can the Directors of the Court of the Bank see down from their lofty offices to the struggles that the Bank Assistants endure/ Is it possible that the clouds get in the way?
Or is it that there are none so blind as those who will not see?
Charles Dickens come back, there is plenty of material for a new novel about pitiless employers and hapless employees.
Of course the Court of Bank of Ireland has very important things to do and important things to think about.
For example the efficiency of labour would appear to take up some considerable amount of their time.
I think the Court of Bank of Ireland has come up with the greatest riddle since 1782, when an Act of Parliament established the Bank.
How to get more for less.
How to get more from the customer and deliver a lesser service and how to give less to the staff and get more work.
Bank Assistants have suffered a severe blow.
The Banks promised them a career path which never materialised.
Bank Assistants were told there was room at the top, but this mirage has turned into a desert of empty dry promises, sun bleached skeletons of the fallen victims and descending spirals of the vultures, vigilant for the weak.
The Labour Court, a supposedly independent party, with national institution credentials, has delivered a knockout recommendation on Bank Assistants.
The grievance between the Bank Assistants and the Bank for parity was a fair contest.
The contest turned out more like a flyweight taking on a cruiserweight, with the referee on the cruiser's side.
No matter how cleverly the flyweight boxes he is going to be stuffed.
Even when the flyweight got a below-the-belt punch he was kicked by the referee to make sure he stayed down.
Our claim for a more just salary scale for Bank Assistants may be down, but it is not out.
The IBOA is now the sole champion of the Bank Assistant.
Bank Assistants may feel bitter, bewildered and betrayed but the IBOA is still in pursuit of justice on their behalf.
The darkest hour may be just before the dawn but it is no time to go to sleep on the job.
IBOA is in there working hard for the Bank Assistants.
Bank Assistants, ask not what the IBOA can do for you but what can you do for the IBOA to get justice for your claim.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS UPDATE
ULSTER BANK — INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENTS
A recent trend, internationally and nationally, in Information Technology Departments has been to rationalise functions.
As all IBOA members realise when the word ‘rationalisation’ is used, it generally means a down-grading of tasks and possible job losses.
The Ulster Bank has embarked upon this path with the proposed transfer of Information Technology from Willowbrook in Belfast to Sandyford in Dublin.
IBOA and its members have grave concerns about this development and negotiations have been in progress for the past number of months.
The Association has experienced, and is experiencing, similar types of negotiations both in Northern Bank and National Irish Bank.
At a recent meeting between Ulster Bank Management and representatives of IBOA, under the umbrella of the Conciliation Services of the Labour Relations Agency, the following points were the subject of detailed negotiations:—
1.
The future of Willowbrook.
2.
The redeployment of Staff.
3.
Other options.
4.
Co-operation Payment.
5.
Redeployment policy.
6.
Additional Posts.
The negotiations were extremely complex and detailed and the whole issue has been referred to the next stage of IBOA/Bank procedures which is an Independent Tribunal.
The decision of this Tribunal will be non-binding on the IBOA but, hopefully, its recommendations will be more equitable than the recent Tribunal decisions received by the Association.
AIB BANK, GREAT BRITAIN — SALARIES
As a result of an extremely adverse recommendation from an Independent Mediator with regard to AIB Great Britain Salaries, IBOA has recently had a meeting with AIB Bank Management.
Management has identified that its agenda for the future regarding its Staff is, firstly, an intention to introduce Performance Related Pay for all Staff by 1995.
The introduction of Performance Related Pay would be extremely dangerous for any member of the Association.
The Association is on record for many years high-lighting the disadvantages of this type of pay scheme.
Imagine, for a moment, the situation that could arise if one was taken ill and was not able to perform to the required levels of the Bank's Targets?
Secondly, it is the intention of AIB Bank Management to introduce a new lower salary scale for new entrants in Great Britain.
These low paid workers will then generate increased profits for the Bank in order that the Executives can get more Share Options to cash at the most appropriate time when the Share Prices are rising and the tax is least.
Thirdly, it is the intention of AIB Bank Management to introduce a reduction in Staff Costs by the elimination of special payments, by the reduction of London and Large Town Allowances, by the reduction of the standard of flights home and the phasing out of Overseas Allowance.
Management's objective is to achieve an overall reduction in the terms and conditions of IBOA members working in Great Britain.
The Bank has decided to capitalise on short term difficulties by attempting to diminish staff terms and conditions.
IBOA has organised meetings in Great Britain to discuss this whole issue with the members involved.
BANK OF IRELAND — PERFORMANCE RELATED PAY FOR OFFICERS AND ASSISTANT MANAGERS
Following consultations, late last year and early this year, with Bank of Ireland Assistant Managers and Officer members through-out the country in respect of Performance Related Pay, it was agreed that the Bank be contacted regarding the rumoured introduction of such a pay scheme for these staff members.
The members decided that the unilateral introduction of Performance Related Pay on a one-to-one basis was not the way forward and if, at any stage, it was to be introduced, it should be collectively negotiated by IBOA on behalf of its members.
At a recent meeting between IBOA and Management of Bank of Ireland, the Bank categorically denied that it intended to introduce Performance Related Pay for these members at this time.
It is very difficult to understand how the Bank can say this on the one hand and on the other hand, send out advertisements for positions such as Outlet Manager,[Whatever that is!], with a remuneration package that is to be negotiated with the Bank.
This is a typical example of the Bank saying one thing and doing another.
NATIONAL IRISH BANK
A recent meeting took place between IBOA and Management of National Irish Bank regarding the review of Pilot Branches that are being Sub-Officed to larger Branches.
It is the IBOA's stated position that these are Sub-Offices and all allowances should be paid accordingly.
The Review Meeting discussed areas of staffing, management structure, holidays and many other issues.
Generally speaking, the Bank stated that the pilots were operating successfully and the problems that were being experienced by staff could be rectified by the introduction of systems.
Detailed information was presented to IBOA in response to the queries that were raised.
It has now been decided that meetings will take place of all Branch Representatives in the Pilot Branches in order to clarify the experiences of our members on the ground regarding these Pilot Branches.
FIRST TRUST BANK
The amalgamation of TSB Bank Northern Ireland and AIB Bank Northern Ireland into the new First Trust Bank is proceeding.
Many items have been satisfactorily negotiated and settled but some items are still outstanding.
The Tribunal Recommendations, which still require clarification, are now being referred through the Labour Relations Agency.
As soon as these clarifications have been received, they will then be balloted upon by the members of both AIB Bank, Northern Ireland and First Trust Bank.
Extended hours have been an issue that Management is pursuing.
The extension of opening hours has implications in many areas for our members.
IBOA set out these problems, and clarification was sought from the Bank.
It is disappointing that Management has failed to provide this information on the issues raised by IBOA and IBOA has referred this to the Labour Relations Agency for a Conciliation Meeting.
Regarding the merging of the two Banks, the Association wishes to discuss a range of issues relating to developments.
HOMECOVER
IBOA Home Insurance Scheme
HOMECOVER, our Home Insurance Scheme has been in operation for the benefit of our members for over eleven years.
For each of these years our members have enjoyed the good value offered by Homecover in price and cover.
Following a comprehensive review of Homecover we are now pleased to announce —
PREMIUM REDUCTIONS
IMPROVEMENTS IN COVER
INTRODUCTION OF A NEW HOMECOVER HOME ASSIST 24 HOUR EMERGENCY HELP LINE FREE TO MEMBERS
These changes will take effect on all new business immediately and on all policies falling due for renewal on and after the 1st July next.
PREMIUM REDUCTIONS
Accidental Damage Premium Reduction
The premiums for standard cover and accidental damage have been reduced by 7% in respect of buildings cover and 10% in respect of contents cover for members in the Republic of Ireland.
No Claims Bonus
A No Claims Bonus of 7.5% is being introduced for members in the Republic of Ireland where no claims have been made under a policy for more than 12 months.
This will mean an immediate reduction in premium for those members who have not made claims under their policies for more than 12 months with effect from their renewal date on and after 1st July next.
Alarm Discount
The Alarm Discount where buildings and contents are insured is being increased from 25% to 30% on the contents portion of the premium where alarms have a direct connection to a central station.
A new Alarm Discount is being introduced where contents only are insured, of 15% on the contents portion of the premium.
To qualify for an alarm discount previously it was necessary for an annual maintenance agreement to be in force.
This requirement has now been dispensed with and in order to qualify for the discount the alarm must be in accordance with the IS199 specification only.
This change should enable many members to obtain a discount who did not previously qualify whilst the discount for existing alarms is also being increased.
Goods in Deep Freeze
Cover for deterioration of goods in deep freeze due to breakdown is now included free of charge up to a limit of £500.
This will represent a saving of £10 for those members who opted for this extension in the past.
This combination of premium reductions could result in a maximum saving of up to 35%.
IMPROVEMENTS TO COVER
Liability to the Public
The limit in respect of any one accident insured for injury to members of the public has been increased from £500,000 to £1,000,000.
Holiday Accommodation
Homecover is now extended to provide Public Liability cover arising out of your occupancy of any building, caravan or camping structure being used as temporary holiday accommodation.
Jury Service Expenses
The amount payable is increased from £5 to £10 for each day attended.
Satellite Dishes
The policy is automatically extended to cover loss or damage to satellite dishes.
Subsidence Excess
The excess has been altered from 2% of the building value of 1% where accidental damage cover is included to a fixed sum of £1,000 each and every claim.
 Visitors' Personal Effects
The limit in respect of  visitors' personal  effects is increased from £100 to £250.
Contents in the Open
The limit in respect of cover for contents in the open is increased from £200 to £250.
Extra Risks Items
An extra risk item now requires to be specified only if it exceeds a value of £2,000 or 10% of the sum insured on contents which ever is the less.
An extra risk item is any single item of gold, silver, jewellery, precious metals, picture or other works of art, furs or collection[s] of stamps, coins or medals.
In addition the overall limit in respect of such extra risk items insured by the policy is one-third of the sum insured on contents.
Buildings Definition
The definition of buildings is now extended to include lawns, trees and shrubs.
Unspecified Personal Effects
The item covering unspecified personal effects and sporting equipment is now automatically extended to include clothing.
This means that two separate items need no longer be insured for such property which will lead to further savings for members.
Loss of keys by stealing
Where cover is arranged for ‘All Risks’ in respect of personal effects and clothing the policy will automatically cover the cost of replacing and fitting of locks of external doors of the dwelling following loss of keys by stealing for a limit of £250.
Smoke Damage
The cover afforded by the peril of smoke has been broadened.
HOME ASSIST
We are pleased to introduce a new service free of charge to our members who insure with Homecover which offers a free 24 hour home emergency service.
We all know how difficult it can be to arrange for a contractor to carry out repairs to our home.
Contractors are either not interested because the job is too small or cannot undertake the work for weeks.
Home Assist gives you rapid access on a 24 hour basis to first class tradesmen and repairers to provide assistance to you in the event of an emergency which results in loss or damage to your home.
For example—
Roof Damage
Damage to plumbing and draining systems
Central heating system
Domestic gas or electricity supply in the event of complete failure
External locks, doors and windows
The Homecover policy holder is responsible for payment of all the repair charges at the time of completion of the repairs.
If your Homecover policy covers the damage then the cost of the repairs will be paid when settling the claim.
As from 1st July next the Home Assist 24 Hour emergency service will be made available to each Homecover policyholder from the renewal date of their policy.
A leaflet will be enclosed with each renewal notice which will contain full details of Home Assist and include the 24 Hour emergency helpline number for use by our members.
FLEXIBILITY OF COVER
Homecover continues to offer members the most flexible policy to insure their home.
Members choose what they wish to insure and decide for themselves on the sums they insure.
This is in marked contrast to the trend with many other insurers where fixed covers are being imposed on customers in relation to both the type of insurance and the sums to be insured.
HOMECOVER — BETTER VALUE THAN EVER
The competitive premiums and broad cover offered by Homecover from the outset assured its success.
These further reductions in premiums, improvements in cover and Home Assist 24 Hour emergency line together with the continuing flexibility of our Scheme policy makes Homecover a better bargain than ever before.
We recommend all our members to seek quotations in advance of their home policies falling due for renewal.
Members in Northern Ireland are not taking advantage of the savings available on Homecover to anything like the same extent as members in the Republic of Ireland and Great Britain.
So we especially ask our members in Northern Ireland to review their household policies and seek an insurance appraisal and quotation before next renewal date.
Simply contact the Homecover staff at Frank Glennon Limited who will be only too pleased to offer you a free insurance appraisal on your existing policy and a Homecover quotation.
In case you forget and you would like the Homecover staff at Frank Glennon Limited to give you a free quotation and insurance appraisal before your next renewal please complete and return this coupon.
KNOW YOUR ASSOCIATION
Association Structure
by Marian Geoghegan, Training and Development Officer
Members frequently make the comment that they know little or nothing about the structure of the IBOA, the decision-making process — in short how the IBOA operates.
In this first of a series of articles designed to make you more aware of your Association we outline the overall structure of the IBOA.
At first glance the structure of the Association seems complicated.
However, the basic structure of Branch Representatives, District Committees and Area Councils is straightforward and operates in most Areas.
You will note that Belfast, Dublin and Britain have a slightly different structure to other Areas.
In addition there are five reserved seats on the Executive Committee for women.
The President and Vice-President of the IBOA are elected to the Executive Committee by the Biennial Delegate Conference.
Our General Secretary, Ciaran Ryan, well-known to all members, is ex-officio i.e. arising from his office, a member of the Executive Committee.
You will see from the diagram that there are 36 members of the Executive Committee.
This number has reduced from 46 as a result of the recent re-organisation of the IBOA.
The Biennial Delegate Conference, which was held in April, is the supreme policy-making authority in the Association.
Members send resolutions and Delegates to the Conference, all of which ensures that it is you, as members, who determine the policy of the IBOA.
Over the next new months the various components of the IBOA will be described in order to show you how they fit into the overall picture.
We will also outline the numerous services provided by the Association for members.
IBOA WHO'S WHO
New Executive Committee Members
WOMEN'S REPRESENTATIVE — DUBLIN
Susan Parkinson
Susan has been elected to the newly created Reserved Seat on the Executive Committee for Women, in Dublin.
She has been a member of the Dublin Ladies' (now Women's) Committee since 1990 and has been a branch representative for 8 years.
She works in Bank of Ireland, 85 James' Street, Dublin, having joined at Clearing Department, Cabinteely in October 1978 and subsequently worked in St. Stephen's Green branch and in Batch Centre, 34 College Green until her transfer to James' Street in November 1987.
A Dubliner and married, Susan's hobbies include reading, knitting, cooking, art and drama.
She also enjoys ladies soccer and swimming.
She has won awards for many of the sporting activities in which she is involved.
WEXFORD AREA SECRETARY
David Keane
A new member of the Executive Committee as Wexford Area Secretary, David has been Wexford District Secretary since 1987 and a branch representative since 1977.
David has worked in Bank of Ireland, Enniscorthy since 1982.
He joined the Bank at this branch in 1971 and later postings included Kingscourt, Relief Staff and Gorey.
David is married to Geraldine and they have three children.
He originally comes from Wexford town and enjoys gardening and reading.
He is an occasional golfer and plays indoor football during the winter.
AIB GROUP, BRITAIN
Susan (Sue) Frost
Sue has been elected to represent members in AIB Group, Britain on the Executive Committee.
She was branch representative in Guildford 1991–92 and in Recoveries since then.
She was a founder member of the AIBBF House Committee which was dissolved in December last.
An officer in Recoveries (South) based in Uxbridge.
Sue joined AIB Business Finance in Guildford on 1st February 1990.
She transferred to Recoveries last year.
Originally from Southampton, Sue enjoys tennis and aerobics.
DUBLIN DISTRICT COMMITTEE
Ciaran Mahon
Ciaran is a newcomer to the Executive Committee in his role as one of the representatives of the Dublin District Committee.
He has been a member of that Committee since it was re-established in 1991.
He was branch representative 1989–90.
An assistant manager in Bank of Ireland's Group Internal Audit Department, Ciaran joined the Bank in December 1970 in I.T.D. where he worked until his transfer to his present location in 1981.
Ciaran, who comes from Dublin is married with four children.
He enjoys chess and hill-walking and is involved in community activities including Scouts, Simon and Neighbourhood Watch.
His numerous sporting interests include GAA, rugby, soccer and badminton.
He completed 4 Dublin marathons in the 1980s.
BELFAST COMMITTEE
Joan Elizabeth Martin
Newly elected to the Executive Committee as one of the Belfast Committee's representatives is Joan Martin who works in Ulster Bank, Operations Section, I.S.S. as a shift supervisor.
Besides her present location, Joan has been branch representative in Ballynahinch where she joined the Bank in 1978.
She was transferred to Ops Section in 1985.
Joan hails from Newcastle, Co.
Down and is single.
She enjoys reading and listening to music.
When asked about her favourite sporting activity, she replied ‘watching’!
GALWAY AREA SECRETARY
Tom Power
Although only just elected to the Executive Committee as Galway Area Secretary, Tom is no stranger to ‘93’ as for 6 years, from 1973 top 1979, he was an Executive Committee member as Cork District Secretary.
He was Galway District President, 1991–93 and was branch representative in all the many branches in which he worked.
Branch manager of AIB Bank, Salthill, Tom joined the Munster & Leinster Bank at Fethard in 1963 and later worked in Roscrea, 66 South Mall, Kinsale, Carrigaline, 26 Patrick Street and 97 South Mall before heading west to his branch in Galway.
Originally from Co.
Tipperary, Tom, who is married with four children, enjoys angling, cycling and gardening.
Living as he does in Moycullen, he has ample local opportunities to indulge in these pastimes.
WHAT!
NO PROMOTION?
Lack of promotional opportunities in all Banks has been a most serious development in recent times for those who work in the Industry.
Now the message is that keeping the job is a triumph — never mind the extra stripes!
Peter Edwards looks at the blank space that now passes for a promotions policy.
Promotion is the new non flavour of the month.
That means there is none of it about.
The message to be carried, by Managers, to the four corners of all the Associated Banks is — Tell them they are lucky to have pens in their hands and less of their fancy notions.
This has resulted in a less than euphoric response from staff across the spectrum.
There is nobody jumping up and down for joy at the news, and morale, which has been comatose, now has a sense of mortality hanging over it.
Strangely, staff concern does not centre on the narrow ‘no opportunities’ tag but on the much wider context.
That is the hit and miss effort of cost cutting.
Today it's no promotions, tomorrow it's no overtime, the day after it's Managers not being replaced.
Next week it's redundancy, the week after its rejigging logic: districts, clusters, satellites, spokes.
Witness an Area Manager, in the Republic of Ireland, who, when visiting Branches, tells the staff not to get too settled.
He regards them not as belonging to a particular branch, but to the Area; hence, ‘transfer’ has been erased from the Dictionary.
The conspiracy theorists, and there are a lot of them about, have said there is a Masterplan behind all of this.
They say that the Banks are trying to create a climate to lower expectations and thereby facilitate the making-up of minds for the final handshake from the Area Manager.
(With 300,000 unemployed the leeway is limited for flag-waving packages, but the rules might have changed with the exception of only one Bank).
Whatever it is, it is not doing much for business, as any Manager will tell you.
Low morale means low esteem and that reflects in quality of work and output of staff.
Confusion reigns for the future direction of the industry in the absence of clear guidelines and leadership.
It can also manifest itself in lack of confidence in Senior Management throughout the industry.
The questions ‘where are we going?’, and ‘what are they doing?’ are concerns which crop up more and more.
Staff are told one thing but, having a Banker's nose for the truth, they believe another.
They complain that there appears to be no concrete and firm plan for anything and this latest block in promotion is just one more item, but by far the most frustrating.
What is Management going to say to staff regarding their future.
Work hard, get in more business but there will be nothing for you at the end.
Your leadership qualities and your skill will simply rot on the waste heap of lack of recognition.
There is no hope of you ever being in a position to work out your own ideas for the future success of the business.
‘Promotional Material?’
You can now cross it out on your appraisal and replace it with ‘Standing Still’ material.
But all of this goes deeper.
How now is Management going to motivate and reward?
How are they going to fill key positions to perpetuate growth?
How are they going to replace themselves in good time so that there will be a talent bank of experience, ready to lead?
What do they mean when they say there will be no promotions at present?
Is it a holding operation until a swathe of Managers and Assistant Managers, especially those who have served their purpose, are induced into early retirement?
Is it that the overall proportion of Management to staff is too high so the balance is being put right?
Are outsiders being recruited without reference to any existing scale?
Is it not good enough for ‘Managers’ to be sent with briefs, memorised in their heads, to have fireside chats with the best and brightest, telling them that in this day and age their promotion is really the ability to retain their jobs.
You can hear it now, ‘With so much unemployment out there, with cost cutting everywhere that it is the only realistic target left’.
But that course of action defies the logic of business.
Stifling leadership qualities is not the principle on which this industry became so profitable.
There is an impression of a dearth of new ideas at the top.
Is that not the best case ever for a clear promotions policy?
What should you do if you are spoken to about this?
Well, it should not be taken lying down.
Using the logic that is on your side, argue, and you will make your point.
Managers may be used to using briefs and may not want to stray off them too far.
But, as on other occasions when they think for themselves, they may well end up agreeing with you.
Off the record, of course!
In other days Managers would have put up an argument as to the folly of this approach by Management.
Collectively they used to be a formidable bunch.
On their wisdom the industry grew to undreamed of proportions.
Now all is changed, changed utterly.
Managers now dutifully bring back the brief.
Can you imagine the Managers of old being given actual lines to say to staff like a bit-part actor?
No, I can't either!
Indeed, I can imagine the comments, over the balls of malt, afterwards; they would probably be unprintable.
So much for that part of our heritage!
What about Human Resources?
Without promotion there is no such a thing anymore.
Because a human only becomes a resource when it is classed as an asset with potential to grow.
The implication of the latest moves are that humans have moved to the debit side and become liabilities.
However I hope the term Human Resources will not be undergoing a consequent change of name.
We all have to keep up appearances while we wait for the tide to turn.
POSTSCRIPT: As I write I have just been handed a newspaper and I see that at the Court of Appeal in London on April 30th, the following transpired ‘Trade Unions scored a notable victory in their fight to maintain collective bargaining yesterday when the Court of Appeal said employers had no right to discriminate against workers who refused to sign personal contracts’.
Talk about tides turning!
Raise the sail!
Land sighted at last.
EVER-STEADY FAGAN PUTTS TO GLORY
The cool head and, of course, local knowledge of the Athlone Course were the deciding factors in a thrilling win for Dermot Fagan in the Mullingar Area Golf Outing recently.
And, though pushed all the way by Noel O'Carroll, it soon became apparent that sinking putts from anything within a range of 20 yards, gave Fagan this much sought-after event, and also qualification for the Golfer of the Year to be held in Killarney.
The weather was good, scores were high on the day, but no-one could live with the excellent golf from Dermot who kept a steady  throughout, pausing only once for a ‘chuckle’ as colleague Kevin O'Leary pitched a 9-Iron into the nearby water hazard, albeit the Shannon.
Faced with the dilemma of dropping a shot or ‘playing her as she lies’, after long deliberations, O'Leary waded in the 4-foot deep water and out went his chances of winning.
The ladies found no such difficulty with the Course and fine scores were recorded.
Overall winner and a quote of ‘I've never won nothing in me life’ belonged to Kathy Jones-Mullins, AIB Ballinasloe.
Ever stood on a tee, met a ‘beginner’ who out-drove you, out-putted you, out-shone you and finally outraged you when you realised the pound was lost…we had Pat McKenna, Ulster Bank, Athlone who won the Beginner's prize.
The overall winners were: 1st Dermot Fagan (Athlone District), 2nd Noel O'Carroll .
Winner Mullingar District:John O'Neill ; winner Cavan District:Fergal Kieran .
Ladies winner:Kathy Jones-Mullins .
MAUREEN RONAN, Mullingar Area Secretary.
BELFAST AND DISTRICT GOLF
The Belfast & District cup was again competed for at the vastly improved Dunmurry Golf Club on Sunday 16th May.
Thirty-six competitors enjoyed a ‘Gap’ in the recent poor weather to get into the 19th dry.
They were welcomed to the Clubhouse by the IBOA Golf Society Captain, Frank Casey and the IBOA Honorary Secretary Michael McCormick.
We were again treated to the usual excellent Dunmurry hospitality and cordially welcomed by the Club Captain, Bob Gourley who was a guest at the Competition and meal.
The Competition itself was hard fought with a count back being required to isolate the eventual winner with 38 points, Dean Simpson of the Northern Bank and a member of Dunmurry Golf Club.
Worthy of note was the fact that for the first time in over 20 years we had a pensioner member playing in the event and whilst he does not want his name or score noted.
Tony Wildy was the surprised recipient of a special prize.
Prize Winners 1st & Winner B & D Cup —Dean Simpson 2nd —Brent Skeffington .
3rd —Jim Lemon .
Best Gross —Liam Donnelly .
Best Net —Tony Mulvenna .
Best 1st 9 —Alan McCollum .
Best 2nd 9 —Arthur Scott .
19–28 Stableford —Greg Hughes .
Special [Pensioner]Prize —Tony Wildy .
Qualifiers for IBOA Golfer of the Year:Dean Simpson.
Tony Mulvenna.
Liam Donnelly .
JOHN CAMPBELL.
WATERFORD GOLF OUTING
The outlook was bad, as people arrived at Kilkenny Golf Course on that very wet windy Saturday morning in April.
The Course was still closed at 10. 30 a.m.
The IBOA Waterford Area Outing had been due to start at 10.
OO a.m.
Club Secretary Sean O'Neill assured us that we would get out to play our competition and so we did.
At 11.15 a.m. the 29 enthusiastic players teed off from a few tees.
All the competitors agreed that they had a challenging game and more than the usual number of wet balls and soggy bunkers!!
We wish to thank Kilkenny Golf Club for their usual kind hospitality.
The Club Captain, John Gunne and Lady Captain, Josie McPhillips joined us for the Outing and for the evening celebrations.
Winners — Men — 1st —John Brennan .
2nd —Harry Geraghty .
3rd —Fred Malzard .
4th —George Collins .
Front 9:Brendan O'Halloran .
Back 9:Jim Scully .
Ladies — 1st Etta Barry-Walsh .
2nd —Kay O'Dwyer .
3rd —Catherine Gannon .
Front 9:Carmel White .
Back 9:Josie McPhillips .
Visitors:Brian Hudson and Josie McPhillips .
Waterford Cup:Harry Geraghty .
ALL SET FOR SOCCER TOURNAMENT
The National Soccer Tournament at Portlaoise (June 26 Weekend) is all set to go.
Interest has been phenomenal with all Areas represented by ladies 7s and gents 11s.
Dublin and Belfast have 4 teams, the standard of which is very high.
Wexford won the Cup last year after a titanic struggle but this year they will face very stern competition indeed, not least from Dublin and Belfast.
Other Areas are in the throes of heavy training schedules and will create a highly competitive spirit in Portlaoise.
Ladies al; so will have an enormous challenge in trying to secure a coveted victory.
Waterford Area came up trumps last year in a classic encounter with Dublin Ladies but Dublin are poised this year to make their mark.
All in all, it promises to be a huge weekend with a happy hour and disco et al.
Full details of results and pictures next issue.
Some of the participants who took part in the Mullingar Area Golf Outing recently.
Back row, l. to r: John O'Sullivan, Stephen Kerr, Noel O'Carroll, Kevin O'Leary, Fergal Kieran, Tony Baynes.
Middle: John O'Neill, Anthony Barrett, Angela Veldon, Breda O'Carroll.
Front: Kathy Jones-Mullins, Maureen Ronan, Honorary Finance Officer, Dermot Fagan.
Winner of Belfast and District Golf Cup, Dean Simpson receives Cup from IBOA Honorary Secretary, Michael McCormick.
DRAMATIC CLIMAX TO DUBLIN BOWLING LEAGUE
Yet again Stillorgan played host to an exciting IBOA final on Thursday April 29th when the Dublin 10-pin League came to a dramatic finish.
All were Superbowlers, but the ‘Hit Squad’ edged ahead at the start and held that position; it was a victory after a tense and close night.
Martin Caulfield, Claire Breslin, Jimmy Evans, Laim Conway, Adrian Roullier and John O'Riordan proved equal to the task, scoring 1761.
They pipped last year's IBOA League winners, the ‘Random Strikers’ from AIB Bank 10/11 O'Connell St., Dublin, who played exceptionally well but failed to capitalise on some sensational strikes at the closing stages.
Theresa Rooney, Gemma O'Dell, Adam O'Keeffe, Margaret Brennan and Jim Browne scored 1694 to take second place.
In third place came Paul O'Connor, Noelle Murray, Margaret McConkey, Helen Daly and Edel Maher of AIB Bank, Capel St. Their score was a very close 1680.
‘Sad Vinny's Virgins’ on 1673 came 4th and ‘The Brady Bunch’on 1672 came 5th.
High Game Series Male won by Martin Caulfield, AIB Bank, with 375.
High Game Series Female won by Margaret McConkey, AIB Bank on 306.
High Game went to W.G. (Billie) Moloney, AIB Bank with 218.
High Game went to Marie Colville, AIB Bank, with 176.
Team High Game Series was won by ‘Stillorgan A’ on 987.
Team High Game ‘Late Recruits’: 550.
Most improved Bowler Male Colm Stanley + 33 pins improvement 33 on handicap.
Most improved Bowler Female Jacinta O; Sullivan + 32 pins, improvement 32 on handicap.
The competition was intensely close with only 22 pins between 2nd and 5th places.
Congratulations again to Theresa Rooney whose list of achievements this year continues to grow.
She was 2nd in the National Championship Qualifiers, High Female average in European Banks in France this month, High Female average AIB inter Branch and Business Houses and now High Female average IBOA.
All prize giving afterwards in ‘93’ the new Vice-President of IBOA, Mr. Ken Doyle [in his first function in his new capacity]praised the efficiency and professionalism of the way and the IBOA League was run and thanked everybody for participating.
BELFAST & DISTRICT ANNUAL DANCE
Belfast and District Annual Dance took place in the Culloden Hotel on Friday 21st May.
The Dance was enjoyed by all present and it was pleasing to note a strong contingent of Bank Assistant/Bank Official Grades present.
Belfast and District again welcomed the General Secretary Ciaran Ryan, incoming President Leonard Coote and incoming Vice-President Ken Doyle and other guests.
Farewells and heartfelt appreciation were offered to Andy Heffernan, out-going President and Brendan Stevenson, out-going Honorary Secretary.
The occasion was kept relatively informal with Ciaran Ryan limiting his speech to an excellent 5 minutes (or so) of entertaining and informative repartee.
As a departure from the usual, the IBOA President was requested to speak in recognition of the fact that the IBOA has, after several years, again a President domiciled in Northern Ireland.
Leonard thanked Belfast and district for its hospitality to him and his wife Pat and informed us that our dance was virtually a family outing with his son Stephen, his daughter Linda and son-in-law, Timothy Smith present.
During the course of the evening a ballot for several excellent prizes was organised with proceeds to be sent to the Frank Holden Defence Fund.
We were pleased to record the sum of £267 had been collected but this was not the final figure.
Two of the prizes, a Magnum of Champagne and a Bottle of Smirnoff Vodka were returned (unused) by the winners who requested that these be auctioned.
After a slow start John Campbell managed to raise a further £90 for the Fund.
DUBLIN BARN DANCE
July 2nd is the date for the best Barn Dance that ever swung into range from behind bales of hay.
On that night Lansdowne Road will become the O.K. Corral for entertainment.
Look what we've got lined up.
To kick-off, we've got an official Happy Hour around the 8.30 p.m. mark — well before sundown.
That should get the sweet-talkin' nicely up and running.
At about 9.
OO p.m.
The Cajun Kings will, under the red sun on the western sky and on top of the hay bales [outdoors, weather permitting], perform some nice down home music.
Good food will be served from the spit.
As darkness falls the immortal sounds of John Hurley will be heard in the upstairs Bar.
Downstairs a Disco will bring the tired and the weary in from the cattle drives and down from the cash tills. the Saloon will stay open late.
Listen folks, tickets are on sale from ‘93’ and it is all for 6 quid.
‘The Hit Squad’, winners of IBOA Dublin 10-pin Bowling League, pictured receiving their Trophy and prizes from IBOA Vice-President, Ken Doyle.
Left to right:— Liam Conway, Martin Caulfield, Ken Doyle, John O; Riordan, Claire Breslin, Jimmy Evans and Adrain Roullier.
IBOA President, Leonard Coote pictured at Belfast and District Dance with, from left, Adrian Ronan, Maureen Ronan, Ciaran Ryan, Pat Coote, Colette Morrison, Michael McCormick and Audrey Jackson.