

ICTU CONFERENCE — An Overview
Over 500 Delegates attended the Biennial Delegate Conference of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions which took place in Galway from 6th to 9th July, 1993.
For the first time in its history the Irish Bank Officials' Association attended and was represented at the Conference by fifteen Delegates led by the President, Leonard Coote.
Her Excellency, Mary Robinson, President of Ireland opened the Conference and was enthusiastically welcomed by all Delegates.
PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
As newcomers to Conference the IBOA delegation was very forcibly struck by the similarity between the problems faced by the Association and those of the wider Trade Union Movement.
In the course of his Presidential Address, Mr. Tom Douglas covered a wide range of issues some of which are contained in the extracts from his speech given below.
RETROSPECT
‘In preparing this Address I had the opportunity to reflect back over the last thirty years, reliving those working days when wages were extremely low, working conditions poor and when in industry a person's life was cheap.
I want, on your behalf, to send a clear message to-day to Government and to Employers — the gains that working people have made for themselves and their families — gains that have made their world a fairer place — are not for taking back and will not be given back’.
UNEMPLOYMENT
‘The Political Parties should join with us as Trade Unions in tackling the lethargy shown by employers when it comes to job creation.
We have Companies who are making high levels of profit, who are still shedding jobs or refusing to invest in new jobs’.
EXPLOITATION
‘I want to say to IBEC and to employers generally, if you want to continue to do business with Congress then you will have to sort out the cowboys in your midst.
You cannot expect to negotiate a consensus with Congress and then continue to support Companies who exploit young people, exploit part-time workers, mainly women and refuse to recognise Trade Unions.
Indeed, given that these cowboys are under-cutting decent employers it would be in your own interest to tackle this problem’.
These and many other thoughts of the outgoing President of Congress reflected, very much, the views and aspirations of members of this Association.
IBOA motions and statements are outlined in more detail in the Delegate's Report of the ICTU Conference.
CIARAN RYAN GENERAL SECRETARY
ICTU CONFERENCE A Delegate's Report
All Delegates had received full documentation well in advance of the ICTU Conference and our Delegation held a half-day meeting on Monday, 5th July, 1993 in Galway to decide policy on voting on 86 Resolutions and five Special Reports which had been issued by the Executive Council of Congress.
THE WELCOME
Given that our Association had been 75 years outside the wider Trade Union Movement, our Delegates were concerned at what type of reception they might receive from the Conference.
This was quickly dispelled.
In introducing General Secretary, Ciaran Ryan as the first speaker on behalf of the Association, Congress President, Tom Douglas said ‘Our next speaker is from a new affiliate to Congress.
The Irish Bank Officials’ Association, over the years, has made a tremendous contribution to the welfare of its members and we know that in recent times IBOA has been engaged in many struggles to protect those terms and conditions.
I would ask Conference to welcome Ciaran Ryan, general Secretary of IBOA’.
In his response, the General Secretary said ‘Chairman and Delegates, before I move the IBOA motion, I would like to take this opportunity to place on record the debt owed by this Association to the Trade Union Movement arising from the events in the Republic of Ireland in the first half of 1992.
I believe Trade Unions recognised that there was more to the   Bank Dispute in 1992 than a mere Salary Issue.
There was a recognition of the hidden agenda and the response of the Trade Union Movement was overwhelming and for that we are grateful.
The threat by the INTO in respect of the removal of its investments, the placing by SIPTU of its National Office Network at our disposal, the many letters of encouragement and the great assistance given to our members on the Picket Line are some of the indicators of this.
I wish to applaud here, publicly, the great strength and courage of our own members who supported their Association in the face of the highest level of intimidation which I have encountered in my twenty seven years in industrial relations.
I would also record here, our appreciation of the fact that the general Secretary of ICUT and his colleagues in Raglan Road recognised, at an early stage, the real meaning of this dispute and their assistance throughout was valued enormously by our members’.
IBOA RESOLUTIONS
All three IBOA Resolutions on the Order Paper were adopted unanimously and as space does not enable us to reproduce the full statements made to Congress a precis is given here-under.
In proposing the IBOA motion on Pensions , the General Secretary, Ciaran Ryan said ‘Manipulation of Pension Funds did not start with Robert Maxwell.
I can recall, back in the early ‘80s, serious difficulty encountered in the Castle Brand Pension Fund which, when the Company closed, was found to be in serious deficit, as part of that fund had been used to pay for earlier redundancies in that Company.
A further emphasis should be placed on the absolute necessity of Employer Pension Contributions being maintained and no reduction in contribution should be permitted unless independent actuarial calculations endorse such a view’.
The IBOA views were endorsed by many Delegates on this Resolution which was initiated by the IBOA Pensioners' Committee.
Assistant General Secretary, Larry Broderick, proposed the motion which condemned threats to Trade Union Membership .
The practice at promotion interviews of questioning Union Members about Union Activity, their intentions in the event of future industrial action and questioning the appropriateness of Union Membership was roundly condemned in this Resolution.
Mr. Broderick said ‘We can all see and condemn the naked anti-unionism of Companies like Pat the Baker, but this form of anti-unionism is far more subtle and all the more dangerous.’
He continued ‘Many of our former members who left the Association because of this type of subtle coercion now bitterly regret their decision.
Many of them have had their terms and conditions reduced, some have been dismissed and they now have no one to turn to as they have turned their back on the Trade Union which is their only guarantee of protection’.
In proposing the IBOA motion on Unemployment , the General Secretary said ‘Heavy emphasis on job creation tends to over-shadow one of the crucial features, that is job retention .
I fully endorse the sentiments of President Tom Douglas in condemning Companies who are making high levels of profit and who are still shedding jobs or refusing to invest in new jobs.
We do not say that workers who have clocked in 35 or 40 years should not retire early, but we are emphatic that their departure should create new promotional opportunities and, most importantly, should create job vacancies for young school leavers who will add a great energy and enthusiasm in the enterprise’.
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL ELECTIONS
In keeping with the policy of the Executive Committee that, in joining Congress, the Association would play its fullest part, the General Secretary, Ciaran Ryan was nominated for a seat on the Executive Council of Congress.
Given that our Delegation's 15 votes formed less than two thirds of a quota and bearing in mind that this was a first attempt, it was felt that this was a somewhat ambitious foray into the politics of the wider Trade Union Movement.
In any event, following a lot of intensive effort by our Delegation, Ciaran Ryan was elected to the Executive Council of Congress for the coming two years.
IBOA Delegation to the ICTU Conference in Galway, 6th — 9th July 1993, front, l. to r.: Tony Arnold, Maureen Ronan, Ciaran Ryan, Leonard Coote, Peter Cassells, General Secretary ICTU, Colette Morrison and Eileen O'Connor.
Back, Ken Doyle, Michael Forde, Susan Bustard, Colman Moore, Brian Deasy, Kate Varley, Michael McCormick and Kerry Christie.
Larry Broderick, also a member of the delegation, was attending to other business when this picture was taken.
IBOA Assistant General Secretary, Larry Broderick in the course of an address to the ICTU Conference on 8th July with ICTU General Secretary, Peter Cassells in background.
COMMENT
STONE AGE MANAGEMENT
The largest company on the Irish Stock Exchange is AIB Bank plc., with a market capitalization of £1,776m representing 16.81% of the value of the entire market, excluding the exploration companies.
The biggest, the best, the strongest, the EVEREST of Irish companies should be an example for other enterprises to emulate.
Unfortunately, the manner in which it is treating its staff in Great Britain is no shining path to follow.
A stone age management opportunity has revealed itself to the Directors of AIB Bank plc in Britain.
This neolithic, Fred Flintstone-like management opportunity is as follows:— For the year ended the 31st March 1992 BC., sorry, little error 31st March 1992 AD., non-performing loans in the UK were £422m.
(Possibly as a result of the Fred Flintstone lending policy).
This was viewed as the opportunity to cut back on staff costs.
It is blatant, undisguised opportunism by management, showing preference for what can be done, rather than what should be done.
One swallow doesn't make a summer, and neither is a snowfall a portent of the next ice age, but for management a snowfall can be exaggerated, flogged and manipulated to appear that an ice age is imminent.
Fortunately the snows on EVEREST have eased, and there has been a £95m improvement in non-performing loans for the 9 months up to 31st December 1992 AD.
Regardless of this, AIB Bank plc management is persisting, as it tries to wrest from staff in the UK the salary increases and allowances to which they are entitled.
Tea allowances, bank holiday allowances, large town allowances are all being threatened by management.
The £95m improvement in non-performing loans would pay for these allowances for the next 100 years.
One wonders where will management stop?
How far down the road of cutbacks do bank management want to go?
Do the Bank want to go back to a time when a male official could not get married until he was earning £150 per annum and by the time he was earning that sum he was past having an interest in marriage.
This relentless pursuit of growth and increased profit at any cost is questionable.
What is the cost to staff working under extreme pressure?
What is the cost of an ulcer, high blood pressure and other ailments endemic in banking?
How often are these stresses reflected in the family life of staff?
IBOA does not accept the opportunism of AIB management in the UK taking away benefits from members on the basis of an argument that one bad year justifies such an approach.
Bank management is extremely slow to give increases when the Bank is doing very well.
Compare the bank's tenacity at taking away allowances with its reluctance to give salary increases when the first sign of adversity appears.
IBOA does not accept the style of management that says to its staff ‘when we want your opinion, we will give it to you’.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS UPDATE
NORTHERN IRELAND SALARIES
The IBOA has a claim for a salary increase in Northern Ireland from 1st March 1993 to 28th February 1994.
This claim has been pursued through all agreed procedures with the Banks' Staff Relations Committee.
The issue was ultimately referred to a Tribunal under the Chairmanship of Mr. Mervyn Morrow, Q.C.
The IBOA negotiators argued forcibly on many points giving reasons as to why the Banks should concede a significant salary increase to our members.
It was pointed out that all the Banks had significantly increased their dividend payments to their share-holders.
Also, it was pointed out that the profitability of the Banks in Northern Ireland shows steady growth and that the Banks have ample ability to pay an increased salary to IBOA members.
IBOA negotiators also pointed out that the inflation forecasts for the end of the year are to increase and that when the salary claim was advised to the Banks, the Retail Price Index at that time was 1.9%.
The decision of the Tribunal is that a salary increase of 1.69% should apply for 12 months from 1st March 1993.
The Executive Committee has considered the Recommendation.
IBOA members in Northern Ireland are to be balloted as to whether they wish to accept or reject the Recommendation of the Tribunal.
BANK OF IRELAND BANK ASSISTANTS
Lengthy discussions are taking place between IBOA and Bank of Ireland.
The issue has been referred to the Labour Relations Commission.
It is hoped that the Director of Conciliation, Mr. Ray McGee will be of assistance to both parties in order that agreement can be reached on this issue.
Talks took place on 13th July and were adjourned at the suggestion of the Chairman.
The parties reconvene on 11th August, 1993.
BANK OF IRELAND PERFORMANCE RELATED PAY FOR ASSISTANT MANAGERS AND OFFICERS
As has already been reported in the ‘Newsheet’, discussions have taken place with Bank of Ireland on the issue of Performance Related Pay for Assistant Managers and Officers.
The Bank has indicated to IBOA that it has no intention of introducing Performance Related Pay across these Grades.
However, the Bank has been quite ambivalent in its ripens to IBOA on the issue of IBOA involvement in the negotiation of Performance Related Pay for Assistant Managers and Officers at any time in the future.
The Association has pressed for a clear-cut answer on this issue and has not received it.
Unless IBOA receives such a reply, the Association will pursue the matter further to ensure that the position of all Assistant Managers and Officers is protected.
NATIONAL IRISH BANK
A domestic meeting took place between IBOA and National Irish Bank Management recently.
Many items were discussed including the following:
1.
Managerial Positions IBOA highlighted its concern at the failure by the Bank to fully implement Agreements in this regard.
The Bank pointed out that this issue is very much related to the matter of re-configuration of the Branch Structure, which is presently being discussed between the Association and the Bank.
The IBOA is currently awaiting a response from the Bank regarding Re-configuration.
2.
Promotions Policy The Association identified that there should be a transparent policy within NIB by which individuals could actively apply for promotional positions.
Bank Management stated that there was no policy of discrimination against IBOA members in NIB and re-emphasised its commitment to equality.
3.
Information Technology IBOA queried the status of a number of studies that are presently being carried out regarding Information Technology in National Irish Bank.
The Bank identified that these studies were not completed and would advise the IBOA when they were completed.
It is envisaged that these studies should be completed in early August and a consultancy process will then commence.
4.
Name Badges IBOA pointed out to NIB Management that it is IBOA's Security Policy that the wearing of name badges is not compulsory.
The matter was discussed between the parties.
The Association has agreed to revert back to Management.
5.
Performance Appraisals Bank Management advised IBOA of its intention to introduce a new Performance Appraisal system in NIB.
It was agreed that a detailed presentation would be made as soon as the Bank has clarified its plans in this area.
6.
Performance Bonus IBOA identified its concern in relation to a new Performance Bonus which is replacing the old Profit Sharing Scheme in NIB.
ULSTER BANK — INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENTS
The proposed transfer of Information Technology from Willowbrook in Belfast to Sandyford in Dublin, by the Ulster Bank, was the subject for examination by a Tribunal.
The Tribunal recommended the following:—
1.
Phase out of Salaries and Shift Allowance .
It is the Tribunal's view that the present arrangements regarding Shift Allowance etc. should apply.
2.
Co-operation Payment The Tribunal recommended a disruption payment as follows:
a
Staff to be transferred from ISS — £1,000.
b
Staff remaining in ISS, who were in Operations — £250.
3.
Redeployment Redeployed staff should be given consideration for vacancies occurring within any area of the Group.
Also, that individuals will receive customised training.
That each individual being transferred out of ISS will have the opportunity of spending up to three days in the new location prior to making any decision to transfer.
4.
Voluntary Severance that staff will have individual voluntary Severance options made available to them for a limited period.
5.
The future of Willowbrook .
The Tribunal noted that Ulster Bank has committed itself to remaining the major centre for development of Information Technology and notes the Bank's assurance that it will expand and improve the facilities.
A further meeting is to take place with Ulster Bank Management.
Following points of clarification on all these issues, the IBOA will be reverting to our members in Willowbrook.
IBOA WHO'S WHO
New Executive Committee Members
WATERFORD AREA SECRETARY
Joe Kelly
Like some other members who have been recently elected to the Executive Committee, Joe has been there before.
He was Limerick Area Secretary 1978–86 and is now Waterford Area Secretary.
A branch representative in almost all branches in which he has worked.
Joe was Limerick District President 1975–78 and has been Waterford District President since 1990.
An Assistant Manager in Ulster Bank, Waterford, Joe joined the Bank at Blessington in 1961.
He has worked in numerous branches since then, most recently in Limerick, 1975–89.
A native of Wexford, Joe is married with two grown-up children.
Some of his many interests include gardening, furniture restoration and music.
DUBLIN DISTRICT COMMITTEE
Kate Varley
Kate has been elected to the Executive Committee as one of the representatives of the Dublin District Committee.
She was branch representative in Bankcentre branch 1983–84 and in 100 Grafton St. 1987–88.
She has been an enthusiastic member of the Dublin Sports and Social Committee since July 1992.
She joined AIB Bank in Bankcentre branch in October 1980 and her career since then has taken her to 100 Grafton St., 1985–90 and Mary Street from then until her transfer to Cabra in July 1992.
Kate who is single, originally comes from Milltown, Co.
Galway.
Besides playing the keyboard, she is a fanatical follower of the Irish Soccer team and has a huge collection of ticket stubs to prove her attendance at matches!
Although scared of heights, she has completed ten parachute jumps.
Some achievement!
WOMEN'S REPRESENTATIVE
Noelle O'Connell
Noelle is a newcomer to the Executive Committee, having been elected to one of the reserved seats for women, outside of Belfast and Dublin.
She was Tralee district Secretary, 1980–1990.
An Officer in Bank of Ireland, Tralee, Noelle joined the Bank at 34 College Green in March 1977.
She worked there until her transfer to Denny Street, Tralee in 1979.
This was followed by a stint in Castle Street, Tralee.
Both branches amalgamated in 1989.
Married with two children, Noelle hails from nearby Listowel.
Her hobbies include reading, drama, swimming and travelling.
She is interested in all sports, in particular football and badminton.
She holds several prestigious medals for gaelic football, including a National League medal playing with Kerry.
A back injury prevents active participation in sport at present.
LIMERICK AREA SECRETARY
Michael Lorigan
Michael has joined the Executive Committee for the first time in April of this year as Limerick Area Secretary.
He was District Secretary there since 1991 and has been a branch representative in several branches since 1976.
He has worked in AIB Bank, 52–53 Pearse Street, Nenagh since January 1983.
He joined the Bank at College Street, Dublin in November 1970.
He also worked in Mountrath 1974–77 and Rathdowney 1977–82.
Married with two children, Eoin and Aisling, Michael is a native of Co.
Clare.
He enjoys gardening and quizzes and his main sporting interests are G.A.A. and golf.
He is a member of Nenagh Golf Club.
DERRY AREA SECRETARY
Padraic Connolly
Newly-elected as a member of the Executive Committee as Derry Area Secretary, Padraic was a member as Sligo Area Secretary for 9 months from April to December 1974 when he resigned on being transferred out of the area.
He has been branch representative in most branches in which he has worked and an Area Council member for 15 years.
An Assistant Manager in Bank of Ireland, Bundoran, where he has worked since 1984, Padraic joined the National Bank at Balla in October 1968.
In between times he has worked in Grattan St., Sligo 1969–74, Laurence St., Drogheda 1975–77 and Swinford 1977–84.
A native of Kerry, Padraic is married with three children.
He enjoys reading and his main sporting interests are rugby and gaelic football.
He won a Connacht senior medal with Ballina RFC in 1977–78 and he hopes to play on Ballyshannon RFC's 1st XV next season.
TRALEE AREA SECRETARY
Mairead Kelleher
Mairead has been elected this year to the Executive Committee as Tralee Area Secretary.
She works in Bank of Ireland, Killarney.
Since joining in April 1979 at International Department, Head Office, her postings have included Caherciveen May 1982 to January 1983, Killarney January 1983 to April 1986 and Tralee April 1986 to February 1993.
Since then she has gone back to Killarney.
A native of Tralee, Mairead is single.
Her interests include golf, swimming and reading.
KNOW YOUR ASSOCIATION
The ‘Why’ of the IBOA
by Marian Geoghegan, Training and Development Officer
It is useful now and again to reflect on the reasons why the IBOA was established and why being a member of such as an Association is of such vital importance.
The IBOA is a legally registered trade Union, independent from the Banks and existing solely to protect the interests of Bank Officials.
Like all Trade Unions its essential purpose is to improve and maintain conditions of employment for those it represents.
TYPES OF UNIONS
Trade Unions can be categorised into three main types — white collar, general and craft unions.
Craft unions restrict their membership to workers who have a certain trade e.g. electricians, plumbers.
General unions on the other hand are open to membership from a huge variety of occupational groups e.g. clerical workers, labourers, cleaners, technicians etc., The term ‘white collar union’ is derived from the type of clothes the members of such unions wore.
The colours of the collars may nowadays be much more varied but the type of workers white collar unions organise remains the same e.g. teachers, gardai, nurses, doctors, engineers, administrative workers, and of course, Bank Officials.
FROM SMALL BEGINNINGS…
You will be aware that last year the IBOA celebrated the 75th Anniversary of its establishment in 1917.
The motto of the founders of the Association was ‘to give of their best for the good of all’.
It took two years of ‘giving of their best’ for the Banks to recognise and negotiate with the Association.
The Association was extremely successful in improving the lot of Bank Officials who previously had meagre earnings and poor conditions of employment.
The public were not always so sure of the precise function of the IBOA.
The first Honorary Secretary of the Association recounts how ‘one lady wrote a letter stating that her daughter had become engaged to a certain Bank Official and requested an opinion, in confidence, as regards his suitability, financially and otherwise’.
From the small beginnings of a meeting in Limerick in 1917, which 40 Bank Officials attended, the Association has grown in strength and in numbers to a 16,000 strong membership in Great Britain, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
As well as representing Officials in the Associated Banks IBOA also has members in subsidiaries and other financial institutions.
A FAIR SLICE OF THE CAKE
There is general recognition of the fact that the interests of employers and employees do not always coincide.
Certainly there are areas of common interest e.g. profit-making is important for the survival and growth of an Organisation.
However the means of making profit and the distribution of resources are the subject of negotiation and can give rise to conflict.
It is vitally important that Bank Officials have an independent organisation working on their behalf.
The Objects of the IBOA contained in the Association's Objects, Constitution and Rules are listed here.
They form the bedrock of the Association's existence.
You will see that some of these Objects have been achieved over the years.
The newest Object was passed as a Resolution at the Special Delegate Conference held in March 1993 i.e. ‘To establish equality of opportunity for all members within the Association and also in the workplace’.
As a result of the dispute in the Republic of Ireland last year and the recent difficulties in Britain many members' eyes have been opened to the harsh realities of industrial relations in Banking.
It would be naive to believe that employers who discourage or attempt to undermine Trade Unions do so out of any altruistic motive, such as concern for the individual employee.
To have to pit yourself as an individual against the might of an employer like the Bank is no easy task.
It is only through collective effort and strength that we can ensure that a fair deal can be achieved for Bank Officials.
Apart from collective bargaining, much of the work of the Association is concerned with providing advice and protection to individual members where difficulties or problems arise.
In the following issues of the ‘Newsheet’ the way in which the IBOA operates will be described and the many services provided by the Association will be outlined.
the Objects of the Association, which are set out below, describe in broad terms the aims and goals of the Association;
OBJECTS OF THE IBOA
The Objects of the Association shall be:
(i)
to regulate the relations between Irish Bank Officials and their employers, the several Banks in Ireland and the relations between the Officials inter se;
(ii)
to obtain adequate salaries and satisfactory conditions of service for all Bank Officials, and equal pay for equal work for males and females, regard being had to length of service;
(iii)
to fix a maximum number of hours as constituting a day's work and obtain extra pay for all legitimate overtime;
(iv)
to obtain proper luncheon facilities;
(v)
to secure adequate vacations and compensation for loss of vacation.
(vi)
to obtain reasonable annual rank allowance for Cashiers;
(vii)
to establish the right to a pension after reasonable length of service and to fix a suitable scale;
(viii)
to have provisions made by the Banks for Officials incapacitated through illness or accident;
(ix)
to obtain redress for members in cases of intimidation or unfair treatment by their employers;
(x)
to safeguard the interests of such of its members as are Officials of Banks amalgamated with or affiliated to Banks outside Ireland;
(xi)
to have established and improved Widows' and Orphans' Funds in the Banks;
(xii)
to establish a Benevolent Fund and a Medical Benefits Provident Fund and other such Funds either contributory or non-contributory, to be administered by the Executive Committee in accordance with bye-laws made for that purpose;
(xiii)
to afford to members legal assistance in matters arising out of their employment and in cases approved by the Executive Committee;
(xv)
to further or participate, financially or otherwise, directly or indirectly in the work of any organisation or in any other lawful purpose which the Executive Committee may deem beneficial to the Association;
(xvi)
to promote social intercourse amongst Irish Bank Officials;
(xvii)
and generally to improve the conditions of services of Bank Officials, to encourage the attainment of a high standard of professional education, to promote a feeling of brotherhood between all Bank Officials and of mutual understanding and confidence between employers and employees in the Banks and to defend the interests of all members.
(xviii)
to obtain the above for employees of other institutions whom the Executive Committee may admit to membership from time to time;
(xix)
to establish equality of opportunity for all members within the association and also in the workplace.
Plenty of Saloon Singin' 'n' Dancin' at Dublin's Barn Dance
As usual a bumper crowd made Lansdowne swing on 2nd July.
The Cajun Kings and the sizzlin' grub made the bodies ready for the night's exertions before sundown.
Many said it was bliss just to sit on the bales of straw and listen to the music.
Others went upstairs to hear our own Superstar John Hurley.
They were not disappointed.
He held the audience spellbound for over two hours with his own work and his interpretation of the classics of Van the Man, Bob Dylan et al.
The crowd were settling in nicely to this when Ray ‘Preston’ joined John for a few numbers.
They did the blues culminating in Van Morrison's ‘Moondance’.
It was some show,(Ray, of course, will be on the box in the Autumn guesting with Spike Milligan and the RTE Concert Orchestra in a new series ‘Off the Record’).
Downstairs the Disco provided a large crowd with the sounds that made them get on the floor and bring a whole new ball game to the w world of the Barn Dance.
So what can one say only it was another great night from Dublin Sports and Social Committee.
The Cajun Kings were just the job, as was John.
Thanks for comin' everyone — and for the next big event watch this space!!.
Enjoying the Dublin Barn Dance, Patricia O'Sullivan, Denise Cooke and Marie Nugent…
Joan T. Craine, Niamh O'Donaghue, Toni Kelly and Anita Crombie
TIGHTLY CONTESTED SOCCER FINALS
The weekend of 26th/27th June saw the 1993 National Soccer Tournament played in sweltering sunshine at Portlaoise Rugby Club.
From the word go the eventual winners from Sligo/Mullingar knew that their task would not be easy when they encountered Dundalk.
The match was closely fought, but the Tournament winners proved to be the pace-setters by getting past Dundalk's Cyril Kavanagh, Kieran Tuite, Eamon Gaughran, Joe McCarthy and Neil Cooney to score that all-important goal.
However.
goals were scarce.
Teams were evenly matched and all games proved to be very close affairs with penalties deciding many of them.
Both Dublin teams under Shay Coffee and Niall Daly gave gallant displays.
The feeling in the dressing rooms after the first round was that one of them would collect the Cup.
But it was not to be despite the tremendous efforts of players like Paudi Lynch, Pat Claffey, Ian Delamere, Paul Neary, Justin Couch, Enda Moynihan, Dermot Desmond and the rest.
As the Tournament progressed other teams came to the fore.
Belfast was one which fought hard and played great football.
They proved to be worthy Finalists having beaten a very good Cork team by three goals to one in the Semi-Final.
Craig McGrugan put his name on the score sheet twice and Jonathan Kennedy got the other.
The other Semi-Final was between Sligo/Mullingar and Derry.
This was again very close with only one goal scored by Cyril Bailey of Mullingar putting them into the Final.
This was despite a brave effort from all the Derry stalwarts like Liam O'Donnell, Peter Smyth, Barry Goodman, Aidan Tighe, Paddy Duffy, Philip Coll and Robert Cooper.
The Final, played on Sunday, proved to be a cliff-hanger right up to the final whistle.
Paul Nicholson and Enda Layng took the joint Captaincy of Sligo/Mullingar.
Belfast proved worthy opponents, attacking tenaciously and not giving at the back.
At full-time it was nil all.
At the penalty shoot-out the same dogged evenness was maintained — it went to sudden death.
Eventually Sligo/Mullingar won by a kick of the ball.
A very worthy player of the Tournament, nominated by the Referees was Craig McGrugan of Belfast.
In the Women's Competition the games were also very close but Cork under their Captain, Marie Hurley proved consistently to have the winning edge.
She was ably assisted by the likes of Mary Lou Crowley, Siobhan Murphy, Karen Finn and Irene O'Keeffe, to name but a few.
The two Belfast Teams put up a great fight with spirited performances from Gillian Cosgrove, Eimear Grieve, Karen Ireland, Jackie Spence, Cathy Murray and Mary McGrath.
Dublin women also played well.
Marina Young and Liz Curran were in great form as were Linda Hyne Patricia McGeever and Shanno Conlon.
The Final between Cork and Wexford/Waterford was hard fought and despite the great efforts of Nuala Dagg, Audrey Connell, Rosaleen Kirwan, Aideen O'Connor, Captain Noreen Fenlon, Kathryn Creedon and the rest, Cork won out to take the Tournament Shield.
The winners of the Plate were Tralee/Mullingar under Captain, Mary Healy.
The Player of the Tournament, nominated by the Referees was Christina McGrath.
IBOA President, Leonard Coote paid tribute to an the participants and thanked the Club for putting their facilities at our disposal.
A special mention to Blainead Bergin who produced the culinary classics on Saturday and Sunday — it was simply delicious!..
IBOA President, Leonard Coote pictured with Sligo/Mullingar team, winners of tournament, front l. to r.: Declan Lawlor, Adrian Ronan, Bernard Green, Paul Nicholson, John Gaffney and Cyril Bailey.
Back, Tony Baynes, Frank McHale, Enda Layng, Leonard Coote, Stephen Kerr, Gerry Ring and Tom Joyce
Honorary Finance Officer, Maureen Ronan who played on the Plate-winning team from Tralee/Mullingar
Craig McGrugan, Belfast, Player of the Tournament, being congratulated by IBOA President, Leonard Coote
Enjoying proceedings, Orla Funge, Liz Curran and Margaret Brennan