

BAIE SCOTLAND — EDUCATION PROGRAMME — SPRING 1993
At our BAIE SCOTLAND committee meeting last Friday, it was agreed that I should write and ask whether Strathclyde Police might host an  evening meeting /seminar, in, say, mid-February.
Our current committee chairman put forward the idea of ‘a visit to an incident room and a talk on police/press liaison’.
Perhaps, once you have had a chance to mull this one over, could you please telephone me at the home number above?
A few weeks after the month which comprised SBAAT/HMS Ark Royal, HMY Britannia and the Cutty Sark  Tall Ships Race 1995 Launch Event, Forth Ports made my in-house function redundant (of which more if we talk).
My effective leaving date was 15th October, and I am busy looking for a new job (of which, once again, more if we talk!).
The pattern of an evening meeting might be assembling at, say, 1830 with a view to the event concluding with drinks and/or coffee and sandwiches around 2030.
I fully  realise your HQ may be ‘dry’ as is Shell's hospitality suite near Braefoot Bay.
We are keen to run a few events next year outside Edinburgh, and a visit to the newish organisation EuroInfoCentre is also planned (for 18th March).
COPIES:
BAIE Scotland Chairman
BAIE Scotland Secretary
BAIE SCOTLAND — INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY SEMINAR AT DUNDAS AND WILSON, 27 CASTLE TERRACE, EDINBURGH ON 14 JANUARY 1993 AT 1800
This is to acknowledge receipt of your cheque for one place at the above at the member rate of Five Pounds (£5.00).
Please arrive punctually, allowing time to get through the security check at the entrance to Saltire Court and then reception at Dundas and Wilson.
Delegates already registered include  of Edinburgh University, of John Menzies, of Elliot Editing, and  of BP Exploration.
Best wishes for Christmas.
BAIE SCOTLAND EDUCATION OFFICER
BAIE SEMINARS 1993
SEMINAR —‘THE EDITOR AS PHOTOGRAPHER’
Having not heard from you in response to my late September FAX, I am a little concerned lest you and Ian have not yet tied up a firm date with Michael Rose of BAIE SECRETARIAT, to whom I am sending a copy of P this fax, for next June's seminar.
Could you please confirm all is well and that the copy which I believe Michael still has from before will suffice for the printed programme.
Sorry to send such a cryptic fax but I have only very limited and occasional access to a FAX pro tem whilst job hunting.
* BAIE —
Dear Sir
I enclose the Constitution of this Association, in the hope that The Prince of Wales Charities might, at some point this year or early next, be able to award it a small donation.
The Association's work is voluntary.
What has always impressed me enormously about the office bearers and team members I have over the years got to know is that they are never judgemental about those they help, and that, like the members of RNLI boat crews, they go out in all weathers to seek to save life and/or to assist the injured.
One or two ageing members of the team have encouraged younger men to join to ensure continuity, and so some of any funds donated may be allocated to training.
Needs are not large, but are regular, and the team's efforts contribute to community welfare.
I do most sincerely hope you may feel able to help, and look forward to hearing from you.
My own involvement is totally voluntary and stems from being a frequent visitor to the area and wanting to ‘put something back in’.
Added to this, small scattered rural communities with high levels of unemployment cannot easily raise all the funds they need in their own area.
All donations will be formally acknowledged by the Honorary Treasurer,, and should of course be in favour of the Association.
Yours faithfully 
I enclose the Constitution of this Association, in the hope that The Roval Bank of Scotland might, at some point this year or early next, be able to award it a small donation.
The Association's work is voluntary.
What has always impressed me enormously about the office bearers and team members I have over the years got to know is that they are never judgemental about those they help, and that, like the members of RNLI boat crews, they go out in all weathers to seek to save life and/or to assist the injured.
One or two ageing members of the team have encouraged younger men to join to ensure continuity, and so some of any funds donated may be allocated to training.
Needs are not large, but are regular.
I do most sincerely hope you may feel able to help, and look forward to hearing from you.
My own involvement is totally voluntary and stems from being a frequent visitor to the area and wanting to ‘put something back in’.
Added to this, small scattered rural communities with high levels of unemployment cannot always or easily raise all the funds they need in their own area.
All donations will be formally acknowledged by the Honorary Treasurer,, and should of course be in favour of the Association.
Thank you for your 28th April letter with BP's generous donation of Two Hundred Pounds (£200.00) in favour of the Glenelg Mountain Rescue Association.
I am sure that its Honorary Treasurer, will be in touch with you as soon as he receives the cheque.
As previously explained, the team has some relatively new members and training and equipment for them are, literally, essential and potentially life-saving.
I often think that mountain rescue teams are just as selfless and courageous as life-boatmen, yet the organisations have different public profiles!
I have tried to ‘phone you once or twice re APRS: please can you contact me?
I should also value, and quickly, advice and a possible letter of support for a particular job application.
More anon.
Meantime kindest regards.
Glenelg Mountain Rescue Association
BP OIL UK LTD was kind enough, about two years ago, to give a generous donation to this Association, allowing it to purchase some much needed items for use by volunteer team members.
Were it possible for a further donation to be agreed at some point during 1993, I should be most grateful.
No doubt you will have a word with me about this if you need further information.
Funding allows team members to attend training courses and to maintain appropriate stocks of equipment such as literally vital ropes and harnesses and so on.
Further to our conversation the other evening at ESBW, I enclose details about membership of BAIE COMMUNICATORS IN BUSINESS, and very much hope you may consider joining.
Rather than my writing at length, why don't we meet to talk it over?
Most members are very friendly, and there are a lot of us in the ‘central belt’ up here in a wide variety of jobs.
It would be most interesting to know if you can think of other potential members — our seminars have in the last year or two proved popular and have been extraordinarily cost effective.
The annual subscription is, incidentally, an allowable expense and can be paid by instalment if necessary.
The current chairman up here is  of SCRE.
Whilst realising some of the questions do not apply to you as a potential member, it would be interesting if you could please complete, insofar as practical, the enclosed questionnaire and return it to me at 
I am also enclosing a note about the British National Corpus, and shall get the discussed poster to you before the next ESBW event.
I am deeply appreciative of the input to BNC which came from your partnership's head office, and much impressed by the quality of the documentation submitted.
Dear 
Valda having provided the introduction, I was of course quite delighted to try and help you with names and contacts the other day on the telephone, and note that you will supply me with a strictly personal and confidential copy at the conclusion of your endeavours and I appreciate this VERY much!
Do send me an interim copy as soon as you can, even in draft or uncorrected form, so that I can all the better rack my brains for you!
It's the kind of thing I really revel in!
Teaching my granny to suck eggs, I am sure, but did you see the last Scottish Business Insider which profiled a number of women?
In case you wonder why I have not returned it (!),
I have not yet received from you the promised database questionnaire, so do please send one.
Meantime I enclose a CV in case you hear of something suitable — I badly need something to do.
Please also send a form to  .
Best of luck with your researches — and do make a point of coming for a gin, an omelette or something if over in Edinburgh.
Do you have any other contact address?
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Thanks for your 5th July letter enclosing your personal cheque in the sum of Sixty Four Pounds in favour of, being ‘cottage contribution’ re Arnisdale for the dates 14th-21st August inclusive.
You are correct in assuming that there is no change in the electricity system, viz. please read meter on arrival and departure and pay at ten pence per unit consumed.
I understand from  's nephew that the electric convector in the sitting room is dead, and shall speak to  about some kind of replacement, though there is of course the second convector in the bedroom which should suffice at this time of year.
The last occupant was  's nephew, and I am forwarding his rent and electricity to  under cover of this letter (this to keep my paperwork down!!).
Lots of love, and I hope you have had a restful weekend with .
I too am tired, with two lodgers of different nationalities — one highly carnivorous and one very vegetarian!
I think you may have met the medical student  last spring?
She is doing surgery elective at WGH whilst  is working at EU Psychology with  's longstanding friend and colleague Professor .
I am, I think, cancelling my forthcoming Japanese student as the loo flooded the other day and whilst a temporary repair has been done, the whole needs attention.
How I wish  was nearer and did jobs in Edinburgh!!
Get in touch on your return and come to supper.
Mrs 
cc: Professor  with cheques
Dear 
In response to your 23rd March letter, I return your form, duly completed and enclosing £25.00.
Your letter was sent on to Italy and the post to and fro is so awful it only arrived back here last week when I was in London.
I do hope I may remain a member?
Please reply to Edinburgh.
Please can you telephone me, ringing again if you initially get my Italian guest!
She is here doing research at the university with one of my husband's oldest friends, and is staying a week or two here before moving to a flat.
How am I ?
Still looking for an appropriate (and I use the word advisedly) full-time job, and currently doing some freelance — and virtually voluntary!— work for a charity, The Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland.
Meantime, I am also seeking, helped by various interested and interesting individuals, to set up what should prove a stimulating Ethics seminar, and shall perhaps hope to involve one of the SWEG Committee as a speaker, of which more anon, as planning is, as yet, at an early stage.
Once things are more advanced, I might hope you could include a leaflet in a future mailing.
Is it still SWEG policy not to issue a membership list: I am in total sympathy re problem(s) of misuse, but other groups I belong to do have lists e.g. IPR, BAIE, ESBW, EICG.
The British Association of Industrial Editors awarded me the 1992/93 Chairman's Award about ten days ago, which was a real surprise and honour — in respect of voluntary input over five years, most notably efforts re Education & Professional Development.
I was a guest of honour (!) at the Annual Conference Dinner at Torquay, along with, Editor of Private Eye (and at a guess, it is the only time I shall sit down to dinner with him!).
Regards to you both.
Why not fix to have a light lunch here one day if ever in Edinburgh.
Dear Ms 
As chairman of the recently established development committee of this respected national association I enclose its first appeal brochure, in the hope that your Trustees will support our important apolitical and expanding remit.
Our objectives are laid out in the attached brochure, and summarised at the end of it, and are of course akin to those of the Council for the Protection of Rural England, with which your Trustees will no doubt be familiar.
Our director designate, Mrs  joined us last month from CPRE, and will be delighted to answer any queries you may have.
One of the aims of this appeal is more effectively to fund our secretariat, possibly strengthening it by the appointment of a short term full time development officer.
We are currently being assisted part time, for a minimal token fee, by a member of the Institute of Public Relations.
She is an APRS member and has for many years been a life member of other heritage and conservation bodies.
Alternatively, one of our London based members, The Hon    would, I am sure, be willing to come and discuss our work with you if this would be of value?
Yours sincerely
Dev Cttee
Copy: The Hon 
As the BBC approaches its 1996 charter renewal, radical changes in the broadcasting and communications industries necessitate discussion of practical and philosophical issues.
Production and transmission  costs are not understood by the public, more interested in subjective issues including the BBC's performance in areas such as news and current affairs, drama, sports and entertainment.
Questions of TV and radio reception and the closure of local radio stations inspire emotional debate about value for licence fees, rather than objective consideration of issues of accountability.
Long-term strategy, and the opportunities of broadcasting, to say nothing of priorities, politics and ethics.
Public-service broadcasters have  inescapable obligations to listeners and viewers.
In contrast, commercial broadcasters have obligations to shareholders: they must consider the priorities and attractions of profit-making programmes and schedules.
The BBC, however, is neither the arbiter of morals nor exists for the benefit of a cultural elite.
Contact with viewers and listeners of all ages, creed, ethnic origin.
professions or trades and political views should allow it to reflect the multicultural, economic and social needs of Britain in Europe.
It would also allow for acceptable innovation and experimentation.
The BBC needs, more than ever, via its Broadcasting Councils and via structured meetings such as‘Extending Choice’.
to take account of informed views.
The need is paramount: the BBC should in the run up to 1996 establish additional viewer and listener groups.
These could promote flexibility, and prove an investment rather than a cost!
Thank you for your recent letter in reply to mine of 15th May.
I am grateful to you for agreeing to ensure my interest is expressed to the relevant Appointments Committee.
Since writing to you — and  a very nice surprise it was too!— I have received the Chairman's 1992/93 Award from ‘BAIE Communicators in Business’, BAIE being the British Association of Industrial Editors, and thought this might be pertinent!
It was received for a variety of voluntary input in Scotland and nationally, but most notably, I gather, in respect of Education and Professional Development, which leads on to my other purpose in writing.
Independently, or in conjunction with BAIE or IPR or others, I hope to set up a seminar on Ethics in Communications, and wonder whether the PCC could be persuaded to be represented?
No date or venue is yet set, but (i) it will obviously take some time to organise properly and publicise/market effectively and (ii) the most likely venue is Edinburgh.
Sample 1992 programmes of BAIE Scotland seminars are enclosed.
I have to date raised my idea with one of Scotland's leading corporate lawyers (a CBI SCOTLAND Council Member), a senior cleric involved with the Life & Nation' Committee of the Church of Scotland and the chairman of a major company, seeking their views as potential speakers.
A senior and much respected civil servant with relevant experience has offered to give me his ideas, agreeing that ethics represents an issue of importance to date not covered by either BAIE or IPR.
I appreciate the role of the PCC does not embrace ethics in internal communications, but it would surely be an interesting opportunity for you or one of your colleagues to speak about your work?
It is unlikely, however, that fees could be paid to speakers.
Whilst wishing to market the seminar widely to relevant professionals, selected industrialists and other public figures, as also members of BAIE and IPR, I want to ensure attendance fees would not preclude young members of the PR and communications industry from participating.
BAIE Scotland has always tried to keep its fees as reasonable as possible, thanks to the generosity of sponsors and tutors.
Meantime, I should value, as requested in my earlier letter, copies of 1991 -93 PCC publications and annual reports.
Would it be possible, please, also to have a copy of the code of conduct by which you ‘judge’ newspapers and magazines?
Enclosures (2): BAIE Scotland programmes 1992
Dear Sir
101 Ways to get Great Publicity
I am a longstanding member of the BAIE COMMUNICATORS IN BUSINESS (established in 1949) and am a member of its Educational and Professional Development Committee, having, over the last three years, had  totally and voluntary responsibility for its seminars in Scotland, in respect of which, on 28th May, I was honoured to receive the BAIE Chairman's 1992/93 Award and to be one of its guests of honour at the Annual Conference Dinner in Torquay.
I should be delighted to review the above — and other relevant management and communications — books for BAIE SCOTLAND's regular Newsletter were this of interest, simultaneously submitting reviews to the national Newsletter and/or Communicators in Business'.
Should you wish to discuss this with me I may be most easily reached via telephone .
I am trying to set up a seminar on Ethics in Communications (which may also touch on more general issues of ethics and management)— do you have any relevant texts of which you might send me a complimentary copy and to which reference could be made in the publicity for what should prove a stimulating event!
Yours faithfully
I have been led to believe that you act as Public Relations Advisor to certain landowners within Highland Region, and should value an opportunity to discuss with you, initially very informally, certain projects for the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland which which I am involved, if this is in fact the case?
Could you therefore please telephone me at your earliest convenience?
I'd hoped to telephone you whilst in London part of this last week for meetings of the British Association of Industrial Editors but got stricken by flu!
As I expect you know, APRS was established some sixty years ago, and is respected for being apolitical, consistent, credible and above all objective.
Dear Sir 
I enclose the Constitution of this Association, in the hope that The Trust might, at some point this year or early next, be able to award it a small donation.
The Association's work is voluntary.
What has always impressed me enormously about the office bearers and team members I have over the years got to know is that they are never judgemental about those they help, and that, like the members of RNLI boat crews, they go out in all weathers to seek to save life and/or to assist the injured.
One or two ageing members of the team have encouraged younger men to join to ensure continuity, and so some of any funds donated may be allocated to training.
Needs are not large, but are regular, and the team's efforts contribute to community welfare.
I do most sincerely hope you may feel able to help, and look forward to hearing from you.
My own involvement is totally voluntary and stems from being a frequent visitor to the area and wanting to ‘put something back in’.
Added to this, small scattered rural communities with high levels of unemployment cannot easily raise all the funds they need in their own area.
All donations will be formally acknowledged by the Honorary Treasurer  and should of course be in favour of the Association.
Having taken your bags of donated books from you at the church door last year, you may like to know that despite the awful rain this week, Christian Aid Sale funds stood at around £35K by noon today, so the total should be up on that figure.
Helping  with this is one of the most enjoyable things I do, as she knows.
I am  sad for her sake that the poor weather this week may reduce the total ‘take’.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
BAIE COMMUNICATORS IN BUSINESS — PROPOSED NATIONAL E & PD SURVEY
Thank you for your 20th April letter.
For your information, I enclose a copy of the final draft of the questionnaire we are currently issuing to members in Scotland (along with other papers for our ‘regional’ AGM in May).
It is being printed ‘back to back’.
One or two thoughts re your draft:—
section A
Remain anonymous — surely ‘be’ anonymous since nothing prior written in!?
What about student category of membership since we have one?
What about which year joined as alternative to years of Membership, since some may have joined as an Associate?
If Fellow, which year granted it?
Which year Member if joined as an Associate?
section B
If people list events could they add in (N) or (R) for national/regional to show which
In the third question,?? add vocational to training events and add management training as something also/specifically to mention
Rather than will you attend Convention 1993 what about Which conventions have you attending since joining or in the last ten years 1983 []1984[] 1985[] 1986[] etc etc
And??
YES /NO after do you attend Workshops staged at Convention, allowing supplementary Name the three most useful (i)(ii)(iii)
section C
See marked style, = suggest: If so, which exam(s) and date(s) taken
And a tiny typo last  question = Which of the following do (not ‘to’) you read regularly?
And there will need to be a note on return address, return by date etc.
Hope this helps a little— love to you both.
We have a contested chairmanship at our forthcoming AGM here — first time ever, I think.
Ditto vice-chairmanship, and no nomination for education (though I wish to do it, although — and in common with a mass of others — do not feel able easily to assist one of the potential chairmen.
I have had ten nominations — an honour and a challenge…!
We also have more potential committee members than we ‘constitutionally’ need, so 14th May could prove an interesting day.
I am doing some part-time and short-term work for a charity — difficult on lots of scores (!).
Frustrated I cannot land what I want to do, and don't want to settle for the wrong thing.
Hope to see you 6th May.
Done this in awful haste — forgive if egg-sucking but just first speedy thoughts to turn round a.s.a.p.
SEMINAR ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY in conjunction with MESSRS DUNDAS AND WILSON CS at SALTIRE COURT, CASTLE TERRACE, EDINBURGH on THURSDAY 14 JANUARY 1993 AT 1800 [the seminar that could save you thousands…]
STOP PRESS!
BAIE MEMBER DEFENDS COPYRIGHT STOP PRESS!
BAIE MEMBER INVESTIGATES PATENT CLAIMS STOP PRESS!
BAIE MEMBER DISCOVERS HIDDEN IP ASSETS
SERIOUS NEWS:
MISGUIDED EDITOR, BADLY MISLED BY MISINFORMED JOURNALIST, DID NOT REALISE THE IMPORTANCE OF ATTENDING BAIE SEMINAR AT DUNDAS AND WILSON ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND LOSES JOB IN CONSEQUENCE OF IGNORANCE WHICH LED TO LITIGATION AGAINST HIS EMPLOYERS, THE JOURNALIST & HIMSELF…
IS YOUR COPY RIGHT?
DO YOU HAVE COPYRIGHT?
Can you clearly, cogently and correctly define and present the copyright and Intellectual Property issues involved in the activities listed below to senior colleagues and to your directors, or to your clients if you work freelance or in an agency?
Are you aware of how both your employers and even you individually are at significant financial risk if you fail fully to appreciate all the Intellectual Property angles involved in:—
research and development work
collaborative work with other agencies or individuals
software and I.T.
artistic works of all kinds, including, for example, literature, drama & music
TV clips and sound sampling
BAIE SCOTLAND believes there is no sounder way to begin 1993 than to concentrate your post-Hogmanay mind on I.P., an issues of increasing professional importance…so sign up without delay!
The seminar fee has been reduced to encourage as many members and non-members as possible to register and attend.
Two partners and two associates of Dundas and Wilson will speak and answer questions, thereafter hosting a reception at which wine and refreshments are offered by this well established Edinburgh law firm.
Dear All — AND WITH APOLOGIES FOR TYPOS GALORE!
The last two pages of  's sterling efforts on Scottish list are enclosed herewith, and I shall research any other missing names.
I still remain a wee bit puzzled as to why we don't try to recruit more than one member in any one large organisation, eg the exclusion of Scottish Power people simply because we have a [Stewart]member already.
Surely we all believe enough in BAIE to hope it will be a yardstick of professional competence and status — after all, some companies have more than one IPR member in a department or consultancy?
I also hope my draft letter reached you (a) by fax and (b) follow up hard copy and that it fits acceptably on ONE page in BAIE typeface on BAIE computer?
Attached is a better academic list, which means that when Name starts my England and Wales list, the FE/university section may be done in full and with fuller names and designations, so there is, in this instance, real benefit from the delay!
I've also ventured to draft a letter re the academic people, and would suggest you consider putting in  (University of Stirling) and  (University of Edinburgh) as telephone contact points, so that they can — if their peer group is interested — speak as participating members about the benefits of membership.
I am sure each would if you rang and cleared this with them — after all, thinks us sufficiently good recently to have added  into membership.
EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE HELD AT BARKERS ON 23 MARCH 1993
Some small points
(1)
I sent in a report on education in Scotland to be (a) tabled and (b) appended to the Minutes but don't see a reference or appendix!
Could it go out as an appendix?
(2)
of CBI SCOTLAND had been written to, asking her to send copies of the forthcoming conference notice to  so each member of the E&PD committee might have one.
She was also asked to send a list of delegates by fax to me at Barkers the day of the meeting so that these two items could be a further appendix.
Could this, please, be followed up, since this is an innovative joint educational venture?
(3)
Who is Diploma candidate in Scotland?
(4)
What is proposed ‘classy’ Colquhoun lecture — and I'm glad my suggestion of
Suggested draft letter to academic potential members
Investment in effective and cost-effective internal and external communications is important to all who practise them, whether in the public, private or voluntary sector.
It has been suggested to me by a committed member of our Education and Professional Development Committee that you might like to know more about BAIE COMMUNICATORS IN BUSINESS.
Established in 1949, has an interesting range of members across all industries and sectors, ranging alphabetically from AEA Technology and Anglian Water plc, via banks, chemical and construction companies and so on through many a blue chip national or  multinational through to universities such as Cork, Birmingham, Edinburgh, Stirling and Napier (also in Edinburgh).
The Association regularly runs courses and half-day or evening seminars on a national basis, has an  annual educational convention (this year in Torquay between 26th-29th May), and has two regular publications for members — the monthly BAIE News and the quarterly ‘Communicators in Business’.
Our invaluable handbook, which otherwise retails at around £100 is included in membership — and members invariably find that knowledge gained via membership, be it from the Handbook, a seminar or fellow members, allows them annually to recover their membership subscription.
We should be delighted, here at headquarters, to answer queries regarding levels of membership (which vary according to experience) and the charges for membership.
Similarly, should you wish to discuss with either of them how BAIE has been useful to them in their university post, why not telephone , Director of PR and Information Services, University of Edinburgh () 31 etc) or , Director of  development , University of Stirling on xxxxx.
[blank to tail properly so Allen  writes in yours sincerely  and his name]
CHIEF EXECUTIVE
On behalf of BAIE SCOTLAND, renewed thanks for all the help you have given us by providing such a useful series of seminars.
I know that members and non-members alike have found them useful, and I am only sorry I missed the October one.
Our thanks are also, of course, extended to , who has so professionally, purposefully and cheerfully dealt with hiccups such as the extra numbers at the first seminar and so on .
I very much look forward to maintaining contact with you all in the future — and still hope you will meet my ‘diving’ husband on his sabbatical here next academic term!
Dear 
SEMINARS FOR MEMBERS OF BAIE
I stood in for  at the meeting of BAIE's Regional Chairmen in London last week, and undertook to pass on to you the name and address of the Chairman of the  London & Home Counties Region, who might well like you to do a seminar or seminars for them.
There are several hundred members in ‘LHC’, many of whom are in senior positions in significant companies, and it might provide some useful contacts for you too, but there are inevitably the questions of time, travel and costs and so on.
Anyway, his name, so that you can follow this up, is:
I am doing some freelance part-time work for the  the overall personal situation is far from satisfactory.
It would be nice to have a chat sometime.
Yours
Dear 
SEMINAR — MONDAY 30 NOVEMBER — LEADERSHIP
With reference to my 2nd November letter, I would advise you that there have been no cancellations and, accordingly, the ten delegates are as listed therein.
I am sending out a list of participants to each person, reminding them to please assemble at, but preferably not much before, 1345 for a prompt 1400 start.
Similarly, by copy of this letter I am advising  and  that, sadly, no last minute places have become available.
Kind regards to you all,