

The majority of poems concerning death are most commonly laments for lost friends who have already passed away.
The particular sonnet I am about to examine, however, approaches the subject from a much different perspective.
The poet writes in the first person singular as a man talking to a loved one about the inevitable advent of his death, and yet the matter discussed here is not so much death as the gradual disappearance of life.
Since it is the poet himself who is the subject, the poem comes across as a very genuine and deeply moving piece of work which regards the real feelings and fears of one who is in the process of losing his own life, rather than, as convention would have it, those of one who has lost another.
The atmosphere which is evoked in the reading of the poem is one of hopelessness, of resignation, of dark depression and sadness alleviated only by the concluding couplet through which we understand that although oncoming death seems to ‘take away’ everything from him, his beloved still remains and can see the glimmers of life through desolation.
The poem is divided into three quatrains each moving closer to death just as the poet himself is approaching his demise.
In the first four lines receding life is seen as the dying season of autumn giving way to bitter and bleak winter.
The theme of lateness is developed here, of an existence which was once vibrant, as in summer, now mellow and dwindling away to the barren emptiness of winter.
Life is a natural cycle just like the changing seasons so youth must move to middle age and then proceed to death.
As all things in life fade and come to an end the poet realises so must he.
The next quatrain is again comparing the cyclical movement of life, as the day moves into night, to the enveloping darkness surrounding the poet.
We have already moved from a whole season to a single day and the next four lines are narrowed down even further from the universal sun to a fire which exists in a particular person, namely, the speaker.
This process of depreciation is almost like the ebbing away of the poet himself.
Already we have moved into a darker, more specific and personal mood which is strengthened by the last chapter where the listener is brought closer to the poet to provide comfort for all the losses he has endured.
The poem is about the extinction of a season, of a day, of a fire and, overall, of a life which is apparent in the last couplet where we can see more clearly the relationship between the poet and his .
The image of the first quatrain is one of inanimacy where ‘late the sweet birds sang’, but do so no more and the only movement is in the few leaves trembling ‘against the cold.’
No noise is made and an overall nothingness prevails, yet not all is dead.
There are still a ‘few’ leaves left just as the poet has but a little life remaining within him.
Similarly in the next lines the sun is fading but has not yet disappeared.
It is still ‘twilight’ and only ‘by and by’, later, will night come to replace it.
In the last quatrain the ‘fire’ of life is still ‘glowing’even though‘youth’has already passed away leaving behind only ashes.
Here the ‘glory’ is presumably the stage between long gone youth and death as the poet is at this point on his ‘deathbed’.
Light and dark imagery represent the opposites life and death as the imagery gets darker while the poet  gets closer to death both in himself and in the poem.
One notices the colour of living ‘yellow’ against a dull and bleak, ‘cold’and ‘bare’, background.
Next ‘twilight’ and ‘sunset’are juxtaposed with the ‘black’of the ‘night’and the introduction of the word ‘death’which has previously been alluded to but has not yet been mentioned.
Night is seen as ‘Death's second self’ which puts everyone to sleep.
The sleep referred to here, however, is death's eternal ‘rest’.
From here on the speaker appears more pessimistic in his outlook and more final in his approach, especially with the words ‘seals’ and later ‘consumed’which seem to cut off life completely.
The light now dies down to a mere flicker of ‘fire’, appropriate enough considering the onslaught of death imagery with ‘death-bed’, ‘ashes’, ‘expire’ and perhaps, again, ‘consumed’.
The warmth and colour which lies at the heart of the poet though, whilst surrounded by cold, dark, lifelessness shines through for his beloved to see.
She can ‘behold’ the ‘yellow’in the first quatrains, ‘sees the twilight’in the second, ‘sees the glowing of such fire’in the third and final quatrain and in the couplet the poet concludes that her love is stronger because she ‘perceiv'st’all this.
In this way then the couplet brings together the three themes of each section and relates them very strongly to the speaker and the listener, with the use of ‘thou’.
This word, together with ‘in me’, appear in every quatrain serving to establish the very personal relationship of the two concerned, evoking an ambience of intimacy which so rightly suits the theme of old age and approaching death.
Although the poem contains such pessimistic overtones and pathetic  acceptance of fate there is hope to be found in the last two lines which seem to be set apart from the rest.
The poet comes to the conclusion that despite all the life which is slowly drifting away there is one thing which is undying, and that is her ‘love’ for him.
The vocabulary and language of this sonnet is relatively simple and straightforward but there are a few techniques, such as alliteration and the careful placing of certain words, which make it more interesting to study.
Firstly, one comes to notice the title, ‘73’, which appears rather perplexingly anonymous considering the intimacy of the poem.
Perhaps it signifies the fact that the poem could apply to anyone in life for we are all at this moment in the process of dying even though presumably not as far forward on our journey as the poet.
The presence of three commas in the second line help demonstrate just how little life there is by breaking up the sentence.
Words are separated to show the fragmented scattering of the sparse ‘leaves’.
‘Shake’ could be taken as the fear the poet has for the ‘cold’of oncoming death and ‘ruined’illuminates the idea of deterioration.
The use of ‘late’ in line four is particularly interesting for it also has more than one meaning.
Most obviously it means that the ‘birds’ sang at a previous moment in time but it could also mean the time of year, the time of the poet's life, and most strikingly, it could be another word connected with death.
The alliteration of ‘sweet birds sang’ is soft and harmonious and strangely at odds with the harshness of the picture painted so far.
It contrasts with the ‘Bare ruined choirs’ but it may be a metaphor for the stealthy spirit of the poet within the dying, empty body.
A similar thing occurs in the next quatrain where the hard plosive ‘b’ of ‘by and by black night’is eased with the soothing ‘s’of ‘second self that seals’.
It is almost as if the speaker oscillates between fear and bravery, bitterness and acceptance.
But optimism, in my opinion, prevails at the end when, by the use of the melodious and light ‘l’ in ‘love’, ‘love’, ‘leave’and ‘long’a higher and more forceful attitude is adopted.
The use of ‘strong’ is significant because we have moved now from a weak, lifeless stance to a healthier, more robust one.
And yet the feeling of departure is still here for although the love is strong in the face of illness or old age, the bearer of that love must inevitably leave the poet when he dies.
The last point I would wish to make about this sonnet is one of rhythm and structure.
It is written in basic pentameter with exactly ten stressed syllables in every single line.
This is undeniably in keeping with the perfect structure of the three quatrains and final couplet to produce an overall symmetry making the poem pleasant to the ear if read aloud as well as to the mind.
The lines remain constant almost as if in defiance at the narrowing down of life in the actual theme or to provide a strong medium for the subject of the weakness of old age.
This uniformity expresses that which occurs in the progress of autumn to winter, of day to night, and of fire to ashes just as the symmetry in the rhythm  show light and dark.
The rhyming scheme in the last two lines however interrupts the rest wherever the poet comes more briefly, concisely and abruptly to a conclusion.
Since there are only two lines the reader takes special notice of their meaning and the author can leave his sonnet assured that his message has been received.
I sincerely believe that the message was in fact received on my part for I found the poem to be particularly touching and genuine in its approach to such a difficult and delicate subject as death.
The author manages very successfully to convey all his sadness and bitterness and at the same time great strength of his departure from this world without being verbose or over the top.
His simple, understandable but rich symbolism and clever technique show someone who has put his whole heart into the character of his poem, if indeed he is not writing from experience.
I suspect there are few poems which are able to make a youthful reader feel at close hand the desperation of the old as I perhaps am able to grasp having read such a beautiful piece of work.
Practical Criticism — The Express
An obsessional tale of a great train's journey from darkness to light, from sombre death to bursting life, is the best way in which the poem, ‘The Express ’, could be described.
It is indeed a very forcible piece of work which throws the reader unmercifully into the depths of the world of the author himself.
He sees the train as a majestic figure transcending even the world of nature so that, she becomes ‘wrapt in her music no bird-song, no, nor bough/breaking with honey buds shall ever equal.’
The poem is rich in language, vivid in imagery, mysterious and enchanting in its overall effect and uses to its best advantage various language features to evoke an atmosphere of grandeur and magnificence conveying the author's passion for something which would otherwise remain a mere vehicle to the reader.
There is a progression in the poem which moves through three stages parallel to the actual journey the train takes from its, ‘first powerful plain manifesto’, until, ‘beyond the crest of the world, she reaches night.’
In the first few lines there pervades a sense of darkness as the train is on the brink of her voyage.
Death seems to be a major theme shown by the author's morbid description of a graveyard as ‘the heavy page of death’ and the images of blackness and mystery mixed with the rather mundane description of the town through which the train is passing.
‘The black statement of pistons’ and the ‘gasworks’paints a depressingly grey picture of banal urbanity from which the train and the poem itself is moving away.
As she gradually picks up speed and moves towards the countryside she enters into the next stage of her journey.
The poem also progresses with the phrase, ‘it is now’ cutting off the second section from the ten lines of the first.
It is in this new phase that the train and the atmosphere of the poem come alive.
It is almost as if she .
a ‘new [era]of white happiness’, an era of light, of increasing velocity and of almost hysterical delight.
The poem's language has also advanced from the darkness and dullness in which it began to a more pleasant and brighter world with words like, ‘white’, ‘light’ and ‘elate’, bringing forth a totally new mood.
There is much more action by the train itself while it is singing and ‘screaming’ and as it ‘bolts’and plunges and also within the lines which describe the movement.
They seem to run more smoothly and quickly together when reading in comparison to the heaviness of the first part.
Again after the middle ten lines there is another break which takes us into the last section of the poem with the words ‘at last’.
Here there is a calm sense of wonder and satisfaction coming down gently from the previous energetic emotion with the sigh of, ‘Ah’, but still maintaining the feeling of happiness and ‘brightness’ with words such as‘white’and ‘flame’with references to nature and ‘bird-song’.
This transition the train goes through is like the experience one has when watching a train embark on a voyage oneself.
At first, close up, it seems very dirty and sullen and yet dignified, large and powerful in its presence until it becomes loud, hurrying up and down the tracks with a frenzied passion, and then, just as we see it disappearing beyond the horizon it seems like a far off star or ‘comet’ silently entering another world.
The poet writes as if the train were a woman to give it a more human and emotional element and to allow the reader to be involved with the journey on a deeper level than would be necessary if it were a simple poem taken from an objective rather than a personal view.
He repeatedly uses the pronoun ‘She’ along with‘her’and describes the train's movements such as ‘bouncing’which one would normally only connect with human activity but here it enables one to envisage in one's mind a picture of a regal  figure ‘gliding like a queen’down the tracks of the railway.
The image of royalty gives us an idea just how powerful and proud the train is as it seems to influence and belittle all the things around it.
Other pervasive images are those of death, contrasting light and dark and the elation of speed which all contribute to the mysterious and obsessional setting the author creates.
The metaphor used in ‘the heavy page/of death, printed by gravestones in the cemetery’, works with the ‘black statement’ of a few lines previous suggesting that death is like a book which can survive through generations and is read, that is experienced, by all.
And yet the train seems to be able to pass it by, symbolically, by her passing by the graveyard, and to almost frown upon and transcend it.
The darkness of the beginning of the poem is suddenly illuminated to a ‘low stream-line brightness’ towards the end when she picks up speed and moves from a misty, black and yet dignified depression to a kind of elation.
She seems, in all her sublimity, to depreciate nature itself as if her whistling, likened to singing, were better and even more melodious than ‘bird-song’.
Only her light appears on ‘the tossing hills’ and she is the only important figure streaking through the night air.
It is almost as if the author is trying to suggest that the mechanical and functional beauty of the train, who seemingly has a life of her own, can surpass that true beauty of nature.
When he talks of the ‘metal landscape’ he is referring to the world of the train and not to the one of green landscapes which we would expect.
The simile, ‘parallels clean like trajectories from guns’ also gives the impression of a rather hard, mechanical world but this is somewhat softened by the way the author compares the train's movement to a ‘comet through flame’, the ‘flame .
is employed to give dramatic effect to the poem as a whole.
Ones such as, ‘powerful plain pistons’, convey the sense of abruptness and force needed in the beginning while ones such as ‘speed throws up strange shapes’ slip from one word to the other giving a feeling of velocity.
Another such example is to be found in ‘no bird-song, no, nor bough/breaking with honey buds,’ which enforces the idea of nature being beneath the power of the train itself.
The beginning of each sentence in the middle of the  poem seems to start at the end of the previous line which has the effect of making the reader almost experience the same sort of speed the train is going through.
The punctuation in the line ‘of deafening tunnels, brakes, innumerable bolts’, seems almost to describe the ‘brakes’ and ‘bolts’of the train while breaking up the sentence in the same pattern.
‘The elate metre of her wheels’ also  show the rhythm of the train in keeping with the rhythm of the poem.
Although there are no apparent rhyming schemes there is a regularity in the number of syllables each line possesses throughout the whole piece of work making it easy to read and, again, rhythmical.
In a poem like the ‘Express ’ I believe we are dealing with a very involved, indeed fanatical, view of the journey, movement and stately presence of a train which seems to overpower not just the author himself but also the very universe and natural world in which it exists.
It is strange to me that such an obviously deep and, in my opinion, very moving, impressive poem can revolve round a mechanical, modern and brash object and almost devalue nature while putting on the personal and human mask that it does.
It is different to other poems on similar subjects, such as‘The Whitsun Weddings ’ by Philip Larkin, which describes the outward view of people and places  rather than the opposite, inward view which is isolated from much of the outside environment like ‘the unknown self-possession of ships on ocean.’
I believe the ‘Express ’ to be a poem of great beauty and I find it tender although strange in approach.
Although I do not wholeheartedly agree with the view the author takes of the mechanical world of the train being somehow better than that of nature, I can still find it interesting and thought inducing from a philosophical angle.
Who can say whether the spirit of nature does possess a beauty or an importance greater than the purely physical or rather mechanical objects?
It is a poem which, although at first in its language and meaning I admittedly find a little daunting, I enjoyed pondering over very much and genuinely hope to read more by the same, as yet, anonymous author.
Spring Term Essay
Do you agree that pastoral is essentially a form of escapism?
The pastoral mode is undoubtedly, in its essence, a medium through which the poet, and indeed the reader, can endeavour to escape to other, more perfect, surroundings than the perplexing and chaotic, contemporary world they live in.
In order to call this genre ‘escapism’, however, it is necessary  first to define the term in the way it is intended to be taken in this essay, and not to confuse the mode with ‘escapist’ literature in the vulgar sense.
Most dictionaries would describe it as a ‘desire or tendency to escape from reality into fantasy’, and ‘reality’ is certainly a key word in this definition.
The pastoral poet most often chooses to ignore the common, but harsh, facts of life, the restrictions of time, the pressure of a greedy and superficial society and the temptations of the opposite sex and flees desperately towards his own imagined world of seclusion and uninterrupted tranquillity.
The burdens and lack of stability of his social community became unbearable and the poet yearns for an age of permanence and simplicity to provide him with an alternative to the real world.
His private place, when found, is full of the innocence and delightful naivety of childhood, where shepherds live an idyllic life of humble pleasures and enjoy the benefits of the rich and ripe vegetation of our idealized countryside.
Frank Kermode describes this fantasy as ‘sheer delightful wish-fulfilment’ when considering Christopher Marlowe's ‘The passionate Shepheard to his Love’, perhaps one of the most famous and conventional of all pastoral poems.
Marlowe chooses to escape from his own Elizabethan society to a land of innocent pursuits where his shepherd asks a young lady, ‘Come live with me and be my love’.
In this short and uncomplicated address Marlowe conveys all the simplicity of his shepherd with his usage of straightforward language.
The message is clear and concise and displays no verbosity that one would expect to find in more courtly love scenes.
But although this is probably the way the young man would have spoken, the line seems to express a certain naivety in his character.
It is almost as if he feels he need only ask the lady in question to join him and she will have no hesitations about accepting his offer.
She remains anonymous throughout, unable to answer, allowing Marlowe to continue to revel in his fantasy.
He ignores the possibility of a straight refusal or any interruptions from another source bar the poet for fear of tarnishing his dream with any slight touch of realism.
It was with this thought in mind that Sir Walter Ralegh wrote ‘The Nimph's Reply to the Shepheard’, showing just how far he considers Marlowe's poem to be pure escapism.
In the first stanza Marlow creates a very generalised landscape of ‘Vallies, groves, hills and fields, /woods [and]steepie mountain[s]’.
It seems to have no geographical place in the real world but is merely the product of the poet's imagination.
Nature seems to portend no danger and is there to be utilised by Marlowe and his lover almost as a playground.
Even the ‘rivers’ are ‘shallow’in this world but, as Ralegh's nymph retorts, in reality they ‘rage, and rocks grow cold’and nothing in nature is as picturesque and harmless as Marlowe would wish it to be.
The young lover proposes to lie back and watch others work while he listens to birds singing, freeing himself from the duty  and responsibility shepherds would have been expected to attend to.
Marlowe refuses to recognise the fact making a living for oneself in the countryside involves strenuous work and long hours of toil in order to reap the rewards afterwards.
He has little knowledge of a  shepherd's life since he writes his idyllic poem from the town, as a wealthy poet, and cannot possibly see the reality as one would have it from experienced eyes.
The shepherd tries to win over his young lady with flattery and entices her with gifts of beautiful flowers which, although not practical, are in compliance with the natural setting.
But when one considers the next two stanzas a flaw appears in the untold simplicity we have followed so far.
The poet offers gold buckled slippers and ‘a belt of straw and ivy buds, /with coral clasps and amber studs’, which all seem too ornamental to be part of a simple, pastoral tale of wooing.
Gold often lies at the root of corruption which is not found in an absolutely pastoral climate.
It would hardly be accessible, along with‘amber’ and ‘coral’to a lowly shepherd and because of this one becomes immediately suspicious of Marlowe creeping towards wish fulfilment and therefore pure escapism.
He craves the simplicity and innocence of a pastoral world but also wishes to enjoy the luxuries of his own.
In the same way in Stanza two the birds sing complex ‘madrigalls’, not simple notes as would be expected.
But the birds play a part in  Marlowe's creation of a condition of harmony existing between man and nature where, embracing the Biblical view, nature exists to accommodate and provide for man.
The shepherd ‘pulls’ the wool from  his ‘pretty lambs’, an experience which I imagine would not be too pleasant for the creatures but to him it is as if the sheep offer their wool with the same eagerness as he offers his gifts.
The animals here are at the command of mankind and offer no  resistance to their own exploitation.
This does not coincide with the realistic view of mankind having to overcome the opposition of nature to do as he wishes and came and cultivate what originally posed a threat, and most often still does.
The slightest hint of rigour in ‘cold’ is alleviated in the next line by ‘gold’.
Marlowe chooses to set his fantasy in the month of May and it will always, therefore, be springtime, the most romantic time of the year.
His evasion of time as a restrictive element is brought out by Ralegh who insists that ‘Time drives the flocks from field to fold’.
Things change, he says, and flavours and ‘posies/soon break, soon wither [are]soon forgotten.
Nothing will last forever but will fade as time goes on and seasons move into the cold of winter.
Time will bring an end to all things, even to Marlowe's dream, as it is only a dream and exists in the temporal, real world.
If pleasure could be everlasting and if one could always stay young then his retreat would be a beautiful and convincing one but as this world is governed by realities and not the imagination of the individual, momentary escapism is all that Marlowe's poem can offer.
Andrew Marvell's ‘The Garden’, however, offers a quite different mode of retreat than that of the former poet.
The metaphysical poets of the 17th century were rarely interested in pastoral as a game and preferred to move on to a more realistic way of expressing their discontentment with the mercantile age they lived in.
Still critical of the economic  and social pressures which centred around the city they could yet find no alternative in this countryside where nature, it was known, was not Marlowe's ‘beds of roses ‘.
Instead they looked within themselves to find solace and contentment.
The perfect world they sought lay in the individual and not in any dream of an idyllic country life.
In the first stanza of ‘The Garden’ Marvell rejects the outer world of human activities for inner world of peace and retirement in a sanctified garden.
Here he can escape from the imperfect society to be an individual alone, attended by nature.
He immediately cuts himself off from those ambitious city men who try ‘to win the palm, the oak, or bays,’ emblematic of the rewards given for artistic, political and military achievement.
These are but single plants though and therefore not so beautiful, long lasting or so worthy of praise as ‘all flowers and all trees’ in the garden.
In being ambitious in specific spheres men in the external world have only limited pleasures whereas if one embraces the whole of nature more can be enjoyed.
Since Marvell did not find ‘Fair Quiet…and Innocence’ in ‘busy companies of men’he entered into his garden and discovered them there, also as ‘sacred plants’unable to grow outside in the barren landscape of reality.
He believes that such delights will never be encountered except in his own sweet dream land, or wished-for world.
But the benefits of ‘solitude’, ‘Quiet’ and ‘innocence’cannot be enjoyed if the body is still susceptible to physical pleasures.
From the rejection of the community Marvell moves on to also flee from the  labours and heartache of human love.
Quite differently from the shepherd chasing nymphs convention of Marlowe's poem, in ‘The Garden’ the colours of ‘red’and ‘white’are toppled from their usual pedestal by the green of plants and nature’.
‘Nor white nor red was ever seen
So amorous as this lovely green.’
The poet believes that any sensual experience will present an obstacle to his complete and serene inner contemplation, a state he is trying to achieve in his mind to gain perfection in an imperfect world.
Marvell is so much taken with the love he has of nature he even proposes to cut out the names of the trees in their own bark, as opposed to the names of lovers.
The Gods, in his opinion, chase after ‘Daphne’ and ‘Syrinx’not because they were women but because they anticipated that they would turn into trees.
Even love itself ‘makes his best retreat’ to attach itself to something new.
The thing to pursue then, is nature, and anything else is but a deviation from real happiness.
One cannot escape from the world unless one rejects all the potential dangers it involves.
Thus Marvell's escapism is more complete than Marlowe's which seems to be pure fantasy and wish fulfilment.
And yet in one way the later poet contradicts himself in the next stanza by following the traditional pastoral view that there is plentiful and ‘luscious’ fruit, ready to be picked and savoured.
The language here is very sensuous and more physical than the last stanzas with words such as‘wondrous’, ‘curious’ and ‘ripe’.
The fruits seem almost to jump into his hands and  mouth, just dying to serve mankind, and, as with Marlowe, there is no sign of work to be seen behind this fertility.
In the poet's idealized concept of nature man need not bother himself with arduous tasks or boring duties, nature is there to provide for him and nothing more.
With the word ‘meanwhile’ in the first line we progress to the central stanza where Marvell concentrates on the mind and its ‘happiness’.
His withdrawal seems now to be going further and further back into his own imagined creations of ‘far other worlds and other seas’ which transcend any physical creation.
Whilst doing this Marvell can live in his own world which has no connection with anything external or real at all.
In contemplating the  garden's verdure rather than experiencing it he succeeds in:
‘Annihilating all thats made
To a green thought in a green shade.’
‘all thats made’ is reduced to a single thought in his mind and it is green because the solitude Marvell has found there is green.
This dematerialisation is taken a stage further when his soul becomes like a bird which can fly away, completely freeing itself from society or any distractions to concentrate solely on the contemplation of itself.
Now any kind of love is rejected except the love of the poet.
The bird symbolising the yearning for freedom man has, his desire to pull himself up above and beyond the limits and discomforts of his own restricted world.
One could not hope to find a better medium for escape than a pair of metaphorical, spiritual wings.
Left in such lofty heights here the poem would be expected to end but ‘The Garden’ possesses a realism which is not found in Marlowe.
He understands that the flight is only temporary and the bird must come to rest on solid ground again at some point just as the next stanza provides a landing area for his mind.
Here he realises that even in Eden Adam had Eve and on earth women do exist and cannot be ignored.
His created paradise is still only temporal and whilst denying that his perfection can be reached in the presence of the temptation of women, he accepts the fact they are here to stay.
His dream is only an illusion and he knows it cannot be realised.
Unlike Marlowe, he acknowledges time as an all powerful element which brings such fantasies crashing down to earth.
Time governs all things and cannot be refuted.
Marvell, in the same way as Marlowe, has found himself, although only momentarily, a heaven on earth and a perfect retreat for a soul still bound to the temporal world.
Just as Marlowe can choose to enter into purely fantastical land of his own making, which caters for his own desires and ignores that which he is unable to cope with in the real world, Marvell can slip into his garden and is free, for a period, from the ball and chain of the world he flees from.
Pastoral, in its simplicity and delightful charm and in its rejection of realism is a gratefully accepted form of release.
One can forget for a while the rigours faced everyday and appreciate wholeheartedly the kind of escapism that lies at the root of ‘The Passionate Shepherd to his love’ and ‘The Garden’and all other poems which make up the pastoral garden.
English Literature Summer Term Essay
‘Nothing can exceed the energy and magnificence of the character of Satan as expressed in Paradise Lost .’
Do you think the portrayal of Satan is a source of unbalance in the poem as a whole?’
It is the opinion of many critics of Paradise Lost, and indeed my own, that Milton has been far too successful in his portrayal of Satan as a grand and magnificent figure.
It seems strange that one so cunning and evil can ambitiously vie for a place in our admiration, contend with those who ought to be foremost in our favour, namely God, Adam and Eve, and win a victorious battle in our imagination.
There seems to be a struggle, which Milton perhaps did not intend, between the reader's response to Satan as a powerful and convincing character and the way in which one should react to such a malevolent force.
It can only be up to ourselves to either be seduced by this sly trickster and his façade of grandeur or to laugh in the face of his absurdity and bring forth the somewhat obscured benevolence of God, his son, and our first ancestral parents, to achieve some perspective to the poem as a whole.
Just as Adam stands between the forces of good and evil, so do we stand between the heroic action and qualities of Christ and the fallen Angel of Light, and just as man did in the beginning, we too, as humans, fall prey to the tempter at each individual reading of the epic.
But this can hardly be our fault when we consider how Milton manages, with or without intention, to build up a wonderfully vivid and intriguing portrait of Satan and offers little else to give any sense of decent, moral, proportion.
Satan possesses many of the qualities found in conventional epic heroes in his struggle against overbearing, opposing forces while building up new cities in place of lost ones and in his determination to regain as much as possible from the debris into which he has fallen.
In our first encounter with Satan we find him within the burning lake of Hell, having fallen from such a great height to such a great depth and now engulfed in fire, licked by flames, seemingly in pain, according to Milton's narration, yet still able to  speak with an uncanny strength and courage against ‘the potent Victor’(I. 95).
He vows ‘revenge, immortal hate, /and courage never to submit or yield’(I. 107) to  he who has supposedly wronged him.
Satan stands in the pit of damnation, in the centre of all suffering, but he stands in defiance, in outrage, and with pride.
He will not bow before another no matter what pain is inflicted and is confident, at least having lost the battle in Heaven, he has been victorious in shaking the throne of the Almighty.
What a display of grandeur and sheer force of will!
We may not agree with the intention of the words as viewed from the poem as a whole, but the words themselves must surely be admired.
At this point we can either laugh at the absurdity of the situation or, more naturally, stand in awe of Satan and from now on find him a compelling figure, whatever evil he is about.
We are next entranced by his massive dimensions:
‘Thus Satan talking to his nearest mate,
With head up lift above the wave, and eyes,
That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides
Prone on the flood, extended long and large,
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the fables name of monstrous size.’
He is compared to ‘that sea-beast Leviathan’, thus appearing a fixed visible force of strength in our imaginations as we picture a towering monster, great though devilish.
This is surely a far cry from the grotesque yet ridiculous horns and hooves we immediately call to mind in any usual interpretation of Satan.
Milton has already dispelled our traditional view of an awesome, bestial figure, in favour of one who possesses a destroyed beauty.
He is still terrible enough for us to fear him yet subtle and cunning enough for us to be charmed by him.
Though Satan's motive for avenging against God is not made quite clear, we accept that he has suffered impairment.
We sympathise with  his injured pride and feel an injustice has indeed been committed.
It is at this point Satan seems to be a more approachable, human like character who has a mixture of feelings we can understand and again we are taken in by him.
As we are drawn closer we become further entangled in his web of deceit.
He is regretful of his position all along and knows full well the hopelessness of the situation but at the same time his stubbornness and pride will not allow him to repent.
This is a characteristic common to everyone and in fact Milton here shows us just how much of himself he puts into his Satan when we recall that he, as a Puritan, contended with his own pride, a fault with which he was most unhappy.
It seems strange that, when we arrive in the Garden of Eden, the only humans we encounter seem so distant to us.
One would expect ourselves to be bonded with Adam and Eve against our common foe but instead in their unfallen state, they seem to be most unlike the people of today.
Adam is intelligent, pious, loving and polite but only shows heroic qualities in sharing Eve's fate and human ones in his uxoriousness.
We are cut off from their happy little world which we know nothing about and are unable to recognise much of our ways within theirs.
Similarly, Milton's portrayal of God evokes a sense of imbalance in the poem.
He is harsh and shows little pity in dealing with the fallen angels and his exclamation that his son will be exalted resounds with a rather curt and slightly arrogant ring.
He shows no love in his dictatorial and threatening speech in book five and we cannot be expected to suppose, in our first reactions to the text, that what he is doing is altogether just.
It would not be unfair to say that God, far from being superhuman, appears to be inhuman.
He is a force we cannot comprehend, a philosophical absolute beyond the limitations  of our intellect.
Even  although Christ redeems man's crime against God, the eating of the apple, his sacrifice is not highlighted by Milton nearly as much as Satan's heroic undertaking of the perilous journey through Chaos to Earth.
We are impressed when on the way he stands in confrontation with ‘the greslie terrour’ of death, ‘unterrifi'd’(II.
708).
He wins universal applause from his followers and admiration from the reader, despite the fact that he is going to take away the paradise which may still have been ours.
He is brave and determined, if he cannot overcome God's power he will certainly have a go at annoying him.
Satan shows authority when bringing order among his people and power when indirectly compared to Etna.
In his speeches of the first two books Satan shows a tremendous vigour, a responsibility to his followers, an impenetrable spirit, heroic determination never to be weak and inactive and an attractive charm and sophistication in his poetic and commanding words.
The readers, though recognising his faults, are apt to leave them behind and praise Satan's magnificence.
Courage is still a virtue even though it manifests alongside evil.
What we see in him is ‘fortitude in adversity, enormous endurance, a certain splendid recklessness, remarkable powers of rising to an occasion, extraordinary qualities of leadership (shown not least in his salutatory taunts) and striking intelligence in meeting difficulties that are novel and could seem overwhelming’.
C.S. Lewis on the other hand would completely disagree with Waldock's conclusion and claim conversely that ‘to admire Satan is to admire a world of misery, lies, propaganda, wishful thinking and incessant autobiography’.
He admits Satan is an interesting character but denies he is all he appears.
It is Milton's portrayal of the devil which is magnificent, not the devil himself, but the author is careful enough to place Satan's admirable  qualities within the text as a whole showing them to be put to evil use.
Like Shakespeare's Iago Satan's virtues become vices when he means only to cause destruction and the reader's eyes are opened to the real nature of the devil.
Although still biased in favour of him we do to some extent begin to change our opinion and perhaps look further behind his lies and inconsistencies.
Satan now seems absurd in raging against the omnipotence of God, he knows he cannot possibly achieve anything by his rantings.
God sees and knows everything at all times, he allows nothing to happen he does not wish to, even, strangely, the Fall of Man.
Satan was never wronged nor despised in Heaven; the exaltation of the son was meant for the good of all the angels but he was so stupid his pride would not allow him to tolerate the unintentional insult.
He suffers from a ‘sense of injured merit’, and like a spoiled child, sulking in the corner, he sulks in Hell and vows always to defy good for the sake of evil, in the vain hope of getting his own back.
Satan lies to his followers and has convinced us too of his mighty strength and even starts to believe in his own lies when he claims he was ‘self-begot’, caused by Fate, or he sprang from the ground or willed himself into existence, an absurd contradiction in terms.
He cannot accept that he was created by God because this would prove that his power lies in his enemy's hands and it would be ludicrous to revolt for he would ultimately be revolting against himself.
If Satan is self-existent he would be able to understand his existence but the very fact he is struggling to prove it denies this.
Satan does not realise that real freedom is found in obeying the voice of reason.
He cannot obey God and subsequently finds himself trapped in his own cocoon.
The self pride he showed in the first two books is shown to be the very cause of his gradual destruction and inner hell.
In claiming to be ‘self=begot’ he is claiming isolation, a  refusal to see anything outside his own existence and an unreality which leads to blindness.
He who once boasted;
‘The mind is its own place, and in its self
Can make a Heav'n of Hell, a Hell of Heav'n’
has discovered ‘Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell’.
(I. 254–255) He cannot escape what his own stupidity, recklessness and stubborn pride has created.
‘What we see in Satan is the horrible co-existence of a subtle and incessant intellectual activity with an incapacity to understand anything.
This doom he has brought upon himself; in order to avoid seeing one thing he has, almost voluntarily, incapacitated himself from seeing at all.’
Even in book one, if the reader is careful enough to notice, Milton tries to undermine Satan's strength.
He compares the fallen angel's shield to the moon:
‘The broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the moon, whose orb
Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views,
At every evening from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdamo, to descry new lands,
Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe.’
(I. 286–91)
As well as suggesting disease and contamination with the word ‘spotty’, Milton tries to put across the idea that the mighty size and grandeur of the moon, like that of Satan, will be reduced when it comes under human comprehension.
We should look behind the artificially magnified scope of the devil to discover he is not so  deserved of our admiration as once we supposed.
After Books I and II, Satan's magnificence is chipped away by a process of degradation.
The reader should note his progress within the whole twelve books and in doing so will see how he moves from a heroic, masterful force and a leader of millions to a spy alone in the Garden of Eden, watching two lovers like a common peeping Tom.
Here, after one has witnessed the grace of the Lord and the splendour of Heaven, Satan is reduced to a size unrecognisable  to the monster in book one.
He is described simply as ‘the devil’ rather than the previously grand ‘Hell's dread Emperor’.
From a spy to a slimy toad and from this to a serpent Satan moves, crawling on his belly in the dust rather than standing upright in a pool of fire.
Having willed himself to be a snake he is then made one by God, demonstrating his impotence in comparison to the Deity.
He is met with the hissing of his followers now instead of the huge applause he expected.
Despite our beliefs, pain has undermined his strength, he is not undefeatable, God has had his way, if he ever lost it, and Satan has not just fallen, from Heaven to Hell, but has buried himself further into the pit, he has fallen further in trying, once again, to achieve greater height than he deserved.
‘O foul descent!
That I, who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest; am now constrained
Into a beast, and mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the height of deity aspired!
But what will not ambition and revenge
Descend to?
Who aspires must down as low,
As high he soared, obnoxious first or last
To basest things.’
In his capacity for remorse, however, and in realising in Eden that revenge ‘back on itself recoils’ he appears more human and still our sympathy lies with him.
We have all done wrong out of malice, have known it was stupid and we have all shown Satan's blindness in ignoring reality, in yet going ahead with our actions and following human passion instead of divine reason.
The ‘bad’ characters in any story grab attention more easily than the ‘good’because in them are realised our own temptations and foul qualities which we suppress in our daily lives.
We can understand, though perhaps not agree with, Satan's motives for revenge and the struggle with his inner torment, but we could never understand the benign goodness of the couple before the fall nor the absolute perfection of God.
One must remember that Milton is also human and, like the reader, could not help but feel for Satan as an expression of a part of himself which was let loose in his writings.
‘All that is said about Milton's ‘sympathy’ with Satan, his expression in Satan of his own pride, malice, folly, misery and lust, is true in a sense, but not in a sense peculiar to Milton’.
We were never meant to fall for Satan but despite the poet's efforts to make sure we don't, we cannot forget the magnificent figure encountered in the first two books.
Milton cannot lift Satan to such great heights and put such great speeches in his mouth and then snatch them back denying in his authorial intrusions what he has just proclaimed through his character.
His ‘allegations clash with his demonstrations’ and we will, unfortunately, believe the latter.
A counter-balance for Satan cannot be found for Milton has gone too far in his wonderful description and characterisation so that even his portrayal of God cannot even hope to rise to the same level.
The Satan we knew before has not changed but disappeared and a new one has been put in his place.
The one is too far removed from the other to present an acceptable balance of character.
Paradise Lost is taken by most at the level of the author's presentation and unless one looks very deeply and sceptically at Satan or one is a Christian like Lewis or a Puritan like Milton one cannot laugh at him for being a fool.
Having studied the text and read critical appreciations of it, my natural reaction to Satan is still the same as it was when he first appeared to me.
I am still under the influence of Milton's potent spell cast in the first two books and have been unable to find a successful remedy in the following books to bring .
‘Discuss, with reference to at least two plays, how tragedy can be enacted not only upon the individual but also upon a family’
A tragedy is often not solely enacted upon one individual but, because our lives do not exist alone in themselves but interact with others, circumstances can affect a whole mesh of other characters.
One such circumstance is inevitably the family circle.
In this tightly knit situation there can be no escape and what upsets one will eventually cause chaos among all.
Good examples of tragedy engulfing whole family circles are the plays by William Shakespeare and Eugene O'Neill, namely,King Lear and Long Days Journey into Night .
Both plays tell the universal and timeless tale of family relationships and how, when supposedly they are a place of union, harmony, love and protection, they are in fact in reality a source of discord and suffering more often than not.
King Lear is a play which fits in perfectly with contemporary society in its portrayal of family tragedy.
The title suggests that the suffering is focused on only one protagonist but one can see later how the King causes so much trouble and pain for his relations.
Fathers are set against children and children against parents.
Sister fights sister and brother plots against brother and even, on a different level, servants turn against their masters.
As Gloucester sums it up
‘Love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide: in cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond cracked 'twixt son and father…
We have seen the best of our time; machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all numerous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves.’
The story begins almost like a fairy tale with the old king calling upon the three princesses to divide his  kingdom among them and ‘shake all cares and business from [his]age’.
Cordelia plays the part of the good child in contrast to her wicked sisters Goneril and Regan.
But this is not altogether relevant for although Cordelia is essentially a fine character and her sisters mainly corrupt, there are the opposites ‘good’ and ‘evil’in both of them.
No one person can be blamed for the tragedy just as Lear cannot be all the victim nor all the instigator.
He does, however, set off the tragedy by displaying his lack of insight, judgement and knowledge of true love in the division of his land.
Lear asks his three daughters to express their love for him and in turn, he will buy their flattery, give them the amount of land measured by their amount of professed admiration.
Goneril and Regan know their father's failings well and act as he wishes to obtain the desired results.
Cordelia, however, in truly loving her father, cannot utter any false promises, and simply tells him,
‘Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
my heart into my mouth; I love your Majesty
According to my bond; no more and no less’.
At this Lear is outraged and all too rashly curses his once most beloved daughter, disowning her in his fury;
‘Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this forever’
This curse will reverberate through the whole play and will not cease in wreaking havoc on the whole of Lear's family until, with death as a result, ‘The wheel is come full circle’.
The King has disclaimed his love for his offspring  and therefore broken the family bond that Cordelia speaks of.
When she is banished, the familial circle is cracked, a prevalent theme in the play, and the only way forward now is a deterioration of the family unit and of Lear's mind.
When Cordelia moves away so does any hope of harmony.
And yet we can also view Cordelia from another, opposite angle.
If she was so close to her father she must have known how he would have reacted to her answer when asked of her love.
She let him carry on with his stupidity and offered no elaboration nor explanation of her terms.
In this way she seems to be a very stubborn character.
There is a clash of wills as Lear and his daughter engage in their own self-protection.
This obstinacy she possesses springs from her father's character.
Cordelia now becomes part of the tragic substance rather than the innocent victim everyone believes she is.
By their very characters father and daughter must fight, just as all the people in a family do not converge into a mythical single unit but remain a set of conflicting personalities.
Lear's tragic mistake is that he tries to mix his authority as a parent with that of a King and assumes love and power are interchangeable.
Lear's failure to judge his family properly, in that he sees things in a materialistic sense rather than in a true sense of love is amplified into the conclusion of a country split against itself.
Being in a position of power, his stupidity does not just affect him, nor just his family, but a whole kingdom, showing the universal not only the domestic significance of the old's relationship to the young.
It was not natural in Shakespeare's day for parents to kneel to their offspring so when his children try to gain authority over him Lear is so enraged he goes mad and the outer conflict between Regan, Goneril and himself  becomes an inner struggle for his sanity.
The natural order has been disturbed and the price must be paid by the parent before it is re-instated.
Lear imposes himself as a burden on his two remaining daughters by expecting them how to look after him and his retinue in his old age.
This he was stupid to assume as they refuse to put up with this strain on their own households and rather cruelly send him fleeing out to face the hard elements in the stormy night.
The fool, a wise commentator, remarks on the instance showing that Lear can expect no gratitude from his daughters.
‘The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
That it had it head bit off by it young’
They strip him down to nothing, removing every scrap of power and majesty he had left.
Although clearly one can sympathise with Lear one cannot expect anything else of the two sisters when they are shown such a bad example of love from their father in his dealings with Cordelia.
They can only act as he has taught them.
But he has not learned his lesson yet as by preferring one daughter over another by her allowance of more knights, he makes the same mistake again.
He expresses favouritism, not love, from one daughter to the next by the things they will do for him, a characteristic not correct in any parent.
The wicked sisters of this now nightmarish fairy-tale can feel no pity nor respect for their father just as he can muster no sense of true love.
Do Goneril and Regan take this coldness from their father, is it part of his ‘evil’ personality just as Cordelia was part of his ‘good’?
Indeed, ‘is there any cause in nature that makes these hard hearts?’.
And yet it is no wonder that Lear, with all his knights, is becoming a nuisance.
It is true of any family, especially  today, that it is not a desirable situation to have an elderly parent living with younger child.
Their bitterness then, is understandable and not altogether unfounded.
Since Goneril and Regan can no longer inflict their evil upon Lear while he is absent, they have to eventually turn against each other.
This is then the complete fall of the family unit as the two sisters grapple over an issue they believe to be, once more, love but it is merely desire for Edmund.
Being destructive elements in the play they have destroyed themselves and already added much to the destruction of their father.
The sub plot of Gloucester and his two sons acts as a parallel to the main and increases the effect of Lear's family situation and experiences; ‘he childed as [Lear]fathered’.
Edmund as a bastard threatens to upset the normal family structure and therefore is the cause of the  families torment.
He is surrounded by deep pathos, however, when sadly introduced by his father with callousness.
He is put down by Gloucester for being illegitimate and ignored so one cannot really blame him for seeking revenge against the wrong done to him and for his bitter character.
Gloucester is different from Lear in that he gives in to his family and also Goneril and Regan.
He tries to commit suicide and is tortured by Goneril hence he is very much the victim of his family but in some way to blame in his wrong treatment of Edmund for something which was really his own fault.
Lear, however, with his strength of spirit, fights against his family, producing more conflict.
This conflict cannot be avoided when Gloucester has such a contrasting character to his son; he is gullible while Edmund is cunning.
Edgar, on the other hand, has his father's nature who saves him in the disguise of ‘poor Tom’.
and making fond remarks.
It seems as though Mary has overcome her addiction and the family can settle down to peace and quiet.
But this contentment is short lived as we begin to discover the true personalities of the characters and the realities which exist behind their initial pleasant façe.
Mary Tyrone, perhaps the central character of the play but certainly not the sole source of discord, is a fading beauty trying to find solace from the harsh realities of the external world and internal torment in steeping herself in lost ideals and numbing herself with drugs.
Her husband James has also lost his greatness.
Once a fairly well known actor, now a drunkard and a ‘sad, defeated old man, possessed by hopeless resignation’.
He strives to live with his wife's addiction, the illness of his hypersensitive son Edmund who is ‘heartsick as well as physically ill’ and the cynical and biting Jamie.
All these characteristics could only ever induce conflict between a family and potential division and so one must remember while reading the play that Mary is not the only one who suffers nor the only cause of anxiety.
Every person each plays a part in the familial deterioration, but no one can, ‘help the things life has done to us.
They've done before you realise it, and once they're done they make you do other things until at last everything comes between you and what you'd like to be and you've lost your true self forever.’
The message here is that we can only be what our society has made us and to fight against it is disastrous.
The Tyrone family fight themselves rather than the world but this is to destroy them too.
Mary is becoming more and more detached from any real awareness of the outside world.
The mother, being as it were the core from which the family springs, causes all its members of the family to lose their bearings when distanced from .
He hates him for being the initial cause of his mother's addiction and also the receiver of most of her attention.
‘You're only an overgrown kid!
Mama's baby and Papa's pet!
The family white hope!
and later
‘It was your being born that started Mama on dope.
I know that's not your fault, but all the same, God damn you, I can't help hating your guts—!’
We can see a resemblance here with the sub plot in King Lear in which Gloucester pours most of his affection, initially on his legitimate child and, in ignoring Edmund, turn him against him and his brother.
Jamie wants him to succeed but will try his best to make him fail.
The bond of brotherhood wishes him to go far but the bitter reality of family relationships cracked by circumstance makes him determined to see his own brother sink.
Mary is also sinking fast, now at the stage of complete alienation from her family.
She is not aware of their presence and sees them as ‘simply a part of the familiar atmosphere of the room, a background which does not touch her preoccupation’.
Although most upset the family has come to realise Mary has no place in the real world nor their own.
They cannot break through the wall she has built around her.
For
‘What help is here’
There is no help for all these things are so
And all the world is bitter as a tear
And how these things are; though ye strove to show
She would not know’.
We must leave the Tyrone family in their foggy mist and emerge ourselves learning, as with King Lear , that an individual's suffering can rarely avoid becoming an entire family's tragedy.