

The Gale
They came as quickly as they went.
At ten o'clock everywhere was ‘normal’, the serene setting of Debenham, in all its beauty.
At ten o'clock in the morning a monster had ripped up the countryside, devastation littering  its wake.
It wasn't supposed to happen, but who trusts weathermen?
The winds began in the night, or so they said.
I slept through it until I was awoken by slamming doors?
Burglars?
The thought ran through my mind I heard chaos outside.
I looked out of the window to see my parents, attempting to repair the temporary lean-to, which was used until our garage was built.
It was still quite dark, and so I flicked the light switch to aid  me getting dressed.
Nothing happened.
A blown light bulb?
Not if my clock didn't work either.
It didn't.
We were stranded in darkness, but this did not stop my progress, it merely hindered it.
I pulled on my wellies ten minutes later, and then, slinging my scarf over my shoulder and securing my stripy bobble hat, I ran outside.
My parents, similarly attired, were replacing the lean-to in the ferocious wind.
I was told my job was to collect together the contents of the ‘out-house’ and assemble them on the patio.
I did so, and seeing I was of no more use, I rushed inside to awaken my older brother and sister to show them what had happened.
Then with a terrifying amount of common sense I searched out the candles, and, obviously having used up my common sense I went to watch television.
A bad mistake, as this became a standing joke for the rest of the week.
Just then my parents came back inside, worn out from the repairs to the temporary garage.
‘I'm not sure I can manage this swim now’, said my dad.
It was then I remembered.
The journey to Stowmarket was doubled in time, as we changed routes to avoid fallen trees.
The local leisure centre was having a sponsored swim, and the funds went towards its upkeep.
And so, for two pence a  length, I started swimming.
A quarter of a mile, and plenty of stops later, I was hauled out of the water by my dripping father, who reminded me we had to go to Kirton, where I was playing football.
It was then I remembered I had forgotten my boots.
We arrived home to the sound of a ringing telephone.
After a loud exclamation about the electricity being back on, I was informed electricity was not needed for the phones to work.
On answering the phone I discovered it was the manager of my football team, Bob, to say that due to a waterlogged pitch the game was off.
Another vain attempt at watching television followed, but it was no good, no dangermouse!
My dad suggested a walk, to take our minds off things.
But it did the opposite.
Everywhere around there were collapsed chimneys, hundred year old trees uprooted.
But as my dad reminded me, we were lucky, nothing had been permanently damaged.
Others were less fortunate.
We arrived home at lunchtime to be greeted by salad!
It was horrible at the best of times, but on Saturdays it was worse.
It was for this reason, and the minor problem of no electricity, we went to our  nan's .
After a week of chocolate biscuits and fruit cake we returned home, and I had the honour of testing the lights.
To our horror they worked, no chocolate and lots of school, a bad combination!
School life
It is a debatable subject as to whether the typical British school child likes school or not.
Countless joke books have been written on the subject of the ‘awful’ school dinners and the general atmosphere of school.
For instance the joke:
Q ‘What's the difference between animal feed and school dinners?
A. School dinners come on a plate.’
Is not found funny by many pupils because it is not true and not particularly amusing either.
In front of adults pupils will not openly admit the fact, but when asked by fellow pupils (eg myself) they do actually like attending school.
Why?
Because they meet people is a major factor.
The vast majority of friends made by a person are made at school.
Another contributing aspect of enjoying school in my opinion is an unconscious desire to learn.
All the time we are learning whether we want to or not.
Also children want to learn, to enable them to acquire qualifications needed for the jobs they would like to do when they leave education.
I am sixteen and therefore in year eleven at high school.
In a few  months' time I will take my G.C.S.E. (General Certificate of Secondary Education).
The subjects I am taking for examination are, Science, English, Mathematics, French, Physical Education, Geography and Art.
I have five lessons every day from Monday to Friday.
Each lesson is one hour in length and there is an hour break for lunch and a fifteen minute break in the morning after my first lesson and a ten minute break in between the two lessons in the afternoon.
Every Wednesday lunchtime I have the responsibility of prefect duty.
This  involves making sure the younger pupils behave correctly during the break periods.
Twenty members of year eleven are prefects.
The school I attend is quite small compared with other schools in the area.
At the moment the school has three hundred and sixty pupils approximately which is very small compared with others containing well over one thousand.
Every day I need to get up at seven o'clock in order to get ready in time to catch the bus for school but because the bus has to pick up many other pupils the journey to school every day takes thirty minutes (it can take up to one hour for other people).
Apart from the (very) occasional disagreement with the teachers I think that I quite like school as I am here for my own benefit.
The only question I have left to ask is ‘do you?’
From the age of five up to ten school is quite easy but from then on it is no joke!
Every year, pupils in year 10 have the opportunity to undertake work experience — a period of two weeks in a chosen environment where they learn about real work and the responsibilities that go with it.
I travelled to London, to sample the work of a general practitioner by shadowing my aunt.
I accompanied her during house visits, at day and night, during surgery, and various other sessions with ages ranging from the newborn right through to the elderly and retired.
I was driven by my father down to Orpington, Kent — a suburb of London — on Sunday evening, the day before I was due to start my experience.
On Monday we went into work later than was usual for my aunt, as she spent time explaining the structure and method of work of her surgery.
We ate lunch before leaving, and at one o'clock we were ready for afternoon surgery.
The following three hours passed with surprising speed, but I had already learnt a valuable lesson: it is very tiring and hard being in general surgery; every patient expects that the doctor knows all about them the moment they walk in the door, and we had to be empathetic, not sympathetic.
On the first Thursday, I got my first dose of an ‘on-call’ period.
For the morning, if any emergencies telephone in, my aunt and I would have to leave immediately to deal with it.
Nothing happened, though, and in the afternoon the ‘on-call’ has passed onto a fellow doctor.
Always, before a patient was seen or examined, they were asked if they minded a student being present.
If they did object, I moved to the reception area next to the waiting room to help replace used files and direct patients to the appropriate places.
By the first Friday, I had either worked, or been on-call for thirty hours, and I was beginning to wonder why anyone wanted to become a doctor, for I was extremely tired, and nothing of any real interest had yet happened.
My anxiety was washed away, though, with the highlight of my experience.
After a morning's surgery, we had two house calls to make.
Neither of them seemed to be emergencies, as the callers hadn't asked for immediate aid.
Because of this, my aunt and I returned home and ate before setting off for the first of our two destinations.
This was just a routine visit to an elderly patient to check that she was happy, and not in any pain, and also to stock her up on her medicines.
We left half an hour later, drove the short distance to the second, and final, visit.
As soon as we arrived, we realised that this was an emergency, as our patient, a middle-aged lady, was rolling about on her bed in extreme agony.
My aunt asked a few questions, and ascertained that the lady's pain was originating from her lower right abdomen — the general area of her right thigh up to the right side of her stomach.
The patient also stated that the pain increased and subsided — but never totally went away.
After a brief examination, it became evident that the lady's pain was coming from her right kidney, and as it was in waves, or ‘colicky’, my aunt was led to believe it was from the renal vein — which leads into the kidney — and as this organ felt hard, a conclusion was reached that our patient probably had a kidney-stone blocking the hollow vein.
Quickly, my aunt searched for, and eventually removed from her black suitcase a small, green metal tin, labelled ‘Dangerous Drugs Box’.
Inside, encased in plastic holders were ten small ampoules, containing a variety of drugs that were all strictly controlled and monitored by the government.
 Pethidine was selected, a drug that is similar to Morphine, but is more effective for this specific type of pain.
50mg were injected intra-muscularly — into the muscles — it takes longer to enter the blood stream this way, but it greatly reduces the immediate effect of retching, but does not reduce pain-relief.
We then telephoned for an ambulance, got her admitted into hospital, and finally wrote a letter of admittance as well— both as a formality, and as a way of stating the patient's medical history, and the findings of the doctor after an examination.
It was only after we had left, and were returning home that I realised what a good feeling it was to have helped someone in pain.
My question about why people became doctors was answered.
My work experience made a large impression on my life.
I was thinking  about becoming a doctor beforehand, but I still was not sure — I didn't know about the hours of work, the jobs done, the environment, and the stamina needed to last through a full day's work — but this experience has made up my mind.
Medicine is definitely the career for me.
 England's Sporting Failure
As I write this the sporting credibility of England is in turmoil.
Virtually every sport England participate in they finish near last.
For example, cricket a game virtually invented by England, they lose to Zimbabwe.
In football another sport invented by the English they struggle to qualify for the 1994 World Cup.
The English public are embarrassed by the national team.
Firstly, football.
The English team are full of great players who could set the world alight.
Many countries are impressed by their style of plan and skilful players.
But the England manager, Graham Taylor seems not to be the man for the job.
He has been verbally slaughtered by English fans and English press alike.
Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland are all laughing at  England's lack of success.
The British press constantly write about England's footballing failures as other European countries all have relative success.
Now, in late 1993, the England manager, Graham Taylor is destined for the sack much to the joy of the England supporters and press.
In cricket England are barracked just as thoroughly.
The England cricket captain, Graham Gooch resigned after the strain of England's failure took its toll.
In the last ‘Ashes’ series in July England lost heavily to the  Australians .
The English and Australian  newspapers heavily took  the team to task .
Using various cutting headlines calling for the captain's head.
What really upset the public was that the Australians  easily outplayed the unfortunate England team.
Another of England's sporting failures is tennis.
Yet another game which the English invented and are now embarrassingly bad at.
The English players never get any further than the second round of Wimbledon.
The tournament is always won by Americans or Germans in both men and  women's games.
In all these sports I have mentioned England has been masters and had all the top players.
In 1966 the England football team won the world cup.
In 1986 England beat the Australians to win the ashes.
In 1976  an English woman tennis player won Wimbledon.
So England have not always been sporting failures just for a short while.
It seems that England might just have to put up with the barracking of the public, press and the other home nations Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Soundback Studios This Way
When I found out the times I would be working things started to look better.
Unlike on a school day I would have the chance of getting up at my leisure, for I would begin at ten o'clock.
I made sure I was well prepared before the big day and I  especially took time in deciding my dress.
I chose to wear my school uniform, just the shirt and trousers, for this was nether too casual nor too formal.
The other factor I checked was where the recording studio was situated and how long it would take me to reach by car.
I had already acquired the address from the ‘yellow pages’ and estimated that it was a ten mile drive, thus I gave myself half an hour to account for delays.
The day came suddenly and before I knew it my father was driving me into the town of Ipswich to drop me off near the studio.
All kinds of questions were going through my mind; How many people would be working there?
Would I get on with these people?
Where did everyone go for lunch?
All these questions were answered throughout the course of my work experience but the most relevant at that point was how to get to the recording studio.
I looked around the car-park in search of some indication of the  whereabouts of the recording studio, and to my relief I found one quickly.
A small plastic sign fixed to the side of a building said ‘SOUNDBACK STUDIOS’ with an arrow pointing to a narrow alleyway.
Curiously I  proceeded down this route and my eyes came to rest on a small, battered, but not unclean little building.
I knocked anxiously on the wooden door and waited patiently until the door opened and a small, plump, bearded man greeted me with a cheery hello.
Since I am not one to judge on first impressions I stepped tentatively inside.
The inside was cramped but not unwelcomely so and the walls were bright white and well cleaned.
A tangle of wires lay on a nearby seat and I noticed some of the studio equipment in a small alcove in one corner.
He opened his diary which was lying on his desk and checked by name against his written entry.
He asked me to take a seat and listen to some music he would put on.
I obeyed accordingly.
He then walked into the small alcove of electronic equipment and appeared to fiddle with some dials and buttons until music suddenly blasted out a pair of wall mounted speakers.
I was impressed.
Throughout the following days of my work experience the owner and I had  some stimulating conversations, from which I learnt a vast amount of information about music, his job and the popular music industry.
Patrick Alexander was his name and he was a very interesting man.
He was forty-six, quite short and not afraid to admit that he was overweight.
He had been  brought-up in London and was stereotypical of a  Londoner's accent and use of language.
One amusing thing was that after all my worry about dress it turned out I was the overdressed character for everyday he wore a different combination of tee shirt and jeans while I wore my neat school uniform.
After the two weeks I spent at Soundback Studios in Ipswich I was sorry to leave.
I had met a man who made sense to me even though he was forty-six and I was fifteen.
I cannot truthfully say that my work experience directly influenced my ambitions career wise but it did show me that the music business is not about ‘Top of the Pops’ but about a  day's work to be proud of.
Buildings in my day
There are many different buildings in my usual day.
I pass a great variety of them on the way to school and I myself actually live, work and play in some of them.
For a start there is my house.
It was built about one hundred and twenty years ago as a small but sturdy bungalow.
Since that time there has been a number of  extensions put on it.
The first of which was probably about twenty years after it was built.
These  extensions  were all done in red brick to fit in with the original structure.
In contrast to this  extensions within the last ten years or so have all been done in cheaper, light  weight breeze blocks.
This is a useful material as it insulates the bungalow well, keeping heat in.
In total the  bungalow's size has probably been quadrupled over the years with various extensions added when needed.
Another  important building in my day is the school at which I am taught.
It is a modern building built about thirty years ago.
That main block is fairly high and has two levels.
On each level there are a couple of corridors with a lot of classrooms, leading off them.
This block is made out of a steel structure covered with concrete slabs and masked with a red brick shell.
About ten years ago a near science block was built  next to the main block.
This new block is  made in a very  similar way to the other block but with less brick and more breeze blocks.
The roofs of these are covered  with a water proof covering of a tar like substance.
On the way home from school I pass many  buildings some are very old.
One of which is of special interest.
The church.
The church is hundreds of years old and is very pretty.
It is constructed of stone and cement with wooden pillars as a  skeleton structure.
There is a large tower at one end of the church which is about twenty five  metres high.
At the other end there is a large stain glass window facing east.
This window and many others are decorated with pictures of religious meanings.
Other old buildings are houses.
These have sticking out upper stories and a  distinct black beam structure on them.
These houses may also be thatched not tiled due to  their age.
Some more modern houses often have bay windows which stick out about a  metre or so from the wall.
These sorts of houses also have sticking out porches.
In the area where I live there is also a lot of large farm houses.
These usually are a couple of stories high and quite often very wobbly looking due to  their age and size.
Some walls may bend slightly and corners may even appear to twist a bit.
Although this sounds dangerous they are perfectly safe and are by far, in my opinion, the nicest house to live in.
A Typical  Teenager's Week
As a student I obviously do many activities during school hours.
However, I also do many activities in my own time, out of school hours.
These range from homework to hockey and cricket to climbing.
On Mondays I play football after school.
I am in the under sixteen boys football team.
The team has only been going for one term and we have only played two matches against other schools.
When we train we go through many moves and set pieces but we also have a joke.
I quite enjoy training.
Also on Mondays is Venture Scouts.
There are seven venture scouts and one leader.
We organise everything for ourselves at venture scouts.
This means that some of us are on an, ‘executive  committee .’
We have a secretary, treasurer, and chairperson.
We do many adventuresome activities.
We have been climbing in Wales, abseiling in many places, canoeing in the peak district, caving in Wales, pioneering in a local field, frostbite camping, night hiking and bare back stunt riding.
With such a varied contingent of activities I say what is the need for school!
On Tuesdays we may have a school football match but we usually do not have one.
I  go to football training with my father and my friend called Jamie.
We play for Ipswich Exiles Football Club.
We are in the Suffolk and Ipswich league Divisions two and five.
We play on a Saturday against eleven other teams.
We only play during the months of August to May.
On Wednesdays I train for hockey in the local indoor leisure centre.
We play on the astroturf at Framlingham College when we can but sometimes we play on the community centre field.
I usually have quite a lot of homework on Wednesday nights.
Thursdays for me are mainly rest days.
I do my homework and then watch television.
We may have a football match planned but not always.
On Fridays there is usually a Disco at the youth club.
At the moment a lot of Rave music is played which is not my favourite music but I usually go to them anyway to socialise with my friends.
If there is not a Disco I will stay home and watch television.
As I said before I play football on Saturday afternoons.
If I am not picked to play football I will probably play hockey.
I enjoy playing football and hockey especially but I am able to enjoy nearly any sport.
Sundays I have a lie in until about half past ten in the morning.
Then I get up and read the papers and magazines.
Then I will watch the Italian football on channel four.
I admire the way the Italians play the game, it is completely controlled.
In the afternoon I watch the English football.
There are many other activities I do at school.
We have been on a trip to Cliff College in Derbyshire.
We went Pony Trekking in the Dales.
This was a great way to see the countryside I think because you can get to places unseen from the roads.
Ice skating was great fun and fairly easy to learn which really surprised me.
It was really good gliding around the time hardly having to put any effort into it at all.
We also went White Water Rafting, this was the best thrill that you can have on water without the use of an engine apparently, I agree.
We do not always go on sporting activities, we also went to the theatre to see, ‘A Midsummer Nights Dream,’ by William Shakespeare.
Although the  language was a bit complicated you were able to understand it after a while through the actors way of raising and lowering their voices.
I enjoyed it tremendously.
There are plenty of things for teenagers to do, and they can suit anyone because they are so varied.
Its great living in 1993.
The Art of fishing
Fishing is the most popular leisure sport in Britain.
All ages are interested in the sport and some men have even left their wives for more time to fish!
There are many types of fishing.
Coarse fishing which is done in fresh water and for many types of fish.
Fly fishing which is also done in fresh water but sometimes in saltwater.
People mainly fish for trout and salmon but other fish have been known to attract to the artificial flies.
Sea fishing is also taken up by many some prefer to fish from the beach and others prefer to fish from a boat.
Under the heading of coarse fishing there are different types of fishing which concentrate on one species an example of this is Carp fishing.
This is one of the most hi-tec methods of fishing there is.
Electronic bite alarms have been invented so the fishermen don't have to even watch a float.
Some people even have their personalised radio controlled boats which carry their tackle to the exact position they want.
The reason for all this is because carp are very hard fish to catch and carp fishermen fish for  a long period of time often a few nights and days.
Many other fishermen think carp anglers are mad because they can go for days without a bite.
Another type of coarse fishing is pike fishing.
Pike are the fathers of all coarse fish they will eat almost anything that is in the way including ducklings and  water rats.
Most of the pike fishermen think the best pike are caught in the colder months.
Using a deadbait.
A deadbait is a dead fish which is either native to the water being fished or a specially prepared sprat or herring.
If they are prepared they normally have colouring and smelling additives on them which attract the fish.
Pike have very sharp teeth so a wire trace has to be used to stop pike biting through the nylon.
The  pike's mouth also has no flesh in it so treble hooks are normally used to secure the fish is caught.
Pike can grow very big up to around fifty pounds.
Fly fishing is a more specific type of fishing.
If you go fly fishing you are normally wanting to catch either trout or salmon.
When fly fishing you use an artificially made fly.
This is a hook which has material and feathers tied on to it.
This attracts the fish to it and the fish  tries to eat it.
Fly fishing is more of an achievement if you  tie your own flies because you have tricked the fish yourself.
Although trout do not grow to enormous sizes they fight very well and are terrific sport.
What makes fly fishing different from coarse and sea fishing is the way you cast.
When fly fishing you only have the fly tied on the line.
Which is very light so to compensate for this a ply line is used this is a rubber line which is quite thick and the rod is flicked backwards and forwards to let line out.
This takes a lot of skill.
My View of the Floods October 1993
By lunchtime on the 12th of October 1993 it had rained so much that schools were closed.
It was said that one months worth of rain had rained within about three hours.
Roads were blocked and gardens were swamped but it carried on raining.
I was at school when the announcement that the banks of the River Deben had burst in Debenham and traffic was being halted from leaving Debenham or coming into it.
Only four wheeled drive trucks were able to pass through the floods but apart from them and buses and lorries, Debenham was cut off.
All of the five main roads which passed through were blocked somewhere along it.
The fire service did their best to help people even though the station was flooded.
The garages shut up and helped people to restart their cars after they had stalled through a flood.
Farmers left their water logged fields and towed cars out of the floods using their tractors.
Luckily I lived at the higher end of the village so my house was not affected.
When the schools was closed I went home and changed into a wetsuit.
Although I didn't expect the floods to be as high as they were my friend, Matthew, and I had planned to go out in this American style canoe.
I cycled to his house which was at the bottom end of Debenham and was right next to the River Deben.
Just I was going to reach his house I was confronted by a flooded Cherry Tree Green.
Before the rain there used to be the river running next to a green and a road next to that.
Now there was just a lake.
I began to cycle through the water and headed for what I thought was the bridge.
The water came up to my cross-bar of my bike so it must have been about three feet deep.
When I eventually reached his house we got out his canoe.
Just as we were about to paddle along the once road we heard a shout from  Matthew's mum for us to go and collect her.
She was standing knee deep in water with her skirt hoisted up.
We paddled to her and gave her a lift back to her house.
Once we arrived at the house she asked us whether we would go and pick up someone else from the  doctor's surgery who she worked with.
We then collected her.
It wasn't till the news that night that we realised we had been filmed while doing these taxi service for people.
After we had rescued these people we decided to have a look at some other floods.
We arrived at one which blocked one of the entrances to Debenham.
In the middle there was a car isolated with water up to the doors.
We saw a lady wading towards it and inquired if it was hers.
It was so we offered to help her.
After pushing the car out of the flood we attempted to bump start it but it was too waterlogged.
After an eventful afternoon we returned to  Matthew's house.
He lived next to an Animal Welfare Sanctuary.
All the animals that were out when it flooded had been taken inside the house and the furniture in the house was on bricks.
The local pottery had been totally flooded out with the stock ruined.
Houses had been flooded and cars had been submerged.
The school was closed on Wednesday as well so people had time to dry out and clear up the mess that the water had made.
London
1993, and the place to be is London; the clothes, shops, cars, museums, parks, nightclubs, disco's, pubs, casino's, the ACTION…
London is the capital of England, the city with all the modern technology.
Earlier in the 90's, ‘Virtual Reality’ came available to the public, and in the whole country there are only one or two places, you can go; Both in London.
Virtual Reality the computer of the future.
All the real life effects that seem so weird.
London is, as well, the main place for entertainment, hundreds of  cinemas especially in the ‘West End’, costing a fortune of around twenty-five pounds.
There are lots of theatres, also especially in the ‘West End’, tickets can cost anything from around ten to fifty pounds, even more some-times.
There are all the  discos , nightclubs and raves, casinos and dog races etc. that you can gamble on; London has everything.
Including lots of homeless children and adults on the streets, lots of violence and crimes.
Children would normally go to London when they ran away from home, because they thought it was the best place to go to get a job, and where they could sleep easily.
London is the best place to mix with criminals, get caught up in breaking the law, and getting injured or killed.
One of the most violent places in Great Britain.
A lot of people consider London to be big and ugly, and not a very nice place to live.
Whereas most students think it's the best place to be.
There are hundreds of arcades in London, and people become addicted to these machines just as they become addicted to drugs.
Both drugs and other addicting things are very  expensive and very easy to get, more so in London.
In a way London is both the greatest city in the United Kingdom, and the worst city in the United Kingdom.
London  have all the entertainment, music and  modern technology, famous buildings, statues , and money; but on the opposite side it has the  ugliness , violence, loneliness, homelessness, lots of pollution, litter, the poor run-down parts of London.
This all makes London a cultured city of England.
In London you are so free to do what you want; you can work where you want, do the sort of work you want,(as long as you have the sufficient G.C.S.E.'s at the age of sixteen, the ‘A’ levels at the age of eighteen, and degrees, or  diplomas etc.).
You can wear what ever clothes you want, such as torn jeans or ‘Armani’ shirts, can have your hair long, short, male or female, beads in your hair however you want to look.
In London there are always communities and societies that take in all different kinds of people.
People with different religious  beliefs , black, white people — different races, anybody.
1993, and the place to be is London, with all the good and the bad!
My Hobby Golf
I was eleven years old when I started playing golf.
It was the summer 1989 when I went down to the golf club with a friend and played around with him after that I borrowed his clubs quite regularly and  practised eventually mum & Dad chipped in  and I bought myself a set of clubs well to be exact I bought myself a bag of three iron and a putter during the next two years I had saved up and built up my set of clubs until I had a half set of irons and 2 woods during that time I had always left my clubs at the golf club to save me taking the clubs to the course every time I played.
But one morning I came to play and I found that my clubs were not there (they had been stolen) I then had to go through the long task of making a claim to the insurance company to try and claim some money to replace the clubs I had lost.
Sometime later I had replaced the clubs and got a better set than I originally had after that I thought I was quite lucky that they had been stolen.
During all the time I had played golf I had not gone into any competitions and I had not got my handicap.
Throughout the next two years I had lost interest in the game I would wait a few months and then in a space of a  week I would go and have a few games it wasn't until 1993 early January that I started playing regularly again I was determined to get a handicap and play in a few competitions sometime that year.
Then in late July I had my clubs stolen again I had left them for ten minutes at about 9.30pm and when I came back they were gone and it was at the time when I was about to play in two large junior competitions.
But then a week later my clubs turned up (all but the woods) so I changed the claim I had made  to to insurance company just so if covered the woods the money came very quickly for once.
I put it with other money I had and part exchanged my irons for a full set of top quality blades which had been in a sale after that my game improved immensely I got my handicap by  putting in three cards  two terrible scores of 86 and the good card which was 72 my handicap was then 15 I played in a junior competition and came third in the lower handicap section a week later  and played in a medal and came down to a handicap of 14.
But about a month later I played in a trophy competition and played a  disastrous round and put my handicap up  to 16 which I'm trying to get down by playing in two medal competitions in October.
During the last year I have played in several fun competitions most of these were  what was called Texas scrambles they are where everybody in the team hits a ball off the tee then  where the best shot lands everybody plays  their shot from that  position this happens until the ball is in the hole the winning team is the team in with the lowest score.
The other fun competition that I entered was the same idea but it is played in the dark you use a special ball which is slightly transparent there is a hole in the middle of the ball which a lightstick goes through.
The lightstick lasts for  up to six hours sometimes longer you tee up the ball on every shot so that you can't hit the light stick out when this game is played the flags are all lit up with bigger lightsticks.
The first time I played this competition my team happened to come first.
The under water world
I first got hooked on scuba diving when I was 12 years old.
It was at Ipswich snorkel club the instructors had brought in their aqualung which consisted of a tank which held the compressed air a regulator which supplied the air to the user and a pressure gauge which told us how much air we had in our tanks — we also had a back pack and harness which secured the tanks to us.
Each one of us was beckoned over to have a go when it was my turn I rushed over and put the tanks on I then submerged It felt strange breathing under water like a fish the bubble emitted from the regulator trickled up the side of my face.
I loved it so much I promised myself I would go on a  course one day when I was old enough.
You had to be fourteen to take up diving so when I was old enough I was actually fifteen I took the novice diver  course .
Scuba diving is a very complex sport and you are required to learn many aspects of the sport all of which are vital for example, pressure equalization, maintenance of equipment, assembling the equipment, nitrogen narcosis, decompression sickness and use of dive tables  misunderstandig or neglecting any of these can result in very serious injuries or paralysis or even death you also learn practical skills like mask clearing to a timed diver low compass navigation must also be mastered and a theory and practical tests are undertaken to show you are competent at scuba diving.
Diving is an extremely dangerous sport if not done properly.
For scuba diving you need special equipment first of all you need  an exposure suit these range from a shorty suitable for pool training to a dry suit suitable for cold water diving which is below 10°C.
Prices range from 65 pounds to 665 pound the better the suit the higher the price, most people opt for a semi-dry suit it is made out of neoprene a rubbery material which lets the water in but  doesn't let it out again your body heat warms the water up.
The flashy divers go for a really expensive dry suit.
the tank this just  hold compressed air and comes in sizes ranging from 7 litre to 15 litre they are made from steel or aluminium and have a valve to let the air out.
The regulator consists of 3 parts a first stage which clips onto the tank a hose and the second stage which you held in your mouth.
Prices vary from £65 to £275.
The pressure gauge tells you how much air you have left in your tank prices range from 30 pounds upwards.
The depth gauge tells you how deep you are  an essential piece of equipment prices start at 20 pounds and lastly the backpack this  hold the tank on your back prices start at 20 pounds and go  up to 310 pounds the expensive one  include an  integrated life jacket which is adjustable.
A water proof watch is also  an important piece of equipment.
My first dive was in a disused quarry pit where we were tested on our skills and we then swam round the lake and in a submerged double decker bus.
I was wearing a thick semi-dry suit and I was quite cold the water was cold and this was in June I was quite nervous and I was forever adjusting my   buoyancy to achieve neutral  buoyancy .
My best dive was when we went down to 18 metres the depth limit for novice divers it was even colder but it was fun the visibility was also low we had to feel our way back.
My worst dive was when on  descending a sudden shock of cold water hit my tooth sending a shock wave up my nerve the nerve ran through a sinus causing extreme pain this is called a dental  trauma I had to abandon the dive immediately.
The spills and thrills of Moto-cross
Moto-cross is a sport where off-road motorcycles race around a natural, rough course with man-made jumps and other obstacles.
The aim is to be the first rider over the finish line after a certain amount of time.
The race begins with all riders on the start line waiting behind a backwards falling start gate.
The starter will then wave a green flag to indicate that the race is soon to begin.
He will then show the riders a thirty second board which indicates that there is approximately thirty seconds before the start.
(Usually, once the thirty second board has gone up, there is around fifteen to twenty seconds before the start gate actually drops).
Then five seconds from ‘blast off’ the starter will hold up a five second board.
The riders will then rev-up before blasting off.
I had my first motorbike when I was six years old.
It was semi-automatic and very small.
I then began to enter competitions at the age of seven, riding a Yamaha fifty with a five-speed gearbox.
Except for a year when I had a break from competing, I have been racing ever since and have won two club championships and nearly one hundred trophies.
Obviously, you have to wear quite  a lot of protective clothing to minimise the risk of getting injured.
Helmets, gloves, body armour, body belt (kidney belt), goggles and boots have to be worn.
Approved race jeans and shirt also have to be worn.
The cost of all this clothing is expensive to buy brand new, but it is possible to get hold of good priced secondhand clothing.
You must also have yourself a motorcycle (strangely enough!!!) and the cost of the  machine depends on your age, and how much you are actually prepared to spend.
 There are many moto-cross clubs in this country and they are easy enough to join.
Firstly, you have to buy a licence that will last for a year (you must then renew it if you are to continue racing).
Then, after you have your licence, you must join a club(s).
There will be a membership fee for the year and you will also have to pay a fee every time you enter a race meeting.
After you've done all this, you're ready to go racing!
In schoolboy moto-cross, there are six different classes, all different ages and all on different sized machinery.
You can begin racing at the age of six, in the automatic class.
The machines in this class are 50cc motorbikes with an automatic gearbox system.
Then after the automatics, you move on to the juniors, at either age seven or eight.
The bikes used in this class are fitted with 60cc engines with six-speed transmission.
It's then on to the inter-80 class at the age of ten, riding six-speed 80cc machines.
Next, at the age of 12, it's onto the inter-open class, riding six-speed 100cc machines.
At the age of fourteen, you move up to the seniors, riding six-speed 125cc machines (full size bike).
The final group is the experts.
This is an optional group as you can leave the seniors at sixteen before moving into the adult ranks.
In adult competition, you can ride anything up to a 600cc!
At the end of a hard  day's racing, there are awards given out to the top six riders in each class, making all the effort worthwhile.
My C.B. Radio
C.B. Radio means community Band Radio.
A C.B. is a radio that people can talk to each other on rather like a telephone but it is not private as anyone who has a C.B. can listen in to your conversations.
To set a C.B. up all you have to have is an actual set a microphone and a C.B. aerial.
Last summer one of my friends lent me a C.B. and an old aerial as he had bought a new set and some more of my friends had C.B.s.
So instead of ringing each other up on the telephone we spoke to each other over the C.B. as you  don't have to pay each time you speak as when you speak on a C.B. your words travel with Radio waves and when you speak on a telephone your words travel down wires.
Since I have had my C.B. I have spoken to people all over the country and even spoken to people in Ireland and Germany.
When you speak on the C.B. you  don't use your name you have a  handle you can make your own  handle usually to do with something you are interested and one you  don't think any one else has.
My  handle is TomCat because I am interested in  aeroplanes .
You have to have a licence to have a C.B. and when you get your licence you also get given a rule book which tells you all the things you are and are not allowed to do and say when using the C.B. One of the rules is that you are not allowed to swear down the C.B. as anybody can listen into your conversation and hear you swearing.
I have made many friends through the C.B. and speak to them  regularly and I have then met some of them.
When you meet someone it is called eyeballing.
So when you eyeball someone and arrange to eyeball them over the C.B. you do not meet them somewhere like your house because you  don't want anyone who might be listening to turn up at your house so you meet them somewhere like the park or somewhere like that and then take them to your house if you wish.
 Flying light aircraft
You may have seen small single engine aircraft buzzing about the skies on warm sunny mornings.
These are light aircraft and they mean one thing!
 There's an airfield near your house.
I fly at Crowfield  flying club with my dad and other members.
The club charges about £2.50 landing fee and sell aircraft fuel sweets and drinks.
The club also does  flying lessons.
A trial flight, to see if this hobby is suited to you, costs around £35 and a normal  flying lesson costs £69 a time.
You can get your  pilot's licence when you are 17 years old.
To obtain this you must have flown a  minimum of 35 hours and there are medical exams and ground exams to be taken.
The medical exam is to find out if you are fit to fly.
If you have had heart  attacks in the past you might not pass your medical for  flying .
To keep your  pilot's licence you must fly 5 hours each year minimum.
Me and my dad fly in a cessna.
A cessna is a trike aircraft because it has a nose wheel and 2 other wheels under the  fuselage .
The other type of air craft are tail draggers.
These planes have 2 wheels under the  fuselage and one wheel at the back under the tail.
I have never flown in a tail dragger before but I would like to in the near future.
My first flight was in cessna called a honey bee, it was with a man called Andy who  my dad knows.
We flew for an hour and in that time I completed a reel of film in my  camera .
I saw my school from the air and my village and  across most of the countryside.
I was able to take controls of the aircraft when we were up in the sky.
Since then I have flown in another black cessna stunt plane and with my dad 3 times and I also done another  circuit with Andy.
The most scary flight I have ever been on was with Andy.
He would jerk the steering  column turning my  stomach over.
On the way into land we couldn't find the  mendlsham mast which we use as a land mark to find the airfield.
As I was only 12 it scared me but now I know seeing a land mark just helps find the airstrip.
The best flight I have been on was in the black cessna.
We flew to the coast at  Clacton and followed it along to  Felixstowe .
 We then followed the  River Orwell to the bridge before going home in the distance we could see other aircraft.
They were about 30 miles away however.
I liked this flight because we were in a nearly full open canopy which enables you to see clearly all around.
On a cloudless day you can see for miles.
I  reckon that, if my maths are right, you can see for over 100 miles.
There have been many aircraft crashes, not at Crowfield, but everywhere, but don't worry about that you have to remember that there have been more safe landings than crashes.
This is what I used to say so I wasn't scared of  flying .
There has been one crash at Crowfield, it was on Anglia News.
A red biplane from Crowfield had taken off and gone into a loop when he came out of the loop he couldn't pull the plane level and he crashed into a field.
He escaped with a broken leg and pulled himself from the wreckage before Crowfield emergency services arrived from the club.
Being with a  flying club enables you to get information on  special air  rally days.
I went to Biggin Hill International Airfair last year.
I went with three other members.
This gave me the  chance to see many different  military aircraft.
I was able to sit in the cockpit of many aircraft including the phantom, tornado, mig 21, Hercules and  buccaneer .
 It's a great day out for anyone interested.
 Flying an aircraft requires great concentration when landing or taking off.
When you arrive at  your aircraft you must do your visual checks.
You check the air cabin ventilation duct for birds nests, the oil the carb and the flaps and  ailerons .
Inside the aircraft you do internal checks.
You must check that the steering column and pedals are in working order and that they control the parts of the aircraft correctly.
You must then check that all instruments like the artificial horizon and altitude metre etc work.
The throttle must be in functional order as well.
Before take off you remove the front cover over the airspeed intake and then start your propeller.
Before starting check that all is clear and shout ‘clear prop’.
When the propeller is on you open and close your throttle to check it works before setting it to the correct position.
You check your flaps before setting the angle and  accelerate down the runway into the wind.
When you are in the air and have climbed to 800 feet you check all the cockpit instruments again.
You then do your down wind and up wind checks before going to 1000 feet.
You do a complete  circuit , left or right depending on wind, and then you can go where you want.
The Debenham Floods
‘The rain will continue through the night until about midday tomorrow.
There may be one or two flooded areas in the morning down along the east coast, but elsewhere should just have a few heavy showers.
This is John Cole reporting for the I.T.N. National Weather Service.’
The rain certainly did come down during the night, it was so loud on the window the noise made it difficult to sleep.
While at school the following day there was a general rumour being passed around, this was that all pupils were going to be sent home.
From what I later found out, it was apparent that if we were not sent home it may have become increasingly difficult to transport those pupils who travelled on coaches home through the floods which had been gradually rising, mainly due to the River Deben bursting its banks and so flooding the nearby villages.
It was  affecting Debenham more than most because it is in Debenham that the River Deben is first starting out on its course.
So it was considered by the staff that the best solution would be to close the school for the afternoon.
As it was only eleven thirty in the morning there were quite a few people who thought that it would be fun to go out and play in the floods and others who were just lending a hand to those in difficulty.
It was quite surprising how when in a disaster the whole community pulled together and helped each other out, and there were a fair number of people who really were having problems.
It is hard to imagine the effect  water can have on the lives of normal everyday people, there were about six or seven houses that I knew of that almost completely wrecked.
If the water did enter a  person's house they were usually able to move all of the furniture and  possessions upstairs where they would keep safe and dry, but this was not possible for all the  residents .
The worst stories were those from the people living in bungalows having nowhere to move to.
From the point when the water first burst the banks and began to rise up the gardens of the properties it was mainly a battle against he clock to try to stack everything as high as they could and take up the carpets.
For most of these people they were fighting a  losing battle.
Inside the house of a friend of mine nearly everything was affected in one way or another.
It was not only the houses and buildings that were  affected , there were also many cars and vans that had to stop their journeys and wait hoping the water start to drain away so they would be able to reach their destination.
Some such cars were held up and trapped for up to six hours, for those who could the best option was to leave the car and complete the journey on foot.
In some areas the water was up to four feet high in places and for people who did not want to get wet the task of crossing this water was only possible by two ways, the first being to ask to hitch a lift in one of the high performance tractors which were out being a sort of taxi service and the second option was to catch a lift in either of the boats which also appeared to offer their services.
These boats were a  dinghy or a canoe so this was no place to be wearing your best  Sunday clothes