

My First Day
There were less than twelve hours before the big day, my first day at Debenham High School.
A day which could and probably would change my life, or so I thought.
I had spent the few months before brimming over with excitement and anticipation for when my time would come to leave what had been my place of education for the previous four years.
Then all of a sudden my enthusiasm had been replaced with deep anxiety and apprehension for what actually lay ahead of me.
It had dawned on me that not only was I leaving the comfortingly familiar surroundings of primary school but that I no longer had any influence whatsoever on the other pupils at the school which I had had before but I was to be demoted to ‘the annoying first year’.
So there I was, lying in my bed with all sorts of horrible scenarios running through my head.
I couldn't remember where my form room was or where the toilets were and what was the Headteacher's name?
As the light had caressed the window in my room early the next morning, implying that the world had begun to awaken, I was already up, dressed in clean crisp fabrics of my school uniform, a new and unwelcome experience to me, and gobbling down my two Weetabix and Marmite toast for breakfast.
I was in fact ten minutes early that morning which seems nearly impossible looking back, and after my tearful goodbye to my mother, I embarked on the expedition to the bus stop.
The sight that greeted me was not really an encouraging one.
A girl I vaguely knew from the village was standing there with tears streaming down her face and apart from the occasional sob from her we stood there in  stony silence.
I inwardly breathed a sigh of relief as the bus pulled up to the stop and we eagerly clambered on, searching for a seat near to someone we  at least knew the name of.
As I failed to do this I spent the entire journey  staring intently at the zip of my coat and at least I learned a lot about clothes fastenings that morning.
After we all clambered off the bus and entered the school I started to become a bit more relaxed as I realised I wasn't the only person there who had butterflies as big as eagles in their stomachs.
 After What seemed like a shattering day, I sat on the bus but this time the journey was much more jovial as relief sunk in.
As I look back now though I realise the similarities, in six months time I will  be embarking on a new era of my life, my first day at sixth form.
Will I be as nervous as I was then?
Will I be able to cope?
But until my anticipation turns into apprehension again I will be waiting, imagining what my life will be like in the new school and will I be able to remember where the toilets are.
My Life
In 1978, on the 21st June, I was born in Ipswich Maternity hospital.
I am the daughter of  and , nee  who were married three years before my birth.
We lived in a large farmhouse, that belonged to the farm my father worked for.
The house had a large garden with a small river running at the foot of it and was situated in the small quiet village of .
Three years after I was born my parents decided to add another member to our family, my brother,.
My brother and I are very close and I have faint memories of visiting him, when he was a day old, in hospital.
I come from quite a large family but most of my family live in the same area.
My cousins lived not far from us, on the same stretch of road, and we often saw them as we were all of similar age.
Although at sometimes we did not get on we generally were content playing together.
In 1983 I was a bridesmaid, and my brother was a page boy for my  auntie's wedding.
I wore a sweet pink dress with dark pink roses patterning it.
I also had to wear new pink sandals that I had only  received the morning of the wedding.
The sandals had shiny soles with no grip and I can clearly remember skipping into the registry office and falling flat on my face.
Unfortunately, my  parents' marriage slowly hit stormy weather and they split up.
As our house belonged to the farm my dad worked on, my mum, and myself moved in with my mum's mum and dad.
It was rather a squash at my nana's house because mum, and I had to share a bedroom.
The size of the room restricted the amount of furniture that would fit in the room.
This meant my brother and my mum had to share a double bed and I slept in a single one.
As this was rather uncomfortable, a year later we were allocated a council house, this house was in  where our old house had been and my nana's house was in  the neighbouring village of , so luckily in all our moves my brother and I never had to move schools.
Our new house is a two bedroom semi detached house.
My brother and I shared a room for a while but we soon had a partition put in allowing us to each have our  separate rooms.
After a while my mum's new boyfriend moved in, and he eventually became my mum's fiancé.
During this time my brother and I would visit my dad every Sunday.
He moved from our old house to a smaller house in .
He also got engaged and moved in with his  fiancé to another house belonging to the farm he works for.
In 1989, on April 1st my mum married her boyfriend.
I was bridesmaid and I wore a  blue and white striped dress.
They were married at a registry office and had a quiet reception.
The weather was cold and windy and during the photographs my hat blew off several times.
In July of the same year my dad married his girlfriend.
They were also married in a registry office.
However, they had a blessing in a church and a large reception.
I  now had two sets of parents.
My mum and my stepdad decided not to have any children.
However my dad and my stepmum had two.
On 16th January 1991 my half sister was born.
She was named .
One year and eight months later on the 27th of September my half brother was born, He was named .
My brother and I treat them as full brother and sister and we spoil them rotten.
A lot has changed since 1978 when I was born.
However, my parents are both happy, has grown up and is football mad, will be three in a few months, has just turned one and in seven months I will be leaving high school and have my whole future in front of me.
School Journey to Edale
It was Tuesday morning, when year ten pupils boarded the coach, ready for the long journey which lay ahead of them.
Our destination was to be Cliff College in the Peat District, where we would spend the next few days.
After leaving school at around ten o'clock, we arrived at Cliff College at about four-thirty in the afternoon.
During our journey we had been taken to Sherwood Forest, where we had a short while to look around and similarly at Chatsworth house.
Both were very interesting and fun, but nothing compared to what was planned for the rest of the holiday.
Once at the College we settled into the homely and very adequate accommodation before having a light snack.
Our evening activity was a relaxing and pleasant walk along Curber Edge, with some wonderful views.
After returning from the walk, we ate tea and then played a variety of logical games.
The next morning, we were all up early and eating breakfast by eight o'clock.
After preparing for our  morning's activities we got on the coach and were taken to the suitable sites arranged for rock climbing and cycling.
The riding stables were about half an  hour's drive from the college.
Once we were there we were geared up with riding hats and given a horse.
Of course the horse named Bess, which I was given had a mind of its own, since it would always be eating and when it was not it only plodded along.
However being my first experience, it was very enjoyable, if only a little sore later and was an excellent way of seeing such beautiful scenery.
We went back  to college for lunch and changed before heading off again.
We arrived in Sheffield a little after three in the afternoon and parked in the Meadow Hall Shopping Centre car park.
The complex was huge and had a lovely interior, with shrubs and colourful plants everywhere.
The rest of the afternoon we spent shopping and taking in the experience of having so many shops and stalls under one roof There were all types to browse in from clothes, stationery , crafts and food as well as many others.
Before departing, we ate and then headed  off to the Crucible Theatre for the evening.
The theatre is quite spectacular, with the seating arrangement and the plays performed there are of a very high standard.
The play we saw was  A Midsummer Night's Dream , which was excellent!
The actors made the play very exciting and left everybody astounded and intrigued with the way they performed and to add to this the stage really set the scene with the back drops and props.
This visit really was worth it.
Once this was over we returned to the college exhausted, with such a cram packed day.
The following day, most of us visited Bakewell, where we did a river walk, before returning to the college.
Other pupils went climbing and pony trekking.
The afternoon was very energetic since we travelled up to Doncaster Dome where we went ice skating.
The rink was on two levels and had an Alpine atmosphere to it with pine trees and the snowflake effects.
We spent about two hours doing this before going swimming.
The contrast of a tropical atmosphere with palm trees and shrubs had been created.
There was so much to do with the six pools, giant flumes, waterfalls, fountains and lots more.
The most exciting was the white water rapids and jets of water which had been created out of doors.
These were brilliant fun and very relaxing, as the water carried you around the small island, without you having to do anything.
The events had been very tiring and we were glad to find our beds that night.
Friday, the last morning was hectic with everyone trying to pack, cook and eat breakfast and clear up.
Eventually we managed everything and left Cliff College at eleven-thirty.
On our journey back home, we were to do one last activity, either ten pin bowling or white water rafting.
The people doing the latter were extremely excited yet also very apprehensive.
Our first problem was one the water was quite cold and so everyone had to find a wet suit to fit them, which caused a slight problem.
However we soon were sorted and ready.
Once we were in the raft with all our life jackets and equipment we had to learn to control the raft and respond to commands, then we were ready to hit the rapids.
The experience was unbelievable and no one minded the part in which we all got soaked.
Completing the course safely everyone cheered.
We then went down again, this time backwards which was also excellent fun, if a little daunting with not quite being able to see what was going on.
The activity had been a wonderful success and very much worth the experience.
Once everyone was dressed we once again boarded the coach for the journey home.
Lowestoft College
The sun shone through my curtains, disturbing me.
I rose, got dressed and gazed at my luggage lying on the floor.
I was going to Lowestoft for two days but my clothing could last me weeks.
At 8.45 I arrived at school my heart filled with delight as I stood amongst pupils in school uniform while I stood in my usual scruffy  manner .
The coach arrived and we all ran for the back seat.
The boys, being the largest, managed to grab them, while we got pushed further and further to the front, nearer to the teachers.
After a long journey we arrived at Lowestoft College.
Lowestoft College was not very eye catching, in fact it looked a dump but as they say ‘never judge a book by its cover’.
After we were given room numbers we unpacked, well we tried to unpack, ten minutes to be outside were our precise orders.
Ten minutes flew  by but we managed to unpack, have a quick wash and change.
We all were introduced to our leaders and they soon explained our first task.
We all had to find a partner and make up imaginary names.
We then were both blindfolded and placed apart at about fifty yards.
Calling out our imaginary names we had to find each other.
Now about  forty five pupils were  playing this game, this also meant  forty five pupils screaming and  forty five pupils running around.
Teamwork was the main word we worked around for our two day visit.
In groups,(for our next game) we all formed a circle around one person blindfolded.
The idea was to see how much faith the blindfolded person had in his so called friends.
The pushing started first gently but slowly progressing to hard pushes.
The men at the time all stood round one side while all the girls stood opposite.
I was standing next to, and we both are not exactly strong.
We  received a giant push from  and poor  (the person blindfolded) fell with a crash to the ground and it was along time before he regained his faith in us.
The  Arrival  at lunch was a welcomed suggestion and the afternoon soon flew  by .
I was then  beginning to wonder  whether I was to return alive, as the activities began to get harder but more enjoyable.
Evening soon came and water was introduced.
Lowestoft  College was set  aside a lake so there was no trouble in finding a good source.
Placed in front of us was a large pole, inside the pole was a fuel which we would be able to make a fire with.
The idea was to pour water in, from the top and   receive the fuel.
However the pole had tiny holes along the sides for the water to escape through.
The result was  forty five pupils running around screaming and totally soaked.
The fire was lit and our group won.
I was very tired and time for bed was heaven.
Our second day turned out to be the  wettest and coldest.
Swimming in the Alton Broads, canoe making, water  treading and loads more.
The time flew  by and the coach came to pick us up and take us home.
I didn't want to go.
The coach journey seemed shorter and it was sad to see the school emerging from the trees.
It was nice, however, to walk through the front door and retire to my bed, I was home and I had survived.
The life of the New Age Travellers
As a teenager living in the ‘nineties’ I lead a fairly normal and basic lifestyle.
I live in a small village in Suffolk called Wetheringsett.
I share a bungalow with my nan and our pet dog Ben.
I used to go to Wetheringsett Primary School but currently attend Debenham High School.
I enjoy living in the countryside and like nothing more than a stroll through the villages.
My one dream in life is to be able to travel.
One day I would like to visit the beautiful country of India.
One of my oldest friends called Jon went to India last year.
He returned home with some  fascinating tales  to tell and some eye opening photographs.
Jon is a ‘New Age Traveller’ and I have known him for two years.
It is the ‘New Age Travellers’ that I would like to write about.
I shall firstly tell you about Jon.
Jon is twenty-five and lives in a bus in Stoke-Ash a village near Wetheringsett.
As a child he was brought up in Kent.
His grandparents used to be  Gypsies and Jon realised from an early age that he would like to follow in their footsteps.
When he was sixteen he left school and went to live with his sister Molly who  incidentally lives with her husband and children in a caravan.
They all moved from Kent to live in Scotland.
Jon stayed with them for two years until he had enough money to own a bus of his own.
He left Scotland and moved to Suffolk with his friend Iain who lives with his parents in a farmhouse in Stoke-Ash.
 It's there where I met him.
He lives in a Double Decker  bus coloured orange and red.
He also has a wonderful dog called Merlin.
 Jon's bedroom is on the top deck along with washing facilities and a television which works from a generator.
His kitchen is on the bottom floor and  Merlin's bedroom is where the driver of the bus would usually be!
He does odd jobs for friends and neighbours and with the money he earns he buys food for Merlin and himself.
Although he leads a different lifestyle from others he is basically a normal person!
Many people underestimate these travellers ;they think they are looking for an easy life.
I can assure you this is not true.
They do not understand their reasons for living this way.
Jon believes that this beautiful world was put before us  to travel around and explore.
I agree with him and one day I shall join him and his friends and travel this world together.
Childminder
Every morning, Monday to Friday, my mother gets up and makes sure she is ready for work.
She works from half past seven until half past six at night.
She has no lunch break or tea breaks.
Eleven hours solid working.
What is this laborious job?
Childminding.
She looks after children before school and after school, up to eleven year olds.
During the day she looks after three under three year olds.
She has been childminding for eight years now and has gained an extremely good reputation.
One of the  babies' mother even said that she would not have another child until my mum had a vacancy!
Some people think that childminding is an easy job, but if they spent just half a day doing the work she does I am sure they would soon be ready for bed!
The work involves feeding them, three babies at a time, it is not easy.
She also has to get them ready for bed and try to avoid one child's screams waking another.
Potty-training is another joy of the job.
Asking every ten minutes if they ‘need a wee-wee’!
By law she is not allowed to smack the children and I cannot understand, sometimes how she manages to stop herself when brand new wallpaper has been pulled off the wall and a clean coat of paint has been drawn on.
This job can be quite dangerous.
Just a few weeks ago she fell on a toy brick and sprained her foot badly!
Although it sounds quite funny picking up children and carrying them can be tricky when you can hardly walk.
You would not believe the variety of personalities of the babies.
I used to think that all children  were the same.
They cry, eat, sleep and dirty their nappies!
Now, however I realise that they all grow up in different stages and learn to do different things at different times.
For example my mum looks after two little boys who are both three.
One of the little boys speaks almost perfectly and draws and mixes colours extremely well.
The other boy speaks  averagely but does not do the rest.
He does however ride a bike and is already able to throw and kick balls where he is aiming them.
One boy,, really sticks out in my mind.
My mum has been minding him since he was seven months old, he is now six.
One day I had left a five pound note on the  mantelpiece .
I looked for it everywhere but I could not find it.
Suddenly  ran up to my mum and burst out,
‘I didn't take Rachel's money and hide it, I didn't.’
‘Where didn't you hide it,’ said mum, ‘you show me where you didn't hide it.’
‘O.K.,’ said  as he skipped off.
He ran all the way to the bottom of the garden and pointed to a duck that was swimming in the river.
‘I didn't throw it to the duck to hide,’ he giggled!
I eventually retrieved my five pound note that had, luckily, not made it to the duck's mouth but had got caught on the bank.
France and Me!
It has been almost three months now since I have been home here in England after spending three weeks holiday in France with my friend Rachel and her family.
When we arrive home from France into the large village, Debenham where I live, it was really strange and felt really odd after not being home for so long.
The journey had been long, hot and tiring and to add to my list I didn't really want to come home.
I will tell you why.
It was on a Friday night and I had packed my suitcases and taken them around to Rachel's house so her dad could stack them on top of the car.
I was so excited.
I couldn't wait to zoom off towards the seacat to go to France, but in 5 hours I would be.
Those five hours passed slowly and painfully, I was  definitely going to miss my family and friends but I just wanted to go and have my holiday.
I jumped into the car after my mum, dad and sister had squeezed and kissed me to death and did up my seat belt.
I really felt like crying because I didn't want to leave my family behind but within three weeks I would be back with them all again.
We waved our final goodbyes, and set off!
We finally reached the docks, and waited in the queue for only a short while, which was surprising because of the amount of cars which were there.
We drove onto the boat and got out of our cars and went up further to the boat.
We all chose our seats and placed our weak bodies into them.
Only an  hour's trip and we  were in  Boulogne .
Yet again we went down towards our car and followed lots of other cars off the boat.
 Boulogne !
Rather a dreary, grey looking place not very eye catching to me but that didn't matter the next eight  hours' driving did.
They went extremely slowly, hot, boring and exhausting  although we were sitting down.
The last ten minutes of the journey were so exciting, I just couldn't wait to plonk my feet in a nice bowl of water, then we reached the village we were to stay in for the next three weeks.
It was called ‘Anetz’ and it looked really lonely, dull and desolate, but that could tell.
Our  Gîte was lovely, it was set on legs, high up off the ground.
It was right next to the beach which was a great advantage.
We unpacked our bags, and then relaxed until the next morning.
The next morning I got up at 7.30 am and had breakfast, got changed and got into the car to wait for Rachel, Betty, Paul and David.
Today we were going to Nantes to go sight seeing and shopping.
When we got there it was really crowded and very city like, with large buildings and lights.
It was wonderful, the shops were excellent ,it was only the first day of our holiday and I had spent most of my money.
The rest of my holiday went so quickly, each day we went out, sight seeing or to various beaches, and also it was very hot, not like England.
I reckon now you might see why I didn't want to come home.
People were so kind and friendly, the  atmosphere was so different and the weather, well, that was unreal.
I had a real tan to  show off to everyone, when I got home, and that was tomorrow morning at 4.00am.
We bid our farewells to all our new  French friends and got into the car wearily, knowing of the long journey home.
Actually the journey home was shorter and less tiring which was weird.
The seacat was a smoother crossing and the drive home from  Folkestone was really quick.
About 1.30 am we got home to Debenham, it was raining it was cold and completely desolate.
Tomorrow I was going to my gran's house like I did most  Sundays .
I got out of the car and ran to my front door, my mum answered the door, she looked quite different but I gave her a massive cuddle and went indoors.
Everything looked strange but I would get used to it, and I did.
Nearly three months on and I still miss France and I wish I could go back, but I'm enjoying myself here in Debenham being close to all my friends and family.
I can always remember my holiday.
It was a holiday of a lifetime.
Trip to Austria
In September 1991 we were given letters saying that the school was organising a ski trip to Austria on the second of April 1992.
It seemed a long way away but before we knew it we were paying the last of the deposits.
Practice ski lessons were arranged at the local dry ski slope.
We attended every Wednesday night after school.
After three lessons we were all able to do the basic skiing.
We left for Austria on the second of April at nine  o'clock .
Everyone was really excited even though we had a long coach journey ahead of us.
We were on the coach until about one pm the next day.
We got on the ferry at Dover and travelled to  Oostende .
We arrived in Austria about five pm on Sunday.
We were all allocated to our rooms and after we had unpacked we went to collect our skiing gear.
We arrived  back at about seven pm, had our evening meal and then got an early night because we had a long day ahead of us.
We arrived on the slopes at nine am.
All the ski instructors had gathered at the bottom of the small slope.
We met with the head ski instructor first and he made us all ski down the slope individually so that he could put us into different groups.
We all started at different stages on the smaller mountain for beginners.
After a few falls we all managed to get to the bottom of the slope in a snow plough position.
We gradually side stepped higher up the slope.
We took a break for lunch at 12 pm.
We sat along the wall at the back of the shops.
It felt weird sitting outside in the snow eating lunch.
Even though it looked cold it was quite hot.
 On the first day most of us managed to get sunburnt.
After lunch we did a bit more skiing and then we had to go back to the hotel.
The day had gone pretty quickly.
After we had our evening meal we went up to our rooms .
 From our bedroom window you could see one of the mountains.
Where we were there was no snow at all but as soon as you started to get higher it was completely white.
On the third day we had to start using the lifts on the ski slopes.
We started off by using the T-bars which were very awkward because you had to stand  in front of a small bar, you couldn't sit down or lean forward.
The first time most of the people fell off halfway up.
Then we had to ski down to the next lot of lifts which went even higher and when we had mastered that we got on a chairlift which took us right to the top.
We did this towards the end of the holiday.
By then we were all pretty good so we found it much more enjoyable.
During the evenings the teachers arranged different activities.
One night we went swimming and bowling and towards the end we had a disco.
In the hotel we were staying at there were other schools, one night we organised a quiz against them which was fun.
On the last night we were all presented with certificates.
During the holiday we did a slalom course and we were all timed and given certificates according to what we got.
They also gave out presents for the funniest person on skis and the person who fell the most.
Everyone was really sad to be leaving.
We left Austria at six thirty pm on the ninth of  April.
Everyone was so tired out that we were all falling asleep on the way home.
We stopped off at a few cafes on the way so that we could stretch our legs.
When we arrived back at school everyone wanted to turn around and go back again.
It was the best holiday I have ever had.
The scenery was beautiful and even though there was snow on the ground it was like a hot summers day and if I had the chance to go back I would.
The Isle of Wight
On the 26th June 1989 I went on a primary school trip to the Isle of Wight.
I was ten at the time and attending Sir Robert Hitchams Primary School.
It was Monday when we left and we had to be out of Debenham by quarter to seven in the morning.
We spent most of that day travelling down to Portsmouth.
We eventually arrived there about one in the afternoon.
most of us had eaten our lunch by then on the coach because we were so hungry, after all it had been seven hours since we had last eaten.
While we were waiting for our ferry to come we went and visited the Mary Rose war ship.
There was not  a lot of the ship left to see and it was very cold, below zero in fact.
We then went to an exhibition of the salvaged artifacts with some very realistic looking wax work people amongst them.
Some even made me jump After this we got back on the coach and waited for the ferry.
The journey on the ferry lasted just half an hour.
We were staying in Carisbrooke House Hotel by Sandown beach.
The rooms were actually quite luxurious with a shower, colour television and duvet covered bunk beds.
There were six of us in our room with many a quarrel breaking out amongst us.
The meals were also rather grand.
Three courses for each of the meals.
I was full just after the first one.
On the Tuesday our proper visits began to the surrounding area.
In the morning we went to Carisbrooke Castle and took part in a game to see how to get into the castle.
My favourite moment of  that visit was seeing Jennifer the donkey.
She pulled the bucket in the  castle's well by treading on a wheel, much like a hamster does on its little wheel.
The well was very deep, about fifty metres down and it took Jennifer ten minutes to complete the task of lowering and raising the bucket.
In the afternoon we went to Robin Hill Adventure Park.
This was a large amusement area filled with slides, rope swings and wooden  climbing frames.
I took a turn on a rope slide and had to sit on a tractor tyre on the way down.
The area was very wet with a large puddle directly under the end of the slide.
There were parrots on show  too .
One sorry looking creature had lost all its feathers.
The next day we went to Haseley Manor and Alum Bay.
Haseley Manor was a very large building with lots of ancient furniture inside.
While we were there we were told some ghost stories about the house and in one room there was a mummified cat to ward off evil spirits.
It was a long journey to Alum Bay.
Almost the whole width of the island.
By then it had started to rain and it was very cold along the coast.
For contrast we went to the glass blowing factory for a demonstration of their skills.
Then we went and had a look at the coloured cliffs of sand.
The Needles could just be made out in the distance.
The day after, which was the Thursday, we went to the Isle of Wight Steam Railway.
Here we had  The chance to ride in one of the many steam trains.
It was a very short trip of ten minutes and took us from Wolton to Haven Street and back.
That afternoon we visited the stately Osborne House with its large statues and priceless antiques.
I must admit that I did not enjoy Osborne House that much but I was very tired by then.
The last day saw me a very sombre person, I was going to miss the island and its attractions.
Before we left the island for good though we had one last place to go.
The Butterfly and Fountain World.
I soon cheered up watching the glorious butterflies going about their business in the hot climate and then cooling down amongst the fountains.
I slept most of the way home only waking when we got back to Debenham.
I was quite pleased to be back home but I missed the excitement of the trips and wanted to go back for just a few more days.
My Musical Experience
For as long as I can remember I have done and been interested in music.
My mum and dad bought me a piano when I started having piano lessons at the age of four and three quarters.
I got on well, and at the age of seven, I took up the violin.
My music then had an unfortunate break of nearly a year when I was eight years old; we moved house.
However, I settled down with a new teacher for both piano and violin.
At the age of twelve, I tried to get an audition for a place in the Suffolk Junior Strings, but the man who was organising it, said: ‘had you played the viola, you would have got in.’
I changed to viola, and at the age of fourteen had grade eight with distinction.
The piano has yet to catch up.
At school, I always used to enjoy the music lessons, the music teacher was a man called .
He played violin, so my interests were much the same as his, having only played classical music all my life.
But at the beginning of my third year, took over from , he played saxophone, and was more interested in school bands and pop music.
There had been a group, not known as anyone, but who played some well-known songs, and went round Primary Schools in the Debenham pyramid, playing to the children who would, one day, be at Debenham High School.
Once Mr Hooper started managing this group, it got a name for itself —‘Black and Blue’.
The members of the band were:(voice and bass),(electric guitar),(drums) and  (keyboard).
However, decided to leave the group, so Mr Hooper asked me if I would play keyboard.
I, of course, said yes.
Our best songs were: ‘Living on a Prayer’ by Bon Jovi, ‘Sweet child of Mine’by Guns ‘n Roses, ‘ Dead or Alive’by Bon Jovi, and ‘Say Goodbye’, also by Bon Jovi.
At Snape Maltings Concert Hall, they have a ‘Celebration of Schools Music’ week, when they ask a number of schools to produce a band or orchestra, or anything musical for their concerts.
As I said, this is over a week, so they have seven concerts.
Each concert will consist of four or five schools.
So they ask  a lot of schools.
Debenham High School was asked this year, and as  ‘Black and Blue’ was the school's best musical group, we played at Snape.
We got a very good reception there; the professional lighting and sound really made us feel as though we were professional.
In February of this year (1993), ‘Black and Blue’ entered a competition called ‘Festival of Youth Music’.
We had to go to Thetford for the judging, and although we were quite good for a school of Debenham's size.
we never dreamed that we would get through to the next round, to be held in London.
We did, and off to London we went on the ninth of July, for the judging, at the Queen Elizabeth Hall.
Unfortunately, we didn't play well together on that particular day, I don't really know why, or what went wrong; perhaps it was nerves from playing in a large hall in London.
As you may have guessed, we didn't get through that round, but getting to London meant that we were one of the best bands (for our age — fifteen to sixteen years) in East Anglia.
Unfortunately, the band has split up now, and  were a year older than  and I, so they have already left Debenham High School, and there is no-one of similar  standard to replace them.
But my studies go on, Music GCSE is just one of the nine exams I take next May (1994), then I would like to  do ‘A’ -level music, and hopefully, Music at University.
And who knows, fame as a composer!
Diary of a fifteen year old 9th October 1993
Saturday
I woke up at about nine o'clock this morning.
I was looking forward to my day because I would be getting my monthly allowance of thirty pounds from my mum.
My child allowance is approximately thirty-seven pounds a month so mum keeps seven pounds and I have thirty.
This is for all my clothes, shoes and anything else I might want to buy.
It is also for presents when it is  somebody's birthday or Christmas.
When we were both ready mum dropped me in Ipswich, gave me some extra money for some food at lunchtime and some school shoes and went to her course.
I had about four hours to spend looking around Ipswich which was plenty of time as Ipswich is quite a small town.
I managed to find a pair of school shoes for twenty pounds which is quite cheap compared to some of the other prices.
I also managed to buy a jumper which is really warm.
The weather is getting colder so I will appreciate it a great deal.
Sunday
I got up quite late today as I do not do anything important and it is my one real chance for a lie-in.
I had enough homework to keep me busy for most of the day.
We had a main meal as usual at lunchtime.
This has been a tradition in my family for as long as I can remember because during the week, everyone in my family has a main meal in the evening and sandwiches at lunchtime.
I managed to get all my work done and still watch some of my favourite programs on the television.
A lot of people I know have got  satellite television but it is quite expensive and somehow, I can not see mum agreeing to it!
Monday
I had to get up at quarter to seven this morning.
I have to get a bus at eight o'clock so I have to leave the house at twenty to eight.
I am on the bus for Fifty-five minutes and the journey begins to  get quite boring.
We arrive at school, just before nine o'clock and had seven hours of school to look forward to.
My lessons were: History, German, Art, Science and Maths.
We are doing a study of Debenham Church in History at the moment and went down into the village in the lesson time to draw the different types of windows in the building.
It rained on and off today but we managed to escape getting wet.
After school I had a clarinet lesson.
I have my lesson at school and then walk down the road to the bus stop in Debenham.
This means that I arrive home half an hour later than usual.
It is still very cold and raining a great deal.
Tuesday
It rained very heavily last night and this morning the ditches at the sides of the roads were full of water.
The roads were quite flooded and the weather was not improving.
In the middle of a History lesson we heard the good news.
School was going to be closed early because the rain had not stopped and the school and village were nearly totally cut off from everywhere else.
The people that live in the village could go home straight away but the buses could only get to some of the villages.
Some people had to wait for parents to pick them up.
By the time I had managed to contact mum on the telephone the flooding was getting even worse.
The River Deben had burst its banks and  people's homes were getting flooded.
It took mum two hours to get to Debenham and it normally takes half an hour.
I still had to do homework when I got back home because nobody knew how quickly the floods would disappear so there was still the possibility of school tomorrow.
Wednesday
I had to listen to Radio Suffolk this morning and Debenham was a school mentioned to be closed today.
I made the most of this and did lots of work and piano and clarinet  practice .
The floods were clearing up quite quickly but they were still the centre of attention on the news.
Apparently they are the worst floods we have had in Suffolk since 1954.
Thursday
Unfortunately we had to go back to school today.
Everyone was in a good mood because not only was it the last day of school today, but everybody had had one and a half  days off school already.
There is going to be a professional training day for staff tomorrow so there will be no school again.
I could get used to two and a half days at school a week instead of five!
The teachers, however, decided that we needed to be kept busy over the long weekend and gave us lots of work to do.
Friday
I tried to get most of my work done today so that I would not have so much to do on the weekend.
I am going to see my dad in London tonight.
I go down there every other weekend to stay with my dad and stepmother.
I caught the five thirty train from  Manningtree and it gets into London at ten to seven.
When I arrived in London we had a main meal and watched some television.
Dad has three cats called Toby, Cleo and Mishkin, and I was pleased to see them again.
I will be staying for the weekend and going back on the train on Sunday night.
I am looking forward to my weekend.
High House Stables
I work at High House Farm Riding Stables.
It is only at weekends and during the holidays.
I enjoy my job and I have some friends who work with me.  and  are like my brother and sister.
They own a pony at the riding stables.
Their father  owns the buildings and fields in which we keep the horses.
He owns some horses at the riding stable too.
My Auntie  runs the riding stables with her work partner .
has a pony on loan.
He has just finished his GCSE's and has now moved on to‘A’ levels at sixth form.
works with us because of her love for horses.
The stables have been open for one year this November.
In the summer we let the horses out on the fields and every morning we catch the horses we need for the  day's work.
In the winter we keep the horses in the stables.
Unfortunately this means that we have to muck out the stables every day.
puts a list of lessons and hacks on the notice board and we tack up and groom horses accordingly.
We do not get paid but we do have a free hack or lesson once a month.
Our tack room is filled with the smell of leather and saddle soap.
In our menage we have wood  chippings which are quite nice to fall on.
lives in a caravan in  Mendlesham and drives to the stables each day.
Our farrier  comes round once a fortnight to shoe the horses and to check their feet.
We get our horses from a dealer and if they are good horses to learn on we buy them if we can afford them.
At shows  and  jump their horses while the children  gymkhana .
Lots of children have ponies on loan from the stables.
Some of the ponies belong to people and they keep them there ‘on livery’.
This means that we can use them for the  riding school, muck the out etc…and the owner pays for its feed.
We have own a pony days when a child is allocated a pony and one of the stable hands takes care of the child and helps them look after the pony.
We also have our own Autumn Shows where you draw your pony out of the hat for each  gymkhana race.
The stable hands eat lunch in the tack room.
We sit round on bins, rugs and the floor for a chat.
Every age is catered for.
The youngest we have is two and a half and the oldest is around seventy.
We have a wide network of hack  routes and we have four teachers.
If you are anybody who is anybody you come to our stables.
It is more of a social club than a riding school.
High House Riding School is the place to be.
School.
A day in prison
The alarm clock rings.
It is time to get up and face another day.
Half past eight comes and it is time to stand outside and wait for the bus.
It will probably be late.
No matter what time of year it is, you can freeze your socks off in winter or be boiling to death in summer, and the Ipswich to Debenham bus is always late.
Finally it arrives .
 All of the Debenham pupils clamber up the stairs leaving the Stonham pupils downstairs.
There is a buzz of chatter with an occasional burst of laughter.
Once at Stonham the primary school pupils get off the bus leaving room downstairs which is soon filled by some of the people who have been sitting upstairs.
The journey lasts about twenty five minutes.
The bus pulls up  in front of the office at school.
The hoards of children pile off the bus and into the playground.
I hang my coat up and start to shout and tell those who are hanging around in the corridor to get outside until the bell goes.
At five past nine the bell rings for registration.
After we are registered we go into assembly and listen to one of the teachers or a guest speaking for ten minutes.
After assembly it is first period, maths in room twelve.
It is algebra for  today's lesson ,my worst topic in maths.
I couldn't wait until the bell rung for break.
 At break I was on duty in the corridor telling people to get out and go around to the canteen not through the school.
After break I have music.
We had a choice of either doing composition work or performance.
I choose to do performance.
At twenty five minutes to twelve the bell went and we went to  French .
Today all lesson we had a test.
Twenty five minutes past twelve came and there was a  mad rush to the dinner hall.
I rang the bells for the different years to come to the hall.
When all of the bells had been rung I started to make the other pupils do chairs.
We didn't finish tidying up the  dining hall until quarter past one.
 In registration we had a letter given out.
In  English after registration we watched a video of Jane Eyre.
The video was very dramatic.
After break we had science.
We did some work on blood and the heart.
When the bell went sounding the end of the day we packed up and put our chairs on the desk.
The pupils flocked out of the rooms like a flock of birds.
I headed for the bus line.
and I both shouted and told the younger pupils to move back and get into a single line.
When we finally left the school the return journey home was even worse than  the journey to school with pupils being cheeky when you told them to sit down and face the  front .
When the bus pulled to a  halt and I got off I was  relieved because I had finished school and I had the weekend ahead of me so I could enjoy myself.
School Days
On a mid-summer morning, a small child made her way towards school, the sun  shining and a smile on her face.
The year 1982.
The school, Little Stonham Primary.
The child .
This was the first of many walks from Creeting St Mary to Stonham.
walked through the winter's snow and the summer's hot sun, all the time, alongside of her mother.
This young girl enjoyed mixing with others her own age, as she had not done so before now.
She made friends with the teachers as well as the other pupils.
There  was only two teaching staff at Little Stonham, and the headmistress , both of  who were friendly and always cheerful.
The  school's lessons were typical of a Primary School, reading, writing maybe some maths and sports.
For sports the children would run around a local playing field, which was just down the road, they walked there under supervision of , or the children would do the long jump in the sand pit.
For breaktime the children played on the climbing frames, or sat on the grass.
At meal times the children would make a line and wait at one end of the room, where a table had been placed, there they would be given a helping of that  day's menu.
Once they had their lunch they would return to the seats and eat, when finished they were permitted to go outside to play.
Everyone dislike winter, in the snow and sharp frost the outside lavatories would freeze up.
would place an oil burning lamp by them trying to unblock them.
Inside of Little Stonham was one room, which was split in two.
This was the classroom.
The smaller room was where  taught the younger children to read and write and count.
In the other classroom the older children (8–11 year olds) would learn English and Maths.
During the last few weeks of Little Stonham Primary  School's history a book fair was held.
All the books ie text books, library books etc were  sold off at say 2p or 10p per book.
On the final day, the 19th June 1986, attended a special farewell service, in this service a prize was given to .
The prize was named the ‘progress prize’.
In this case it was a book, entitled ‘Andrew and Fergie — the newly weds’, this was handed over to  for her good attendance in the four years which she had gone to Little Stonham Primary School.
Everyone was sad that Little Stonham school had to close down, especially the children.
and her friends moved  on to Stonham Aspel Primary School, they missed the fact that there was only 20 or so pupils and now at their new school there was around a hundred and twenty or so.
Everyone buckled up and braved a face to see everyone and say their goodbyes as it was a parting for many good friends, both teachers and pupils.
At the age  of 9 years, moved on, she was  accompanied by her good friend , at their new school, Stonham Aspel.  was more fortunate than some as the  such-like of  and  :they were moving away and faced a strange school and strange people.
was sad to see the school close but looked forward to the future with a bright outlook on her new life ahead.
My experiences of Young children
I know many children and I enjoy looking after them I plan to do this for my career as I have applied to Suffolk College for a place in the Nursery Nursing course so that I can go on to be a Nanny.
There are many children I know who live around me as they are my neighbours.
Across the road from me is where four boys live.
The youngest one.
, I remember right from when he was a baby as I went to see him the day his mum brought him home.
He is now almost 5 years old and he has just started primary school.
He, along with his three brothers is very lively and is always running about and making plenty of noise outside my house.
Next door to me is where two young girls and their brother live.
Their names are , and .
They are also lively with  being the most noisy and then bringing  and  into the noise.
I also remember  right from when she was a baby as I went to see her after she had been brought home.
When I was in year 10 at school we took part in a T.V.E.I course, one part to this course was the community service work.
For the community work I went to help with the Mothers and Toddlers group that was held next door  to the school.
I thoroughly enjoyed my time there and I was sad when it all came to an end.
The first week I was there I helped set out all the toys and then helped the children with the toys.
On a separate table was the play dough which was a particular favourite with the children.
They used to cut it up and pretend to eat it and would cut out all different kinds of shapes.
There was one child amongst the others called  who was eight months old at the time.
I used to look after him while he played with his favourite toys.
I also used to help him with his drink and biscuit and he would always drop his soggy biscuit over me but I was ever so sad when I finished going to the Mother and toddler group as that was my favourite part of the week.
Another part of year 10 is that you go on work experience for two weeks.
For my work experience I went to the local primary school where I was a classroom helper with the reception class.
There was one little girl called  who used to like following me around when I was there.
One thing I thought was nice was that one little boy, was more noisy than the others but it started thundering once and he came and held my hand as he was scared.
It was the summer when I was there so they were then starting to go swimming in the school pool.
Most of them had never been before and  was scared, she got just a little bit of water in her mouth and she thought she was drowning  but instead of saying drowning she said to me, ‘I drownded’.
There was also a boy called  and a girl called  who were there and I see them two and  every morning as I walk to school.
always says Hello to me  every time she sees me and I do sometimes see  in the mornings.
I have now started to do babysitting for a number of people.
The first people I babysat for have got two children, and .
can sometimes have trouble settling down and getting to sleep but they are both usually very good and are quiet.
I am now babysitting for people who have three children, who is 5, who is 3 and  who is about 1.
woke up once but she was good and went back to sleep well.
I also babysit for my next door neighbour sometimes and , and  are also good as they are quiet and get to sleep well.
Stage Fright!
What's Stage Fright?
I had never considered myself as a shy quiet child so drama and acting never bothered me.
It was my father who started me off, about three years after we moved into the village dad joined the Debenham Players the local amateur dramatics society.
This was during the mid 1980's and the group was of moderate size and the productions were of a moderate standard also.
The first production that he was involved with was a pantomime Dick Whittington.
I remember enjoying every moment of it especially because I was watching my father.
The second I saw was an Alan  Ayckbourn , considering that I was only six at the time and I didn't understand some of it I still was enthralled with the acting and enjoyed it almost as equally enough as the panto.
Since then the Debenham Players has most  definitely grown in size and support, the productions get better each time but still the members run the whole thing by themselves be it from costume making and lighting to front of house and stage construction.
When I was about eight years old my turn came.
I was asked to be a coachman for Cinderella with my best friend, of course I was very excited and as the time grew nearer my costume was made and fitted.
I thought that I looked so smart in my white shoes, shorts, shirt and three  cornered hat.
Myself and my friend rehearsed frantically trying so very carefully not to push the coach off the edge of the stage but the production date was growing ever closer.
Finally my time  had arrived.
It was the first scene in act two.
The fairy lights were on and a machine was belting out smoke two frail pure white eight year old coach men stumbled out onto stage  desperately trying to heave a massive structure around the stage, containing one very beautiful princess who seemed very heavy indeed.
But my screwed up face of determination soon turned to one of exhilaration and delight as I paraded around with people oohhing and aahhing at me.
It was then that the drama bug had bitten.
I carried on with the Debenham players getting small parts almost every year in the pantomimes, they weren't major acting roles but for a nine, ten, eleven year old child they  sufficed .
But it was as I got into my teenaged years I began to get bored with my walk on roles, sitting around for hours waiting to go on with make-up and costumes on was no fun any more, but I was far  too young to do anything else but walk on say a few lines and walk off again.
At the end  of year nine it was make my mind up time on my GCSE options, there was no doubt  which I wanted to take, drama, but my father had other ideas he thought a second language would be far more constructive.
But I put my foot down .
I wanted to act .
It was my choice and nothing was going to get in my way, dad finally saw it my way.
At fifteen years old I started my drama course and I couldn't have been happier.
It obviously took a while to find my feet with the group  but when I had done I really started to enjoy myself.
I still get smaller parts helping with year eleven.
I did a drugs awareness sketch and got a small part in the school play which was Twelfth Night.
We did other things like going to the theatre and doing improvisation.
Now I am in year eleven and I have the main female role in a production we are doing next year, and rehearsals for next  year's school play are in full swing.
Acting isn't a career choice for me.
It's just a hobby I really enjoy, journalism is the job I really want to do and you never know drama could come in handy one day!
Tally-Ho!
As soon as anyone mentions field sports people direct their conversations to someone else.
The first thing that people think of is that poor little fox being chased after by lots of dogs, and those little birds being shot by big guns.
You start to argue the case for hunting, shooting, coursing and fishing.
Then the person you are speaking to slips in words like blood sports, slaughter, cruel, fluffy creatures.
Is this because they think they are without  inhumane behaviour?
Or is it because they do not actually know what goes on at field sport events such as shooting?
Have you ever walked up to a fox and given it a cuddle without it trying to bite your arms off?
 There's no fluffy about it!
In England  there are many different types of hunting for example mink hunting .
I must state this is not for the fur.
Stag hunting in Scotland and many people Fox hunt, hare hunting is another field sport not to be confused with people who shoot rabbits.
I cannot remember my first day hunting but I can tell you a normal day of  all-day hunting.
On Friday night about six o'clock I would ride my horse then I would brush (groom) it and clean my  horse's saddle and bridle.
I would then clean my riding boots and would lay out a white shirt, my pony club tie my  jodhpurs ready for the morning .
 After I had my tea I would go to bed.
 About eight o'clock in the morning I would get up put on  jodhpurs , shirt, tie and jeans and a jumper to protect my riding clothes .
 About half past eight I would feed my horse and then have my breakfast.
I would be putting everything I needed into the horse box until about ten o'clock and at about half past ten my horse and it's tack would be in there as well and I would be on my way with my day to an eleven thirty meet at a pub nearby .
 My dad would park the Horsebox in the  pub's car park.
About half an hour later we would tack our horses up and the (field) the people who come hunting would ride two abreast behind the master or joint masters .
 In front of the master/master the huntservants would ride with hounds running with the horses.
We would ride about a mile to the first field then we would draw the first field.
Drawing a field means that the hounds are guided by the huntsmen and  whippers-in across the field until the hounds pick up the scent of a hare .
 When they do they start barking and run after the hare then the huntsmen and whippers in followed the hounds to make sure that they do not cross a field  they're not supposed to, the field (people) follow the master/masters and this is what hare hunting is.
Hunting is very complicated and most people  do not know about  hunting or how it is done so they don't like it and say that it is cruel .
 The more people find out about it the more you might like it .
 Just think in  years to come lots of people could be hunting.
Horses
There are many different types of horses and ponies.
Their breeds range from the English Shire horse to the Shetland pony.
These are only two of the numerous breeds of this marvellous animal.
The English Shire is a big boned animal and pulls big and heavy carts.
Their size is measured in hands and the Shire is roughly 18hh–19hh which is very high.
The Shetland pony is one of the smallest ponies in the world and it can be ridden by very small and light people.
This pony is roughly 9hh–10hh which is very small.
There are also quite a few different colours ranging from black and bay (light brown) to grey and  palomino (cream).
There is  a lot of work involved in looking after domesticated horses because they rely on human beings for all their food and water.
They have to have feed at morning and night and hay and grass in between.
They have to be ridden everyday for exercise and have to be cleaned out (stable) everyday.
Alternatively they can stay out at night in an enclosed field.
To ride a horse it has to have saddlery.
First of all, a saddle to which we sit in and this is placed on the horse's back.
Then a bridle which is on the  horse's head and a bit, in the  horse's mouth and reins attached to the bit which we hold on to.
To keep a horse clean you need to groom it.
To do this there are a range of different brushes.
Horses have very  sensitive legs and need  protective boots and bandaging.
There are many types of boots and bandages used.
If you have done all this so far you can and are ready to compete.
You can take horses to shows in horse trailers pulled by cars or horse boxes, a vehicle of its own.
There are different types competitions such as 3 day events, 1 day events, Show Jumping, hunter trials and also hunting, which is not a competitive sport.
In these competitions there are 3 main events .
 The first one is Dressage.
This is in the 3 day event and 1 day event.
Dressage is a test which you have to memorise and then perform the test on your horse.
The test is a series of movements in walk, trot and canter and you get marked for the movements in the test.
The next phase of the 3 day event and the 1 day event is the cross country.
This is a course of man made permanent jumps and they are spread out and not in a ring.
The course may have a water jump.
Sometimes there may be a timed section which is a few jumps and you have to go as fast as you can.
The last phase of the 2 events is the Show Jumping phase.
This a times course of jumps in a ring and you have to go as fast as you can.
Horses and ponies of today
Over the world there are  a lot of different horses.
Each horse has a different kind of character, these range from nervous horses to very confident horses, they are much like humans.
Horses also come in different heights and breeds, horses start from the height of fourteen-two hands high.
Under fourteen-two hand high are called ponies A hand is a measurement used for measuring horses height and each hand is four.
For example a fourteen-two hands high horse is fifty-eight.
The biggest horse is the Shire, a lot of people like to show these, with their mane and tail plaited.
The smallest kind of horse is the Shetland pony.
The Shetland pony is also shown by many people, this breed of pony can be ridden by children and small adults, this is because the Shetland has a strong back.
Shetland ponies are  normally about ten hands high, and range in colour.
The colours of horses and ponies are grey, bay, dun, flea bitten grey, dapple grey, strawberry roan, chestnut and  a lot of other colours.
If you have a horse or pony there is  a lot of events which you could go to and take part in.
If you are under eighteen you could join a pony club, which involves you going to at least two meetings a year.
When you join ‘pony club’ there are a variety of different activities which you could go on, for example there is show jumping which involves you deciding what height jumps you would like to jump, normally the classes range from two feet high and up.
There are various types of Show Jumping .
 Sometimes the competitors jump a course of various jumps, those with a clear round will then either go against the clock — which means the person getting  a clear round in the fastest time wins.
Another way of deciding the winner is for those with a clear round to jump a smaller course of higher jumps with the jumps getting higher until you have a winner.
For pony club the jumps would be outside .
 Professionals do have indoor areas so they can jump all year round.
Another type of jumping is cross country where you jump a variety of logs and other well constructed (usually wooden) jumps, they can be very solid, high and wide.
The event is judged by clear rounds and part of the course is timed.
The people who win the competition and a certain amount of  runners-up receive rosettes and at bigger competitions they receive cups.
Dressage is also taught at pony club.
Dressage is one of the hardest competitions for the horse and rider because the horse and rider have to perform a certain series of movements in an arena.
In the arena the rider has to halt the horse, make it pace and do figures and turns.
This all has to be done in front of a judge, the judge gives marks, not only on the rider's control of the horse, but also for the appearance and condition of the horse.
When you go to pony club the  teachers do not just test you on Dressage, cross country and show jumping they show you how to care for your horse and how to understand them.
The teachers also show the children how to clean the tack and stable management.
The teachers in the ring show the children how to do basic horse riding.
A horse in a field needs shelter — may be  trees all around the edge of the field and/or a wooden shelter.
The field needs to have a good supply of water.
The horse needs a head collar with lead rope with a basic saddle and bridle.
You do not have to spend much money on these items for basic hacking and general enjoyment of your horse/pony but you could spend hundreds of pounds for the best.
The pony/horse could have a stable and rugs, these items are a necessity for the highly bred horse but not essential for the hardy ponies.
Another item which a horse does need is shoes.
The horse could have two or four shoes depending on the amount of work which it is going to do.
The shoes need to be changed every five to six weeks, they cost between thirty and thirty five pounds.
Most horses are used today for pleasure riding, for example hacking, hunting, and pulling traps.
The traps can be pulled by one or more horses.
Very few horses are used for working horses .
 The police use some and the army use some.
But cars, lorries and tractors are more effective so are used more than a few years ago.
Horses and ponies have more character than machinery so there will always be a place for them in our lives.
My  Secondary School days from Year 7 to Year 10
The name of the school was St Aidans Church of England High School.
The School was in Harrogate.
Harrogate is a town in North Yorkshire.
Around the school  was many streets and houses.
At one side of the school was the Stray.
The Stray is open land owned by the Council, but anyone can go on there.
The school held  1700 plus.
There were two main buildings in the school ground which accommodated class rooms.
Between the two buildings were  annexes .
Some of the  annexes held two classrooms and  others only one.
The two main buildings were called Main School and Bede House.
In Main School there were the staff rooms, main offices, Headmaster's office, Head of  years' offices, cleaners' offices, the main hall, science labs, sports hall, Gym, changing rooms, maths rooms, new Geography rooms and History rooms, English rooms, Technology rooms, Art rooms, music library rooms and Home Economics rooms.
The new geography rooms and History rooms were built in November 1991.
The Technology rooms were also new rooms and they were built in June 1993.
Bede House was once a hospital during the war, before the school was built.
In Bede House there  is two more science rooms, Religious Studies rooms, French rooms, staff rooms, Head of year room year 12–13, Common room year 12–13, Bede Hall and other private studies rooms.
The  annexes varied from science labs, Religious Studies rooms, Special needs room, maths room and French rooms.
In the main school was the sick room and Chapel.
There was also a conference room for the governors to have their meetings.
The Chapel was often used as another classroom.
The Main Hall was used for assembly in the mornings, for Drama productions, and career evenings and also parent evenings.
There were three separate Dining rooms.
They were the Junior Dining room, The Main Hall and Senior  Dining room.
The Junior Dining  room was only for year 8 to year 13 plus teachers.
The Senior Dining room was for anyone who wanted a snack.
There was also a lecture  Theatre for people who had packed lunches.
Year 11 pupils were allowed out of school at lunch-time as well as years 12 and 13.
But year 11 had to sign the ‘out’ book and ‘in’book when they came back.
There was a sixth form at St Aidans which was joined with St John Fishers School's sixth form.
When I first went to St Aidans the Geography rooms were in  annexes .
The Technology rooms were always dirty and unsuitable to work in.
But with the two new extensions built we were able to work more comfortably with carpeted classrooms.
Whilst the Technology was being built there was a fire at the school which meant an extra classroom had to be built.
As all year 9 pupils throughout England choose what subjects they are going to take for G.C.S.E. St Aidans wasn't any different.
Year 9 pupils could choose from Geography, History or  Integrated Humanities, French or German, Separate Science or co-ordinated or  Modular , Religious Studies, Islam or Christianity or life and teaching of Jesus, English language or English language and literature or English language and Media Studies, Technology and design or Design and Realization or Design and Communication or Drama or 2nd language or Art and design or Physical Education or Home and food or Geography or History or  Integrated Humanities or Pre-vocational Course.
All of these subjects were for year 9 to choose from to study for 2 years at G.C.S.E. level.
The subjects I choose to do were French, English language, Co-ordinated Science, Design and realization, Geography, Integrated Humanities, Islam, contemporary issues and Maths.
The last two subjects are what they call core subjects which you have to take.
Being a large School people think that not everyone will know each other.
Well that isn't the case.
Once you are starting the second year at the school you see faces that are familiar and through brothers and sisters who are in the years above you get to know them.
The same applies with the teachers, they soon get to know you and before long you get to know them all.
In July 1993 I left St Aidans in year 10 and moved to Suffolk.
I  now go to Debenham High School.
This school is much smaller than St Aidans.
In Debenham High School there  is 300 plus pupils.
This amount would just be more than one year group at St Aidans.
At Debenham there are two small buildings which are joined by an under-cover way.
One building is a science block with 3 other classrooms, one a music room and the other two language rooms.
In the other building is the main office, staff room, Headmaster's office, sick room, Main Hall, Dining room, Technology room, Home Economics room, Conference room, Library, English rooms, Geography room, Art room, Textiles room, computer room, Religious studies and History and maths rooms are shared rooms.
The options you can choose from are Art or Physical Education or Drama, French or German, Geography or History.
As you can see Debenham is a much  smaller school than St Aidans.
Debenham High School thrills 'N' Spills
I was not very worried as I had been told that the school was very good.
The night before I could not get to sleep then in the morning I woke up at half past five when I was meant to get up at seven thirty .
 By this time I was getting nervous worrying about what if I got lost?
What if nobody wanted to be friends with me?
I got on the bus with some of my friends with whom I went with to primary school.
It seemed that they were slightly worried as well.
When I arrived at the school I saw some people who I recognised from the induction days.
This school looked so much bigger than the other two primary schools that I had been to.
We had to go to our form rooms and fill in our timetable, the week looked so busy.
The lessons were better than I thought.
The teachers tried to put life into our lessons and some of the people in my form were trying to be funny as well.
After my first day I felt really tired when I got home, as that day was the longest day of my life.
I had already got some friends who came from my primary school but I realized that I couldn't stay friends forever with them .
 Anyway I needed a change .
I had already made one friend who I met on the induction day.
I was lucky that she was in most of my lessons but the lessons that she wasn't in I would sit with the other friends from Stonham Aspel.
Later on in my schooling life I made more friends but there has been a lot of falling outs, but we always make up again.
At Debenham there was a lot of extra curricular activities on offer like inter house competitions, Sports days, I took part in quite a few activities like Sports days , assemblies and  some of the interhouse competitions like design a Christmas card and basket ball, I also went to a club on Friday lunch times.
Of course there are a lot more activities to do.
Going down under
On the twenty seventh of December 1989, I woke up at five o'clock.
My mother and I, that morning were to  travel to Heathrow Airport to fly to Australia to see family and friends that we had not seen for over five years.
My suit case was ready packed and had been for the last week.
After checking for passports and air  travel tickets we had nothing else to do but wait for our taxi.
The taxi driver was a friend of ours so we were able to relax driving to the Airport.
Once we got to Heathrow airport I was able to get out of the car and  stretch my legs as on  travelling down to London I had fallen asleep with my knees on the floor and my head on the seat.
We loaded a  trolley with our suit cases and bags.
We were a quarter of a way on holiday.
Mum and I said goodbye to David the taxi driver and went into the airport.
I followed mum and joined a long  queue , there we had to wait for ages while other people on our flight handed in their tickets.
I remember mum saying that I must not let anyone near the suitcases or  accept a parcel to take with me and post it when I got to our destination.
This I now of course understand, that everyone has to be careful of any drug smugglers.
When mum and I had checked in at the travel desk and given in our suit cases we were able to  wander around and have something to eat  until our flight was called out.
Our flight was announced over the loud speakers and we made our way through lots of small passages  until we were on the plane.
There a lady showed us to our seats, once we had got comfortable we were shown a safety routine by the stewardesses.
When the plane was  airborne lunch and drinks were  brought round.
There really was not much to do on the plane, you were able to  listen to about six different  channels on the radio, read, write or drink.
I have to say I must  have spent most of my time in the toilets.
I found myself being really  bored , as there were not any films on  until the evening.
I was however able to amuse myself by annoying the stewardesses by buzzing them every five to ten minutes asking for a drink, hence the time I spent in the toilet.
The first fourteen hours must have been the worst of the journey as I was not able to sleep, whatever position I sat in.
We landed in  Bangkok this is where we had to change planes, there was about an hour and a half wait so we had plenty of time to look around the duty free.
I remember learning the word humid as the air in  Bangkok at that time was hot and wet.
Our plane was called out again and  we're off now heading in the direction of Singapore.
We were half way on our holiday.
It was time for a film, a film I had watched before, however I did not mind as it passed the time.
I don't know how but I fell asleep and three hours passed quickly.
We were landing again, this time in Singapore.
We waited on our plane while it  refuelled .
We were  airborne again, only three hours to Perth Australia and it was time to annoy the stewardesses.
Even though my time in Australia brings back memories the journey sticks in my mind like glue.
My Primary School Days
I was four and a half years old and I was about to start Bedfield Primary School.
Bedfield was the village I was living in at the time.
It is a very small village and so is the Primary school.
There  was approximately thirty pupils attended the school when I first started but now the number has dropped to twenty three children.
On my first day of school my mum kept trying to wake me but I pretended I was asleep because I was so nervous, eventually mum knew that I was playing a trick.
That morning I was really behind .
I wouldn't get dressed until the last minute because I thought I would be late and therefore would not have to go to school.
Well, for some reason  that's what I thought.
Mum was getting very panicky at 8.30 am because I had one sock on ,a jumper round the wrong way and my shirt collar in a mess.
However, we still got to school by 9.00am.
I gripped my mum's hand very tightly as we walked along the playground.
I can remember children stopped playing and glared at me.
We walked into the classroom and the teacher named Mrs Donnan greeted my mother and myself.
I could hear my mum and the teacher talking, but what about I do not know because i was too busy looking around the classroom, it seemed massive to me.
My mum  give me a kiss and went.
My eyes filled up with water, I didn't want to stay there I wanted to be with my mum.
Mrs Donnan  came and took me by the hand.
‘Come on Kelly, school isn't that bad we have some fun,’ she said.
I just hung my head down and didn't say a word.
I was too scared to speak to her because she was a bit on the large side and had a pair of glasses sitting on the tip of her nose and she struck me as a very bossy, short tempered teacher.
I soon made some friends that day.
Every morning when we got to school we were allowed to play until Mrs Donnan stood outside and clapped her hands.
When she did this we all had to line up into two lines which were the juniors and infants.
We then went to assembly which lasted anything from fifteen to twenty five minutes, we would then go into our classrooms and do whatever we were told.
As a rule we had  do tell everybody what we did over the weekend which was called our ‘news’ and we usually did this first thing on a Monday.
We never had a routine day, it varied from day to day.
Once I had been there a little while I really  settled in and really enjoyed my primary school days.
After six years it was time for me to move on to Debenham High School.
We had our final assembly on the last day of term, there were four of us leaving and the headmaster who was called Mr Smith presented us with a book each.
It was quite sad to leave but I was looking forward to  starting my new school.
When I was in the fourth year at high school we had to do work experience for two weeks.
We had to choose a placement where we could work.
Therefore it gave us an idea what it was like in the working world.
I chose to go to Worlingworth primary school, I was working with the infants, generally I was a classroom helper.
It really brought back memories when I was at school, I really enjoyed it.
My last school trip
It came to our last school trip.
We were in year 11 and all the pupils were aged between 15–16.
This trip was to teach us to work in teams and to help each other.
It was also to help us if there was an accident and we would have to work in teams.
We were set different tasks to do eg getting across an area of grass which had poison on it.
When we got to University of East Anglia we were set seven tasks .
 The first one was half of us were blindfolded and we were set out in a line and the rest had to move about 5–10 metres away and stand in a line.
They called out our names and we had to follow  where we  think they were calling us from.
We were then split up into groups of five or six.
The second task was to stand on some planks of wood which had been set out in a hexagon.
The planks were placed on top of some metal barrels and we were all standing in a hexagon.
We had to move around without  stepping off in alphabetical order.
This took us some time to do but it was  a lot of fun.
The  third task was to get the five members of our group through a large spider  web .
There were large and small holes and we could only go through a hole once.
We did this by getting the smaller ones through the higher hole and the larger ones through the middle and lower parts.
The fourth task was to get across a piece of rope which had been tied around three trees which was set in a triangle.
We had a long piece of plastic tubing to help each other with.
If we fell off the rope we would have had to go back to the start.
The fifth one was to make a shelter out of a piece of plastic which was 2 metres by 1 metre, 3 pieces of wood and 3  pieces of string.
We also had a large plastic bag which we had to get in.
The sixth one was called  caterpillar it was two long planks of wood with poles coming out of it .
 We had to walk through a course  without people falling  off .
The seventh was to fall back into   someone's arms.
We were blindfolded and then had to move back until we bent our knees.
That was our first day.
The second day was in the survival tank in Lowestoft College.
In which we had to be very  responsible like wearing a life jacket and  plimsolls so we didn't slip on the floor.
In the tank we had to get in  huddles to keep us warm .
 We had to get in and out of life rafts.
The most exciting part was when we had to jump  into the water from a 12ft high board.
In the same day we went to Oulton  board to do the same thing but in freezing cold water that was not as much fun as the survival tank.
It came to 5 o'clock and we were getting on the bus to go home, very tired and hungry.
We were all very glad to get home.
Primary school Days
I did not go to playschool or kindergarten so going to primary school was a big event in my life.
I had been looking forward to going to what I called ‘big school’.
It would have been better than staying at home but I did not want to wear a school uniform.
I can remember me and my mum going into town to buy these shoes for school.
They were black painted with small flowers on the buckle.
I can remember that I wanted a care bears lunch box.
I can vaguely remember my first day at school.
In the morning I was very nervous and so I was awake early.
I was nervous because I did not have any friends and I was worried that I would be on my own.
My school uniform colour was a deep green.
I absolutely hated having to wear a skirt but I soon got used to it.
I was ready and dressed in my white blouse, grey pinafore dress, grey tights my new black shoes and green cardigan.
I picked up my lunch box and I walked to school.
I walked to school with my mum and it was very cold and windy day.
I did not live far from the school so it did not take long to get there.
When we arrived I was very worried but the whistle had just gone and my teacher Mrs Edwards came out to get us and show us where our class room was.
Our classroom was in a porta-cabin.
We were given a peg to put our bags on.
My peg number was 48.
After we were shown where to sit and where our trays were we were shown around the school and where everything was.
We had been given books and we soon began learning.
I mostly enjoyed art and maths but I did not like P.E.
very much.
I can remember that the most memorable thing that happened to me was when it was Sports day.
I took part in the obstacle course which when I was that age I found it difficult.
I had to run to the end of the course with a hoop on my head  then put the ring on a pole, then on the way back I had to arrange the bean bags in the right colour hoops, then get in an old potato bag and jump to the middle of the course then I had to skip to the end.
I came second which I was very glad about and I  received a pink certificate which I still have.
My Mum also ran in the Mum and Dads race which my mum did not do  too well.
My best memory when I was at Primary School was that I was a member of a  Gymnastics club and for many weeks we rehearsed our routine to do in front of the school and parents.
It was very nerve racking and of course it was hard work.
The result was very  rewarding and I enjoyed doing it very much.
When I was eight years old I joined our school choir.
At Christmas we went around houses singing carols but the best thing of all was when on Christmas eve we went to the local old peoples home to sing carols.
We sang all the most common songs and our Christmas carol of our own, which we wrote the words to and illustrated our own booklet to give out to people.
Towards the end of my primary school years I went on a holiday with my year to Kent with my friends and many other pupils and teachers.
We stayed in a hotel called the Fairbank Hotel.
We visited many places and went out to dinner and went to London during that time to watch the theatre production of ‘Cats’ by Andrew Lloyd Web which I think is the most memorable event of that holiday; as well as going to  Canterbury Cathedral.
I also stayed at Scarborough where we stayed for two weeks.
During our visit we visited railway museums  historic places, craft and  ornamental places.
Between the two visits I  preferred the Kent trip because of visiting London but I also enjoyed going to Scarborough because of some of the places.
I mostly enjoyed staying with my friends away from home and I did not get  homesick .
I enjoyed all my years at Primary School although some events were not so good as others.
After primary school I moved away to a different High School but I have the photographs and certificates of achievement that I have worked for.
Places I've lived in
My family and I originate from many countries, this is because members of my family were born in different places.
My Mother and Father were both born in Western Australia.
They both lived there most of their life and that was also where my mother and father met and became married.
My brother was born in Canada so of course he became Canadian or a Blue Noser as they are called.
And then there was my sister and myself.
The pair of us were born in  New Zealand .
So we are both known as ‘kiwis’.
I can't remember any of the country because of me being such a young age, but my sister remembers more than I as she is older than myself.
And to finish most of my family off there is of course, my Grandparents.
My Grandmother (Nan) was born and brought up in Wales.
My Grandad was again born and brought up, not in Wales but in Scotland.
Even though members of my family were born in different areas of the world, it doesn't mean that we had lived in all of these areas.
Once I was born we lived in  New Zealand for about two years.
 I'm not sure but it could have been longer.
From there we moved to Canada, where my brother was born.
We settled in Canada as a family, my mum, dad, sister, brother, grandad, nan, and I. There we bought a motel near the sea and stayed for nine years.
My parents once told me  that they lived on the Canary Islands for a little while but I don't think I was born just yet.
They lived there just before I was born.
As I have already said, I lived in Canada for 9 years, but after that we moved once again, but this time to here (England).
So far as a family we have been living here for about 6/7 years.
Once we moved here we all started to miss our old home in Blackpoint (Canada), so at the moment as a family we are planning to move back either to Canada or Australia.
Out of the places which I have mentioned, it would be difficult for me to  choose my favourite destination and my worst destination.
But if I had to decide I would say my favourite would be (favourite country) would be Canada because I have lived there the longest out of all places and so I know it better than any other country.
My worst country I think would be  New Zealand as I don't remember any of the country and it would appear to me a complete stranger if I moved there.
If I were to choose any country in the world to live as a family in it would have to be somewhere different, perhaps exotic.
I would like to travel to Barbados as it would be completely different from where I've lived before.
MY HOLIDAY
The Dolphin, the Bermuda Suite, Club 93, the Bingo hall, a large swimming pool, a Sports hall, Amusements , these are just some of the few things that are situated at Highfield Holiday Park, Clacton, where my family and I have been going on Holiday for 10 years.
For as long as I can remember it has always been a tidy, clean, friendly place.
The whole area of Clacton always seems to be a tidy and a very pleasant town to visit.
Since the age of 5 I have been going to Highfield, my sister was 6 and my brother was 8.
We always got excited when we were packing ready for the journey of about 50 miles.
I would be sitting in the car looking out at the fascinating scenery, my mum and my brother would be doing the same, my sister would be looking at a book and my dad would be driving.
As we got nearer my mum would be saying how much she enjoyed coming to Highfields.
When we arrived it seemed such a friendly place, there would be 2 or 3 people to meet you at the gates and welcome you in.
We would be shown where  our caravan was which we were to stay in.
If it was a warm, sunny day we would pack all our belongings into the caravan and then we would head to the beach or we would go swimming in the pool on the park.
At night we would meet all the entertainment people and they would play games and music would be played.
My mum and dad would meet people and become friends with everybody who worked at Highfields.
As the years have gone on not much has changed around Clacton and at Highfield Holiday park, the people there are all still friendly, it is still a very tidy and clean place to visit.
My brother, sister and I have made lots of friends whilst we have been down there, but it only really started to fascinate us  from about 2 or 3 years ago, before then we had just been interested in swimming, going into the  amusements and going to the beach etc.
Now at the ages of 15, 16 and 18 we speak to a lot more people, we know the staff a lot better and we take part in things such as karaoke and adult games etc, we do not go to the  amusements and swim much now that we are older.
I have always enjoyed going to Highfield Holiday park and to Clacton because I know that when you get there, there always seem to be a lot of people who make the effort to welcome people to the Holiday park and they have always seemed friendly and if anything was wrong i.e. you  lose something or somebody accidentally falls and hurts themselves or indeed somebody else the staff are always quick to help and so are a lot of other people who are on holiday there.
We have been to a few other Holiday sites/parks, but none came up to the standard of HIGHFIELD HOLIDAY PARK.
Although we have been going there for 10 years the excitement of seeing all our friends will never ever die and I hope it is going to stay a good, clean Holiday site for many years.
Pain For Pleasure!
I am now sixteen and like most sixteen year old girls I enjoy shopping for clothes and shoes.
Unfortunately the only way in which I can fulfil my interest is to work.
Almost every Saturday for three years I put on my black skirt, my white blouse, my newly polished shoes and my uniform white frilly apron.
No, I am not going to a fancy dress party, but to work.
My employer is Heather Wilkinson a well known caterer.
I work for her as a waitress.
There is no end to the types of functions I have worked at.
They range from weddings to funerals and student balls to wedding anniversaries.
During the summer months weddings are the most popular function.
The very first time I worked for Heather Wilkinson was just before my thirteenth birthday.
It was a wedding in Mendlesham village hall.
I had not worked before as a waitress so I ended up with most of the easy jobs like washing up and cleaning left overs from the plates!
Since then I have progressed and I am now able to waitress with confidence.
My job does not only involve waitressing.
Many other skills are incorporated with this.
For example I have learnt to lay-up a table consisting of:— side plate, butter knife, glasses, cups and saucers, other cutlery and also putting on tablecloths and flowers.
Also in my job I learn to attractively set out different types of food and serve wine and champagne.
My favourite part of the job is not actually waitressing.
I prefer to prepare the food and I also like to serve the drinks.
My job is very good for meeting people.
I have made many friends since I have been working.
Because I work for many different  functions I get the chance to see many different kinds of weddings.
My boss is very clever and thinks that presentation is one of the main things to think about.
This can be annoying sometimes because jobs that would only take a little while can often take  a lot longer.
The finished product though is always worth it.
Heather Wilkinson employs  a lot of workers and not only waitresses.
She employs people also to help cook or prepare the meals and also she employs people to  wash up .
The most interesting wedding I have ever waitressed at was very unusual.
The bride and groom arrived on horseback.
At most weddings the bride wears a veil but at this wedding the bride was wearing a beautiful top hat.
I've not only waitressed at weddings.
I have, a few times waitressed at football Club dinners.
These have a  tendency to become very rowdy.
I must admit that I do not always want to go to work but once I am there I nearly always have a really good time.
Waitressing is not the only job I have.
I also do a paper-round six mornings a week.
My parents moan at me because I am not always willing to go to work.
As I said at the beginning of this essay, the only way in which I can fulfil my interest is to work:— and so I do.
This  enables me to buy the latest fashion accessories and clothes without relying on my parents.
Working also gives me a great sense of independence.
It may be ‘pain for pleasure’ but it is most certainly worth it