

APRIL, 1402 TO JULY, 1403
1
The girl had chosen to take her seat in the one spot from which the opening of the inner door would afford her brief glimpses into the prince's audience-chamber.
She sat erect in her black, sombre and motionless on the bench against the tapestried wall.
Thomas Prestbury, abbot of Shrewsbury, had given over his entire lodging to the prince's party, since there were ladies among them, and the castle, tightly-garrisoned and well-supplied as a vital base against the rebellious Welsh, had little comfort to offer the Lady Percy and her women.
For his own part, the prince would cheerfully have bedded down in the cramped military quarters he normally used on his periodical visits, but he was punctilious in providing every amenity for his guests, and the greater space and grace of the abbot's apartments made approach to his own person easier, and brought more petitioners in search of his favour, which at once satisfied his thirsty sense of duty, and wore him out into childish sleepiness by nightfall.
He was fourteen years old, intelligent, forceful, capable of listening attentively to his ministers and then overruling them and going his own way, capable, even, or so they said, of arguing a case strenuously and sensibly against the king himself in Westminster, though he seldom won his way there; but he was still a boy, unpractised, with little experience yet of living.
The girl in black was nineteen, five years older than the boy to whom she was bringing her petition.
She had watched others  come and go, and seen the hall empty round her, until only she and her opponent remained; and she had felt no impatience, only a growing resolution.
And all this while, from behind her mourning veil, she had fixed her eyes on the inner door, and watched for revelations from within.
The narrow chink presented to her vision showed her the spot where the prince sat.
She found him surprisingly ordinary, a solemn-faced boy in plain, clerkly brown clothes, long-legged and angular like everybody's young brother, with a fierce, cleft chin and huge, attentive hazel eyes.
But at least his concentration never flagged.
She was encouraged, because it seemed she could rely absolutely on that devoted attention, but discouraged, too, because he looked and was so young, and what could he know of marriage and widowhood, and the things that happen to women?
He might will well to her, and yet be too green to do her anything but harm.
She never moved or relaxed her watchfulness; but in her very stillness there was something of violence, as though a touch might cause her to spring into startling and daunting life.
When the man who waited with her crept to her shoulder and whispered in her ear, as he did several times between his nervous pacings about the room, she made him no answer, and never seemed even to be aware of him, though her braced tension made it plain that nothing that passed in this apartment escaped her instant notice.
‘You'd do well to think better of it, and come home.
Do you think I won't make it worth your while?’
She gave him no sign.
He ranged about the room uneasily and leaned to her ear again: ‘Waste of time!
He won't receive you!’
But he knew and she knew that the prince denied access to no one who ventured to appeal to him.
Those who had no case had no such courage, either.
‘Is it likely he'll listen to you, against me and my house?’
The answer to that she did not yet know, but she had her own answer already sworn, and she would not go back on it.
‘Come, be reasonable!
Listen to me, girl — I'll make your  fortune!
I mean you nothing but good, why should we quarrel?
Give over this fool plea, and be wise for yourself and your sire!’
The outer door was thrown open with haste and ceremony, to admit a cloaked and booted gentleman who swept through the anteroom on a gust of chill April air, shedding a knot of servants and gallants at the threshold, and hurling all doors open before him with an alacrity that spoke to her of royalty.
She turned her head towards the servant who had just hurried to let him in to the audience-chamber, and put out an imperious hand to arrest his attention.
‘Who was that?
He that just went in?’
She had seen little but the outline of him, and the walk, which was individual enough to be remembered, once seen; rapid and vehement, with a long stride that barely lit upon the earth before leaving it again as vigorously.
And a passing glimpse of a profile clear as bronze, and at the moment of passing as aloof and serene.
The page was disdainful.
‘Do you not know the Lord Henry Percy, the prince's governor?
He's just ridden in from London, and his lady's here to meet him.
He's newly made the king's lieutenant here in North Wales, now we're as good as at war.’
‘Are we as good as at war?’ she asked, and there was no way of knowing whether she laughed or was alarmed behind the widow's veil.
‘With this Glendower rampaging round Wales as free as a bird, and threatening Ruthyn every time Lord Grey turns his back?
And urging on Ireland and Scotland to his help?
Can you doubt it?’
Her face was quite still behind the shrouding veil, giving away nothing.
She had said all she had to say.
So that sudden presence was the great Hotspur, the most celebrated, the most gallant, perhaps the last, knight-errant of the age.
A strange man — or perhaps a plain man lost in a world where most other men had grown strange — collecting superlatives to himself as Saint  Sebastian collected arrows in the wall-paintings.
Something had blown through the room with him, a gust of exhilarating air trapped in the folds of his garments, leaving a breath of his own vigour behind.
‘You can still withdraw,’ whispered the wheedling voice at her shoulder.
‘Come, be wise in time!
You shan't regret it.’
The door of the audience-chamber had opened.
She saw the prince's chamberlain lean out and speak to his waiting page.
She felt the burden of their eyes upon her, and rose from her bench silently, waiting.
‘Mistress Hussey — His Grace will receive you now.
Master Hussey, he begs you also be in attendance.’
She walked into the prince's presence, her anxious enemy treading hard on her heels.
And she thought as she crossed the threshold: He is still there.
You have more audience, Julian, than a mere royal child, whatever his goodwill.
You can address yourself to a man, and at least hope for a quick ear and an open heart!
‘There is still a lady without,’ the chamberlain had reminded them respectfully, ‘who has a petition to your Grace.
And a gentleman who desires to speak in answer to it.’
They broke off their colloquy at once, postponing all that they had to ask and to answer.
‘I'm sorry!’ said Hotspur.
‘We have time, and indeed I did mark this lady waiting in your anteroom.
Yes, surely have her in.
If she has far to go, the evening will soon be setting in.’
‘You'll stay with me?
I should appreciate it.
I have no notion what her case may be.’
He was quite without knowledge of women, but granite in the acceptance of his responsibility.
‘Admit the lady,’ he said, and sat down again in his chair of state; though it was but a rather uncomfortable chair, not raised by a brace of steps like the abbot's own judgment seat.
She came in with a light, wary step, made a deep obeisance just within the doorway, and then advanced to the prince's chair and  sank at his feet, touching her lips to his proffered hand.
The boy took her cold fingers in his, and raised her.
‘Madam, you have a petition to us.
I pray you speak out, and we shall listen.
You, sir, are a party to this lady's plea?’
‘I desire to speak in answer to it, your Grace,’ said the man, stooping obsequiously to the extended hand.
He was a handsome person in his florid, full-fed way, ruddy and brown-haired and aware of his consequence.
The woman was a mystery, tall and slender in her black, straight and steely as a boy, and thus far silent.
Silent women are always formidable, and always mysterious.
‘Madam, I see by your habit that you are in mourning, and for that I am sorry.
How may I help you?
And what is your name?’
The girl raised her hands to put back the veil from her face.
Her youth blazed at them suddenly like a torch kindled, a thin, bright, deeply-moulded face all pearl-tinted skin over abrupt, burnished bone, with a wide, firm, full-lipped mouth, and dark eyes.
On either side her head gleamed coiled braids of dark-gold hair, almost pale copper in the subdued light of the room.
The intensity of that face turned her mourning and her stillness into the mere dark casing of a lantern.
‘Your Grace is kind.’
Her voice was guarded, mellow and low, a well-schooled boy's voice.
‘My name is Julian Hussey.
I was born Julian Parry, only daughter to Rhodri Parry, a merchant of this town, dealing in wool and woollen piece goods, and married by him a year and a half ago to Master Nicholas Hussey, who held lands here north of the town.
My husband died two months ago, and we had no issue.
By my husband's will, and the custom of his house, all his manor and lands go to his nephew and heir, and I am without purpose in the household longer.
For me there is no function left but to return to my father's house, and care for his old age.’
She lifted eyes like gem-stones, ruby-bright in the light of the torches, black, surely, in full daylight.
They looked at the prince, and passing by him, fastened with intent upon  Hotspur's watching face, as yet impassive.
‘Your Grace, my father is but a merchant, and to marry me into this noble family he gave me a noble dowry, eight hundred marks.
Now he desires, as is but right, that my dowry should be returned with me.
But my husband's heir, my nephew by marriage, will not repay what is due.
And if he receive not his right, my father will not receive his daughter.
I ask justice of your Grace, for unless your Grace do me right, I am without redress.’
She spoke to the prince, she even looked at the prince, but what she said was addressed to the man who sat withdrawn at the prince's elbow.
‘Your Grace,’ said Hussey, bent reverently double, and eyeing his widowed kinswoman from the corner of one eye, ‘if your Grace will but hear me…’
‘You may speak to the matter.
You are the heir?’
‘Yes, your Grace.
I am Edward Hussey.’
‘And what this lady says, is true?
You have no quarrel with it?’
The prince leaned back in his chair, and waited, and wondered.
‘None, your Grace, so far as it goes.
All is as my most valued kinswoman has told you, but your Grace will comprehend that money matters are none so simple.
My lord, my inheritance is indeed enough, but my immediate resources in money are limited.
I would with goodwill repay Master Parry his daughter's dowry, but at this moment it is out of my power.
I have not the sum to hand, and cannot raise it even by loan.
Yet I have made provision,’ he said fatly.
‘There need be no dissension.
Until I can repay the dowry, I have set aside apartments in my household, where my kinswoman may keep her own establishment however she may dispose.
Her keep shall be a charge upon my estate, and for company she shall be assured of the society of my own wife, her close kin and most attentive servant and friend.
I cannot offer more, nor with better will.’
‘It would appear,’ said the prince mildly, ‘a fair offer.
What say you, madam?’
‘Your Grace must consider,’ said the girl, lowering her eyes, ‘that I am still young.
My father may well wish for me a second marriage, and to that end I must be at offer soon, and with a proper dowry.
It is well I should marry again from my father's house.
And that would, indeed, be my wish.’
‘Nor would I stand in my kinswoman's way, my lord,’ said Hussey eagerly.
‘So soon as may be, Master Parry may make such disposal as he thinks fit, and I will never say the loath word.
It is my grief that I am unable to repay at this time the money that is due.
Within a year there should be no such restriction upon me.
And Master Parry himself is willing to agree to the offer I make.’
It seemed that with every exchange the man was growing more confident, and the girl, for all she maintained her fiery calm, a little more pressed and on the defensive.
‘Your Grace,’ she said quickly, ‘even a year may deprive me of my best prospects.
And what should I do in another woman's household, who have been used to managing my own?
Your Grace knows that two women in one hall is not good sense.’
‘Yet, your Grace, with all the goodwill in the world, I cannot repay this year, or not until after the harvest.
There is not so much ready cash in my treasury.
And it is but right that until I can make restitution, my kinswoman's expenses should fall upon me.
I don't seek to escape my duty.’
He was, perhaps, a thought too complacent on the subject.
The girl flashed one brief look in Hotspur's direction, and for an instant the glitter of her eyes seemed to him hunted and wild.
He leaned forward to the arm of the prince's chair.
‘Yet — with your Grace's permission?— if this eight hundred marks was paid over no more than a year and a half ago, surely it cannot all have been used or turned into goods so soon,’ he said.
‘Unless your estimable uncle had expensive amusements, Master Hussey, you must surely have come in for this very money along with the rest.’
The girl was quick to catch at the hint, drawing breath gratefully.
But so was the man; he must have come prepared even for this, and there was surely something unnatural in his readiness.
‘My lord, you say truth.
My uncle was already old, and not given to rash spending, indeed he carried his carefulness too far, and was something of a miser.
And what he has done with such ready money as he kept about his house neither I nor his clerk can tell as yet.’
‘He did not trust his clerk?’
Hotspur asked negligently; and it was at the girl's wry face that he looked.
‘He trusted no one,’ she said with sudden muted violence, and paled at the bitter sound of her own voice.
A year and a half ago, Hotspur thought, this fierce faun was surely no more than seventeen years old, and married off, like many another, to an old miser three or four times her age, for the sake of a noble name and a set of paltry quarterings, and the hope of a grandson set up in the landed estate.
And here she is, so short a time after, widowed and childless, with nothing gained and much lost.
‘The better reason for feeling certain that his eight hundred marks are still unspent, and still safely bestowed somewhere about his household.
It will be needful to find them, Master Hussey.
You may very well find it possible yet to send them home again in the very minted pieces in which they left home with the lady.’
‘So I hope, too, my lord, for then our whole dispute is solved.
But if my fair kinswoman will but be patient and abide in my house until we have brought all into order, and made proper search for this money…’
Even a few weeks would do for him, thought Hotspur, and caught the girl's eyes fixed upon him in silent desperation and appeal; though indeed it was so imperious as to be more of a demand.
But for God's love, he thought, half-intrigued and half-exasperated, if she has anything to charge against him why does she not speak?
Why has she not spoken long ago in the right quarter?
For it seems she has a father!
He leaned to the prince's ear, and said in a rapid whisper: ‘There's more in this!
Call an adjournment until tomorrow and have the merchant summoned to attend.’
The prince, at a loss with the complexities of women, was quick enough to pick up an offered lead, and not infrequently bettered the prompting, as he did now.
‘It seems to me, Mistress Hussey, that we should hear you further on this matter, and that we have need of more certain information than is available here.
I will hear the case again tomorrow, at three in the afternoon, and I desire that Master Parry shall also appear then to speak for himself.
It is not enough for one party or the other to tell us what his mind is, that he must do in person.
And further, Master Hussey, it would be helpful if you would bring with you your manor clerk, to speak to the value of your own holdings and this inheritance.
We cannot make a judgment without knowing what your resources are.’
That tasted bitter, thought Hotspur, watching Hussey swallow it down perforce, for on the face of it it was reasonable, and minor lordlings from the fringes of Wales do not argue with the prince of Wales.
And sweet!
For the girl's eyes, which he was beginning to read as he read his own children's, had flared briefly in vindictive joy, and again veiled themselves.
There goes a woman who would dance on her enemy's grave, he thought, curious and thoughtful.
And lie down in her friend's, too, if need be!
He understood instinctively the nature that deals in extremes.
They had both made their reverences, and were withdrawing, markedly separated by three feet or more, and shrinking fastidiously from approaching more closely in the doorway, when Hotspur called the lady back.
‘Madam, I misdoubt that you should be abroad after dusk alone, either here or in the town.
With his Grace's goodwill, I would offer you a night's lodging here in the safety of the abbey hospice, and tomorrow you shall have escort to bring your father to the audience.
My lady and her women are lodged in the  guesthouse, you need have no fears in joining their company.
If you accept, his Grace's page will conduct you, and commend you to my wife.’
She had risen from her deep curtsey, and stood for a long moment gazing steadily into his face.
This was the moment when she elected him, with her eyes and her heart wide open, knowing what she did.
She never turned back from it after; nor was it her habit, any more than his, to repent of what she did.
‘My lord,’ she said, ‘I know of no greater honour you could offer me, nor any that I would more joyfully embrace.
With all my heart I will go to your lady.’
Elizabeth Mortimer, Lady Percy, was thirty-one years old, and had everything woman could wish for, royal blood in her veins, wit and spirit and beauty, a husband the envy of all his peers, a little son the budding image of him, and a baby daughter on whom he doted.
She had also a gallant and generous heart wide-open to affection.
She received the unknown and unexpected widow like a welcome cousin, asking no questions and extorting no confidences, but offering on her own part enough warmth to make the early April evening glow.
She talked of her children, far away in the north at Alnwick castle with their household, and of the late Spring when she would take her husband home to them for a brief visit.
He was newly come today from Eltham, the king's favourite manor, where he had been a witness at his Majesty's proxy marriage to the widowed Duchess Joan of Brittany.
The king had been many years a widower.
She spoke with courteous compassion of the widowed, and for her guest's sake did not dwell on their sorrows.
And well might one so gloriously married feel pity for all those less happy than herself.
They were still sitting together when Hotspur came from the prince's apartments.
Julian rose as he came in, and bowed herself unnoticed from the room; but from beneath her lowered lids she saw them meet, and the private radiance that lit their faces was  still a dazzle in her eyes as she closed the door upon them.
She saw him cross impetuously to his wife, lift her bodily by the waist, and kiss her heartily; and she knew that before the latch clashed into place they were in each other 's arms.
Proof, she thought, astonished, that men and women do love.
For she had seen little enough evidence of it in her life so far.
She watched them in hall, from her place among Elizabeth's ladies, and they were two bright lanterns burning with sparks of laughter and joy and prodigal kindness, for pure pleasure of being together after an absence.
They lit the whole of the high table, startling the prince's grave face into gaiety.
Julian watched them, and every moment of watching only confirmed his election, though it set him another league away from her.
Nevertheless, he had felt her need and advanced to fill it.
She did not suppose there would ever be another such moment to hope for, yet few could ever have had so much.
It was unlooked-for grace that after supper he should send his page to ask Mistress Hussey to be kind enough to come and speak with him in the small chamber the prince was using as a study.
And a prodigy that he should receive her there alone.
‘Now that we are private,’ he said, looking her in the eyes, ‘you may speak out openly what for some reason you did not wish to speak out before the prince.
Why are you so urgent to get away from your husband's house and back to your father's?
Oh, the wish I well understand.
You're young and handsome, and your family clearly wealthy enough, you have a life before you.
But if that were all, would it be so insupportable to stay a few more weeks in Hussey's household?
And you yourself made it clear to me that you would not stomach so much as one more day, if we could but be induced to open a way of escape for you.
If we had not provided you this delay, and this opportunity, what would you have done?’
His voice was quiet, matter-of-fact and kind, and his eyes  smiled at her with interest and curiosity, she thought, beyond the mere charm he must use by native grace upon all who came near him and were weaker than he.
She debated for a moment whether to answer, and then how to answer.
‘My lord, I have good reason to know that it was you who said a word for me in his Grace's ear, and gave me this day for thought, and even offered me arguments I was not wise enough to find for myself.
If you had not, and the prince had consigned me again to that man's house, I should hardly have known what to do, or where to turn.
Though I should have discovered a tolerable way,’ she said, with force and finality.
‘Needs must, and I have had some practice.’
‘And why was it so urgent to you to go?
And to him that you should not go?’
‘He wants me to remain under his roof,’ she said deliberately, ‘because I am young and handsome — it was you, my lord, who called me so — and his wife is neither.
Widowed and childless and penniless, a woman is at the mercy of her husband's kin — or so he reasoned.
He offered me a fat life as his whore, and I laughed in his face.
Since then, twice already he has attempted me by force.
In his house I should never be safe.’
‘Then why have you not spoken out and accused him?’ demanded Hotspur warmly.
‘If he has done you such injury this fellow must be held to account.’
She smiled, a small smile as bitter as rue that just curled the corners of her lips.
‘He has done me no injury — yet.
It is I who have left my mark upon him.
Your lordship may see the print of my affection scored across the back of his left hand and wrist, if you care to make him hand you his manor roll tomorrow.
But give him his due, he does not give up for a scratch or two, and not even a dagger could hold him off for ever.’
‘No!’ said Hotspur, flushed with anger.
‘This cannot be allowed to pass without redress!
You should have spoken out boldly before the prince.
Why should you hesitate?
Do you think he would not see right done to you?’
‘With all my heart, my lord, I believe he would, but it would be a costly redress to me and mine.’
She leaned forward, flushing in her turn.
‘I do not want right done.
All I want is silence, and to go back to my father's house.’
‘And how much silence will there be when your father hears how you have been used?’
‘He will not hear,’ she said vehemently.
‘Never from me, and never from you, my lord, if you regard my good.
What I have told you here I have told you in confidence, whether I exacted any promise from you or no, and you cannot violate my trust.’
‘God forbid!’ said Hotspur, baffled and frowning.
‘But why should you be willing to let so gross an injury pass?
For I think it is not out of any maiden meekness in you,’ he said, with a sudden blazing smile that turned the stricture into a compliment.
‘Because he is English, and noble, though he may be only the small cousinly fry of his house.
He is distant kin to Arundel himself.
And I am the daughter of a Welshman, a settler in this town for many years, but still Welsh.
Your lordship of all people knows what that means now.
We Welsh are all suspect since the Lord Owen raised his banner in mid-Wales two years ago.
We cannot own property, or hold office, we must give hostages for our good behaviour — we are prisoners and outcasts in our own town.
My father was to have been bailiff, now that and all other honours are out of his reach.
He had a great and flourishing trade with the Welsh weavers, bringing their wool and piece goods into England here, and transporting them to London.
Now all trade with Wales is forbidden.
My father is a proud man.
If he knew of the insult offered me he would want revenge — and against the Husseys he cannot possibly speed.
I want my father living, not dead.
What use is revenge to me if it means the destruction of what life we have left?
No, my lord, I beg you keep this thing secret.
I need only one thing from you and his Grace, to return to my home and take part at least of my dowry with me.
And if you can give me that relief, I will be grateful.’
He thought it over, to judge by his frowning face with something of a struggle, and gave way reluctantly.
‘Well, you shall have it as you wish, though it goes against the grain with me to see this fellow go free.
But you must give me leave to confide in the prince, and I make the same promise for him.
Tomorrow's audience must be managed plausibly, he will need to know what he is about.’
She hesitated.
‘And can you so promise for him, my lord?’
‘Never fear for that.
His Grace is wise beyond his years.
I pledge his secrecy as freely as my own.’
He sat silent for a long moment, considering her soberly from beneath knitted brows.
She felt that the interview was over, and yet his stillness held her still, and the solemnity of his regard filled her with a curious sense of freedom and enlargement, as though she enjoyed the very fashion of intimacy with him that he might have shared with a man and his peer, even with the prince himself.
Those who were his companions in arms must have known such moments.
He was at peace with her while he reasoned and thought before speaking; and the lengthening silence had neither weight nor tension, but lay between them gently like the comfortable warmth of a fire.
She had never before known how to be still and wait; there had never been anything as worth the waiting for as this was.
‘Lady,’ said Hotspur, ‘there is yet something you may do for me, if you will.’
‘I will,’ she said, without haste or hesitation.
‘Gently, you do not know yet what it is.
You said well, no one knows better than I what it means to be Welsh now in these border towns such as Shrewsbury, with trade forbidden, and restrictions bearing down hard on every man with Welsh blood.
I know that for two years now Welsh labourers and students and journeymen have been stealing away out of England, to make their way back to Wales and enlist under the banner of their self-styled prince.
I know the manner of this same Lord Owen's  disaffection, and I tell you honestly, though I must and will fight with him wherever I may, yet I think his cause not all empty and not dishonourable, and there have been faults committed against him foolishly and grievously, which a man may well resent.
It is gross waste that a man with such qualities should be turned into a traitor, when I think he never willed to be any such monster, but wanted only his native right.
And if I could bring him to reconciliation with the king, without more bloodshed and without revenge, I would count it a good deed both for England and Wales.
You see, I speak with you as with my own conscience.
I have already attempted something in this vein, but there are those who deal distantly with such realities, and the prince and I, both, suffer from them hardly less than Owen does.
Nevertheless, it is our purpose to keep a channel open by which we may still talk with Glendower.’
‘I have already heard,’ said Julian, ‘how in the council of last November you spoke for a parley with the Lord Owen, and told the king's ministers that he would be willing to talk peace.
And how there were some there who thought no shame to recommend that you should invite him to a meeting, so that he could be taken unawares and murdered there.
And I have heard,’ she said, ‘how you answered.’
The eyes that dwelt upon her had opened wide in surprise, perhaps even in amusement; but the mind behind them was held and deeply exercised.
How came she to know so much?
‘And how did I answer?’
‘You said it was hardly in accord with your rank and honour to make use of the oath of fealty to lure a man treacherously to his death.
And the prince,’ she said, watching him narrowly, ‘approved you.
And so the matter lay.’
His eyes were very bright now, though the constancy of their regard never wavered.
Looking down into them, she could see clean into his soul.
If ever this man needed to deceive, she thought, dismayed, he might as well bare his neck for the axe, for  he could not save himself.
He has no mask to cover his intent.
He is like a naked light.
And his lady is no different.
Does that come from living and loving together?
Or from choosing after his own kind?
He said drily: ‘You are very well-informed concerning the workings of the king's council.’
‘The Welsh are all wizards,’ she said.
‘And the Lord Owen is the greatest wizard of all.
Have you not heard as much?’
‘Lady, I study to learn.
There are more secrets than those belonging to the English, and well I know it.
Your father, as I hear, was the main channel through which the Welsh woollens reached England.
Parliament in its wisdom or folly has banned all such trade, true enough.
But parliament is far away, and the border of Wales is very near, and is there a soul in these parts who does not know that smuggling goes on day by day, and that life here would be impossible if it did not?
Almost half of Shrewsbury has Welsh blood, or at the least friends in Wales.
How can such a border be blockaded?
It cannot, nor it is not.
The Severn, even in spate, is not impassable.
Now supposing, lady, supposing, I say, that there are traders who have kept their contacts across the water.
Then such men can be of use both to England and to Wales.
Peace is in the interests of both.
You believe me?
You trust me?’
‘I believe you,’ she said.
‘I trust you.’
She did not say: ‘I love you.’
‘Good!
You have spoken openly with me, and I speak openly with you.
No penalties!
I am neither a bailiff nor a tax-collector.
What you say to me has been said only to me.
Is there a reliable man who goes back and forth freely into Wales?’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘there is such a man.’
She had said it, and she was committed, and had committed others along with herself.
The thought did not daunt her, but she had great need of a moment of silence, to take breath and consider how much she dared tell.
He had dealt with her honestly, not as with a mere woman, one who must necessarily be only on the fringes of her menfolk's concerns.
He had asked her only for what he needed, though there must be many blunter questions he could have put to her had he been so minded.
She trusted him, for her own part, without reserve or doubt; but she was trusting him for those who crossed the river and took the risks.
Moreover, he himself had loyalties of his own to preserve, and it was well for him that he should not know too much.
‘Yes,’ she said, picking her way delicately for his sake, ‘the cloth still finds its way in, though not so freely and not so profitably.
Yes, the money still finds its way out to pay for the cloth.’
‘And letters can find their way both in and out,’ he said, ‘by the same route?’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘they can.’
Can and do, she thought, ever since that September of two years ago, before I was given in marriage, when Owen fired Ruthyn, and his men plundered Oswestry and Welshpool, and the king came storming through here and across the border with all his army, but never found any enemy to fight.
The Welsh had all vanished into the hills, as they always vanish, and Henry marched his army back through Shrewsbury empty-handed.
The despatches that mapped every move he planned went into Wales ahead of him by this same route.
And that was only the beginning.
‘Will you bring me in touch with this messenger?’
She hesitated, pondering means.
‘You must meet him?’
‘I think it may be even more important that he should meet me.
Will he take your word for my good faith?’
‘Do you take my word for his?’ she said.
He smiled.
‘Come, then, let's be plain.
I have warrant from the king to deal-to keep open, if I can, a means of communication with Glendower, any honest way of continuing the debate that may yet stop this fighting, and let tradesmen and students and friars move freely about their business again.
I want pacification.
I want an open border, as you do.
I want Owen back lawfully on  his own lands and in good odour again with his king.
What I do in approaching him thus I do with the king's goodwill.
But well you know, it seems, that one such attempt has been ruined and rejected by the council, and it may take us a weary while to find a fair agreement and a council sobered enough and sensible enough to abide by it.
Yet I think the trying well worth while.
If I move as privately as possible, it is to hold off the fools and rogues until the thing has a chance of success.
And if I handle all with my own hands, and keep the prince clear of it — though he knows my mind, and it is his mind, too — I do so to preserve him from harassment by those who will hear of nothing less than Owen's head on London Bridge.
The letters your man will carry will be in this hand!
He has a right to come face to face with me, and judge for himself whether he can honourably deliver them, and never fear that he is helping to lure a brave man to his death.’
‘My man knows your reply to the council,’ she said, ‘as well as I do.
But your lordship says right, it is better there should be as few hands in the chain as may be.
No one between you and Prince Owen but one man.’
‘Will you bring me to meet this man?’ he asked.
‘He cannot well come here.
Or to the castle.’
He nodded assent, and did not ask for a reason.
‘I would rather come to him.
There must be no suggestion of the prince being involved.
If your father will receive me in his house, I should be glad.
I would not have him think I have taken advantage of his daughter, and shun facing him.
Nor that I will to borrow his messenger without his knowledge.
I need not ask if he can be secret.’
‘He can be the most secret man alive.’
‘Will you be my go-between to him?’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I'll be answerable for my father.’
There was nothing he could have asked of her that she would not have done for him.
She had never been afraid to look straightly at whatever fortune sent her, to map its every feature, and acknowledge it for what it was.
She had examined with analytical precision her empty and disgusting marriage with an impotent old man, and her candid delight at the death that had put an end to it.
She had even considered the possibility that the old fool's frantic efforts to match a young wife had been the cause of his death, and the idea had not caused her to turn her eyes away and evade the issue.
She had rejoiced at her childlessness, and even found the heart to laugh at the lamentable end of her father's fond dynastic ambitions.
If there was one thing not ugly and absurd about that marriage, it was a small but irreversible change in her own situation.
She was no longer an unmarried daughter, but a widow, and widowhood represented status, and liberation not merely from spinsterhood, but also from any expectation of fulfilment in marriage.
Through that illusion she had walked with blessed speed, and out beyond it into a world of other possibilities.
Eventually the experience might have to be repeated, in her own defence, but she could not hope to find much more in it than she had found in this first venture.
There were other relationships.
Whatever she could look for in the future must be looked for outside marriage.
What was here being offered to her she took with both hands, roused and grateful.
She had not yet even recognised what it was, but she knew it for better worth than she had ever yet been given.
‘You will go home with him tomorrow —’
‘If he gets his money,’ she said with a rueful smile.
‘He'll get his money, or part of it, at least.
How soon can you bring me to meet the man you speak of?
If he goes and comes, it may be days yet?
Or weeks?
I cannot afford weeks.’
‘He is here in Shrewsbury,’ she said.
‘It can be tomorrow.
Give me but one day, and by night he shall be waiting for you at our house.’
‘I will come there after dark.
Tell me how to find the place.’
‘It is a house in a court behind St Chad's church.
You may come there by the alley from the town wall, and leave the church  on your right.
There is a sign over the gateway, the Fleece.
Or if you will, I will come to the abbey gate, and bring you there by the least frequented way.’
‘I would not so burden you.
No, I will come, and alone.
You and your house shall take no risk by me.
Oh, I know,’ he said, ‘the pains of being Welsh, and too close neighbour to the English, when the standards are out.’
He took her hand, not to kiss, but as he might have taken a man's hand who had met him fair and done him honour.
‘I am ashamed that I have kept you from your rest, after so troublous a day.
Go now and sleep, and have no fear for tomorrow.
I will take care that you shall not be persecuted further.’
She crossed the chill, moonlit parclose of the abbey of St Peter and St Paul, the faint smoke of frost from her breath going before her.
The great church was mute and dark, for compline was long over, since the routine of the house clung as yet to its winter timetable, and the monks were in their beds until midnight should rouse them for matins.
She walked alone in the silence, hearing her own muted footfalls like echoes of past or future, she could not distinguish one from the other.
Faithful to his orders, she had no fears for the morrow.
There was no man but one who could trouble her rest ever again, and whatever disorder or ordeal he cast into her path she knew she would go gladly, and gather like flowers.
She entered the warmth of the hospice as Lady Percy was leaving the hall to go to her own apartment, attended by a single demure damosel.
Elizabeth saw her, and stretched out a generous hand:
‘Mistress Hussey, I missed you!
Margaret has orders for your comfort.
Sleep well, and be sure they will see right done to you.
Good-night!’
Julian looked after her, the high, exultant step, the reared head under its coronal of brown hair, the lofty joy in every movement.
And she thought: What must it be like to go to one's marital bed with delight, instead of disgust?
And to such a man, instead of an old fool with the shakes, and sweating like a pig in an ague?
And how strange, she thought, that I have come from him, and you are but now going to him, and yet I do not envy even you, the most enviable of women!
For God's sake, what is it I have got from him, that it sets me so high?
2
She suffered one paroxysm of doubt, the first and the last, and a matter of shame to her as often as she remembered it after, when the hour of noon came and passed, and no one sent for her to go into the town and fetch her father to the audience; and when she ventured to enquire, she was told that one of his Grace's clerks had already gone to summon Master Parry, and she need not concern herself in the matter.
That struck her hard; but the shock passed as quickly.
It seemed the prince would not have a witness influenced, even by his own daughter.
She had relied on having time and opportunity to confide in him, and set his mind at rest about the unexpected summons.
She knew him, and could imagine his state now, half surly defiance, half anxious and defensive fear.
He was not a brave man, and often said so, brandishing his supposed nervousness like a banner.
If they did not let her see him until they both appeared before the prince, what wild errors might he not commit in his insecurity?
Yet she could not, once that first convulsion was past, feel any unease.
Hotspur had promised her a fair deliverance, vouching for the prince no less than for himself, and in his promise she believed as in the mass.
So she waited for the summons to the prince's presence, and went with a demure step and a high heart when she was called at last.
Her father was in the anteroom, waiting for her with a dour face and uneasy eyes, but so closely attended by page and  chamberlain that barely a word beyond her submissive greeting and his mumbled acknowledgement, phrased as a blessing but uttered like a malediction, was able to pass between them.
Then they were ushered together into the presence-chamber.
She looked round for Hotspur, but he was not there.
She was not to be trapped into suspicion again; if he knew his power so well that his presence was unnecessary, that was enough for her.
The prince was seated, not in his chair of state, but between two of his clerks at a trestle table, with a quantity of papers and parchments spread before them; and his treasurer stood at his shoulder, ready to advise if requested, but looking on so impartially that it seemed to her he had already done his share.
Before the table Edward Hussey stood hunched in defensive composure, very plainly dressed — had he set out to demonstrate the modesty of his means?— and with his countenance fixed in an expression of resigned and dutiful benevolence.
It was somewhat of a disappointment to her vengeful mind to consider that he might have taken yesterday's omen to heart, and prudently drawn in his horns, resigning his pretensions on her rather than venture even token opposition to the fiat of the prince and his governor.
It was, she supposed, a possibility.
The girl was well enough — all the better for hating and fighting him!— but not worth that risk.
There were plenty more to be had cheaper!
‘Mistress Hussey,’ said the prince as she entered, ‘we beg your forgiveness for keeping you waiting a little beyond the time we appointed.
Master Parry, pray pardon also a summons at such short notice, but the case we have to judge concerns you nearly, and I make no doubt that your daughter's wellbeing is your first anxiety.
We have pleased to reserve this hearing until we had had an opportunity of acquainting ourselves with all the circumstances.’
He lowered his eyes for an instant to the parchments that littered the table.
The hovering clerk at Hussey's back was watching them narrowly every moment, as though one of them might elude him when he came to gather them up again.
‘The  matter at issue, as you no doubt know, is the return to your household of your daughter, now widowed and without children, and the repayment of her dowry.
Madam, it is your personal wish that you should so return, is it not?’
Julian inclined her head and veiled her eyes.
‘To the end that you may make a second and happier marriage from your father's house — is that so?’
This time she raised her face, blazing with candour, and said: ‘Yes!’ boldly.
She was not one of those who cannot lie with wide-open eyes and angelic faces when needful.
‘Such an intent we find wholly commendable,’ said the child gravely, monumentally sure of his shaky ground, ‘and we confide that your father must feel with you, as is but natural.’
He is acting, she thought, touched and elated, he is prompting my father; he has learned his lesson well.
But then she looked into his eyes, which dwelt upon her in huge solemnity, and knew that he was burningly sincere.
If he delivered her, with her endowment secured, as she had been promised he should, he did so of his own will, because he was convinced of her need and the justice of her complaint.
And he had been left to conduct this hearing on his own, secure that he would make the decision both Hotspur and she needed.
Never had he surrendered, or been asked to surrender, his independence of action.
Had Hotspur even confided to him all that she had urged and confessed, yesterday evening?
But yes, surely he had.
He had given the boy all the evidence, dumped it in his lap without ceremony, and left him to examine all, and act as the prince he was.
That argued a very profound knowledge of the royal mind on Hotspur's part, and an even deeper confidence in its infinite will to justice.
On what grounds, she reflected now, enlightened, had he vouched for the boy?
He had never said: ‘The prince will do as I tell him’, but simply: ‘The prince is wise beyond his years.’
Why, after all, should that cause her any surprise?
The boy  had been in his tutelage now for two and a half years, closer far to him than to his own Lancaster kin.
‘Very well!
We have now examined into Master Hussey's means, and we are satisfied,’ said the prince, very gravely and courteously, ‘that even though no exact inventory has yet been made of all the property passing to you, Master Hussey, by your uncle's will, yet you have certainly acquired assets which must be disposable, and of such a nature as to be very readily disposable.
You are already possessed of a substantial household, and have here been visited with a second.
We are taking into account that both manors must be properly manned and maintained.
But there is still a handsome balance of advantage to you.
And it is our judgment that you can and should pay at once a portion of Mistress Hussey's dowry, so that her maintenance may be assured, and she may return to her father's house from this court, as is her wish.
We cannot feel that such an arrangement is in any way unjust to you.
Even if we were to order the repayment of the whole sum at once, the amount would be less than if you were paying tax of a lawful fifteenth of your movable goods.
Which could well happen,’ said the Prince — was it possible that he was capable of a strain of malicious humour?—‘whenever parliament meets.
But we are not demanding the whole.
One half of the dowry, four hundred marks, you will pay to our treasurer here by this day week, and we ourselves will see it conveyed to Master Parry.
The remaining four hundred you will pay through the bailiff of our town of Shrewsbury within six months from today.
We have given our judgment,’ said the prince formally, and sat back in his chair with an authority and finality that no one cared to challenge.
There was nothing for Hussey to do but bow before the wind with as good a grace as he might, profess his resolve to do all that was required of him-at whatever penal cost to himself, his martyred countenance implied — reverently kiss the prince's hand, and withdraw to his plain, melancholy wife and his two fat manors up-river.
Julian made her reverence in her turn.
Over the extended hand she looked up into the prince's eyes, and saw there the same candid regard she had seen in his model; yet the shafts that pierced into this boy's inmost being were somewhere shuttered close, standing off all communion.
There was no obliquity, no deceit; neither was there any revelation.
The boy had learned what the man would never learn.
She watched dispassionately, concealing a faintly malevolent smile, as her father's inflexible knee forced itself to bend before the wrong prince of Wales.
The return of his four hundred marks was a strong inducement, nevertheless it went against the grain with him to do homage to an Englishman.
‘Master Parry,’ said the prince, innocent of his offences as of the benefits that spoke loudest for him, ‘we will make it our business to see this money duly paid to you.
Madam, I pray you may enjoy a more fortunate marriage hereafter.’
They were blessed and dismissed.
They went out into the precinct of the abbey church, and the showers had passed, and April wore its radiant face.
Distant across the river the towers of the castle rose against the sky, straddling the only land approach into Shrewsbury.
Pale, rushing clouds danced across a blue almost as pale.
‘And what the plague,’ demanded Rhodri Parry irritably, grasping her arm as they crossed towards the guesthouse doorway, ‘did you want with starting such a frantic legal bother, without a word of warning to me, without a hint of your purpose?
Could you not have sat tight in the fellow's house for a few weeks longer?’
‘Not a day longer!
I could not stand another hour of the man himself or his bleating sheep of a wife,’ she said tartly.
‘And moreover, could I know how long the prince would stay here?
It might have been no more than two or three days.
I had to strike now or never.
And you had best be grateful to me, for if you had left it to the little men of law he could buy better and shiftier than you, and you would never have got your money at all.’
The old man — she was the child of a second marriage, and he had been well past forty before she was born — snorted his disbelief, but she knew he was doing little more than vent the nervousness of the past hours, now that the suspense was over.
‘He could not have denied me.
It was due.
Or else he could have fed and kept you for the rest of your life!’
‘Then there would have been bloodshed, for I tell you I could not be in the same house with them and keep my temper.
And as for letting go of what he had, he would have gone to every possible shift first.
It might have cost you more to get it than the gold was worth.
You should never have been so eager to pay so much for so poor a privilege.’
‘Poor?
Do you know the value of that manor of his?
It is a noble name and a noble family.’
‘Very like, and I make no doubt there are even some noble members somewhere within the clan, but my husband was none, nor is this nephew of his.
I suppose if he had been wifeless you would have had me married off to him as soon as I was out of mourning!’
There had never been a time when they had not wrangled, and yet after his fashion he was fond of her.
‘You might have done worse.
But let it go — the man is married, and there's an end of it.
And I'm glad enough to have you back, since you could not give me the grandson I hoped for —’
‘I could,’ she said fiercely.
‘Will you have me prove it?
On what stock shall we graft?
You should have bought me a man, and not a threadbare purse.’
‘In God's name, girl,’ he protested, shaken, ‘what devil has got into you, to talk to your father so?
You were not wont to be so loud and bold.’
‘I was not wont to be a married woman, and now a widowed woman.
The degree loosens the tongue.
’ And she meant to use it to the full, though perhaps not in this wasteful way.
In one unwelcome marriage you learn much about the means of evading  a second, and still retaining the consequence gained by the first.
It had been her only gain; she did not mean to let it be whittled away.
‘Wait but a few moments here for me,’ she said more gently, ‘for I must make my farewell to the Lady Percy, who has been more than kind to me.’
Elizabeth gave her a warm, vivid smile, and her hand, and good wishes to go home with her.
Her faith in the prince's justice perhaps larger than that, in God's — had never admitted any question of the outcome, assured that a plaintiff her husband favoured must be in the right.
Julian went out from her strangely uneasy for creatures who walked through the world so openly and confidently.
It is too simple a matter to damage those rare few who are too brave, too scornful and too trusting to put on armour.
‘Lady Percy!’ said her father, musing, as they walked side by side towards the gatehouse.
‘That's Harry Percy's wife?
He they call Hotspur?
He was not there with the prince at the audience?’
‘No,’ she said, ‘he was not there.’
‘A pity!
Since you needs must drag me here, I should have liked to see this Hotspur men talk so much about.’
She said nothing to that.
It might be needless caution, yet she kept silence by instinct in all public places upon all that touched Hotspur's affairs, and more because they were his than because they affected the state, and such gravities as peace and war.
All the way home she held her tongue, answering only in monosyllables to her father's habitual complaints and strictures, which never were meant to be taken too deeply to heart.
It was not so long a walk, though it led her back in twenty minutes through a year and a half of her life, and was quick with memories both sharp and sweet.
The sun had come out fully over the abbey mills and the narrow bridge of Meole brook, and in the foregate there was bustle enough.
This English gate into Shrewsbury was guarded less stringently than the Welsh bridge on the further side, and therefore used more freely, and the  drawbridge was lowered from earliest dawn.
The river was high and sparkling, piling light debris of branches and leaves against the piers of its four stone arches; and beyond, the walls of the town rose, and the tunnel of the open gate.
Down the steep slope from the walls to the shore the narrow terraces of the abbot's vineyard ranged like a staircase, the vines like charred black stumps as yet barely showing the first shadowy tint of green.
Reflected light shimmered upwards from the rapid water, and rippled along the stone of the ramparts.
A fair city, something dishevelled after uneasy times, and hampered and straitened now -by the loss of the thriving Welsh trade which was half its life, but still capable of living on its own fat for some while yet, and still hard to take and invaluable to hold.
‘You'll not find it easy to get the keys from old Joanna,’ Rhodri remarked with malice, as they passed in through the archway and continued along the town walls.
‘She's had her own way too long now.’
She cared less than nothing for the privileges of the housewife; the old woman could have kept the keys for ever, and Julian would have been indifferent.
Yet her homecoming and remaining at home would have to be justified, and there was no other immediate way except by assuming the direction of the household.
‘Leave me to fend for myself,’ she said.
‘What's my due I shall have, and today.’
She had not tried, as yet, to see beyond today; she sensed that what she saw when she did lift her eyes might well be a void, and as bleak as winter ice.
Another marriage — probably as chill and loveless as the last — or a comparable prison in her father's house.
Some women found at any rate a sanctuary behind the veil, but a convent was more likely to be a hell of rebellion and constraint to her.
And yet, she thought, as they picked their way gingerly along under the stooping eaves of the alley that led to the rear of St Chad's church, to avoid the running kennel thawed and filled by the morning showers, the finger of God had intervened  in her life only yesterday, and might again lean down to point out for her an acceptable and fruitful way.
What she wanted was not a sanctuary, but a battlefield.
But nobody less than God was ever likely to offer her one.
The house of the Fleece was timbered and dark and beetle-browed on the side next the street, with jutting upper storeys and shuttered windows.
There was an arched cartway into the yard, and a narrow wicket let them in through the thick oak portal to the cobbled court, ringed round with stables and storehouses.
Another prison, indeed, but at least this one had a visitation promised.
Not until they were within, the door closed after them, and the silence of the thick walls like a seal against the world, did she tell him what manner of guest she had invited to his dwelling, and how soon he was to have his wish.
It was past nine o'clock when he came, late enough to have emptied the streets.
The house of the Fleece was fast shuttered by then, the wicket in the yard door closed but not barred; and Julian was waiting in the doorway of the undercroft, her ears pricked for every footfall that passed along the alley.
She knew him when he came; though he trod quietly his step was unmistakably light and long and confident, and he was one of the few who came that way by night alone, yet not furtively.
She was at the wicket before him, and because the yard was dark, put out a hand to guide him within.
The implications of the contact she honestly had not considered; she would have done as much for any who came by night.
He accepted the service as naturally, closing long, hard fingers on hers to read the hints they gave him.
Her veins ran fire, flashing back like a powder-train to the heart, and there bursting in a brilliance and violence such as she had never experienced or dreamed of.
She contained it and gave no sign, for she was enlarged, as the night is by the moon.
She even detached herself composedly when he was within, to have  both hands free to drop the heavy wooden bar into place and fasten the door, and then took him by the hand again to bring him safely to the door of the undercroft, across the uneven stones.
Only when they were within the house, in the timber-scented darkness of the staircase, did she halt to kindle a light.
The tinder caught and glowed, the candle billowed, a small orb of yellow light between their two faces, and they were looking intently into each other 's eyes across the flame.
‘You keep close and careful house here,’ he said, with a small, grim smile.
‘The Welsh in Shrewsbury do not invite notice, especially by night, my lord.
And my father is a timid man.
These precautions are not all for you.’
She had answered him, as he had spoken, in an undertone.
He cast a glance about him, noting the half-empty spaces of the undercroft, and the faint gleam of light from above-stairs.
‘Are there servants in the house?’ he asked in the same low voice.
‘One old woman — deaf, and in bed and asleep in the garret long since.’
‘Your father has no journeymen living with him?’
‘Two, but they sleep across the courtyard, above the storerooms.
You may be private enough, my lord.
The house is sealed.’
She held the candle steady until it burned tall and pale, and the light swelled and smoothed the mellow wood of the walls, calling gaunt shadows out of empty air.
Then she lit him up the stairs, and went before him into the panelled solar, where Rhodri rose from a tall chair by the fire to receive him.
‘Father, here is Lord Henry Percy.’
She was quiet, muted, moving before her sire with downcast eyes and dutiful voice, and withdrawing into the shadows as soon as her errand was done, as though she had no part in what was still to do, unless to wait on their requirements.
For a moment Hotspur almost believed in her extinction, her relegation to the servant's role which was the lot of daughters in their parents' households; and even for a moment  it grieved him to believe in it.
But the face into which he had gazed across the candle-flame had been neither tamed, nor troubled by any foreboding.
She did what she chose to do, and was as for the time being she chose to be.
‘Master Parry,’ he said, ‘I must thank you for granting me this interview, so strangely requested.
No doubt your daughter will have told you why I am here.’
‘You are welcome to my house, my lord,’ said Rhodri.
‘For your kindness to my girl I am in your debt, as she is.
Yes, she has told me.’
Hotspur had felt some curiosity about this father of hers, for she was not a woman whose antecedents could easily be guessed at.
What he saw was a man of about sixty years, older than he had expected, but still hale, and of a powerful frame.
He stood no taller than his daughter, probably she exceeded him by an inch or two, but he had the shoulders of a bull, and a great head of brindled brown hair laced with grey, like his short, square beard.
He leaned and peered a little, but not from any weakness of the eyes, rather out of a fixed suspicion that caused him to study with narrow attention all who came near him, and especially strangers.
His gown was rich and sombre; he knew cloths, and had the means to buy the best.
He valued ceremony, too, perhaps as a barrier, negotiable when desired, but inestimable as a means of maintaining distance during a parley.
On the heavy oak table beside him there were good silver goblets set out, and a flagon of wine.
‘Be seated, my lord!
Put off your cloak and draw near the fire.
You'll drink a cup of wine with me?’
Hotspur put up a hand to the furred collar of his cloak, and let it slide from his shoulders; and like a silent and attentive valet the girl came gliding out of the shadows and took it from him.
He was plain and sombre, dark brown from head to foot, to pass in the night unnoted though undisguised.
As soon as he was seated at the table she poured and handed wine, and he marked the  breadth and strength of the shapely hand that offered the cup, and realised suddenly, noting the blue cloth sleeve of her gown, that she had already shed her mourning.
‘Master Parry, I have so much confidence in the good offices of your daughter that I have brought with me the letter of which I spoke to her.
Is he here that should deliver it?’
‘He is here,’ said a soft, deliberate voice from the darker side of the room, remote from the fire.
The narrow inner door had been invisible in the uniformity of the panelling, and its latch had made no sound as it was lifted; but suddenly there was a man framed in the doorway, a lean, wiry, lightly-built creature, stepping out of the wall with a conjuror's aplomb and a deer-hound's lanky grace.
Hotspur had swung round in his chair to face the voice, which had an aloof, noncommittal sweetness of tone, promising nothing.
It did not disturb him that he had been under observation; he was not accustomed to deprecate what he was, or to undervalue it.
He looked up with interest, candidly returning the inspection, at Rhodri Parry's agent.
The young man — perhaps not quite so young after all, he might have been as much as thirty — came forward into the room, closing the door behind him.
He wore the usual faded, dun-coloured every-day clothes of the peasant and labourer, coarse woollen chausses and short homespun tunic, with a capuchon pushed back from his head and dangling at his back; but the belt that circled his hips was of finely-tooled leather, and had straps to attach both sword and dagger, though he wore neither; and his boots were knee-high, and also of soft leather, no doubt hand-worked somewhere in Wales, from native deerskin.
His face was long and gaunt, tanned by outdoor living in all weathers to a deep olive tone, but his eyes, deeply-set beneath black brows that flared upwards like wings, were unexpectedly blue and cool and far-looking.
He wore a short, close-trimmed beard that scarcely veiled the shape of a wide, mobile, quirky mouth like a jester's; and though his thick crop of short, curling  hair was black, there were twin streaks of mingled rust-red in the beard's blackness, sharpening and tapering his long chin to a fiery point.
The corners of his mouth bit inward deeply; it was sometimes difficult to know whether he smiled, or had a wry taste on his tongue.
He stood unmoving to be examined, in no way disconcerted by the length of the scrutiny, and feeling no need to break the silence, until Hotspur said at length, with slow consideration:
‘Somewhere I have known you before.’
‘It may well be, my lord.
At any rate, your lordship will know me again.’
‘I think so.
You might be all too easily remembered.
Yet I cannot call to mind where I have seen you.’
‘As good a gift as being easily forgotten,’ said Rhodri Parry drily.
‘Your lordship desired to meet the man who can carry messages freely into Wales, and out again.
Here he is, and for his ability I can vouch.’
‘I pray you — with your leave, Master Parry!— sit down with us.
It is fair you should have time to consider well.
You are vouched for,’ said Hotspur, with the large simplicity that was warp to the weft of his equally vast pride, ‘but no one has vouched for me.’
The young man sat down readily at the table, leaning his homespun elbows at ease; and Julian, without being bidden, came forward noiselessly and filled a cup for him.
Rhodri watched them with his hooded, wary eyes, and said nothing.
‘He has avowed only that I can.
Not that I will,’ said the young man coolly.
‘That he can hardly promise.
Only you can do that.
May I know your name?’
‘My name is Iago Vaughan.
I am a Welshman from under the Berwyns, and distant kin to the Tudors of Anglesey.’
Hotspur smiled, for the sons of Tudor ap Goronwy were first cousins to  Owen Glendower, prominent in his counsels, and in his warbands, too.
‘Does your lordship require to know more of me?’
‘Not even that, if you had not pleased to tell me.
But I like a face to have a name.
And it is a fair exchange, for mine you know before I name it.’
He turned suddenly to Julian, standing silent and attentive in the shadows, and said to her, with a hand outstretched: ‘Hand me my cloak!’
But he did it with a warming smile and a ready assumption of her allegiance and willingness, more as if he had asked a small current courtesy of his wife than given an order to a servant.
And when she brought it to him, he did not take it from her, but only felt in the deep pocket stitched into its lining, and drew out a parchment rolled and sealed, which he reached across the table and laid before Iago Vaughan.
‘You can read?’
‘In four languages, my lord.
I was brought up in the cloister, and have Latin and French as well as English and Welsh.’
‘Faith, I wish I could say as much, for I never mastered Latin, and have no Welsh.
But I write a tolerable hand in English.
I trust the superscription is clear?
I have not named the place where he is to be found, since I do not know it, and a week hence it may be very far from where he bides today.
Yet I make no doubt he can be found.’
By one of the Tudors, he thought, a finger could be laid on him any day of the year, I'll swear.
But he asked nothing; it was not his habit to woo men from their clan allegiance, or try to make dishonest use of a man he wished to employ honestly.
He leaned back in his chair, leaving the letter in Iago's hands.
‘Will you take Owen my  message And bring me back his answer?
Will you undertake as much again, if this bears fruit?’
He looked at the old man, peering darkly under his down-drawn brows; and there was one who would have questioned and writhed and wondered, pondering long before he would have given any answer, and then, most likely, regretting the answer he had given, whatever it chanced to be.
But he looked at Iago Vaughan, and was suddenly aware that his motives would not be  questioned nor his matter suspected.
The thin, clever, spatulate fingers — they could have been an apothecary's or a musician's — held the roll of parchment delicately; the light blue eyes studied Hotspur's face without disguise and without wavering.
They saw a man curiously like and curiously unlike himself; like, in that he was no man's man but his own, and what he pledged, he would perform; unlike in his innocence, pride and primitive simplicity.
A man without a glimmer of serpentine wisdom about him, for all the sword-sharpness of his mind, a man who thought with his blood and his bowels, for good or evil.
A dangerous man, and a man who lived eternally in danger.
He wrote English vehemently, scoring deep into the vellum:
‘To the most excellent lord, Owen ap Griffith, lord of Glyndyfrdwy and Cynllaith.’
From one haughty and courteous prince to another.
Only a few months ago, after this Lord Henry Percy had withdrawn to his other urgent command on the Scottish borders, Owen had run wild over most of North Wales, and made himself master of the counties of Carnarvon and Merioneth; and while the woollier heads in King Henry's council had seethed and talked bloody war, Hotspur had come swooping back to hold the balance so sturdily that he had been allowed, on the king's warrant, to approach the Welsh prince, and attempt to bring him back to his allegiance, on promise of honourable terms.
There were still Welsh grooms and servants and even lawyers about Westminster, to listen and observe and send word.
And there was no man in the kingdom who knew better than Owen what Hotspur's disdainful answer had been to the council's shameful proposal of murder in place of magnanimity.
This new approach, it seemed, was not to be made so publicly, not to be exposed to the expedient treason of little devious minds far removed from the battlefields on which honest men met, and contended, and killed  one another without malice.
Yet the girl had said that what he did, he did with the king's warrant, and the prince's approval.
They had learned, apparently, not to let the pack near the scent too soon.
‘I will do your errand, my lord,’ he said, ‘and I'll bring you word again from the Lord Owen.
And for the future, so long as there is hope that this may speed, I will be your go-between.’
‘God speed both it and you!’ said Hotspur, and sat back with a short, sharp sigh of satisfaction.
‘When do you set out?’
‘Tonight.
But for your lordship's visit I should have been gone before this.’
‘And how soon can you be again in Shrewsbury?
No, never tell me more of your goings and comings than is my due, I need only to know, as nearly as you may judge, how long I must bide here to wait for the answer.’
‘Within a week, unless the Lord Owen move too often and too fast for me, I shall be here again.
How may I come in touch with you?’
‘Why, that's no great problem while we remain at the abbot's lodging, since half of Shrewsbury and a good part of the shire goes in and out freely at the abbey, and you may ask an audience whenever you will, and always find yourself one of three or four, various enough to keep any man in countenance.
But it's well,’ he said seriously, ‘that you should have a token about you that will get you in to me or the prince at need, and stand you in good stead if ever you should fall foul unawares of any of his officers or mine.
I need your discretion, yes, but I will not have you brought into needless suspicion or danger upon this account.
Here, wear this!’
He plucked a heavy silver ring from the middle finger of his left hand, tugging it over the knuckle impetuously, and held it out across the table in his palm.
The single stone with which it was set, opaque in browns and golds, passed from hand to hand like a glowing eye.
‘It is known to be mine, and I will give my chamberlain orders that it shall admit the bearer at any time.
If ever you have word when I am not by, it will bring you to the prince in my place.
I'll see to that.’
He smiled, seeing his pledge lie in the other man's palm, as yet only half-accepted.
‘Put it on, and wear it.
It's yours, whether we speed or no, and some day you may need it.’
‘I take it, then,’ said Iago Vaughan slowly, ‘since there may be a time when there'll be little leisure for persuasion.
Are you not afraid, my lord, that I shall use it upon my own occasions? which may not always be yours?
A princely warrant to pass where I will could be a godsend to such a man as I am.’
‘Unless I have lost my judgment,’ said Hotspur bluntly, ‘you would not be beholden.
Though so it serve our purpose, I would not quarrel with a little license.’
Iago slid the ring on to his finger, and admired the deep sheen of the polished stone.
‘If I have not lost my cunning, as you have not lost your judgment, it will never be used but to come to you with that which belongs to you.
What is it, this stone?’
‘The Scots call them simply pebbles.
I got it while I was prisoner there, after Otterburn.’
He smiled a little ruefully, remembering his captivity and his costly ransom, fourteen years past now, before he married.
‘And take this also, for you will have charges to meet on your journey.’
He had not asked, nor would he ever ask, what provision was normally made for these frequent and illicit journeys, the relays of horses, the hire, perhaps, of boats, transport for the cloth.
That was Rhodri's business, and if it was illegal, it was also inevitable and understandable.
He laid upon the table a drawstring purse of soft leather, that chinked faintly as it shifted and settled.
He saw Iago's lean and secret face stiffen, the blue eyes shrink to points of steel, and the linked hands draw back from touching.
‘Ah, never look so, man!
I have not bought nor bribed you.
I am asking a service of you, and I will pay the expenses, as is but right.
You need not feel your hands tied — if you can bring that  prince of yours and his armies victorious into Shrewsbury over my body in fair fight, go do it, and I'll never cavil.
You are as free a man as I am, we do but agree over the hire of a courier.
So you give me that service, there are no debts between us, and no obligations.’
Iago looked up at him over the wine with a face suddenly bright, astonished and disarmed, and burst into a muted crow of laughter.
‘By God, my lord, I think you are a man after my own heart!
And I pledge you my word, and I take my fee.
I shall use it only on your business, and if your business is done and myself discharged before your gold is spent, you will take back the balance, or I will break your teeth with it.
And if I play you false, you may break mine.
Within the week I will bring you back your answer.’
He reached for his cup, and there was Julian with the flagon lifted, ready to refill both his and Hotspur's, so silently and impassively that they might almost have dreamed her into the fringes of their conference, but for the fourth cup which had appeared beside theirs, and which she was also filling to the brim.
Her hand — that firm, forceful, boy's hand of hers — lifted the goblet as they lifted theirs.
She drank with them as they pledged each other.
Her face was tranquil and still, but her eyes flashed like arrows from one face to the other, observing and remembering, before her large, creamy eyelids veiled their light.
Iago could not recall that he had ever truly noticed her until that moment.
She had a tension about her like a strung bow, and every bit as lethal, and she had a piercing beauty — why had he never marked it, he who had known her nearly three years? that made his heart contract as he looked at her.
He could afford to study her, for she was not looking at him with any but surface attention.
She recorded everything that passed in the room, but she cared for only one person.
Nor was that one altogether unaware of her, or unappreciative.
But on what curious terms, only God knew.
He had never before seen man and woman  regard, consider and touch each other as man with man.
No, even that fell short of truth; there are degrees that cannot be accurately plotted.
They made their own terms of reference; she, perhaps, with knowledge and calculation; the man, after his kind, by impulse and the blind brilliance of his own nature.
He was on his feet, roused and content, and looking round for his cloak; and she was there with it, lifting it to his shoulders.
His eyes encountered hers, and smiled in pleasure and gratitude; hers smiled, too, but mutely, making no marked acknowledgement.
Rhodri Parry thrust himself stiffly out of his chair.
‘I shall look to hear from you,’ said Hotspur, fastening the clasp of his cloak, ‘in a week, if all goes well.
God speed you, and bring me a hopeful answer — both for England and Wales!’
‘So I pray, too, my lord.’
‘Master Parry, I owe you my thanks.
Should I ever be able to serve you, I pray you let me know.’
‘We are still in your lordship's debt,’ said Rhodri formally.
Hotspur had withdrawn a step or two towards the door when he turned again to look at Iago.
‘Carry my respectful greetings and compliments to your kinsmen, Gwilym and Rhys ap Tudor and their brothers, and say I still owe them a shrewd knock for their taking of Conway on Good Friday of last year.
It cost me a deal in time and labour and money to get my castle back from them, and if we had not had such a pious garrison — all but the lame and bedridden in church!— they would never have prised their way into the place.
I look for an adjustment some day.’
‘I make no doubt they will accommodate your lordship,’ said Iago.
‘Yet if I speed too well you may have no remedy.’
‘I'll bear that as the yoke of God.
Mistress Hussey — Master Parry — Master Vaughan — I bid you good-night.’
‘I'll light you down to the gate,’ said Julian, the candle ready in her hand.
The door of the solar closed behind them; their feet felt a way silently down the staircase.
At the house door she left the candle  burning upon a shelf within, and took him by the hand to lead him across the stones of the court to the wicket gate; but he halted her suddenly, drawing her back within the shelter of the doorway.
In the soft, still light she felt his eyes earnestly and faithfully searching her face.
‘Madam, are you content?’
She knew he did not mean with their night's work.
Evenly she said, in the same undertone he had used: ‘All is very well with me, my lord.’
‘I would I could be sure of it.
I have in some sort made myself a party to your situation, and it will go hard with my conscience if you find yourself no better blessed than in your old condition.
If ever you should be in need of a place of refuge, you have a resort in my wife's household.
You need only come to her.’
She offered her thanks with composure.
In her heart she thought: Kind as she has been to me, and much as I respect her, your wife, my lord, is the last lady living to whom I am likely to apply.
Nor is it a place of refuge I want, among the women of a countess's retinue.
I do not know as yet what it is, but I know it is not that.
‘Well, bear it in mind.
In case of need, it will always be open.
God be with you!’
‘And go with you, my lord,’ she said.
His hand withdrew from hers, and he was gone, stepping silently through the narrow wicket into the darkness of the street.
But the warmth of his touch remained with her, in spite of the chill of the night, as she dropped bolt and bar into place, and fastened the house door.
She let herself into the comfort and glow of the solar to hear her father's querulous voice complaining, in terms in which surely he himself did not believe: ‘My mind misdoubts me we have done wrong to have any part in this.
How if he is sending you with a bait to bring Owen to his death under cover of a parley, as the  king's council urged?
Our lord would not be the first to come to bargain and stay to bleed.’
‘You trouble needless,’ said Iago, undisturbed.
‘You know as well as any what answer he made to their urging and how fast they dropped it, at least in his hearing.
Do you think they would send such a lure through such a palpably honest man?’
His eyes, fragments of pale, clear sky, and yet so impenetrable, were on the doorway, waiting, she thought, for her.
They did not leave her as she closed the door and drew the curtain over it, and came forward into the room.
He saw his own words sink deep into her mind like water into a secret thirst; but her face was motionless and indifferent.
‘Fool,’ said Rhodri impatiently, ‘would they be likely to send it by one palpably dishonest?
There's hardly a man in England but this one to whose lure Owen would stoop now.
And perhaps his father!
And why?
They're well-disposed enough, all the Percy tribe, because their own holdings are in the north, and they have nothing to lose here on the Welsh border.
It would be a different tale if they were in the king's own shoes, for he's a marcher lord himself by reason of his Bohun marriage, and when Wales is in question he thinks like a marcher lord, and there's an end of it.
No, if they want to flush him out of hiding, there's hardly a man they could use but Hotspur.’
‘I would stake what I have,’ said Iago, still watching the girl, ‘that this Hotspur is not an easy man to use.
And in November at the council he let see how much trust he was ever again likely to put in the little law-givers at Westminster.
Never be deceived by his simplicity and honesty.
In defence of that same honesty I think he could be shrewd enough, and ruthless enough, too.
And as for deliberately lending himself — why, he would cheerfully hew off Owen's head in fair fight in the field, and never lose a night's sleep for it, though he'd grieve for the loss of a grand fighter.
But as for putting poison in his wine, or setting a pitfall under his feet at a hunt — no, he'd hew off the head of any man  who tried to put him up to it.
What they call policy nowadays he'd still call by its old and uglier names.
And he has a sense for it, as the cleanly know by instinct how to avoid filth.’
The girl had lifted her head and turned her face towards him, though he could not flatter himself that she was looking at him; rather at the image he drew before her, that spare portrait of the departed visitant, sketched in so few lines on the firelit air.
He saw her breath quicken ever so slightly, and her chin lift, and the light glittered in her half-hooded eyes, red as the embers.
It caused him to look back in some compunction, in case he had lied to discover what he wanted to know; but he could find no lies.
Hotspur was as he had painted him.
He seldom had to meet a man twice to be certain of his ground with him.
Women were another matter.
How was it that it had taken him so long to see Parry's daughter thus clearly?
‘In any case,’ he said, rising and stretching lazily before the fire, ‘you lose your pains if you trouble on Owen's account, unless you think him easily gullible.
A letter in a man's own hand is evidence to be read, along the lines and between the lines, and Owen can read as well as any, and better than most.
You think he will move unless he's sure of his ground?
And now I'm off to pick up my cloak and pack, ready to shift before dawn.’
He had put away the letter, somewhere inside his ample tunic.
He moved towards the inner door by which he had entered, no long time ago.
Before he reached it he was aware that Julian's eyes had shortened their focus, and were fixed with sharp intelligence upon his face.
She said nothing, but she met his gaze fully and did not veil her own.
Rhodri was still muttering, unwilling to give up his customary pessimism, but he might as well not have been in the room with them, he counted for so little at this moment.
As little as she did to him, Iago thought, for now that he was to have half his money back, that he had staked on her ennoblement and his grandchild's inheritance, he scarcely  noticed her.
She filled her place, she fetched and carried for him, but any tame girl would have done as well.
He had no need of this mewed, motionless falcon, waiting now only for the moment and the means to shake off her jesses.
In the world into which she intended to soar there was little room for Rhodri Parry.
But there might, he thought, if he knew how to wait, be room some day for Iago Vaughan.
3
In the foothills of the Clocaenog forest, snugly folded within the pleats of thickly-wooded ground, the camp was invisible from all sides at any distance, covered on one flank by an upland bog, and guarded on the other by a line of outposts.
Long before an enemy could get near enough to distinguish any glint of arms, the whole company could fold their belongings and slip away into the mountains at their back.
They needed little and carried little.
They were expert at vanishing silently and reappearing suddenly in some unexpected place; and in case of need the Lord Owen's main stronghold of Glyndyfrdwy was no great distance away, mound and manor guarded by a curve of the Dee, down there to the south in the close confine of the valley.
The weather that mid-April had turned fair and mild; the trees were coming into delicate leaf, and ladysmocks fluttering over the marsh meadows.
It was pleasant to live in the open, and easy to provision both men and ponies; and the courtier and man of law who had lived a high life in the London Inns and colleges, and been in the king's own service, was nonetheless a hardy Welshman, well able to campaign in the hills winter or summer, and never complain of a hard bed or a scanty meal.
He was the master of most of North Wales and part of the central lands, but a swathe of bracken and heather covered by a skin rug and his own cloak was bed enough for him, and he ate what his men ate, and wanted no more.
He had the roads to Ruthyn and Denbigh  under his eye from this eyrie, and Mold was not too far for a raid if the weather and the omens were good; but since his active autumn of last year he had contented himself with holding and consolidating, and swooped down in the occasional raid along the border only to keep his hand in for greater things if the season should indicate the necessity.
He sat on a couch of deerskin, under the awning of his tent, a long, sinewy man in the prime of his powers, forty-eight years old, black of eye and black of hair, but for the first frostings of grey at temple and lip.
He was changed since his days at Lancaster's court; with all his polish and scholarship, which neither time nor place could tarnish, he had nevertheless shed all the cramping tensions of city life, and moved like a young stag, long-stepping in motion and magnificently abandoned in repose.
His armour was piled not three yards away, arrayed ready to be donned at short notice.
Everything he bore in hand was but half-achieved and for ever in the balance; yet if at this moment there was a prince in Wales, his name was Owen, and Owen knew it.
Outside, on the grass stippled with the bright embroidery of light and shadow under the trees, Iago Vaughan sat clasping his little travelling harp.
Of the prince's bards he was the least, the stray; but his touch on the strings was no less sure than that of Owen's court poet.
‘And he said he had known you somewhere before?’
‘He said so.’
‘I doubt it may have been somewhere in a circle of exiles, plucking that familiar of yours.’
For in England every bard was an incendiary, with however much deceptive mildness he chose his songs; he was the voice calling the Welshman home, and for what purpose except to join the golden dragon in arms?
There had been disaffection among the Welsh in the universities for more than eighteen months now, and many a wandering musician had been thrown into prison for stirring up sedition with his tribal songs, and more than one had been put to death.
Welsh labourers, however indentured, however bound, had somehow found a means to slip away, and England well knew where, and for what purpose.
Iago shrugged and smiled, muting his vibrating strings with a flattened palm.
‘It's true he was in Oxford while I was there, and the schools were no very safe place to be singing about great Llewelyn in his seven-foot grave, or making verses after the manner of Cynddelw.
God knows we were not always as discreet as we might have been.
But more likely it was some time in London.
He has his own town house in Bishopsgate Street.
Does it matter?’ he said, lazily watching the dew distil into vapour as the sun drank it.
‘Even if he remembers, it's a year and more ago now, and he'll remember to forget.’
‘You at least have confidence in him,’ Owen said, thoughtfully frowning down at Hotspur's vehement hand.
‘Yes.
Confidence in his will to end this war, even upon terms not ungenerous.
By comparison with that, what is it to him if one bard goes free?
I'm of more use to him, if I carry his letters faithfully, than all the statutes and limitations and restrictions they've clapped on the Welsh trade.
He knows them for folly, and has no patience with the little, grudging, timorous minds that made them.’
‘Will you hear what he writes to me?
Listen, then, you've seen and spoken with the man, and have some insight into his mind.’
The prince unrolled the scroll, and read aloud:
'’ To the most noble and puissant Owen, lord of Glyndyfrdwy and Cynllaith, Greeting and Respect!
By this it will have come to your lordship's ears what little success my attempt to put forward your terms for negotiation achieved in the council.
There are those among the ministers and members who have little knowledge of Welsh affairs, and are not well-disposed to proffer any concessions.
But I beg you to believe that there are also men  of a wiser and more experienced sort, who by no means decline all consideration of negotiating terms.
For my part, I promise you I will continue at all times to have this possibility in mind, and to take every opportunity of bringing it to the minds of those who can best move in the matter.
The same guarantee I can offer for all my house, whose will to you is as mine.
And I am in haste to get this word to you, that you may know your affair is not in abeyance, and that the undeclared truce which has held good, but for some small brushes, since the council met in November may continue unbroken.
This circumstance of restraint on your part is the most favourable argument they can have, who are your well-wishers here.
Every day that passes without further raiding speaks for you, the more confirming those who give their voice for reconciliation, and by little persuading those who were against.
But if you again burn and provoke, for every enemy you slay you raise up in England a score of enemies, and do but increase the odds against your cause.
Which, as I esteem it, is a cause not all unjust, and not to be distorted by ill-judged action.
’’ I charge you, therefore, for the present abjure all fighting but that is forced upon you, when no man can blame if you do valiantly in your own defence.
But forswear all attacks upon cities and towns, upon travellers going their way without ill-thought towards you, all provocation of all kind against the borders, and avoid, so far as ye may, any meeting with any English soldiery.
You well may do so, as I know, where every valley and hill and track is known to you.
And in return, I promise you that if I get from you the reply for which I hope, I will be about your business presently.
'’ But further, my lord, one stipulation I make, for your own protection: do not upon any consideration come to any meeting, or respond to any advance, however seeming honest, that does not come to you by my hand, and by this  same messenger.
For notwithstanding I trust to bring you off happily, with the goodwill of our lord the king and all who best speak for this land, yet I do know there are some who may have other thoughts concerning you.
Therefore bide your time and refrain from all action, until I send you word that you may come with my warranty to the council table.
Which warranty, when I have given it, I will make good with my life.
'’ I trust to have word from you by this messenger, and delay only to know that you wish me to proceed.
Thereto I pray all good both to you and to Wales, again reconciled soon, I trust, to the king's Grace.
'’ Given by my hand at Shrewsbury, the seventh day of April, this year of our Lord fourteen hundred and two.
'’ Henry Percy, Knight.’’
‘By God, he goes a degree beyond even what I had thought,’ said Iago, roused and vindicated, ‘to warn you not to put your trust in princes and councillors.
Surely he knows you're well warned already, but for his honour he cannot keep from underscoring it three times.’
‘It was he laid my terms before them, and put the idea into their heads,’ said Owen with a wry smile.
‘He may well feel the need to scare me off.
But I grant you there are not many would have gone to the trouble.
You'll need a fresh horse, Iago.
Go and see to it.
Einion will find you whatever you need.
And ask Philip, and Griffith Fychan, to come to me here.
I have a letter to write.’
‘You'll remember, my lord,’ said Iago, rising with alacrity from the grass, ‘that he is but an earl in the making and has no Latin.’
‘It shall be in English,’ the prince promised him drily.
‘And favourable?’
‘God granting, everything shall be as he wishes.
I will keep my hands from the English — any and all but one,’ he said grimly.
Iago slung his harp over his shoulder, where it carried snugly under his cloak on horseback, and hunched one shoulder slightly under the cape of his capuchon when he went afoot in England.
He had made no more than half a dozen strides towards the heart of the encampment when Owen called him back suddenly, in a sharp, changed voice; and when he looked back in surprise:
‘What was that you said of him?— of Hotspur?
‘He is but an earl…’’
‘An earl in the making, I said, but it was a foolish saying.
In what does he fall short of an earl now?
Why, my lord, what is it?’
Owen's black eyes, deep-set and far-seeing, stared blindly inward, narrowed after some vision they had almost captured, and yet let slip.
His face was honed bright, like carved ivory.
‘Nothing!
I cannot be sure now.
The fire kindled, Iago, when you spoke.
Now it's gone.’
Colour came back into his weathered cheeks; the volcano of prophecy that was known to burn in him had cooled and crusted over.
There would be no further prodigy.
‘I have it in me, Iago, that this Hotspur, whatever he be, will never be an earl.
Strange!
Less and more I see him, but never that.
Never Northumberland!’
Iago ambled down out of the forest in mid-afternoon, on a Welsh mountain pony with a barrel like a butt of wine, a cross-grained temper, and a turn of speed no one would have credited from her build.
He wanted no more showy mount; for all his notably individual looks, he could jog like a pedlar and fade anonymously into any background when he chose.
He had Owen's letter in the breast of his tunic, and his harp tucked away behind his shoulder, and three days of his promised week left for getting back into Shrewsbury.
He could have moved directly south into the valley of the Dee, but instead he chose to head eastwards towards the vale of Clwyd, to take a cautious look at the borders of Lord Grey's domain before he turned south to cross the mountains to Valle Crucis.
The truce, after all, did not depend all on one man's goodwill.
The sun was high and bright as he dropped gently out of the hills towards the vale, faintly misted with vapour, and saw in the far distance before him the mole-hill of Ruthyn, hunched and veiled in the smoke of its house-fires, a delicate blue flower in the sparkling folded green, with the giant hogback of Moel Famau towering beyond.
And he saw, too, narrowing eyes that were used to singling out detail at great distance, the betraying glitter of sunlight upon arms, below him in the copses of the valley.
A crackle and sparkle of steel, spitting light and vanishing into shadow, but to reappear by spasmodic flashes thereafter, moving up towards him.
They were no threat to him; they were far away, and he was in tree-shade, and had nothing bright about him to catch the light.
He was invisible; and at need he could better their speed.
He loitered, untroubled but curious, for they were no small company, and by the line of their march they had come from Ruthyn.
Reginald de Grey reckoned every Welshman a thief and an outlaw, and had his borders patrolled as though against the entire army of France, in great measure creating the animosity and disorder he saw everywhere; and this company might be no more than a routine patrol meant to impress and intimidate on his usual terms.
Yet they moved with more than usual purpose towards the hills; and it was always a possibility, however remote, that some vagabond poacher or time-expired soldier living wild had hit upon Owen's outposts without being detected, and thought it worth his while to carry a tale to Ruthyn.
He did not take it too seriously, but nonetheless he wheeled his pony and made off at speed, back towards the fringes of Clocaenog, where he had passed the last of the prince's watch.
The man looked down at him from his perch in a beech-tree above the track, and laughed.
‘You think we're asleep, up here?
A runner went to the prince half an hour since — by now he knows better than you.
Get on your way, and watch how you cross them, for it's Grey's livery they're wearing.’
It was true enough, he had good need to take thought for his own safe passage, for his course must somewhere cross that of the armed company.
To avoid their notice, and give them time to get clear of the folded valley before he ventured it, he turned on a contour course towards Ruthyn, and kept in the fringes of the forest, watching the glint of steel come and go on the track lower down the slope, drawing steadily nearer to him, but some half-mile below.
And having found a vantage-point where he had a clear view of the meadows and was himself sheltered, he halted his pony and stood to watch, narrowing his eyes to single out coat-armour, and number the forces in the English party.
There were archers with them, but not a great company, and some three-score men-at-arms, all mounted; and a knot of bright devices he could not quite read at that distance, though their colours did almost as well.
Four knights at least, all Grey's men; and a rugged, thickset figure in half-armour, whose seat in the saddle was familiar, even if the black horse under him had not been so signally ornamented with his blazon.
Reginald de Grey himself was on the move, with a strong and well-mounted party in arms.
They passed, and left the valley free for him to cross.
He waited until they were lost to sight beyond a fold of ground and a belt of trees, and then made good speed down to the little river, splashed through it where the banks were level and firm, and climbed the slope on the other side.
Clocaenog village he left at a distance on his left hand, and wound his way up into the hills again.
But his mind was not easy.
It was an ill omen that Grey should appear on this day of all days, so close to where Owen lay hidden, newly resolved to take Hotspur's advice, bide his time for peace-making, and forbear aggravating the English further.
Any and all but one!
And that one had to appear, like a spirit raised by necromancy, suddenly almost within grasp of his hand.
And for what purpose, with such a force, unless he had some word of power to lure him out of his castle?
The old quarrel, sprung from a tract of land in dispute, had been fomented by many acts of hostility since.
When King Henry had summoned his muster for Scotland, the year after his coronation, Grey had been charged with delivering the summons to his Welsh neighbour, and had withheld it until too late, so that the lord of Glyndyfrdwy was exposed to the charge of being a traitor.
Out of this personal feud had burned up, like the sudden flaring into splendour of a bush fire, the old, old quarrel that belonged not solely to Owen, but to Wales.
After so long of acquiescence, the Welsh felt themselves Welsh again, a nation with a prince and a prophet of their own.
And yet the personal bitterness still rankled in the heart of the fire, and as it had kindled it, so might it sour it and put it out.
His uneasiness grew, and yet he could not tell why, for the prince was warned, and could very well deal with this matter.
Avoidance would be easy, the camp could dissolve into the hills like mist within half an hour.
More likely, if the force from Ruthyn seemed to be passing without ill intent, they would merely sit still and let the enemy go.
Yet Iago suddenly wheeled his pony again, and made for the highest point of the ridge, where he could look back over the valley, and see as far as the scattered outer copses and the rim of the forest.
Far below him the river was a silver thread, curling and twining through meadows freshly green in sunlight; and beyond it the folded hillocks rose plumed with clumps of trees, heaving and falling in a series of green bowls all along the flank of the dimpled ridge that soared to the dark green of woodland above.
He saw, as though some wall painting had come to life before his eyes, the glitter of steel and the minute clusters of rainbow colours just moving over the crest of one rise, to descend into the next bowl; and riding towards them, negligently like men out hawking, he saw a smaller group, no more than half a dozen mounted men, who had been until this moment hidden from them by the lie of the land.
There was an instant when both parties halted at gaze, no more than a quarter of a mile apart; and though they were so far from him across the valley, he felt the shock of confrontation and recognition quiver through his own body as they measured each other.
Then the handful of riders wheeled their mounts in wild haste, and rode back by the way they had come, and after them in headlong pursuit streamed Reginald de Grey and his knights and men-at-arms.
The quarry must needs have ridden steeply uphill if they were to gain the cover of the trees, and he saw that they were not even attempting it, but climbing only very obliquely towards shelter, preferring to gain distance on the level.
And as the half-dozen lengthened into a line, he watched them like a file of horsemen on a hanging tapestry, each separate, and the last flagging.
He saw the tall grey horse stumble, or seem to stumble, and recover but lamely.
The pursuers saw it, too, and lingeringly across the valley, long after they had launched it, he heard their shout of triumph.
The Lord Owen was taken at a disadvantage, surprised in the open, hunted like a hart, and his horse fallen lame.
The men of Ruthyn had abandoned all caution, spurring their horses furiously, lengthening out in their turn into a long frieze parallel with the edge of the forest, every man mad to be the first to lay hand on the arch-enemy.
Iago felt in his blood the coming of the climax, the moment when Owen had drawn them, with his body for bait, exactly where he would have them, with all eyes on him, and never an archer ready to string bow, or a lookout to shout an alarm.
There had never been a more insolent ambush.
He did not know whether to laugh or to weep.
Suddenly the grey horse was lame no more, but picked up his heels and leaped ahead with stretched neck and lunging shoulders, the prince lying forward over his neck and thrusting with him, as though he and his beast were one flesh.
The gap between him and his pursuers widened; and at the same moment, though they were invisible and their volley could not be followed by eye or ear, the  Welsh archers deployed all along the rim of the forest loosed their shafts together.
It was like corn falling before the scythe.
They had every man his mark, and they loosed at leisure; not at the horses — good horses never came amiss, and certainly never were wasted — but at the men.
The mounts, suddenly lightened and without hand on the rein, wheeled and circled curiously in the heaving bushes and trampled grass, more at a loss than frightened.
Without a sound the men of Ruthyn, more than half of those leading the pursuit, fell with the impetus of the arrows that pierced them, heeling out of their saddles like a breaking wave, downhill from the forest.
Some were dragged by a foot still caught in the stirrup, round in a circle in the turf.
Some shook themselves clear, and even rose again, but many lay threshing, and some lay still.
And before those following could rein in and look for cover, or dismount and string their bows, or drive headlong into the trees from which their death was launched, the second volley followed the first.
At that range, Welsh arrows could shear through plate-armour and fine mail shirts within, and these were riding half-armed.
Owen and his half-dozen were in the trees by then.
They took breath for a few moments before they emerged, after the third volley, to finish what they had begun, the Welsh swordsmen boiling out of the bushes joyously on their heels.
Iago watched that fight to its end, and saw the survivors haled away into the forest and silence.
A few, those who had been last in the line, turned their horses in time and rode for Ruthyn to carry the news, and were not hindered in their going.
All the wilds of the Cambrian mountains were at Owen's back, there were plenty of places where Reginald de Grey could safely be hidden, long before any party ventured out of Ruthyn to collect and bury the dead.
Iago dug his heels into his fat pony's ribs, and took the shortest way down into the Dee valley, riding hard for Shrewsbury.
And still he did not know whether he should be laughing or weeping.
He came into Hotspur's presence in the abbot's lodging at Shrewsbury abbey, still stained and dusty from the road, a thin brown packman with some plea about a permit to carry his goods to Chester.
His extraordinary eyes he veiled with lowered lids and humility, and only the satirical curve of his long lips, accentuated by those twin russet flames that forked upwards through his short black beard, caused the chamberlain who admitted him to look at him a second time.
Both chamberlain and clerk accepted it without question when they were dismissed from attendance.
There were no other petitioners waiting, and they had routine work to do.
This fellow's matter was simple enough.
‘You've made good speed,’ said Hotspur when they were alone.
‘Better even than you promised me.
You have a letter for me?’
‘My lord, I have.’
But he held it in his hands still, not yet proffering it; and his eyes were unveiled now, two slivers of clear sky, but a winter sky.
‘My lord, I entreat you to believe that what you find in this letter was honestly written and honestly meant.
I pledge my own honour for it.
But there has that happened since that may well have changed all.’
Hotspur sat very still, watching his visitor's face.
‘What has happened?
There has been no news here.’
‘Not yet.
But there will be.
I have come straight from the event, and as your lordship sees, I have wasted no time in applying to you.’
‘I am content,’ said Hotspur quietly, ‘that you have fulfilled all terms, and done everything you undertook to do.
What more has happened cannot be of your doing.
But I need to know.’
‘Read the letter,’ said Iago.
Hotspur broke the seal in silence, and unrolled the parchment.
Owen had written to him in his own hand, a fine and scholarly hand.
He read it through, while Iago watched his always eloquent face.
‘To the most noble and excellent Sir Henry Percy, Knight, Greeting and Love!
‘For your lordship's letter, duly come to hand, I send you my thanks and my grateful sense of your lordship's kindness and good feeling towards me.
I have, as I ever had, the fullest confidence in your honour, and am willing in all things to deal with you as man with man.
But I confess that I have not the same trust in some your peers.
Nor does the issue of life and death rest only with your estate, as we have well seen in the fate of those earls lately in dispute with the king's Grace who fell into the hands of certain lawless gatherings of commoners, and were shortly done to death.
I will well, therefore, that you should, as you have said, deal for me as you may, and when you summon me to conference with your own warranty, I will not hesitate to come.
But for no other will I come in confidence, unless it be for Prince Henry, whose mind I conceive as noble, and his word as his bond.
‘And to the end that you may deal for me without hindrance, to bring about this peace, I undertake that I will not henceforth, at least until I do withdraw this word, have any ado of my own willing with any English company in arms, but will forbear them as you counsel.
And for the rest, if any do challenge me, and I cannot but defend myself, you shall hold me justified and excused.
Though whether any other of your part will, neither you nor I can well determine before the event.
‘I greet your lordship well, in the hope of a good deliverance for us all, and look to hear from you again, God willing.
‘Given under my hand, this eleventh day of April, the year of our Lord fourteen hundred and two.
‘Owain Glyn Dwr, lord of Glyndyfrdwy and Cynllaith.’
He looked up from the scroll, thoughtful and faintly frowning: ‘You know what the Lord Owen writes to me?’
‘I know what he gave me to understand he would write.
And I know it was written in good faith.’
‘That I never doubted.
So what has befallen to make this of none account?
And how came you to know of it, if it befell, as it seems, after you had left the Lord Owen?’
‘I myself witnessed it, my lord, though from a distance.’
He told it, exactly as he had seen it, not concealing that there were curious and doubtful points in it which even witnessing could not make plain.
‘Sure I am that until this party was sighted, the Lord Owen had no thought in his mind of any such happening, and no plans to provoke it.
But when the word reached him, and especially when it was seen that Lord Grey himself was with the party, thereafter I cannot be sure.
I tell what I saw.
The English came over a crest, face to face with the Lord Owen in open field.
And they spurred forward to pursue and take him, no doubt believing it a happy chance for them, and the Lord Owen caused his horse to appear to drop lame, and so encouraged and led them until they were spread all along the field in open order, within close range of the bowmen in the woods.
When he had them so placed, he spurred ahead and drew dear, and the archers cut them down like corn.
Only a few of the rearmost broke away and escaped back towards Ruthyn.
But whether they came out knowing of the Welsh camp, and with some plan of attack, which the Lord Owen by his own stratagem forestalled, or whether they were on other business and would have passed by but for this lure, I tell you honestly, I do not know.
And even if they meant him no threat, how could the Lord Owen be sure of it?
And with all his force to guard, how dared he assume it?’
‘You argue well,’ agreed Hotspur, watching him keenly, and with a sudden remote spark in his eyes that looked like involuntary laughter.
‘And whatever the way of it, had I been in the Lord Owen's place, with my chief enemy thus presented  naked into my hand, I doubt if I could have resisted the temptation.
Certain it is, if he had more than three-score armed men with him, he was not on his way to church!
Well, tell on to the end.
The archers cut them down — a few broke back for home unscathed.
Some, no doubt, made their way back later with their hurts.
Were there prisoners taken?’
‘My lord, there were.
I saw two or three of the knights haled away into the woods.
And after them,’ he said with deliberation, ‘Lord Grey himself.
If he was hurt at all, it was but a minor hurt — he walked where he was led.’
He caught the wide, levelled eyes watching him with the first faint shadow of doubt and disquiet, almost distaste, and laughed shortly.
‘Oh, never wonder about me, my lord!
You are the first of the king's officers to know that Lord Grey of Ruthyn is carried off prisoner into Wales, and if this moment you turned out the muster of every shire between here and Denbigh, and loosed them into Clocaenog forest, do you think you would find hide or hair of a Welshman there?
I would not have told you place or time if I did not know that every man of them is far into the mountains and out of your reach long before this.
And I tell you now in order that you may reckon well what chance is left of keeping any hope of peace alive, after this skirmish.
For I do believe you honest in desiring it, and so it deals fairly with the Lord Owen, I desire it, too, and will still be your instrument in pursuing it.
But I tell you plainly, I count the chances as low enough.’
The shadow broke like a cloud, and was blown away in a gust of rueful laughter.
‘And so do I, Iago, so do I!
What can follow now but renewed war, and hotter than before?
Can I argue and persuade for moderation, when every baron along the march will see himself in Grey's shoes?
I am sorry, Iago, that it is so soon over.’
‘For this time,’ said Iago, and slid the ring from his finger.
‘There is also money which is yours.’
'  No. keep it — keep both.
I hope there will yet be occasion to  make use of them again in the same cause, even if we must wait now for a better opportunity.
Or a verdict in the field,’ he said, abruptly flashing fire, ‘for if you have occasion to speak with the Lord Owen again, you may tell him I will not spare to do my uttermost against him.’
‘That he knows,’ said Iago, ‘and would expect of you.’
‘Yet I would rather a resolution less wasteful.
So, Iago, keep the ring.
And if you ever have word for me that may bear fruit, come and ask entry to me wherever I am.
And should I need you, can I find you or get in touch with you at Rhodri Parry's house?’
‘They may not always know where to find me.
But they will always know the times when I shall be here in Shrewsbury, and I will see to it that whenever possible they shall have word of my moves between.’
He thought of Julian in her drab housewife's gown, with her still, tense body and her hungry eyes, and he said, hardly knowing why, or whether it was mischief in him or mercy: ‘If you need me, apply to the girl.
She keeps at home now, and she can be as secret as any man.’
But into that flight, though he looked at him thoughtfully and searchingly, Hotspur would not follow him.
And so they parted.
When the prince heard the story, over a conference table littered with notes, despatches and letters, he first opened eyes and mouth wide with shock and disbelief, and cried: ‘Never say so!’ and then as suddenly laughed aloud, crowing: ‘A judgment!’, looking, for once, a year or so less than his age and capable of mischief; and then he looked very grave indeed, and sat staring moodily at his table-full of papers, and said, dismayed: ‘The king will be out of himself with anger.
He values Grey.’
‘Too well!’ said Hotspur grimly.
There was no third present, and they spoke openly as they always spoke together.
‘I don't say the man could not be of the highest value, if he did not ruin everything he touches with his implacable spleen.
He fights well, he mans and maintains his castles well — God knows not all in the  marches do so!— and he has a good grasp of tactics in the field.
And yet he is the man who first made this needless quarrel, and now inflames it even when Glendower is disposed to be reasonable.
He would never in life agree willingly-or let the king agree — to any settlement but a total victory over the Welsh, and the hanging of all their leaders into the bargain.’
‘To be fair,’ the prince pointed out generously, ‘in this case it seems to have been Owen who took the offensive.’
And briefly, before resuming his burden of responsibility with a resigned sigh, he laughed again.
‘It must have been a rare sight!
I wish I'd been there to see.’
‘Faith, and so do I, but we're like to pay dear for it.
And what do you think Grey was doing, skirting the forest with such a force?
No, he had his information, no question — only it seems it was none too accurate.
And the upshot is, there will be war on hotter terms than ever, and no more listening to counsels of peace.
And we had best get our fences in order, you and I.’
‘We must get back to Chester,’ the prince said, ‘and call a council at once.
We can better keep care of Denbigh and Mold and Flint from there, and I must see to it that Ruthyn is properly garrisoned, now that Grey's gone.
Where do you suppose they have taken him?’
Hotspur laughed shortly.
‘Where no one but a Welshman is likely to be able to track them.
The king had his fill of trying to find the Welsh in their own mountains, a year and more ago.
The most we can do is expect Owen everywhere, and be strong enough to match him wherever he strikes.
For strike again he will, now the die's cast.
There's no going back from Grey's capture — not until time has dulled the sting, at least, and made it possible to mention peace without being called a traitor by some city haberdasher in the commons.
I've already written the news to my uncle of Worcester in Cardigan.
Who knows, the next foray may be into the south.
And, Hal, from Chester I must go north to the march as fast as I may, for Walton sends me word  there are new raids threatening, and it's his belief and mine there are French knights serving there with Douglas.’
‘France has declared its intent to maintain the truce,’ the prince objected.
‘To send a force with King Charles’ official blessing is one thing,’Hotspur agreed with a hollow smile, ‘to finance small parties of adventurers and let them slip away privately to Scotland is another.
It's cheaper than out-and-out war, and they can be disowned if things grow too difficult.
But trust me, they're there.
And both France and Scotland are receiving Glendower's letters, and finding them tempting too.
We may yet find ourselves fighting a war on three fronts, and all one war.’
‘I know it is a possibility my father has much in mind,’ the boy admitted soberly.
They did not speak of what lay behind France's bitter enmity, though it was always present in their minds, a spot too sore to touch on lightly.
Charles of France might shrink from fomenting a direct war, but he would be glad to use every oblique weapon against the upstart king who had deposed his son-in-law, and sent his little widowed daughter back in clumsy state, but without her dowry, which had been fed of necessity into King Henry's treasury to keep it solvent during his first year of kingship.
‘Dunbar is there in the north,’ said the prince, offering what even he felt to be dubious reassurance.
‘The more reason I should be there, too,’ said Hotspur tartly, ‘for a man who can turn his coat once can turn it again as readily.
I'll take my wife home to Bamburgh, Hal, and go north to Berwick myself for part of the summer.
If you need me, I'll be in Chester within three days.
But to say truth, I trust this border to you with a far lighter heart than I trust the east march to Dunbar.’
He hungered for the north, too, the prince knew that.
It was his country, and campaigning across those noble moors under the Cheviot was his true life, as natural to him as to the hawks hovering on languid, sinewy, expert wings above the heather.
He  did his work here well and thoroughly, but he hankered, every so often, for the rough grey seas and painted, cloud-dappled hills of Northumberland, and his children, and the soil that knew his step and warmed under the sole of his foot, like a caress.
‘I'm faced with this business of the Danish marriages,’ the boy said without enthusiasm.
‘I shall have to go to London, perhaps in May, to appoint proctors.
I suppose I must at least be civil to the Danish envoys, and offer them some entertainment.
I shall not linger.’
Hotspur forgot his preoccupations for a moment, and looked more closely and with quickening affection at his friend.
To be thinking of marriage, at this age, to a girl he had never seen, who might be ugly, stupid and inert, where he was handsome, intelligent and almost excessively alive!
He felt a wave of almost incredulous pity for princes.
‘Are you happy about this proposed match, Hal?’
The boy shrugged, raising his brows with a mild affectation of surprise that it could be thought to be important; but the stillness of his face and the steadiness of his eyes on Hotspur went some way towards betraying him.
The three northern countries had recently agreed by treaty to unite under one king, the fifteen-year-old Eric, and Eric had sent envoys to propose a marriage for him with King Henry's second daughter, Philippa, and as an opportunist gesture by the way, a second match between Eric's sister Catherine and the prince of Wales.
The boy had lived through the negotiations, rather less sordid than most of their kind, for his sister Blanche's marriage, and had got the tune of these affairs very well off by heart now.
It was no shock to him that he should be marketed in his turn.
And yet the Danish princess was no great catch for the heir to the English throne.
He knew that, too.
By this time there was very little he did not know about being a prince; and long before he came to it he would know more than most men born to it about being a king.
‘Why, it's nothing yet but the beginning of talks.
They'll play  with it for two or three years yet, and in the end very probably nothing will come of it.
After all, Philippa is not yet eight years old.
I was but an afterthought, and I doubt if they're bidding high enough for me.’
His voice was cool, even a little cruel, in its effort to be adult and civilised.
For when it came to the point, he would probably do what was expected of him, whatever that might be.
Marriages were an acknowledged part of the to-and-fro of barter and bargaining that royal children were born to.
(But there was always the sudden stab at his heart when he reasoned thus, because he had not been born to it!)
And that thought brought him sharply into collision with the one marriage that stuck most obstinately in his throat.
He had not mentioned it in all this week that Hotspur had spent with him at the abbey, had asked no questions but the most current politenesses about his stay and his journey, and had shown no interest at all in the ceremony from which he had come.
But now suddenly he came out with it violently, almost in the manner of Hotspur himself over-riding some constraint that tied his tongue:
‘Harry, what does my father hope for from this marriage of his?’
And as Hotspur turned to face him, in mild but sympathetic surprise: ‘He cannot suppose that allying himself to the duchess of Brittany will either placate or frighten the French.
It will not even give him any power in Brittany, for if she comes here she loses whatever sway she has there.
He neither gains an ally nor sweetens an enemy, and say she brings but a token household with her, yet it will cost him dear to keep them.
And you know how willing the commons will be to grant an aid for a foreign queen!
They starve him of funds even for paying his soldiers.
No one knows it better than you — we've both pledged our own valuables before now to keep our archers from deserting.
What does he want,’ said the boy, pale and passionate in resentment, ‘with a new expense?
What does he want with a queen?
He's lived content enough these eight years since my mother died.’
He had put a finger too accurately on the true cause of his indignation, and flinched away from it hurriedly.
‘And if it is not some political advantage he is after, what else is there?
Why, he can have seen the duchess no more than once, and that at least four or five years ago, when she was a wife.’
Wife to an elderly duke, he could have added, and his third wife at that; it did occur to him fleetingly that she, perhaps, had something to gain, a brief recapture of life and youth before it was too late.
‘So what is it he hopes to get out of it?’
‘True enough he's seen her but once,’ Hotspur said gently, ‘and by the same token he must have liked well what he saw, for he's been in correspondence with her ever since he was crowned.
And but that he had many things to occupy his mind, and she no less, I think something would have come of it before now.’
It was hard to urge forbearance and sympathy with the father on the son, all the more in face of that bitter resentment that was all for poor Mary Bohun, mother of six young children and dead at twenty-four.
More than likely his younger brothers and sisters would welcome a new mother, but he was too nearly a man to take kindly to any woman set with so little warning in his own mother's place, especially when this new incumbent stood to gain a crown as well as a ring.
The earl of Derby had never offered Mary a crown.
‘You must not think,’ gently said the man who had married for love in his late twenties, ‘that the king has always reasons of cold policy for what he does.
What does he hope for?
A little happiness, perhaps, Hal, nothing stranger than that.
A little happiness, while there's still time.’
4
It was a grim summer that year.
There were torrential rains, rivers burst their banks and flooded standing crops, churches were struck by lightning in heavy thunderstorms.
After the first fair flush of spring, nothing went right.
Like the weather, the fortunes of the time were soured.
Nothing but bad news came in from every frontier.
The king withdrew in great weariness and exasperation of mind from his son's manor of Kennington, where he had presided over an anxious council on Wales, and took refuge in mid-June in his castle of Berkhamsted, with only his intimate household about him.
Strange how wide a gulf he found between these old retainers of Lancaster and the full council of the realm, let alone the unpredictable vagaries of parliament.
Nothing could shake the steadiness of such men as Hugh Waterton or John Norbury, who had been in his service from the time when he had been merely Henry of Bolingbroke, earl of Derby, and even that title borrowed by courtesy from his father.
On these, on the Leventhorpes and Rempstons and Erpynghams, he could lean when he would, and they would not let him fall.
But the council of England turned in his hand.
Parliament crossed him, always with the greatest respect but implacably, criticised his use of the council to levy an aid for the marriage of his elder daughter without consulting them, doubted if there was a precedent recent enough to justify the aid, and periodically and obstinately  restated to him the principle that the king should live ‘of his own’, without demanding that parliament should raise money by taxes for his expenses.
Had not John of Gaunt been reckoned the richest man in the kingdom?
And so might his son have been and remained, with only a duchy to administer, but a kingdom was a different thing.
How different, he had never dreamed until he made the assay.
They had declared at his accession, they had repeated often since, that they desired him to reign upon the selfsame terms as his predecessors; and yet they made him aware, whenever it was needful to ask for a grant of money, that in fact he stood upon ground subtly changed, and must ask as a favour what had been Richard's unquestioned right.
But there were never any open words expressing the inflection, never anything to which he could raise objection.
Only the feeling of mute resistance, the chill sense of acquiescence so grudging as to give pain.
It was, perhaps, partly his own fault.
In that first parliament of his, immediately after his coronation, he had refrained from asking for money, had even prided himself on his princely forbearance, and believed it had won him friends and trust.
Fool, he should have known that that was his one chance to strike, and make known his mettle, and assert his right once for all.
It would have been time to win them with clemency later, when they knew his power and will to dominate, and could be stunned into love by the unexpected mercy.
Now it was too late.
They had his measure.
But was this indeed his measure?
He knew he was no such man!
What had gone awry, that he should have been led to this pass, and even now he felt himself following, perforce, the twists of his fortune, headlong as a fall, when he should have been steering his own course and bearing them strongly with him?
He had been king for two and a half years, and he was aged by ten.
When he peered into his mirror he saw himself already a little stooped in the shoulders, a little heavy in the body, the full  cheeks beginning to hang, their old ruddy colour grown muddy and pale, strands of grey in the short, forked beard and at the high temples, and above all, that permanent, aching double pleat between the long, thin brows, scored a little deeper every day.
He was thirty-six years old, and his youth was gone, and even his prime was passing.
He came from hearing vespers in his chapel, and shut himself early into his private chamber.
The wind tugged at the banner-pole that carried his standard, outside at the turret, and made a dolorous creaking sound that accompanied his steps along the chilly corridor, and whined faintly in his ears even after he had closed the door and shut out the sound of the rain.
Such a night for a ten-year-old child to be out on the North Sea, as by now she must be, if contrary winds had not driven the ship back into port.
Blanche, born an ordinary little noblewoman, and now a princess, and bound for Cologne to meet her bridegroom there, Louis, son of Rupert, king of the Romans, duke of Bavaria and Count Palatine.
She was small and fair like her name, shy like her mother, and his favourite child, dearer even than Thomas, for daughters are more fragile and vulnerable than sons, and she was his first daughter.
And though she had been excited and proud about all the frantic arrangements for her state departure, when it came to the point she had been frightened, and sad at going, though she would not complain.
He prayed that the boy might be fine and gentle and kind, and take good care of her.
At least she had her uncle Somerset to watch over her on the journey, and the countess of Salisbury to be a mother to her until she was handed over at Cologne to Louis.
Even this, in its way a successful transaction, had done no better than limp lamely to its achievement.
He flushed with anger when he remembered how the legal aid he had levied to furnish her to her wedding had brought in only miserable trickles of money on the date appointed, and how he had been forced to  send out letters to all and sundry requesting loans to help to pay for her clothes and dowry, and even to borrow abjectly from the City of London and some of its richest citizens, with all the members of his council pledging themselves for repayment, so low was his own credit fallen.
Even so, only a negligible part of Blanche's forty-thousand-noble dower left England with her.
Even her departure had been delayed for weeks for want of the funds necessary to fit out her ship and escort.
And had there been any real need to send the child away to her bridal so soon?
True, Rupert had proposed the match, and sent envoys a full year previously to treat for Blanche's hand, and the alliance was not one to be despised.
But had he not fallen in with it too readily and too rapidly simply because it was a testimony to his secure tenure, a declaration before the world that he was a king indeed, and his progeny fit mates for the royalty of Europe?
Was he clutching too eagerly at every such evidence?
To flourish before whom?
Charles and his quarrelsome relatives in France?
King Robert and his dangerous regent Albany in Scotland?
Or Henry of Lancaster, here solitary and discouraged in Berkhamsted?
Did he need Rupert's reassurance to prove to him that he was indeed king of England?
And was he to be as abjectly grateful for proffers even from young Eric in the north lands?
For only a month ago he had seen his eldest son and his younger daughter appoint proctors to treat in the matter of their proposed Danish marriages.
And the little one, Philippa, barely eight years old!
He was not committed, of course.
The discussions would move languidly enough, the parties being so young, and there was time to extricate either of them, or both, at whatever stage he found it desirable.
Yet the first step had been taken, and an inexpressible sadness closed in upon him, as if he had stripped himself wantonly of the children who were his own flesh.
He saw himself, ten years on, a querulous old man complaining in self-pity: What company have my children ever been to me?— and  forgetting that he had sent them so lightly away from him, Blanche across the sea to Heidelberg, to a husband she had never seen; Philippa, possibly, to remote Denmark; Thomas, only this Spring, to be titular governor and keep his court in Ireland, and try to make good the wrack and ruin of castles and garrisons there.
A good boy, Thomas, keen and ambitious and full of filial zeal.
He understood Thomas.
And his heir, Henry, only a year older, could he claim to understand him, too?
So different in every way, even in looks, so grave and contained, so full of contrary ideas, and, sometimes, so blunt in uttering them, yet himself so perilously elusive.
Deep as a well, and for all his strength and prowess — for he could hold his own with any boy of his age, afoot or on horseback, when he chose — looking and bearing himself like a clerk, and sometimes even like a clerk in orders.
Not one easy to fathom, or comfortable to frequent.
Though it hardly arose, for the boy was engrossed in his Welsh affairs, and came south as little as he could.
He had put in an appearance, perforce, at the ceremony at the Tower, to appoint his proctors, but returned to Chester as soon as he decently could, and had not left it again to come to the council at his own manor of Kennington, sending only one of his esquires with a report on the situation — admittedly an admirably full and expert report — to lay before the assembly.
He made no bones about stating his own views or criticising theirs.
He was too free with his strictures, and too impatient with restraint.
Because he was on the spot, and had established a surprising, and surely almost heretical, chain of friendships there on the border, he thought he knew better than these older and cooler heads in London.
There were letters from the boy here in his closet, no more than a week old, cold-blooded enough in their analysis of the military situation since Grey's loss, and ruthless enough in their acceptance of the necessity to deal in extremes in the last resort, but still arguing the advantage of restraint, even daring to suggest that  Lord Grey's capture made no substantial alteration in the case for negotiation, since he was the original party to the complaint which had never actually come to a judgment under law.
There was something of the lawyer about Hal himself.
Perhaps that was what he respected in Glendower.
No denying the boy was dutiful and punctilious in all things, however opinionated he might be.
But unsparing in his pressing of points he thought vital, and eternally urging the need for money.
It was the same burden Northumberland was always singing in the north, and Hotspur from whichever front of his double responsibility was occupying his immediate attention.
Always the money that had not arrived, always the arrears of pay causing disaffection, and even if they had been sent substantial tallies on regional treasuries or port taxation officers, still the endless complaint that the money simply was not there to meet the bills.
What was the use of tallies that might, perhaps, be valid in theory, and even capable of being turned into cash in six months' time, or a year, but were so much paper now, and no use to disgruntled archers and men-at-arms whose need was for coin that could be spent at once?
as if he did not know all this for himself, and was not endlessly wrestling, valiantly and incredulously, with the problem of his own chronic poverty!
He had had three treasurers of England already, good men every one, and two treasurers of his own household, and none of them had made ends meet yet.
It was an unfathomable mystery how a once-wealthy magnate could become so poor merely by the act of assuming the crown.
But penury, though exasperating enough, was not the whole of his distress.
If only it had been!
He looked back upon the month of May, and stood aghast at what he recalled, so far were these extremes from the whole habit of his mind.
When had he taken any delight in killing?
In defence of the faith, in defence of his crown, he had no choice but to stand rigidly upon the law, but every cutting off of the least citizen was a maiming of his own  nation and his own body, and he found no remedy against the grief and horror into which his own procedures cast him.
Where did they come from, those sudden rumours that ran about the country like little trails of fire spread underground in a dry summer?
As fast as the council ordered the arrest of one carrier, the story ran to the opposite end of the land and broke out afresh.
Ever since the proxy marriage it had been so.
The king was about to sail for Brittany to marry the duchess, and in his absence from the realm Richard would come again with a great host, Richard who was not dead, but alive and in safe hiding in Scotland, and had never truly relinquished his own.
In the middle of May they had imprisoned Sir Roger Clarendon, who was, so the common people said, natural son to the great Edward, the Black Prince, and half-brother to Richard the king.
But the story could not be shut up with him, and before another week had passed they had been forced to commit to the Tower six more persons, four friars minor, Stephen Lene, parson, and the prior of the friars preachers of Winchelsea.
The prior of the Austin canons of Launde, in Leicestershire, followed these into captivity, and shortly all of them had been put to death for treason.
But no matter how many friars died, the story would not die.
And only two years ago the common people had risen in anger, and themselves done to death the rebel earls and knights who had dared to take arms for Richard!
They should have waited two years more, Henry thought bitterly, until the people had come to hate me even more than they hated Richard.
How was such malignant hatred brought to birth, when he had meant nothing but good, and tried with all his soul to work no evil against them?
Is to be a king the same thing as to be the object of universal hate?
The council had done its best, formulating a writ to all sheriffs to issue proclamations forbidding the spreading of lying rumours that Richard was alive, and committing to prison all culprits on whom they could lay hands.
But the secret wandering singers  from Wales and the itinerant preaching friars still went their ways, and the prodigy still washed like a wave before them, whispering treason.
There is no way of stopping the seeping of water, by every valley and hollow it still finds its way.
Strange, he thought, aggrieved, that the friars should be so implacably his enemies, and stranger that by becoming his enemies they should regain a little of the credit they had lost among common men.
As though he had not tried always to be God's knight, and do the church clean service.
He had been a crusader in the north, he had made devout pilgrimage to Jerusalem, a soothsayer had promised him he should die there when his hour came upon him.
What clearer mark of grace could a man have?
But still they slandered him and conspired against him, not only the Welsh Minorites of Llanfaes, whose house he had burned last year, but the Franciscans everywhere, in Norfolk, in Leicester, in Kent.
First he had forborne them, and then he had punished, but still there was no amend.
But this was self-pity, to which he had never been addicted, and he must shake it off at all costs.
Everything would be magically changed when Joan came to England.
She had her difficulties, too, or she would have been with him by this; but she was as much the prisoner of circumstances as he, and could not well take ship until she had established a firm and safe regime for her young son.
But she would come, and surely bring sunlight and a blessing with her, to his great hope and help.
He clung to the thought as to a talisman, or a reliquary of supernatural power.
He had seen her only once, and that briefly, no more than a few days, when she had come to Richard's court on a state visit with her ancient husband; but he had never forgotten her, and after the duke's death, which by some dispensation of providence had taken place shortly after Henry's coronation, he had taken advantage of every courier to France to send her devout greetings.
And she had replied warmly and kindly, and at last sent him her picture.
Though he needed no picture to see her very clearly, a tall, fair, calm lady with a high forehead and blonde hair, her features regular, smooth and serene, not beautiful, but possessed of such a quality of gentleness and repose.
Everything his heart needed, even dreamless sleep, she would be able to give him.
The rain had stopped; even the wind seemed to have eased, and the banner-pole no longer creaked so eerily above the roof of his chamber, as though the calming thought of her had its benign influence even on the elements.
The king sighed and stirred in his chair, and reached out a hand to ring the small silver bell on his table for his chamberlain.
Strange, even when he looked at his eldest son, whom he knew to resemble her, he could not remember Mary's face.
Owen Glendower, lord of Glyndyfrdwy and Cynllaith, and master of most of North Wales, came south that June into central Wales, his raiding parties materialising like shapes of flashing, thundery sunlight out of the rains and mists of the hills, and eating at the borders of the Mortimer lordships in Radnorshire.
When least expected, they struck, plundered and withdrew.
Reach for them, and they were mist between your fingers.
Every castle mustered its defences and stood by to repel the normal sharp and brief attack; for only when they were insolently sure of their supremacy did the Welsh assay a siege.
Their strength was in their mobility, and in the contemptuous austerity with which they could discard their meagre establishments and take to the hills with their real possessions, their liberty, their horses and cattle, their tribal loyalty and their weapons.
Much had changed in Wales in the two hundred years since Llewelyn ap Iorwerth the Great; but this was not changed.
The earldom of March was in the king's ward; for Roger Mortimer, earl of March, had died in action in Ireland, leaving a six-year-old son to inherit.
But Roger's younger brother Edmund, twenty-six years old, high-spirited and impetuous, was at large about his border lordships, and very much inclined to resent the incursions of his Welsh neighbours.
He mustered from his family's many garrisons a substantial army, and went out to patrol his borders and look for his enemy.
He found him, or was found by him, on the 22nd of June, in the valley of the river Lugg, near Pilleth, where the steep slopes of Bryn Glas hurtled down to the track on one hand, and the flats and meadows of the river hemmed it on the other.
In the wet, wild June the grass was tall and lush, and the heather on the hills stood high and bristling like wire.
Beyond the river, which was wide and hasty in spate, Llan-fawr soared into cloud.
And out of the bracken and the thin, fine rain the Welsh boiled like foam out of a hound's jaws, to confront the English in the narrows under the hill.
Edmund Mortimer kept his head, deployed his archers in what cover there was, massed his knights and men-at-arms on firm ground clear of the marsh meadows, and stood to receive the attack, braced to hold back his horsed companies until the bowmen had had the chance to loose from cover three or four volleys, and reduce the odds.
He withheld the signal until the range was close enough to be deadly, and the stocky Welsh ponies were stretching their frenzied necks and rigid nostrils for the impact, and then flung up his arm, and waited for the tremendous thrumming in the air, that maddening, intoxicating sound like a thousand wild geese all taking flight at once.
It did not come.
The volley of arrows was thin and broken, its unevenness jangling in his nerves even before his senses recorded it.
He turned, incredulous, to stare, and saw half his array of bowmen, the Welsh-born half, standing mute and grim with bows on shoulders, some slowly raising them, some fitting the shafts; and he knew, by their faces and their movements, where those shafts were bound.
He uttered a great cry of anger and  shame, without words, and then the words came following, so hotly that they burned in his throat:
‘Traitors — traitors!
You've eaten my salt and taken my pay…!’
But they were Welsh!
He should have foreseen it.
Mercenary soldiers are mercenary only skin-deep, they still have blood, and the blood can out-argue the indentures and the oaths of fealty sworn for pay.
In his heart, even as the first shaft sliced into the flesh of his left arm, he did not really blame them.
But now there was only one thing left for him to do, and that he did, before the shock of Glendower's assault sheared deep into his ranks, hardly slowed by the few casualties caused by the English archers.
He wheeled his horse, and roared his own knights round upon their bowmen; and the loyal among the marksmen set up an answering howl, and fell out as best they could, leaping sidelong into the bushes and up the heathery slope, to stand clear of the slaughter and find a vantage-point again from which they could play their part.
Edmund rode with slashing spurs and flailing sword into the ranks of the mutinous archers, his knights hard after him.
Before that killing was over, the vanguard of the Welsh charge struck them in side and rear, and swept the whole melee two hundred yards down-river in a tangle of steel and blood and shrieking horses, inextricably mingled.
A few of the rearmost fled down the river valley towards Whitton, and made good their escape, but most stood their ground as soon as the hurtling, heaving mass lost impetus and came to a seething stay.
The loyal archers climbed into the wet furze-tangles of the hillside, and did what they could to pick off the outliers among the attackers, and those in the rear, where they were less inextricably tangled with the English.
But Owen's bowmen were swarming along the higher shoulders of Bryn Glas and shooting down upon them, and upon the struggling men-at-arms; and they had the advantage of better positions and better sighting, and skill and marksmanship at least equal.
Most of the  loyal archers died where they fought, picked off at leisure from above.
A few, when the field was plainly already lost, crept away into cover as best they could, and lay hidden in the valley of the brook beyond Graig Hill until nightfall, to make their way home in the dark.
In the meadows by the Lugg, driven by its own weight ever closer to the edge of the water, and trapped by its own trampling ever deeper into the quaking marshy turf, the mass of struggling, hampered men and horses wallowed like a bogged ox.
In the heart of the press one or two died of suffocation, and many were ridden down and crushed to death under the horses' feet.
There were horsemen snared in the vortex who died unable to free an arm to defend themselves.
One or two, their horses killed under them, were held for a time unable to fall, and others slithered into the river, its shore by now churned into slime, and drowned there in their harness.
This lasted but a little while, for those on the fringes, both forward and aft, drew off as soon as they had room and control, and sought firmer ground and more elbow-room.
The swords which had been clubbed or shortened into daggers for want of space to use them, now came into more orthodox play; and the Welsh archers above on the hills were able to select their targets again without killing their own comrades, and worked with supercilious skill as long as there was light to slay by, and an Englishman still alive.
Edmund Mortimer, with blood running down inside the plates of his armour, heaved his mount out of the mire and up to firm ground, and wheeled to take his first brief survey of the field, and locate the main body of the Welsh cavalry, for only in hand-to-hand combat with them was there any respite from the steady and murderous attentions of the bowmen above.
They would not dare risk a shot at anyone within a sword's reach of their prince and his guard.
He found the raking black horse that stood a head above the tough mountain ponies — Owen was a long-legged  man, and liked a tall mount — and the knot of unmistakable knighthood around it.
He saw the flaunting, rosy feather in the prince's helmet, and the golden dragon outlined on the white surcoat.
Edmund rose in his stirrups, and bellowed against the uproar all round him:
‘Mortimer! Á moi!
Mortimer!’
And those who could dragged themselves clear to re-form and charge with him.
They presented a target thus for only a matter of seconds, though three of them fell in that time; then they were hand-to-hand and at blows with the prince's bodyguard and this was battle as it had formerly been understood between knights, and the hovering archers were crippled and out of the fight.
And yet this field was like every other since the archers had become the terrible force they were; their part was done first, but nonetheless at the end it was seen to be the determining part.
There were so few left active to sustain the burden afterwards.
The lord of Glyndyfrdwy had been as well-tutored in arms as in law, and as apt a pupil; he had, moreover, all the experience that Edmund lacked.
It was all one to him whether he directed a battle or a raid from his headquarters and left the action to others, or himself went to work with lance or sword in the centre of the din; they were merely complementary skills in the same comprehensive expertise.
He unhorsed Edmund, knowing very well whom he held at his lance's point, with economy and address, and without damaging the horse, for of fine horses there can never be too many.
When the boy rose at him on foot, none too steadily but with grim gallantry, and dripping blood from the finger-ends of his mail gauntlet, Owen vaulted promptly out of the saddle to match him, and waved off his companions, who would have borne the young man down by sheer weight.
No one wanted to kill him, no one wanted to spoil him; he was too precious for that, and already too securely theirs, for hardly a whole man was left to back him.
Owen drew on him, and let him attack as he would, approving the pointless but touching valour  with which he came on.
He had lost much blood, his helm was notably dinted, and the head inside it already dazed and misty as the dusk coming down on the hills.
He wavered and lurched as he came.
Owen measured his distance, and as he swung, struck the sword with well-judged force out of his failing hand, and clubbed him senseless with the flat of his blade.
The boy dropped at his feet, in a single, total fall without a movement after, like a stone.
‘This one,’ said Owen generously, looking down at him, ‘may not be over-valued at the price.
I'd as lief have him on my side as against me.’
He looked round him, upon the desolation of the field between Bryn Glas and the river, littered and faintly heaving still with bodies and cast arms, and groaning with the last convulsions of struggle and pain.
The dusk was coming down fast.
Horses threshed feebly, pounding the earth in a frenzy to get to their feet, and falling back again.
The men lay more quietly; some, not a doubt of it, still alive, some even lying mort until it should be safe to rise and go.
Let them go who could.
The Welsh wanted none but valuable prisoners, and had no interest in killing the others, since they would surely leave this place more nimbly and rapidly than the English survivors, and be as inaccessible as the stars by the time another force looked for them.
‘My lord, there are three knights live and yielded.
Shall we bring them, too?’
‘Can they ride?’
For the company would move fast this night, lie but briefly, and double again; and even the prisoners must stand the pace.
‘Yes.
And the horses are blown but sound.’
They had remounts not two hours away; that was no problem.
‘Yes, bring them.
If they give their parole, take it.
But keep archers at their back.’
Even a knight was worth a fair ransom; and better worth if he decided, upon consideration, to enlist upon the other side.
He looked down at Edmund Mortimer, motionless at his feet, his mailed hands relaxed and empty in the  turf.
‘Bind him on his own horse — it will go better under him than another.
We'll have the harness off him at Llanbadarn, and see to his hurts.
I would not lose him for every noble we'll get for him.
But have him out of here we must, and quickly.’
They hoisted him into his saddle and bound him there, lying forward upon the beast's neck with his arms lashed about it to hold him secure, and a folded cloak under his breast and cheek.
They took what there was to take, all the mounts that were fit to travel, all the arms that lay masterless about the field, and vanished in the dusk up-river into the mountains with their prisoners and their triumph.
The night came down over Bryn Glas, and the remnant of the Mortimer forces crept out of hiding, salvaged what they could, and made lamely for home with their wounds and their disgrace.
The squire who carried the news to the king at Berkhamsted reached him on the evening of June 24th.
The young man had ridden hard, and was stained and tired, and not a little frightened at the magnitude of the disaster he reported.
When he had finished, the king was motionless and silent for so long that the messenger held his breath, in dread of the repercussions that commonly attend the bearer of bad news.
But when at last Henry spoke it was mildly and quietly enough, though his eyes, deep-set and haggard under their drawn brows, looked curiously opaque, like grey glass with no light behind it of lantern or sky, and his hands, slightly gnarled like the hands of an older man, gripped hard at the arms of his chair.
‘Carried away prisoner, you say.
And alive?
You are sure he was alive?’
A strange question; who would burden his raiding party with a dead man?
‘Was he wounded?’
‘Your Grace, I saw him felled.
It was not a killing blow, it was meant to stun.
But I think he was already wounded.’
‘Gravely?’
‘No, your Grace, for when he mustered what force he had left  and drove at the Welsh knights, he could both ride and fight, and so did, and well.
And they were careful of him, knowing his worth.’
The king thought long, or perhaps sat silent long without thought, hardly yet fully grasping what had befallen.
Then he asked slowly: ‘What other losses have we suffered in this battle?’
‘My liege lord, three knights killed, and as many captured, and of others killed, some three score archers, men-at-arms and squires.
The Welsh losses were but light, but for the archers of Welsh blood in our forces, who are all dead or deserted with the enemy.’
‘You have been at some personal pains,’ said the king in the same quiet voice, ‘to bring us an eye-witness’account, and for that we thank you.
How came you off so fortunately?’
‘Your Grace, I and two others were some way behind, bringing up the spare horses, and came on the scene only in time to see Sir Edmund at grips, and the battle all but done.
When they saw us they pursued us, but not far, for it was growing dusk.
And when they gave over I ventured back to see from the hillside, where there was some cover.
So we rode for Whitton, and were able, as soon as the Welsh were gone, to bring off some of our wounded safely.’
‘You could do no more.
Very well, you may leave us.
Take your rest and refreshment here, and when you leave tomorrow I will send letters by you to Wigmore.’
And when the messenger had made his reverence and limped out from the presence, Henry turned his head a little, and looked at his closest confidants, but obliquely, out of the corner of a sunken eye, and dismissed them, too.
‘Leave me.
I must have time to think.
This cannot go on unchecked.
I'll call you when I need you.’
The door closed on them.
He was alone; he could let his face fall, and his eyes open and cast their shutters.
There was no one to see in him either dismay or glee, or the furious fusion of both  that raged in him.
He lay back in his chair limply, and felt himself begin to tremble.
He could not have borne a mirror in the room with him now, for fear of what he might see; in his heart he knew that it would be unrecognisable, as he failed to recognise the turmoil of his own feelings as having anything to do with the self he had always known.
Bad news, so bad the boy had almost been afraid to utter it!
If only he had known enough, he might have come privately and hoped for a reward!
Grey in April — that was one thing.
But now Mortimer in June!
Of all men, Mortimer!
Great-grandson to King Edward the third, and by a branch senior to Lancaster, even though his descent came through a woman.
For Edmund's mother was Henry's cousin Philippa, the daughter of Lionel, duke of Clarence who had been born before John of Gaunt.
And no matter how the experts argued about the legitimacy of descent through the female line, nevertheless the people recognised no bar, and the council had accepted it as just and right when Richard, in view of his childlessness, had been urged to name his heir presumptive, and had named Philippa's elder son, Roger, earl of March.
Well, Roger was no rival now.
He was dead in Ireland, four years ago, in Richard's service; but he had left behind other Mortimers, far too many Mortimers, to inherit his claim: Edmund and Roger, his sons, Anne, his daughter.
And if all these should flicker out like candles, still his young, lusty brother Edmund, strong as a stag, and ripe for marriage, capable of getting more sons, more Mortimers to carry on the line and the claim to eternity.
And if this second branch failed, there was yet another Mortimer, Edmund's sister Elizabeth; and like Philippa, even if she was but a woman, she had given birth to a son, the youngest Henry Percy, Hotspur's heir.
He sat staring before him, seeing nothing but a long line of Mortimers, inexhaustible and prolific to the end of time.
True, Roger's children were all in the king's wardship, the boys far too  young to cause trouble, and in reliable hands even if they should try, or others should try on their behalf.
Yet they lived — and all men knew they lived.
And this elder Edmund, their uncle, he was no child to be held in fosterage, but a young man of power and property and ambition.
Why could not Wales have taken care of him as efficiently as Ireland had of Roger?
‘Captured’ was well enough in its way, at least it disabled and immobilised him.
But it might so easily have been ‘killed’!
The king seemed to himself to turn suddenly, and gaze back into his own mind, and it was like peering into a cavern where dangerous creatures lurked, such as he had never suspected could habit within him.
He willed to turn his eyes away, but he could not.
Once having looked, he could never again be unaware.
And yet it was false, he had no ill intent, he had done no wrong to Edmund or to any of them.
Was it any fault of his if the Welsh rebels had made prisoner a Mortimer, at this moment the most formidable of the Mortimers?
Had carried him off into the mountains, in this harsh summer of storms and floods?
And wounded, if only lightly!
Perhaps not so lightly!
Perhaps gravely.
And such a forced journey after — Who knew where death was lying in wait for him?
No, he had done nothing to harm Edmund, nor would he in the future.
Only let be, he thought, hardly knowing he thought it, and there may be no need!
And yet this matter of the battle at Pilleth could not be left unanswered, for the sake of his tenure.
The blow to English arms was bitter, and he felt it as an insult to his own person.
The threat from Wales grew steadily, and could not be suffered any longer.
It was time for him to take action.
He had left things to others too long, and his sovereignty was in danger of being slighted.
In this matter, too, he hardly recognised himself.
When had he ever had to be pricked into action before?
He was at his best when reacting promptly and powerfully to every threat, how had he let himself be hemmed in thus by forms and processes and the operations of incompetent deputies?
It was easy now to decide what to do, both  for outward appearances and for the comfort of his own spirit.
He must and would take the field himself against Glendower, and make an end of him.
(Yet if he did so, was not Edmund Mortimer let loose again from his prison?)
He rang his silver bell, and it was John Norbury himself who came in to answer it.
‘My lord?’
‘John, I must write to my council.
Send Nicholas Bubwith in to me.
And bring Thomas, too, and do you stay with us.
I need your advice.’
And when they were come, and settled into conference with him: ‘I desire your views upon the decision I have taken in this matter of the Welsh war.
It is in my mind that this last outrage cannot be allowed to pass, nor can I longer leave the handling of the affair to Prince Henry or his advisers.
I purpose, therefore, to wage war myself in Wales, and I intend to set out from Lichfield on — let me see, this is the twenty-fourth of June — on the seventh day of July.
Draft a letter to my council, Nicholas, notifying them that I have already had the news of the action at Pilleth, and asking them to send out orders for the knights and squires of all the midland counties to meet me at Lichfield, fully prepared, mounted and arrayed for war, by the seventh day of July.
You may say also that I think it well that the musters of the northern counties should prepare themselves for possible action against the Scots at the same date, and those along the south coast should be ready to resist any assault by sea from my enemies in Europe.
For we already have knowledge,’ said the king, ‘that our enemy in Wales has sent letters praying aid to all these potential foes of our state, and a joint assault is more than a possibility.
So write, Nicholas,’ he said, leaning back relaxed and smiling in his chair, ‘and I will sign it.
And you, my friends, show me your will, and say if I do well.’
His eye had regained its clarity, and his head its proud poise, as  in the days when Norbury had accompanied him in his Prussian crusade with the Teutonic knights, long ago.
With one voice they told him that he did well.
At very much the same hour Edmund Mortimer came out of the deep sleep that follows fever, and opened his eyes reluctantly, remembering instantly and ruefully a day and a night of indignity and discomfort before he had lost all sense of place, time and direction, and finally of his own identity.
He had no idea where he was, except that it must be somewhere in the wilds of Wales, well hidden from any possibility of rescue; and he took his first unwilling look about him in the conviction that captivity could mean nothing better than solitude, close confinement and squalor.
He opened his eyes upon discreet candle-light, upon a small room hung with tapestries and green fir-boughs that smelled of spice and resin and open air; and upon a girl's face bent solicitously over him.
She could not have been more than eighteen years old, golden as a kingcup and white as windflowers.
He had never seen hair of such a full, glowing gold, or a fairer brow underneath it.
The great thick braid of spun metal hung over her shoulder, and brushed his cheek as she leaned over him.
Her eyes, which were blue-black, were very large, grave and kind.
As soon as she saw that he was awake she slipped a hand expertly under his head, and held a cup to his lips, and he drank thirstily, like a child, all the more willingly because it was plain that his docility pleased her.
He must, of course, be dreaming her.
During the fever brought on by wounds, forced marches, wet and cold he had dreamed many odd and discomforting things, but never anything like this.
He tried whether he had a voice in the dream, and it seemed that he had, though a curiously meagre one, for she leaned still closer to hear what he wanted, inclining her earnest head to bring  a small, close-set ear almost within touch of his lips.
‘Madam, I see that — after all — I have not been too much a sinner.
For you can be nothing — but an angel.’
She heard and understood him.
She drew back a little, and let him see her face whole again, and in focus.
The briefest of smiles took flight from her lips to her eyes, and away, leaving her portentously grave again; and with careful, frowning concentration she said in English, her bright, light, child's voice forming the words as gingerly as a novice using an untried weapon: ‘Oh, no — I am only Catherine.’
5
King Henry's moves that summer afforded a curious study to an observant man.
His decision was taken, and the orders sent out for the triple muster, yet even after news from the northern border confirmed only too clearly that Scotland intended to take a full part in the harrying of his realm, he was slow to move.
He was still at Berkhamsted at the end of June, but at least then he had the relief of writing to his council with somewhat more reassuring news from Northumberland.
The earl had successfully held minor raids near Carlisle, apparently launched to sound out the defences of the western march, and at Berwick the garrison, with the help of George Dunbar, that angry refugee from over the border, poacher turned forester, had decisively defeated a party of four hundred Scots.
But this was no more than the beginning; for by now they knew very well that there were French knights fighting with the Scottish companies, and in fair numbers, too, and the south of England had been warned to look to its defences in case of a direct assault from across the channel.
In July the king finally moved north, took up his residence in the abbey of Lilleshall, and made it his headquarters while he reviewed the defences of the Welsh border.
He remained there long enough to draw many camp-followers of various kinds, including several of the merchants of Shrewsbury, who had an interest in the supply of gear and provisions, and smiths and other craftsmen who could pick up lucrative jobs among the  armouries.
It was easy to move among this great, churning concourse, and hear all there was to be heard, and no great trick, for an intelligent man, to winnow the less likely rumours out of the crop, and be left with the grain.
The king, so they said, had made four new commands on the Welsh front, though it was only four months since he had made the previous appointments of the two Percies as lieutenants of north and south Wales.
He hardly knew his own mind, they said candidly among their own intimates.
His executives went in and out of office like dogs at a fair, and so did his treasurers.
True, Lord Henry Percy had his hands full on the eastern march of Scotland, and could hardly be in two places at once, but the earl of Worcester was still in Wales, and acting as the prince's governor and head of council, too.
The only magnate who kept his place unchallenged for long was the prince himself.
And now that he had his muster here, what would the king do?
Strike directly into Wales?
Surprisingly, he turned not westwards, but eastwards, to Lichfield again, and on to Burton-on-Trent, where he issued orders for the victualling of all the border towns by the 27th of August, ready for an advance into Wales.
Thus far Iago Vaughan, like many another displaced labourer tramping the roads in search of casual work in these disturbed times, had followed the unwieldy cavalcade and kept his ears and eyes open.
But if the victuallers were to have their stores ready only by the end of August, and the king was intending, as it seemed, to continue his journey eastwards across the centre of England, equidistant from the possible battle-grounds of the Welsh and Scottish borders and the threatened south coast, and ready to move in whichever direction should first require his presence, then there was no longer anything to be gained by loitering here, and he had better be making his way over to Owen with what information he had, and whatever intelligent inferences could be drawn from that information.
‘We need not expect him, then,’ said Owen, ‘until the beginning of September.
And these estimates you bring me of his numbers since they can but be estimates — have you shot low or high?
He'll have more, or less?’
They were sitting together over a rough table in a room in a farmhouse outside Abergavenny.
Owen distrusted castles unless he had had the ordering of them and the garrisoning for a year or more; there was infinitely more safety in the hills, because the hills were his castle and not another man's, and could not be betrayed or easily taken by storm.
The English feared for their lives to be shut out of a keep; but the Welsh were more wary of being shut in.
‘My lord, as I think, less.
If I am in doubt, I overshoot.
And as you see, the numbers with which I credit him are more than enough.
But more important is how he will use them.
And — my lord — there is here something more than strange.’
‘I am listening,’ said Owen.
‘I have studied this Bolingbroke carefully and long.
I know his record, before he became king and after.
So do you, better than I, and you must check me if I stray.
For my life I cannot understand, what is it makes this man now so lame, so hesitant, so crippled, who was wont to be hale and prompt enough.
He moves about his business, life or death, like one with a broken back.
He can, but he will not, or he will, but he cannot.
He knows what he wants, and he means to go forward and grasp it, but ever he turns aside, or his feet lag.
I have seen the son, and he is no such being.
So far as he's let, he knows his mind very well, he determines and he does.
What has happened to this Henry, since he landed at Ravenspur and struck out so baldly for a crown?’
‘He has won it,’ said Owen, his mouth curling in a dark, private smile.
‘Should that unman him?’
‘He was ever a man of terrible rectitude,’ said Owen dispassionately, half-closing his eyes to peer back into a past he  hardly ever dwelt on now.
‘Narrow as a lance, but sure of his own probity, and very well able to act if his rights were infringed.
What has he to be sure of now in that quarter?
As certain as he thinks ‘my rights’ and puts out his hand to strike in defence of them, he knows they're none of his.
How came the son of a younger son to have any ‘rights’ in the throne?’
‘Make no mistake, my lord,’ said Iago vehemently, ‘he'll stoop to any shift now to keep his hold of it.’
‘So he will, I know it.
So he must.
But his arm will be lead to lift, and his feet chained when he seeks to stride.
Like a man in a dream, that must for his life run like a deer, and can only crawl like a broken worm.
When most he wants and needs to strike home, he'll find himself shuffling and stumbling and hesitating, waiting to see what his enemy will do.
You cannot be a man of such icy probity as he was, and not be crippled when your credit's gone.’
‘Don't underrate him, however.
Even a broken worm can kill, if it happens to be an adder.
And he is not yet so low that he cannot bring down many a better man.
For with all his rectitude,’ said Iago, coldly considering, ‘I think him but very small in goodness, and very drear.
He is a winter man, and his frost drives away even those who most willed to warm him.’
‘He was not always so,’ said the greatest of those he had yet alienated and turned into enemies.
‘It is a part of his malady.
And now there is no cure.
He must live with his disabilities as we must live with his abilities.
We shall see who calculates most accurately.
The twenty-seventh of August!
And you say he plans a three-fold advance, from Chester, Shrewsbury and Hereford?’
‘That was the talk of his camp.
I think it could well be true.
Certainly they are victualling all three towns.’
‘Then the prince will move in from Chester.
It is his headquarters.’
He who was the effective prince of Wales spoke easily of ‘the prince’, and never grudged him his courtesy title.
‘Henry will take Shrewsbury for himself, the central base.
And  Hereford — that will be either Worcester or Stafford.’
He had already noted all Henry's new appointments.
The young earl of Stafford was coming early into prominence, for he was one of the new knights Henry had made on the eve of his coronation.
‘Well…well,’ he said, narrowing his far-sighted eyes upon the beloved map in his mind, ‘they shall be somewhat too far north by then to find any trace of me.
And while they feint at shadows, I will be busy with the substance.
For it's time they saw more of me in the south, Iago, where I shall not be expected.
I have a fancy to show myself as far as Newport and Cardiff, while they lose themselves in the mountains of Maelienydd and Brecon.’
‘And I, my lord, what shall I do?’
‘Go back to Shrewsbury.
It is his main base, and where the news will be.
I'll send letters by you to Rhys and Gwilym, and they'll have a man waiting across Severn at Guilsfield, ready to pass on any word you send him.
Go and be a hanger-on at Henry's storehouses, and pick up what grain you can.
As for me, I shall move south by Usk and Caerleon.
And I warrant I shall be ready for the twenty-seventh of August before Henry will.
It will be a testing month,’ he said, smiling a little to himself, ‘more ways than one.’
Iago rose to take his leave, but the prince called him back for a moment.
‘Will Percy come south to Wales, think you, or stay on the Scottish march?’
‘He'll stay in the north, my lord.
He must.
There's not a mile of that border safe if he turns his back now, and they know it.’
‘You think he knows yet that I have Mortimer?
But he must, surely.
He'll be pinning his faith on Henry and his autumn parliament to raise the money for the young man's ransom, no doubt.
Should you, by some far chance, rub shoulders with him again, Iago, let him know his brother is well healed of his wounds, and in good fettle.
He had a zealous nurse,’ said Owen, and laughed at some thought of his own.
‘And will you let them go for ransom?
Mortimer and Grey both?’
‘What use is Grey to me now?
I cannot fight him while he's my prisoner, I cannot kill him until he's free to face me again in arms.
And his price — his price can be of enormous use.
Ten thousand marks it shall cost them, if they want him back.
And as for Mortimer, they shall pay dearer still for him.
But whether in money or kind,’ he said, a suppressed smile tugging the corners of his mouth inward in very private amusement, ‘may well be another matter.
I doubt if it rests altogether with me or with Edmund.’
The entire vast enterprise lurched into uneasy motion at last, in the first days of September, in the strange, ominous hush of the end of that disastrous summer, while France sat mute and made no sign, and the Scots, for all their gadfly raids, seemed to hold off from testing the defences of the north.
It was King Henry's one great gesture against Glendower, and nothing had been spared of loans, and exhortations, and massing of stores, to ensure its success.
It was his misfortune to envisage every such encounter as a matter of life and death, though by now he should have been used to anticlimax, and to the survival and tenacity of both parties to fight another day.
He wanted an ultimate solution, and life does not deal in such simplifications.
The prince, who took his force into Wales from Chester in good tight order, and at every mile ensured his lines behind him, was on his guard against his own instinctive enthusiasm as well as against Welsh armies, and knew enough about them by this time to feel no surprise that he should probe ever more deeply and carefully into North Wales, and never touch hands with anything more than a darting patrol, gone almost as soon as sighted.
He threw out no sounding parties too weak to guarantee their own safety, and he lost none of them.
Past Ruthyn and Clocaenog and into the Cambrian mountains and the Berwyns, hampered by vile weather, and impeded by swollen streams and misty hills, he moved methodically on the lines laid down for him, and made  no contact with any substantial enemy.
He made no attempt to touch Owen's ancestral hold of Carrog, because he had no orders to do so.
His advance had been laid down for him in definite terms, and he held to it, but taking his own precautions along the way.
In any case, he knew who would be in Carrog — the women and children and those unfit for warfare — and he knew how quickly they would remove before him if he went near them.
There would be men enough left with them to ensure their safe withdrawal, not enough to make it worth his while disabling them.
What he wanted was the main force, mobile and sudden and a prize fit for his steel.
Some day there might be a time for setting light to both Carrog and Sycarth, and driving their households homeless into the hills; but not now, that was to fritter away all these preparations upon a minor consideration.
He went his way across North Wales, probing as he moved, but he never saw hide or hair of Owen.
The force from Hereford had the choice of two ways in, the more northerly by Hay and Brecon, the more southerly by Abergavenny, and by ill-luck chose the first.
At Talgarth they got wind of skirmishes in the south, and set off southward over Mynedd Troed for Tretower; but because of the time they had lost they were always too far behind their quarry even to realise the magnitude of the chance that persistently slipped through their fingers.
By the time they reached Abergavenny, Owen was at Cardiff, and while they were pressing hard from Usk to Caerleon, Owen was withdrawing in excellent order into the wilds of Brecknock.
They never got so near to him again.
They had suffered less than the other armies from the evil weather up to then, but in the days that followed Wales and September did their worst, and it was difficult to keep open their lengthening supply lines.
King Henry himself, with the third army, struck due west from Shrewsbury for Welshpool, strongly garrisoned and lavishly provisioned as an advanced base.
From there they moved on into the  Cambrian mountains; and for three days they toiled through the worst storms of the year.
Every brook coming down from the heights was swollen into a torrent, every valley river gulped these tributaries into its heart, and burst out over the narrow meadows into languid shallows, while in the centre it rushed ahead with treacherous force.
Some of their stores were swept away, some of their mounts and pack-horses were bogged, or foundered and damaged themselves in the stones of the river beds.
In the upper levels of the hills the occasional pools had grown to three times their normal size, and turned every bowl of rushy upland into marsh, where the army laboured perilously for every half-mile of painful progress.
On the seventh of September the clouds broke for the first time, the wind subsided, and the sun came out.
That evening they pitched their camp on a shoulder of dry ground above a valley, thankful for the respite.
The king slept half-armed in his tent, the remainder of his plate-armour massed just within the entrance, and his lance with its pennant fixed upright in the turf outside.
Strung out along the shelf between hill and vale, with outposts covering every approach, the army settled down for the night.
In the third hour of darkness the climactic storm seemed to materialise overhead out of a sky barely dappled with clouds.
Those who were waking said afterwards that it did not move towards them across the sky from any direction, but burst suddenly, directly above them, in a great whirlwind and a peal of thunder.
Then every star vanished, and the sky was instantly one piled mass of black cloud, out of which lightnings flashed and rain streamed in a circling torrent, swirled by the terrible wind.
One sentry almost drowned on his feet, for the wind had pinned him against a rock, and he could not free himself or even turn his face into shelter, while it dashed into his mouth and nostrils unceasing volleys of rain so heavy that he could not get his breath; and if two of his companions who had their backs turned upon the blast had not been cast against him, and so afforded his  face shelter enough to breathe, he must have died spread-eagled there.
Some in the low-lying places, who were heavily asleep, did drown as they lay, the water gathering so rapidly in every hollow.
The king awoke out of his sleep to a frightful sound, like a great crash of thunder and the hissing flight of a thousand arrows.
He sprang up with a cry, and in the same moment the tent collapsed upon him, pinning him to the ground under its heavy folds, and the hammering rain held it there, flattened crushingly over his breast, moulding itself to every feature of his face, so that he was nearly suffocated.
And yet the place was drenched, as with water, so with a fearful smell of burning.
He had laid by his sword, but he had a dagger still upon him, and managed to draw it and slash through the folds that smothered him; and Norbury and Erpyngham and half a dozen others of his own people came plunging and splashing through the storm to help him out of these ominous grave-clothes.
Then they all saw that the royal lance, which had stood upright at the door of the tent, had been flung down so violently that its point had pierced the breast-plate of his piled armour; and the shaft of the lance was twisted and discoloured, all the armour dinted, and the royal pennant charred as if it had been burned.
They began to shake, for this was too close to hell-fire and witchcraft.
No one then had time to utter what he dreaded; but afterwards, though those about the king held their peace doggedly, and spoke only of phenomenally bad weather against which no man could guard, in the ranks men were saying to one another that this was no natural storm, that there had never been known so strange and violent a tempest, that it was sent out of malice against them, either by Owen himself, or by those stiff-necked Franciscans of Llanfaes whose house the king had burned, and who were allies of Owen and the devil to the last man.
But this was afterwards.
There was no talking that night in the darkness, men had enough to do to stay alive, and salvage something out of the ruin.
For after the rain came hail, to batter and  crush what the water had left undamaged, and after the hail, snow, sudden freezing squalls that piled white drifts in every cranny and across every open space.
And towards morning, when the snow turned again to rain, the whole hillside under which they were camped had become furrowed and scoured by a hundred brooks scurrying and leaping downwards into the river valley, till the level of the flood crept up towards their outposts, and its tributaries carried down into it everything movable that came in their way, including some of the hobbled horses, and the wreckage of tents, and drowned men.
When the light came they mustered what was left to them, and knew without many words spoken, even when the storm subsided at last into mere mist and drizzle, that they could not advance further.
Half their provisions were lost or ruined, many of the horses dead or hurt, and a number of men drowned.
They had little hope of bringing up fresh provisions in these conditions, and if they lengthened their lines by a few more miles they would have no hope at all.
The army turned back in drenched and miserable retreat towards Welshpool, without having so much as sighted a Welsh force of any kind.
And the soldiers muttered to one another as they limped and splashed back towards England that the black friars had not only sent the terror, but withdrawn it from them as soon as they turned back, and the devil their master could call it up again in an instant if they so much as looked over their shoulders.
In Welshpool they halted to rest, and make good what losses they could, to dry out their arms and reflight their arrows; and there was a brief council of war.
But the issue was never in doubt.
Some said the king was gravely shaken by his narrow escape from death, and the implied threat that still hung over him.
Some said merely that the money was not available to fit out such an expedition a second time, even if the spirit had been willing; and that was certainly true.
But all agreed, even before the order was given, that when they moved from Welshpool it would be back to  Shrewsbury.
And all agreed most bitterly, though no one uttered it, that they would be going back derided and disgraced.
No one knew it better than the king; and no one felt it more corrosively.
It so happened that on this same 7th of September the inner circle of the royal council was meeting in a small room in Westminster to hear the report of the treasurer, the king's old and loyal servant Henry Bowet, now bishop of Bath and Wells.
Among those present was Master John Prophet, dean of Hereford, who among his pluralities numbered also the deanery of St Chad's at Shrewsbury, the king's privy clerk, and soon to be his secretary.
The treasurer's lament was not new to any ear; it was the unceasing accompaniment of every expensive undertaking.
But this time it had a note of desperation which rendered it almost novel even to those who had heard it so often.
‘I have employed every way I know,’ said Bowet wearily, ‘to procure money for his Grace's needs.
I have offered bonds under my own seal, as well as the royal seal, but without result.
They will not lend any further sums unless they hold jewels as security, and more, unless they may have letters patent to give them the right to sell if they do not get repayment by the date appointed.
We have no authority to issue such letters, yet the matter is urgent, all the more as his Grace is absent in such a vital cause.
He cannot be reached at this moment, and the question cannot be shelved.
The money must be raised, and at once.
I ask the council to advise.’
They debated unhappily, reluctant to commit themselves to an opinion, until John Prophet suggested sadly that in the circumstances it might be well to consult the archbishop of Canterbury, and in some relief they agreed on this course, and carried their problem that same afternoon to Lambeth; where Thomas Arundel, on the force of whose word and influence they could rely, advised them, in consideration of the desperate need, to  issue the required letters patent, and he would be responsible for defending their action to the king, should it need any defence.
Accordingly the lenders got their security, and leave to turn it into good cash if no other cash redeemed it in time.
There was a proviso that should the value of the jewels exceed the amount of the debt, the excess must be paid over to the king's treasury.
But no one wasted much attention on that.
It was a practical certainty that he would be trying to raise more loans long before these were ever repaid.
But at least they could hold off within the value of what they now held, and were empowered to dispose of to advantage.
So low was King Henry's credit fallen with those who lent money to him.
But lower still, infinitely low at this moment, with himself.
The news of the retreat came into Shrewsbury only a day ahead of the returning vanguard, and filled the town with rumours and counter-rumours.
Some said there would be no more than a brief lull to refurbish and reprovision, and then another attempt; others maintained that the troops would be paid off — if they were so lucky as to be paid!— and disbanded from Shrewsbury, for it was too late in the year now to favour an invasion.
And many whispered of witchcraft; and some, in very low voices and in trusted company, said that the judgment of God was sometimes miscalled the malice of the devil, by those who must pass off their devil as God.
There was even some whispering, in secret and in Welsh, of birthrights; for the lord of Glyndyfrdwy was the lawful living heir of the princes of Powys Fadog, and his mother, Helen, was great-grand-daughter to Llewelyn ap Griffith, the last revered and lamented prince of North Wales; and Henry of Lancaster was the son of a younger son, and the stars and the elements could not be deceived.
But those who could speak English spoke no Welsh aloud in Shrewsbury in those days, for feeling was running all the higher  because the two races bred and mingled so closely here, and it was well to be known as a loyal king's man, and indulge other sympathies only in low voices round the hearth, or better still, in silence within the heart.
But Welsh and English alike took care to put their valuables and their armour, if they had any, safely under lock and key, for if the returning troops were to be billeted in the town, even for a few nights, there would certainly be some looting, and no sane burgess was so loyal a king's man as to be complacent about losing goods and gear without a struggle to preserve them.
And some, and among them Rhodri Parry, had more dangerous and precious things to hide from the retreating soldiery.
A town filled with disgruntled men-at-arms, more than ready to pick an easy quarrel to pay for the hard one they had lost, was no place for a fugitive Franciscan friar escaped from the Leicester convent, and suspect of treason along with several others of his house, some already executed.
He had lain in one of the lofts above the storehouses for several days, weak and sick after zig-zagging cross-country ahead of the hunt, moving by night in this foul summer, and lying up in woods and trees by day.
Iago had brought him, and Iago should have been here within two more days to take him away, somewhat recovered now and strong enough to continue his flight into Wales.
But the disfavour of heaven had driven the royal army back too soon, and there was no Iago here to relieve the house of its dangerous guest.
And within a day there might well be ten men-at-arms bivouacked in the house and the store-rooms.
‘He must go,’ fretted Rhodri, tramping the length of his solar like a caged wolf, ‘or he's a dead man, and his blood will be on our heads.
By tomorrow night it may be too late.
And how are we to get him past the gates, with the town in this ferment?
The guard will be on its mettle, with the king not a day away, and the sheriff alerted to expect him.
I would not give a solitary noble for his chances by the Welsh gate.
Where is Iago, for the love of God, when we need him most?’
‘About our business and the Lord Owen's,’ said Julian, with a vicious snap that belonged rather to a wife than a daughter, ‘and worse pressed than we are, very likely.
Hush your noise and see to your journeymen, and I'll do the rest.’
‘You?’ he said with unflattering disbelief, and laughed.
‘What else am I for in this place?
You are the one that might be missed about the house and the business.
Nobody asks me to be answerable for anything here.
Keep the boys to the cloth warehouse after noon, and I'll see to it that Joanna has things to do above-stairs.
She would not hear the crack of doom, and I'll ensure she shall be satisfied where I'm gone.
Walter will find him safe lying at the holding until Iago can ferry him over and see him on his way.
And you need know nothing, not even what we bargain among us.
Who knows nothing can tell nothing, nor be convicted of anything, either.’
She had not quite the disdain of him that she put into what she said; and perhaps he knew it as well as she did.
They had been father and daughter, and sworn enemies, for a long time now; they understood each other too well for comfort.
‘Give me your blessing, sir,’ she said, the devout child, ‘and be about it, and never look over your shoulder.’
He cursed her, and blessed her, and fumed away on her errand as far as the door; and turned there to say with genuine fury: ‘Am I mad, that I turn you loose to take your chance among wolves?
Say you put a foot wrong, are you not game to be coursed and spoiled, like other women, that I listen to you like a craven creature as I am?’
‘You need not fret,’ she said equably, with the darkling smile that disquieted him more than her enmity.
‘I was spoiled long ago by that maudlin old wreck you bought for me, what more can happen to me now?
Yes, there is somewhat in me still virgin, but not my body, and not at any man's beck and call like my body.
Never have any fear for my virginity — it is not in danger.’
He was a poor, meagre creature, this Brother John Caldwell, thin  as a rail from long starving in the woods, and by no means fully recovered as yet.
His tonsure had grown out raggedly, and grown out white as ash, and the six-weeks-old beard he had acquired from living wild was streaked with grey.
They had thought it well to keep that, trimmed into a square shape that concealed his lean jaw and fallen cheeks as much as possible.
In Rhodri's cast-off clothes and worn shoes he looked like a penurious wandering scrivener of sixty; in truth he was barely forty, and had been a tall, strong man of his hands once, and would be as good again after a month of eating regularly, and nursing his frayed body and broken and blistered feet.
They would not normally have dreamed of attempting to get him into or out of the house except under cover of darkness; but now there was no certainty that they would have even one night of grace.
Julian left him lurking in the shelter of the cart-house while she kept watch from the wicket for the most favourable moment, and beckoned him through quickly when the alley was empty.
They were in luck, for the sky was still murky and a thin drizzle falling, excuse enough for him to cover his head and shadow his face within his capuchon, and for her to pull forward the hood of her old cloak, and hide within it.
Once away into the open street they could breathe more freely.
He leaned heavily upon her arm, with a shambling lameness which was only half assumed, for he had gone barefoot for three weeks before he reached the refuge from which Iago had conveyed him west to Shrewsbury.
They moved slowly through the crowds in the streets, glad of the obscuring numbers and the bustle and the noise, and the quivering, suppressed excitement, a thick veil behind which they walked, unnoticed and anonymous, towards the High Cross, and the long, gentle descent to the castle gate.
She knew better than to take a wanted man near the Welsh gate; but the castle gate was the one land approach to the town, the eastward and inviolable gate, overshadowed by the bulk of  the castle and the strength of its garrison.
Where men feel most secure they keep least suspicious watch.
It would mean a longer walk for them round the northward coil of the river, but that was a small matter once they were out of the town.
The great corner tower of the curtain wall loomed above the street on the right hand; and here the crowd was thicker, and the babel of voices louder and more excited.
It seemed that somewhere ahead of them, towards the gate, all motion had ceased, and the press of people heaved and shifted, but made no progress.
Julian took her companion by the hand, and wormed her way round elbows and between shoulders as far down the street as she could, drawing Brother John after her; but before she was close enough to the gatehouse to see what was happening there she was brought to a halt, and could move no farther.
Others thus jammed beside her were shouting questions to those before them, and craning to peer over their heads.
And up from the barbican of the castle, heaving the crowd aside by force on either hand as a plough turns the soil, came the clatter of hooves and a flurry of plumes, and resolved themselves presently into a posse of horsemen, breaking open a clear passage before them with staves, and thrusting the watching crowds back to the walls.
She watched the leaders ride slowly by, edging their horses mincingly along the fringes of the road, and shouting orders to give warning ahead:
‘Stand back, there!
Clear the way!
Make way for the king's heralds!’
Crushed tightly together, the mass held its ground stolidly, and watched curiously for what would happen next.
The town bailiffs passed slowly — she knew them well, Robert Thornes and John Scryveyn, both gentlemen of coat-armour.
Their under-officers fell out one by one and took station along the way to preserve the channel they had opened.
‘What is it?’
Julian asked in the ear of the man in front of her.
‘What's happening?
I'm late with getting back home as it is.
Will they keep us here long?’
‘So am I late, my girl, and many another here, but there's no help.
They've closed the gate.
There'll nobody get out of the town by this road until the king's officers have passed.’
‘They say the king's left Welshpool with a small escort ahead of the army,’ volunteered a boy a yard or so in front of them, turning an excited face.
‘Is he coming here, to the castle?’
‘Nobody knows.
Some say he is, but last time he went to the abbey.’
‘No, he'll go on to Lilleshall.
You'll see, they'll quarter the soldiers on us, but the king's officers will be pushing on for London as fast as they can.’
Julian looked about her, and took heart.
There were any number of laden country folk in this concourse, and within the hour there would be still more crowding down upon them from the town, after the market.
If they had closed the gates to guard against any untoward incident until the king's men had passed, they would be the less inclined to make any checks of those passing through afterwards.
It would be a case of opening the gates thankfully, and letting them pour out and disperse over the neighbouring villages as they would.
The wait would be well worth it for such a blind release; and in this motley crowd, drawn from a dozen hamlets outside in addition to the town, her companion was nameless and faceless as a hunted man could wish to be.
She pressed his gaunt hand with vital, confident fingers, and looked anywhere but at him.
He must bear his soul in patience; he was safe enough.
Over the crest at the High Cross, erupting suddenly out of the declivity beyond, and certainly from the Welsh gate, the hard drumming of hooves burst upon their ears, coming at a gallop.
Every head turned towards the sound, and every tongue stilled.
A small party of riders — she counted eight of them-swept at speed along the channel cleared for them, the royal pennant at their head, two squires and four lightly-laden sumpter-horses  following hard on their heels.
Two riders turned in at the approach to the castle, the rest of the cavalcade swept onward through the gate, flung open to give them passage, and vanished in a flurry of spume and fine mud along the foregate.
The echoes subsided after them, but the under-bailiffs kept their place, patrolling nervously along the edge of the crowd, and all but trampling toes, though the horses sidled delicately away from contact, and shook their ornamented heads in distress at being held so close.
Evidently there was some further party expected, and there would be no move until it had passed.
They had a long wait for this one, almost an hour.
Julian looked sidelong at her charge, for he was weak as yet, and in this press, even if he swooned, he would not be able to fall.
But he stood like a rock, his burning eyes fixed.
She ceased to wonder that he had survived his long ordeal of flight and hiding and hunger; he was durable beyond most men.
There were more horses coming now, less hurriedly than the advance party, but still approaching at a brisk speed from the Cross.
Craning and peering, they caught glimpses of a minor forest of lances and standards, though the number of riders was probably no more than a score; and rumour on rumour flew down the street before them, and name on name.
‘I see Arundel's livery — and Stafford's…’
Silver swallows and a red chevron, and the purple lion of the Lacies; and another standard, lions and lilies quartered.
‘The king…’ someone said, in a vast, wondering sigh.
The horsemen passed.
The marks of their campaign were upon them all, in the dulling of their armour and the soiling of their harness, in their stooped crests, and most of all in their fixed and frosty faces, the chagrin of paladins repulsed without a blow, out-ridden, out-manoeuvred, outdone in every way, and no remedy in gallantry.
Shrewsbury had never until then sensed the bitterness of this recoil, or its galling comedy.
The crowd fell absolutely silent, beholding the humiliation of the crown.
‘The king…’
King Henry rode with eyes fixed before him, and brows drawn taut above them, as if his head ached.
He had put off his armour, and rode in black and gold, with high gauntlets of purple leather, and a fine, extravagant capuchon in the same purple draped and twisted into a flaunting hat that drooped a long liripipe about his shoulders.
It made a brave picture, for he was a fine figure in the saddle, tall and erect and well-made, and looked younger and more athletic than when he went on his own two feet.
But his head, Julian thought, staring up into his face with intent and passionate attention, was a death's-head, drawn and pale about hollow eyes.
He let his gaze rest upon the awed and silent faces that fringed his passage, but without seeing them.
There was even a moment when he looked directly into Julian's eyes, and she opened them wide to take him in, but there was nothing alive in him to enter.
He brushed with the same dead regard the face of the man his agents were still seeking in the matter of the Leicester treason, and Brother John gazed back at him earnestly and impartially, and was moved to distant pity.
But no spark passed between them.
The party clattered by, the gate opened to give them passage.
They diminished steadily, shadowed under the archway, smoothed by the soft grey light beyond, riding onward towards some unknown destination.
No, he was not going to linger here.
He had sent his outriders on ahead to make ready for him at Haughmond, or Lilleshall, some retired place where he could swallow this wormwood in solitude, out of the eyes of men.
Julian felt no pity, only a detached curiosity and wonder; for he was not quite as she had imagined him, neither so malevolent nor so formidable.
She was chiefly aware that his passing had served them well; for the under-bailiffs had relaxed their vigilance, and were moving slowly downhill towards the gate, and suffering the crowd, those who willed, to move in that direction with them.
Who was going to check on these hundreds, all bent on getting home with their  purchases, or the profits of their sales?
They let them surge out at the gate and shake themselves loose of restraint to take their several ways.
It was simplicity itself.
‘Then that was the king.
I never saw him before,’ Julian said wonderingly as they took the path that wound along the riverside, and the high walls of the castle fell behind them.
‘But it is not a bad face — only bleak and suspicious, not evil.’
She looked at her companion; they made their way at ease now, no longer in haste or fear, with a two-mile walk before them.
‘And did you really conspire to depose him?’
‘We never willed to do him wrong,’ said the Franciscan of Leicester, treading gratefully in the thick turf with his crippled feet.
‘King he is not and cannot be, for King Richard was well alive when this man took the crown, and an abdication under duress is no valid abdication and cannot confer a valid right.
And if King Richard is now dead, then it was by Lancaster's order he died, and whatever title Lancaster might otherwise have possessed to inherit from him is forfeit.
No manner of election can entitle him to a siege which is not vacant.
And no murderer can enjoy legitimate rights to the fruits of murder.
Duke of Lancaster he is, with every right, and we never denied him that title, and never would.
But king he is not.
Neither crowning nor anointing can change the nature of truth.’
‘Excellent law,’ said Julian, sourly smiling.
‘You should have said as much to him as he passed.’
‘No need,’ said Brother John Caldwell tranquilly.
‘God has already shown him by the lightnings what I do think he already knew in his heart.
For this is too just a man not to recognise his own offence.’
She was thinking then of another man, and did not answer him.
For it had dawned upon her suddenly why she had been able to take such pure pleasure in the Lord Owen's triumph, unspotted by any tincture of regret or sympathy for these humbled princes driven so ignominiously out of Wales at his hands.
It  would not have been so light a thing to her if Hotspur had been among those dour-faced lordlings clattering through the streets of Shrewsbury with their shame.
But that was folly!
If he had been there, he would have come out of it with his lustre still upon him, and his crest as high as ever.
No matter how, no matter what the lightnings that assailed him.
She could not associate him with any loss of dignity, or credit, or grace, not because he felt these too nearly and jealously, but because he wore and used them with as little thought as the breath he drew, and they were as natural a part of him, and like breath, when they left him they would leave him dead.
But not even the contagion of disgrace had touched him through his king's disastrous venture; for he was in the north, far away from this débâcle.
And in whatever enterprise he was engaged there, in that far-off region she had never seen, and never would see, where his heart was, she knew in her own heart that it could not be less than glorious.
6
They had held back at Milfield on the Till, biding their time, until their scouts came in with exact information of the movement of the Scots army.
For this time it was an army, no less, ten thousand strong, though its actions were still those of simple border reivers.
It was fourteen days since the force had crossed the Tweed, eluded the levies that rode to intercept it, and roved south towards Newcastle, pillaging and burning what was left of the standing crops.
And Northumberland had chosen, rather than pursue them with a force then quite inadequate, to gather his and his sons' levies and wait for the marauders to return.
His spies had plotted their course all the way, sending back word by a chain of messengers, until now they knew numbers and names, and were well aware that what they awaited was a national army, glittering with noble pedigrees, not all of them Scottish.
The earl of Douglas was their general, and he had no less than four other earls as his lieutenants, Moray, Angus, Orkney and Murdoch Stewart, earl of Fife, the regent Albany's eldest son.
But among his knights there were at least thirty who were French.
It went against the grain with Hotspur to let such an illustrious company move south unchallenged into England, merely because they had not been intercepted in time to confront them on reasonably equal terms.
But George Dunbar, whose renegade's knowledge of his countrymen and their terrain King Henry had seen fit to use where it could be most effective, on the Scottish march  from which he derived his title, had counselled the waiting game, and Northumberland had come down upon his side.
‘Hold your hand,’ Dunbar had said, ‘bring up all your force, and make sikker.
Most of your harvest's in the barns, your folk will be into the towns and the peel towers at a word, cattle and all, what's to lose?
And everything to gain!’
And there was much in that, for the policy of these raiding parties was always to loot, never to attempt the towns or the castles if there was strong possibility of resistance.
They were happiest on the move, never constant in siege.
Where there was a stout tower, they would prefer to pass it by and take what came easily; and most of those Northumbrian herds and farmers would survive.
Most, but not all.
And Hotspur was restive with his new ally's counsel, wise though it might be, as he was in the company of the new ally himself, however often proved the wilier tactician.
He was at his elbow now, a long-stirruped, loose-riding knight in modish plate-armour, peering keenly out of his helmet with half a face, the chin erased in steel.
The high cheekbones showed, powdered with red freckles, while the redder hair was hidden.
His eyes were blue, beneath sandy brows, and very keen and bright, missing nothing favourable or unfavourable to himself, and the mind behind them recorded all, and forgave nothing.
He was much the same height as Hotspur, and much the same build, though twenty years at least older, and a century more crafty, and there was always the curious suggestion about him that he was ready and waiting to fit himself into the void if ever Hotspur slipped out of being.
He had, after all, cut off all his sources of wealth and honour and position in Scotland, and a man must take care of himself and his own, at whatever cost to other men.
He had cast in his lot with England, and there was no going back.
But of his courage, though it was not of a kind that Hotspur admired, there could be little doubt; and of his ability and calculating detachment, none.
Northumberland had more use for  him; he was temperamentally closer to this coldly thinking man than to his own son.
Father and son were fond, but different.
It never troubled them, and never divided them.
Where family affection was concerned, they were both marvellously simple creatures.
Blood was blood, and sacred.
They had moved their army south from Milfield yesterday, as soon as they were sure by what route the Scots were returning towards their own country, and chosen their position on the northern bank of the Glen water, a mile and more from its confluence with the Till.
From here they could control both river valleys, and deny Douglas his passage home by either.
Their front was protected by the Glen, and the foothills in which they deployed their forces, low though they lay, were well-grown with bushes and clumps of trees almost to the waterside, and afforded a clear field of vision before them.
They had placed small groups of bowmen wherever this rich cover offered, keeping their main companies higher along the hills to shoot over them.
Between the archers were set the formations of pikemen and swordsmen.
The cavalry were drawn up in three companies, on the wings and in the centre.
And on a high point forward of the central company Hotspur and Dunbar sat their horses, and studied the sweep of country before them.
The Glen came down from their right turgid and fast, shut in by hills on either side, round the rim of the Cheviots and the great curving flank of Yeavering Bell, and across their front to empty itself into the Till.
By this valley of the Glen water Douglas had surely intended to make his way back to Kelso, for he had brought his army out of the cleft of Wooler close under the hills, bearing west, and only when they were clear of the town and close to Homildon village had they become aware of the English army drawn up facing them, closing this route, and in a position also to deny them access to the more easterly route by the Till.
Their preference was understandable, for Till was in flood, spreading in lead-grey pools across the water-meadows, and flashing  suddenly into silver when fitful gleams of sunshine broke through the mask of cloud overhead.
Here, as in Wales and the south, it had been a black, malevolent summer.
The Scottish host was drawn up now along the flank of Homildon Hill.
They could distinguish the four orderly schiltrons of solidly-grouped infantry, ready and able to bring their pikes to bear in any direction.
When a shaft of sunlight crossed their ranks the steel heads of the lances glittered and defined them clearly.
Between them the light-armed men-at-arms formed smaller companies with room to manoeuvre at need, and the knights and cavalry, visible in snatches of blazonry and colour against the dun-coloured slopes, were drawn back somewhat higher in three squadrons.
They had an excellent position, but for the fact that there was an army between them and home, and with England at their backs, and bitterly conscious of their recent attentions, they could not afford to sit still and wait to wear out the enemy.
Hotspur looked up, and above the enemy ranks the hill soared rounded and perfect, the shape of a woman's breast, with a sunlit nipple pointing at the sky, that vast, spacious sky of Northumbria that he missed even above the grander mountains of Wales.
And beyond that, the outliers of the Cheviot swelled, dappled with cloud-shadows and stained russet and purple with bracken and heather, rolling away in waves to the distant and invisible summit of the Cheviot itself.
‘Take my counsel,’ said Dunbar at his elbow, ‘hold back as long as you may, and the archers'll do all for you.’
‘Very like!’ he said, knowing it was true, and knowing that he would not hold back so long as to let it be true.
There were lives to keep, yes, valuable to their lords and their wives alike, but he had learned warfare in another school, and without the shock of arms and the life staked there was no savour.
Somewhere there must be an honourable compromise, just as the van chasseours and the parfytours shared the work of the chase, the first  coursing the deer and the second pulling it down, equal in achievement.
The archers to start and wear down the game, and the knights to capture it; for bowmen can kill, but not make prisoner.
And it would be shame to him to hold back and let a fighter like Douglas be shot to death from a distance, with never an enemy at hand to exchange blows with him.
A brave man deserves an opponent he can reach.
‘First we've to get them within range,’ he said grimly.
‘And how if they sit it out with us?’
‘They'll not do that.
Now they've seen you, little choice they've got.
You need not so much as move a company across the Glen to fetch them down.
Wait, and they'll come to us.’
And he was right, for unless they could lure the English across into the open they could not make use of their greater numbers or the advantage of the ground.
And they knew that they could expect no reinforcements from Scotland while they could have no certainty that a second force was not closing in behind them from England, since clearly their movements had been known, and their return anticipated.
They would not wait it out like this for long.
Nevertheless, the English had prepared for the unlikely event of a contest in patience.
There was a bridge below, where the track crossed the Glen, and there were three good fording places, level and safe, for even in spate the Glen was not a deep or dangerous river, only an unruly one.
The English could use these at will, and looked to do so later; the Scots could not approach them without coming into close range of archery they had learned to respect.
‘Look yonder!
They're moving!’
The bristling pikes were indeed on the move, the whole mass shifting down the hill, the cavalry pacing slowly with them.
They would drop almost into range, and then make use of the slope to give impetus to their charge.
Dunbar was grinning in high content as he wheeled his horse to trot back to his own division.
‘You've only to hold on, and let the archers begin and end it.’
He rode  away complacently, sure of his countrymen, whose deaths he had been so busy arranging, and meant to buy as cheaply as possible.
The knot of squires at Hotspur's back hung close and eager, ready to carry his messages.
Their eyes were fixed and intent upon the mass of heraldry and steel sliding in formation down the flank of Homildon Hill.
‘Master-bowman!’
‘Here, my lord!’
‘When the first ranks are within range, hold your volley until I signal.
They'll try a feint to bring us out before they risk all, and they'll want to bring up their pikemen as close as may be.
We'll waste no arrows until they make their true attack.’
‘Awe, my lord!’
This they had done together many times, though never in such a pattern setting as now.
Dunbar was not the only man who knew how to use archers, even if it went against the grain to leave too much to them.
‘If it goes as we expect, then your task, when they are close enough, is to split me a way into the ranks of the two central battles of pikemen.’
Cavalry cannot break into a solid phalanx of pikes until a way has been cut for them, but once in they can do fearful slaughter.
‘Concentrate on the centre of their ranks, and if they try to close, keep the gap open at all costs.’
‘Awe, my lord.
Every man knows and understands his orders.’
He looked at the hillside across the river, where the moving masses had halted, still just out of range even for the most expert, to redress their line.
‘Now they'll come.’
And he went to his place jauntily, without even hurrying.
They came, with a yell that crossed the fields ahead of them like a sourceless bellow out of the air.
The cavalry surged suddenly ahead, streaking downhill to the meadows, the massed pikemen broke into a measured run, keeping formation, and followed them.
A quiver passed along the English lines, the horses stirred and shuddered, but no more.
Hotspur sat bolt  upright in the saddle, his eyes narrowed on the hurtling horsemen, and never moved a hand.
All the bows braced and drew and leaned, like hawks about to stoop, fixing upon their prey before it was in range.
And now his experienced eye told him that the foremost ranks could be reached, but still he did not move, nor did any of the bowmen loose.
Their nerve was a match for his; they had most of them served him several years, for his men did not leave him.
‘They'll turn!’ whispered one of the squires at his back confidently; and he smiled, noting the voice.
And on the very word, the Scottish wheeled in two wide circles, to form again ahead of the pikemen.
There was a strange, silent pause.
The English did not come.
They would not come.
There was no way left but to go to them.
The pikemen had never lost the impetus of their tireless running, the deceptively slow-looking running of mountain men, that covers the ground with frightening speed and ease.
When the knights reformed in front of them they suddenly launched a wild shout, and welded into one moving weapon, that aimed itself at the enemy beyond the river, and this time did not halt.
Even so, Hotspur held his hand until the issue was certain, and the thundering vanguard of cavalry well within range, and plainly bent on driving home.
Then he raised his lance, and a shaft of sunlight from beyond Homildon Hill fired its point like a captive star, before he drove it down again.
The radiance burned from it as it fell; and the master-bowman, somewhere below him with his men, bellowed: ‘Loose!’
The air quivered and thrummed and shook, the horses shuddered to the vibration, and their manes rose erect, bristling and undulating to the contractions of their twitching hides.
The pent arrows took the air like a flight of hawks, and in the charging ranks across the river sudden gaps were ripped and flattened like corn before the wind.
Horsemen heeled sidelong out of the saddle, crests sank and pennants lurched low, fouling other riders, startling other horses.
After the first volley there was always more chaos from the terrified horses than from the loss of men.
And always it gave time to fit the second shaft and loose the second volley, and redouble the boiling turmoil that was held at a distance by nothing more deadly — but there was nothing more deadly!— than cloth-yard shafts of wood and steel flighted with a handful of feathers.
A few shook themselves loose from the tangle, and pounded onward, others skirted the fallen and fell in behind them.
And now the archers were shooting at will, selecting their targets where they best offered, without haste and without respite.
But what was left of the line of knights after every fall always came on, implacably brave; and Hotspur's heart started and complained grievously whenever the foremost fell, still short of the river bank.
Dunbar had said no more than the truth, the archers could do it all.
But so much gallantry to be squandered with so little hope!
Nevertheless, he held his heart in check until the schiltrons of the pikemen were in close range, and being harrowed like arable fields by the steady volleys of arrows.
There was place enough there for a knight, after the archers had done their work.
He had stood it until his heart bade fair to burst with longing, and if they could not cross the river, then he must go to them.
He launched a great shout of: ‘Espérance Percy!’ behind him, waved a hand at the squire who carried his guidon, settled his lance, and plunged headlong down into the river at the ford they had marked out for the centre, and out again in a flurry of muddy spray on the levels beyond, with the whole company of his knights and squires and mounted men-at-arms hurtling after him.
On the right, his father was not many yards behind him in that charge.
On the left, Dunbar held his hand and re-deployed his archers to pick off any strays who might still offer a safe target.
He would risk his life coldly where there was need, but here he saw no need.
Why exert himself to win a battle the bowmen had  already won?
When he crossed the Glen it would be in his own good time, and with an eye to what prizes were left alive for the taking, and for them he would fight as doughtily as any man if he must.
But he would not be fool enough to fret if he need not fight.
What remained of the Scottish chivalry had re-formed in haste to face the English charge.
Hotspur's lance, steadily lowered as he came, selected its target, the foremost knight on the tallest horse, and struck the uplifted shield so strongly that the shock flattened its bearer back upon his horse's crupper; but he kept his seat gamely, rolling under the lance as it flashed by, to recover dizzily and swing a vehement though ineffective stroke with his sword, before the lurch and sway of the press carried him away.
Hotspur wheeled to keep touch with him, pleased by the ready retort, but his impetus had swept them apart, and from that moment it was hand-to-hand work with whoever was cast up at him, horsed or afoot, until he could find room enough to choose his man and use a lance again.
The warm, wild joy came over him that never failed him when he met hand-to-hand on an even footing with his peers — his peers whatever rank God had given them — in courage and spirit and tenacity, without a grain of malice or hatred.
He heaved his snorting, raging mount out of the press of dismounted men, swung him round in a trampling circle to clear ground about him, and drew off to realign his vision and find a just opponent.
The field was chaotic now, the archers had done their part, and could do no more from this on but let fly at the occasional fugitive.
For some on the fringes were already in flight.
Therefore this was a battle now as he understood a battle, however mangled beforehand by being half-decided at a distance.
And his heart sang as he settled his lance in rest again, and drove at the first and readiest knight who caught his eye.
This time his lance struck accurately in the throat of his adversary's helmet, too fast and too high to be warded off, and hurled the  rider to the ground and his mount off-balance, dragged by the tightly-gripped rein, to roll upon his master.
The lance shivered, the shaft splintering halfway down to the guard, and Hotspur hurled it from him, and reached a long arm to snatch at the bridle as he was swept past, and drag the terrified horse to its feet again.
The man kicked and struggled wildly, and rose on his knees.
He had fallen in soft, lush ground, still waterlogged after the flood had somewhat subsided, and he came to his feet whole and angry.
But the tide of flesh and steel tore them apart, and Hotspur saw no more of him.
If he had known his man, and cared for what he knew, he could have battered Albany's son and heir into surrender, instead of hauling his horse off from crushing or smothering him in the mud.
But he did not know him, and would not have cared too greatly if he had.
He was looking for the Douglas.
He was glad for them, they fought so ferociously, as if they had never heard of defeat, they who were already defeated.
He turned his horse time and again, and went ploughing through the thickest of the struggle with bared sword, exchanging strokes with any who cared to stand and debate with him.
Time did not exist for him now, as long as any challenged him.
He did not even know that most of the Scottish host had already cast off everything that weighed it down, and taken to flight, acknowledging the truth of this meeting.
They were pursued, some into the Till, where many drowned and some swam to safety — if it was indeed safety, so far into England — on the further side, some as far north as the Tweed and the border, thirteen miles away.
But the Tweed also was in flood, and many perished there.
But Hotspur was more concerned with those who stood and traded blows as long as they could stand, and some even longer, on their knees and still defiant.
These he understood and worshipped, and went about to salvage if they would be salvaged, for they were far too good to waste.
He had barely a scratch upon him, he was hardly blown by comparison with these, and he stood  off while they breathed, and at the last lighted down from his tired horse, to meet with the most valiant on equal terms.
But the terms were not equal, for his assailant bled from the head, under his conical helm and gorget of chain mail, and from some wounds under his plate-armour, also, for there were red seams in his body-harness, and he leaned to his right side, favouring it as he fought.
Hotspur hung back from him, and let him gather himself, waited, indeed, for him to make the first assay, and put it by when it was made with the utmost care and forbearance.
When it was pressed again, doggedly but almost blindly, he struck the questing sword expertly out of the hand that held it, with only the measured force required, and reached a hand eagerly to his adversary as he crumpled to his knees.
‘Be ruled, man, yield yourself to me, you've done enough!
I promise you all possible honour, it is but your due.
I am Henry Percy.’
He had uncovered his face; the field was fallen into a curious quietness about them, as though they were alone.
The mailed hand in his kept hold firmly enough to draw him down to his knees as its owner sank back into the turf.
‘Is it you, Hotspur?’ said a thick, bubbling whisper out of the broken helmet.
And again, just distinguishably: ‘I surrender myself to you.
None but you…
’ The steel fingers loosed their hold, and slid down to lie lax in the grass.
‘Do off his helmet, quickly,’ said Hotspur, tearing off his gauntlets and himself stooping to fumble at the mail gorget, ‘he's breathing blood!’
They got the harness off him, and turned him to bleed into the grass rather than into his own throat.
It was a young face, surely not past the early thirties, comely, dark, passionate in line and feature, with reddish black hair and thick, straight brows.
From the eyelid down, one cheek was a mask of blood; the eye stared opaquely from under a half-closed lid.
Dunbar came picking his way between the debris and the fallen, and looked down calmly upon the son and successor of his old enemy.
‘You've taken a fair prize there,’ he said dispassionately, ‘if he live.
Yon's Archibald Douglas.’
‘Bring a horse,’ said Hotspur, rearing up fiercely and looking about him for the nearest serviceable squire, ‘and get him on to it.
We must have him away into shelter in Wooler.
If he die on us, so gallant a man, I'll never forgive myself.’
Seven Scottish nobles were killed in that battle under Homildon Hill, five earls made prisoner, Douglas, Fife, Moray, Angus and Orkney, and twenty-three other noblemen captured, as well as three of the French knights.
In all, eighty barons and knights of rank, and a host of men-at-arms and archers, besides those killed in action, or drowned in Till or Tweed in their flight.
And this battle took place on the same day that King Henry in retreat from Wales rode through Shrewsbury, the 14th day of September.
The squire who was sent south to carry the good news to King Henry overtook him at Daventry on the 20th of September.
The young man, whose name was Merbury, was eager and inexperienced, and took it for granted, as an honest man well might, that his story of complete and shattering victory, of the capture of so many of the active nobility of Scotland, and of a bright lustre added to the name of Percy and of England could not fail to be pleasing to his sovereign.
He told it well, with a wealth of detail, for he had been there, and was proud; and at every word of praise for his Northumbrian lords he rubbed salt into sore and festering wounds.
So apt, so malevolently timed, one more great benefit conferred on the one side, one more debt incurred on the other!
Who could choose but look on this picture, and on that, and acknowledge and be shocked by the inevitable comparison?
And I must sit here and smile, thought the king, to hear him praised for his valour and impetuosity, and worse, worst of all, for his success, and say some good and gracious words in return, with my mouth  full of wormwood.
And is he to carry away his laurels thus unchallenged and undespoiled, while I am famished?
But he found good and gracious words to say, and the Northumbrian squire in his simplicity was well satisfied, and did the rest of his office joyously.
‘And the Lord Henry Percy and his lady in especial greet your Grace, and pray you be of good cheer in this happy news, for that the price set upon these Scots prisoners, such as belong to the Lord Henry, shall be at your Grace's disposal in the matter of the redeeming of their beloved kinsman, Sir Edmund Mortimer, out of his captivity in Wales.
For they would not that burden should be borne all by the crown.
And they wish your Grace joy, and comfort in the favour God has shown to your arms, and the Lord Henry trusts to see you in health and spirits at the assembly of your parliament at the month's end.’
He was thanked and rewarded for his embassage, and dismissed in great content.
And King Henry, alone in his chamber, held his head between his hands for fear it should burst with anger and chagrin, and something else which he did not or would not recognise for pure hatred.
'— joy and comfort in the favour God has shown to your arms!
' Was there ever such insolent irony?
As though some evil genius had inspired the man to find the most mortifying words possible in which to signify his loyalty and goodwill.
True, he could hardly have heard, when he despatched his messenger, of the shaming tragi-comedy in Wales.
And yet how could a man so beset fail to hold it against him?
Too happy Harry, the darling of fortune always, and always so sure of the love other men bore him.
The fruit of his prowess to be sold to ransom Mortimer, and a graceful by-gesture made to his king in the process!
And no doubts, never any doubts at all, that men thought as he would have them think, and would always be as he had always known them.
How was it possible for any man who fell within the circle of his radiance to forgive Hotspur for being Hotspur?
In and out of season he must give off these sparks of personal brightness, to dazzle as he had dazzled James of Lusignan, King of Cyprus, with his ‘singular courtesy and noblesse’ when he was governor of Bordeaux.
Even the loss of Conway castle in his absence, a ridiculous incident enough, and costly, he could turn to appreciative laughter, and never grudge that the laughter, at second-hand if not directly, was against himself.
So over-blessed a nature must bring a man either to a throne or a grave before ever he lived to be old.
But I am no such creature, the king thought, burning in his own fury and grief, I cannot be thus constantly outdone and bear no grudge.
And he shall not, he shall not, walk onward like this over my discomfiture, secure that his foot cannot slip.
He shall feel the ground give under him, if only once, he shall fall, and men shall see him fall, and know him for a man like other men.
And then if I please to reach him a hand and pick him up again, he shall know and acknowledge to whom he owes it, and walk more humbly thereafter.
And I will love him the better, his heart said, turning rebelliously in his breast.
At St Inglevert — do you remember, Lancaster? he was the match of any he met in arms, if not the master, and so were you, and together you two held any two that France could set up against you, and Jean de Boucicaut himself acknowledged it.
But those were the days of innocence, long ago vanished and past recovery.
I will give him sharp orders, he thought, and bring him up on a short rein; and I will see him come to terms, and kiss the hand that curbs him.
And then, then, I will restore him what I denied him, and graciously accept the proffer of it again as a tribute to me, so that for ever afterwards he shall know who is master between us two friends.
He shall give, and I will deign to accept.
And I will give, and he shall be mortally glad to accept.
But he was careful not to think, because some corner of his mind knew that that way lay a kind of death, of Hal in Chester, quite certainly notified, or soon to be notified, by Hotspur or another, of the long day's work done at Homildon Hill six days ago.
The one thing he could not have borne, the one thing he could not completely shut out from the fevered fringes of his mind, was the thought of the boy's chill assessment of his father's achievement and his friend's.
Hal had sent a messenger only yesterday with a dutiful report on his fruitless sally into North Wales, and his orderly return.
Nothing could have been more controlled or correct, as if he did not know that his father had been driven out of the principality like a half-drowned rat, or a hound caught in a thunderstorm, and running for shelter with its tail between its legs.
And now to think of him listening to the rhapsody of such another youngster as this Merbury, besotted as they all were on their paragon, Hotspur!
From the contemplation of this inescapable judgment he turned his face resolutely away.
There should yet be adjustment between them, and the boy should be made to witness it, whether he would or no.
When all the hot bitterness in him had cooled and congealed into a hard and reasoned purpose, and he had command of his face and his voice, he sent for his secretary, and dictated a letter to his council at Westminster.
In Bamburgh castle, where they had carried him from Wooler as soon as he was fit to be moved, the earl of Douglas took his ease in a very light and illustrious captivity.
They had found no less than five flesh wounds on his body when they stripped him of his armour, but all clean and none dangerous, once the draining of his blood was staunched.
But there was one loss that could never again be supplied to him: he had lost the sight of his damaged eye.
All he could discern on that side was a shade of difference between dark and light; but with the one eye remaining he missed very little of what went on about him, and within the week he was out of his bed and trying his skill at aim and balance about the rooms and staircases.
Since the light hurt his blinded eye, and  indeed the cut which had damaged it was not yet healed, he went with it bandaged and darkened with a black shade.
Hotspur's wardrobe furnished him with clothes, and Hotspur's stable, when he was strong enough, and already restive with inaction, supplied him with a mount.
His parole was given and taken, and there was no need for him to lack exercise.
They rode together, hawked together, played chess together, and to work off the convalescent's stiffness as his wounds healed, essayed a little mild sword-play together.
The prisoner was popular with those who attended on him, adored and followed round faithfully by the children, and well-liked by Elizabeth, to whom he was heartily gallant.
‘Your lady,’ he said warmly, ‘has been to me the kindest of hostesses and gentlest of nurses.
Were I her honoured guest, she could not have used me more generously.’
They were walking their horses among the sand-dunes south of the castle, and on their left hand the sea ran high and grey, and the gulls were uneasy, aware of coming wind.
‘Why, so you are.
And she's trying to buy a little justice from fate,’ said Hotspur, with an overshadowed smile.
‘As she uses you, she trusts, so may Glendower use her brother Edmund, who is also a prisoner.’
‘She uses me according to her own sweet nature, and could do no other for her life.
But I've seen,’ he said, grown serious, ‘that she frets over him.’
‘So do we all.
It's three months now, and no news, not a word of ransom yet.
Though when parliament meets — it's no more than six days now, we shall be leaving tomorrow — I hope the matter may be quickly resolved.
She has lost one brother already,’ he said sombrely, ‘of the two that she doted on, when Roger was killed in Ireland, four years ago.
Now she fears for the one remaining like a hen for her only chick.
It's been so ever since I've known her — she was the eldest, and felt herself a mother to the pair of them.
And Edmund was always the more venturesome, and the one that frightened her most.
He's five years her junior.
And, faith, since we married I've been pressed into service as one more brother to him, a father, too, since his own father died when the boy was barely thirteen.
I'm very near as fond of him as Elizabeth herself.
I wouldn't for the world he should miscarry.’
‘He'll do well enough with the Welsh,’ said Douglas stoutly, ‘why should he not?
This Owen's an able prince, no more like than any other prince of Christendom to do harm to a prisoner, or let harm come to him.’
‘That I believe, but Owen is mortal, and hunted hard.
How if he be killed, then who follows on?
And in such a state of war as we have now in Wales, mischances can happen all too easily.
Their way is to pick up everything movable and retreat into the mountains when pressed, and in such rapid removals and sudden onslaughts a man can come by his death by pure accident.
And in sickness, say — and wounded, as he was — how if a prisoner hampered their movements too much?
They might be forced to discard him — and a stray company working at large would not scruple to cut his throat, though Owen would.
He is not in a court captivity, he must live wild like the rest, and founder if he cannot keep their pace.
I shall not be easy until we get him back.’
‘For a Mortimer,’ said Douglas, ‘they won't haggle over the price.’
Hotspur laughed aloud, startling his horse into a side-long dance.
‘Not haggle?
If you knew how many complaining letters I must write before I get the means to pay my men their dues!
God knows how the treasury comes to be so desperate poor.
But there isn't an officer of the crown who hasn't had to put his hand deep in his own coffers to make good what should be crown expenses.
Else none of us could keep an army together.’
Douglas was laughing, too, though a little ruefully.
‘Faith, I begin to see how I may be serviceable to your lady.
If coin's so short, it might be simpler to offer me to Owen just as I am, in exchange for Mortimer.
If the price of an earl is what he asks, send him an earl.
But I doubt he'll hold out for the money.
I'd best be sending out letters to see how my credit stands at home.’
‘The thought,’ admitted Hotspur, grinning, ‘had entered my mind.
But I'm not in such a hurry to be rid of you just yet.
So we'll sound out parliament first, and hold you in reserve, my lord, for a last resort.’
They rode back together very companionably; their rides were short as yet, for Douglas was still weak, and tired soon.
Hotspur watched the marred profile beside him curiously as they paced side by side, for he was greatly drawn to his prisoner, and could not reconcile the many stories concerning him with this man he had begun to know.
He had come into his earldom only two years ago, very shortly after the scandal which had sent Dunbar storming over the border into England in dudgeon, and asking for a safe-conduct to King Henry's court; for the old earl had died very soon after the coup on which he had staked so much, leaving this new Archibald Douglas to step into his shoes.
Only two years established, barely thirty-three years old, and already he had a reputation as formidable as his father's.
Perhaps the most powerful man in Scotland now, excepting only Albany, the regent.
King Robert himself hardly counted, poor soul.
Fifty-three years old when he came to the throne, and crippled by the kick of a horse in his youth, what could he do against all these turbulent and forceful lords, his brother Albany, his son Rothesay, and these Black Douglases who bore almost the prestige of a royal dynasty?
And now this dark story that had leaked out of Scotland earlier this year of the death of the duke of Rothesay — the husband of Douglas's own sister, and the brother of his wife, doubly close kin to him!
Certain it was that the young man had died at Falkland palace in Fife.
Of a bloody flux, the official proclamation had said.
But unofficially the word ran that he had died of plain starvation.
It was Albany's castle, and it was Albany who had shut up his nephew there, and must carry the burden of his death.
Scotland had proved too small to hold two such power-hungry men.
But there were those who said that Douglas had known of it and connived at it.
Watching him ride thus, strongly recovering from wounds that might have killed a lesser man, and whistling softly and contentedly into the sea wind, it was impossible to think evil of him.
And after all, Rothesay, so they said, had led Margaret a dog's life after all her father's pains to secure him for her, and been by any standard a poor bargain for any girl, having worn out so many before her — including, the bolder gossips whispered, Dunbar's unhappy daughter, affianced and bedded but never wed.
Who could say if Margaret was not better off a young widow, able yet to make a humbler and happier match?
And yet murder was murder.
Hotspur could not conceive of such doings in the dark; but neither could he connect his prisoner with them.
The man's heart, even in captivity, was light as a bird.
Even with an eye covered, he was debonair to look upon.
Even in bodily weakness and misfortune, he charmed all who came near him.
And of all fighters Hotspur could remember holding at the end of his own sword, this was the bonniest.
And he could not choose but love him.