

3
Welfare Economics
15
Introduction to Welfare Economics
‘We want to see an economy in which firms, large and small, have an incentive to expand by winning extra business and creating jobs….
Only a government which really works to promote free enterprise can provide the right conditions for that dream to come true.’
Conservative Election Manifesto
‘The Tories say that ‘competition’ ensures that shoppers get a fair deal.
The customers know better.
Stronger legal safeguards are essential to protect customers…
We must rebuild…under a Labour Government working together with unions and managers to plan Britain's industrial development.’
Labour Election Manifesto [Italics added by the authors]
In Chapter 1 we pointed out that markets are not the only device by which society can resolve the questions, what, how, and for whom to produce.
Communist economies, for example, rely much more heavily on central direction or command.
Are markets a good way to allocate scarce resources?
What does ‘good’ mean?
Is it fair that some people earn much more than others in a market economy?
These are not positive issues about how the economy works but normative issues about how well it works.
They are normative because the assessment will depend in part on the value judgements adopted by the assessor.
Welfare economics is the branch of economics dealing with normative issues.
Its purpose is not to describe how the economy works but to assess how well it works.
The election manifestos of the Conservative and Labour parties fundamentally disagree about how well a market economy works.
But how are we to cut through the political rhetoric to see what lies behind the disagreement?
Two themes recur throughout our discussion of welfare economics in Part 3.
The first is the question of allocative efficiency.
Is the economy getting the most out of its scarce resources or are they being squandered?
The second is the question of equity.
How fair is the distribution of goods and services between different members of society?
15–1 Equity and Efficiency
We begin by defining what we mean by these terms.
Equity
Economists use two different concepts of equity or fairness.
Horizontal equity is the identical treatment of identical people.
Vertical equity is the different treatment of different people in order to reduce the consequences of these innate differences.
Whether or not either concept of equity is desirable is a pure value judgement.
Horizontal equity would rule out racial or sexual discrimination between people whose economic characteristics and performance were literally identical.
Vertical equity is the Robin Hood principle of taking from the rich to give to the poor.
Most people would agree that horizontal equity is a good thing.
In contrast, although few people believe that the poor should starve, the extent to which incomes or resources should be redistributed from the ‘haves’ to the ‘have-nots’to increase the degree of vertical equity is an issue on which different people take very different positions.
Efficient Resource Allocation
By a resource allocation for an economy we mean a list or complete description of who does what and who gets what.
To emphasize that markets are not the only possible allocation devices, we begin by assuming that allocations are chosen by a central dictator.
Feasible or producible allocations depend on the technology and resources available to the economy.
The ultimate worth of any allocation depends on consumer tastes, which determine how people value what they are given.
Figure 15–1 shows an economy with only two people, David and Susie.
The initial allocation at point A gives David a quantity of goods Q D and Susie a quantity of goods Q S Are society's resources being wasted?
Suppose by reorganizing production it was possible to produce at point B to the north-east of A. If David and Susie assess their own utility by the quantity of goods they themselves receive, and if they would each rather have more goods than less, B is a better allocation than A since both David and Susie get more.
It is inefficient to produce at A if production at B is possible.
Similarly, a move from A to C makes both David and Susie worse off.
If it is possible to be at A, it is definitely inefficient to be at C.  
Figure 15–1 ALLOCATING GOODS TO TWO PEOPLE.
Provided people assess their own utility by the quantity of goods that they themselves receive, B is a better allocation than A which in turn is a better allocation than C. But a comparison of A with points such as D, E or F, requires us to adopt a value judgement about the relative importance to us of David's and Susie's utility.
But what about a move from A to E or F?
One person gains but the other person loses.
Whether we judge such a change desirable depends on how we value David's utility relative to Susie's.
If we think David's utility is terribly important we might consider a move from A to F a good thing, even though Susie's utility will be severely reduced.
Value judgements about equity, the fairness of the distribution of goods between people, have got mixed up with our attempt to make statements about waste or inefficiency.
Since different people will make different value judgements, there can be no unambiguous answer to the question of whether a move from A to D, E, or F is desirable.
It all depends who is making the assessment.
In an effort to separate as far as possible the discussion of equity from the discussion of efficiency, modern welfare economics uses the idea of Pareto-efficiency named after the economist Vilfredo Pareto whose Manuel D'Economie Politique was published as long ago as 1909.
An allocation is Pareto-efficient for a given set of consumer tastes, resources, and technology, if it is impossible to move to another allocation which would make some people better off and nobody worse off.
In terms of Figure 15–1 a move from A to B or A to G is a Pareto gain.
In either case Susie is better off and David no worse off.
If B or G is a feasible allocation which could be produced then point A is Pareto-inefficient.
How about a move from A to D?
David is better off but Susie is worse off.
The Pareto criterion has nothing to say about such a change.
Without bringing in an explicit value judgement about the relative importance of David's and Susie's utility we cannot evaluate this change.
Thus the Pareto principle is of only limited use in comparing allocations on efficiency grounds.
It only allows us to evaluate moves to the north-east or the south-west in Figure 15–1, but it is the most we can say about efficiency without becoming entangled in value judgements about equity.
Figure l5–2 takes the argument one stage further.
Suppose by all possible reorganizations of production, the dictator decides that the economy can produce anywhere inside or on the frontier AB.
From any allocation inside the  frontier it is always possible to achieve a Pareto gain by moving to the north-east onto the frontier.
Hence any point inside the frontier must be Pareto-inefficient.
It is possible to make one person better off without making the other person worse off.
But all points on the frontier are Pareto-efficient.
Beginning at a point such as C, it is possible to give one person more only by giving the other person less.
Since no Pareto gain is possible, every point such as C lying on the frontier must be Pareto-efficient.
Figure 15–2 THE EFFICIENT FRONTIER.
The frontier AB shows the maximum quantity of goods which the economy can produce for one person given the quantity of goods being produced for the other person.
All points on the frontier are Pareto-efficient.
David can only be made better off by making Susie worse off, and vice versa.
The distribution of goods between David and Susie is much more equal at point C than at points A or B.
Thus the dictator should never choose an inefficient allocation inside the frontier.
Which of the Pareto-efficient points on the frontier is most desirable will depend on the dictator's value judgement about the relative importance of David's and Susie's utility.
It is purely a judgement about equity.
15–2 Perfect Competition and Pareto-Efficiency
Will a free market economy find a Pareto-efficient allocation on its own, or must it be guided there by government intervention?
If we can answer this question, we shall have gone some way to understanding the different claims made in the Conservative and Labour manifestos.
Under certain conditions, soon to be elaborated, we can prove the following striking result: If every market in the economy is a perfectly competitive free market, the resulting equilibrium throughout the economy will be Pareto-efficient.
Formalizing Adam Smith's remarkable insight of the Invisible Hand, this result is the foundation of modern welfare economics.
Competitive Equilibrium in Free Markets
Suppose there are many producers, many consumers, but only two goods, meals and films.
Each market is a free, unregulated market and is perfectly competitive.
Suppose the equilibrium price of meals is 5 and the equilibrium price of films is 10.
Finally, we suppose that labour is the variable factor of production and that workers like equally the non-monetary aspects of jobs in the films and meals industries.
We now argue through the following stages:
1
The last film produced must yield consumers 10 worth of extra utility.
If it yielded less (more) extra utility than its 10 purchase price, the last consumer would buy less (more) films.
Similarly, the last meal purchased must yield consumers 5 worth of extra utility.
Hence consumers could swap 2 meals (10 worth of utility) for 1 film (10 worth of utility) without changing their utility.
2
Since each firm sets price equal to marginal cost, the marginal cost of the last meal must be 5 and the marginal cost of the last film must be 10.
3
The variable factor (labour) must earn the same wage rate in both industries in competitive equilibrium.
Otherwise there would be an incentive for workers to transfer their labour to the industry offering higher wages.
4
The marginal cost of output in either industry is the wage rate divided by the marginal physical product of labour.
Higher wage rates increase marginal cost, but a higher marginal physical product of labour means that less extra workers are needed to make an additional unit of output, thus reducing marginal cost.
5
Since wage rates are equal in the two industries and the marginal cost of meals (5) is half the marginal cost of films (10), the marginal physical product of labour must be twice as high in the meals industry as in the film industry.
6
Hence reducing film output by 1 unit and transferring the labour thus freed to the meals industry would increase the output of meals by 2 units.
The marginal physical product of labour is twice as high in meals as in films.
Feasible resource allocation between the two industries thus allows society to exchange 2 meals for 1 film.
7
Stage (1) says that consumers can swap 2 meals for 1 film without changing their utility.
Stage (6) says that, by reallocating resources, producers swap an output of 2 meals for 1 film.
Hence there is no feasible reallocation of resources that can make society better off.
Since no Pareto gain is possible, the initial position — competitive equilibrium in both markets — is Pareto-efficient.
Notice the crucial role that prices play in this remarkable result.
Prices do two things.
First, they ensure that the initial position of competitive equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium.
By balancing the quantities supplied and demanded, prices ensure that the final quantity of goods being consumed can be produced.
They ensure that it is a feasible allocation.
But in competitive equilibrium prices are performing a second role.
Each consumer and each producer is a price-taker and knows that he or she cannot affect market prices.
In our example, each consumer knows that the equilibrium price of meals is 5 and the equilibrium price of films is 10.
Knowing nothing at all about the actions of other consumers and producers, each consumer will automatically ensure that the last film he or she purchases yields twice as much utility as the last meal purchased.
Otherwise that consumer could rearrange purchases out of a given income to make himself or herself better off.
Thus by their individual actions facing given prices, each and every consumer will automatically arrange that 1 film could be swapped for 2 meals with no change in utility.
Similarly, each and every producer, merely by setting their own marginal cost equal to the price of their output, will ensure that the marginal cost of films is twice the marginal cost of meals.
Thus it takes society twice as many resources to make an extra film rather than an extra meal.
By rearranging production, transferring labour between industries, society can swap 2 meals for 1 film, exactly the trade off that would leave consumer utility unaffected.
Thus, as if by an Invisible Hand, prices are guiding individual consumers and producers, each acting only in their own self-interest, to an allocation of the economy's resources that is Pareto-efficient.
Nobody can be made better off without someone else worse off.
Figure 15–3 makes the same point in a simple diagram.
DD is the market demand curve for one of the goods, say films.
At a price P 1 a total quantity of films Q l will be demanded.
But we know that the last film demanded must yield consumers exactly P l pounds worth of utility; otherwise they would buy more films or less films than the quantity Q 1 .
Hence we can think of DD as showing also the marginal utility of the last unit of films which consumers purchase.
When a total quantity of Q l films is purchased the last film yields exactly P 1 pounds worth of extra utility to consumers.
In a competitive industry, the supply curve for films SS is also the marginal cost of providing films.
Variable factors (labour in our simple example) are paid not only their marginal value product in the film industry, but also their marginal value product in the meals industry.
Why?
Because labour mobility between industries ensures that wage rates are equated in the two industries.
Hence the marginal cost of producing the last film must be the value of the meals sacrificed by using the last units of labour to make films rather than meals.
Prices ensure that both industries are in equilibrium.
Figure 15–3 shows that at the equilibrium point E the marginal utility of the last film equals its marginal cost.
But the marginal cost of the last film equals the value of meals sacrificed, the price of meals multiplied by the quantity of meals forgone by using labour to make that last film.
However, the meals  industry is also in equilibrium.
An equivalent diagram for the meals industry shows that the equilibrium price of meals is also the marginal utility of the last meal purchased.
Hence the value of meals sacrificed to make the last film is also the marginal utility of the last meal times the number of meals sacrificed.
Figure 15–3 COMPETITIVE EQUILIBRIUM AND PARETO-EFFICIENCY.
DD is the demand curve for films.
At any output such as Q 1 , the last film must yield consumers P 1 , pounds worth of extra utility; otherwise they would demand a different quantity from Q 1 .
The supply curve SS for the competitive film industry is also the marginal cost of films.
If the meals industry is in competitive equilibrium, the price of a meal is also the value of its marginal utility to consumers.
Thus the marginal cost of a film is not only the market value of extra meals that could have been produced, but is also the value of the marginal utility consumers would have derived from those meals.
Hence at any film output below Q *; the marginal utility of films exceeds the marginal utility of meals sacrificed to produce an extra film.
Above Q *; the marginal utility of films is less than the marginal utility of meals sacrificed.
The equilibrium point E for films and the corresponding equilibrium point in the market for meals thus ensure that resources are efficiently allocated between the two industries.
No reallocation of resources could make all consumers better off.
Thus, provided the meals industry is in competitive equilibrium, the marginal cost curve for the film industry is simply the extra pounds worth of utility sacrificed by using scarce resources to make another film instead of extra meals.
It is the opportunity cost in utility terms of the resources being used in the film industry.
And equilibrium in the film industry, by equating the marginal utility of films to the marginal utility of the meals sacrificed to make the last film, guarantees that society's resources are allocated efficiently.
At any output of films below the equilibrium quantity Q *;, the marginal consumer benefit of another film would exceed the marginal consumer valuation of the meals that would have to be sacrificed to produce that extra film.
At any output of films in excess of Q *;, society would be devoting too many resources to the film industry.
The marginal value of the last film would be less than the marginal value of the meals that could have been produced by transferring resources to the meals industry.
Competitive equilibrium ensures that there is no resource transfer between industries that would make all consumers better off.
Equity and Efficiency
In the previous section, we saw that there are an infinity of Pareto-efficient allocations, each with a different distribution of income or utility between different members of society.
We have now discovered that a competitive equilibrium in all markets would generate one particular Pareto-efficient allocation.
What determines which of the possible Pareto-efficient allocations it picks out?
People have different innate abilities.
At any instant, people also have different amounts of human capital and financial wealth.
In Chapter 13 we saw that these differences allow people to earn very different income levels in a market economy.
They also affect the pattern of consumer demand.
Brazil, which has a very unequal distribution of income and wealth, has a high demand for luxuries such as servants.
In Sweden, where there is a much more equal distribution of income and wealth, almost nobody can afford servants.
Thus, the initial distribution of abilities, human capital and wealth, by affecting income-earning potential, determines the pattern of consumer demand in the economy.
Different patterns of demand imply different demand curves for individual goods and services and determine different equilibrium prices and quantities.
In principle, by varying the distribution of initial income-earning potential, we could induce the economy to pick out each and every one of the possible Pareto-efficient allocations at its competitive equilibrium.
Now we come to a very attractive idea.
The government is elected by the people to express the value judgements of the majority.
Ideally, we should like the government to ensure that the economy is on the Pareto-efficient frontier, shown in Figure 15–2, but take responsibility for making the value judgement about which point on this frontier the economy should attain.
Since every competitive equilibrium is Pareto-efficient, and since different Pareto-efficient allocations correspond to different initial distributions of income-earning potential in a competitive economy, it appears that the government can confine itself to redistributing income and wealth through income and inheritance taxes or welfare benefits without having to worry about interventions to ensure that resources are allocated efficiently.
Free competitive markets will automatically take care of allocative efficiency.
This seems like a pretty powerful case for the free enterprise ideal espoused in the Conservative Election Manifesto that we quoted at the beginning of the chapter.
The government should let markets get on with the the job of allocating resources efficiently.
Governments should not interfere by introducing a host of regulations, investigatory bodies, or state-run enterprises.
Nor need the free enterprise ideal be uncompassionate.
The government can make its value judgements about distribution or equality and can pursue its views about the desirable degree of vertical equity without impairing the efficient functioning of a free market economy.
The Conservative case is more than a political ideal: it can be backed up by rigorous economic arguments.
But surely the Labour Party must be aware of these arguments?
Before you conclude that the case of free markets has been convincingly made you should remember to read the fine print.
We began this section by stating that under certain conditions we could show that free enterprise or free markets led to a Pareto-efficient allocation.
It is time to study these conditions in more detail.
In so doing, we shall begin to understand the difference between the two views of how a market economy works.
The Conservative Party believes that these are minor qualifications that do not seriously challenge the case for a free market economy.
The Labour Party believes that these qualifications are so serious that they remove any presumption that the government can rely on a free market economy.
Accordingly, they believe that a considerable amount of government intervention is necessary to improve the way the economy works.
15–3 Distortions and the Second Best
Competitive equilibrium is Pareto-efficient because the independent actions of producers setting marginal cost equal to price, and consumers setting marginal benefits equal to price, ensure that the marginal cost of producing a good just equals its marginal benefit to consumers.
A distortion exists whenever society's marginal cost of producing a good does not equal society's marginal benefit from consuming that good.
It is simplest to begin straight away with an example of a distortion.
In the previous section we suggested that a government could use taxes and welfare benefits to redistribute income-earning potential and thereby enforce its value judgements about equity while leaving the market economy to take care of allocative efficiency.
We now explain why this apparently neat solution will not in fact be possible.
Taxation as a Distortion
Suppose the government wishes to subsidize the poor.
To pay for these subsidies the government must tax the rich.
It does not matter much whether the government taxes the incomes of rich people or taxes the goods that rich people buy.
Let us extend our example from the previous section where there are only two goods, films and meals.
Suppose everyone buys meals, but only the rich can afford to go to the cinema.
If the government wishes to raise tax revenue in order to subsidize the poor, it should levy a tax on films.
Figure 15–4 shows that tax on films makes the gross-of-tax price of films to consumers exceed the net-of-tax price received by producers of films.
The difference between the price to consumers and the price for producers is exactly the amount of the tax on each unit of films sold.
Consumers equate the gross price to the  value of the marginal benefit they receive from the last film, but producers equate the marginal cost of films to the lower net-of-tax price of films.
Figure 15–4 A TAX ON FILMS.
DD shows the demand for films and the marginal benefit of the last film to consumers.
SS shows the quantity of films supplied at each price received by producers and is also the marginal social cost of producing films.
Suppose each unit of films bears a tax equal to the vertical distance FE.
To show the tax-inclusive price required to induce producers to produce each output, we must draw the new supply curve SS '; that is a constant vertical distance EF above SS.
The equilibrium quantity of films is Q. Consumers pay a price P 1 , producers receive a price P 2 , and the tax per film is the distance EF.
At the equilibrium quantity Q the marginal consumer benefit is P l but the marginal social cost is P 2 .
Society would make a net gain by producing more films.
Hence the equilibrium quantity Q is socially inefficient.
Hence in competitive equilibrium the price system no longer equates the social marginal cost of producing films with the social marginal benefit of consuming films.
In this example, the marginal benefit of another film exceeds the marginal cost of producing another film.
The tax on films is causing too few films to be produced.
Producing another film would add more to social benefit than it would add to social cost.
When the other industry (meals) is untaxed and in competitive equilibrium, we showed in the last section that the marginal cost of producing films is exactly the value of the marginal utility sacrificed by not using the same resources to produce more meals.
But when films are taxed we have just seen that the  marginal social benefit of another film exceeds its marginal cost.
Hence the marginal value to consumers of another film exceeds the marginal value of the last meal currently being produced by the resources that would be necessary to make another film.
By transferring resources from meals into films, consumers of extra films could compensate meals consumers for the meals sacrificed and still have some extra utility left over.
Hence it would be possible to achieve a Pareto gain, making some people better off without making anyone else worse off.
A similar argument holds for any other commodity we try to tax.
A tax will cause a discrepancy between the price the purchaser pays and the price the seller receives.
Suppose there is an income tax.
Firms equate the marginal value of labour to the gross wage rate, but suppliers of labour equate the after-tax wage rate to the marginal value of the leisure that they sacrifice in order to work another hour.
The income tax ensures that the marginal value product of labour, society's benefit from another hour of work, now exceeds the marginal value of the leisure being sacrificed in order to work.
Again this is inefficient.
With another hour of work, society would gain more than sufficient to compensate workers fully for the value of the extra leisure forgone.
We can now pose the choice between efficiency and equity in a stark form.
If the economy is perfectly competitive, and if the government is quite happy with the distribution of income-earning potential that currently exists, the government need raise no taxes.
Perfectly competitive free market equilibrium will then allocate resources efficiently.
There will be no possibility of reallocating resources to make some people better off without making others worse off.
The economy is not wasting resources.
However, if as a pure value judgement the government considers that this distribution of income-earning potential is inequitable, the government will need to raise taxes from some people in order to provide subsidies for others.
Yet the very act of raising taxes introduces a distortion.
The price system, operating through  competitive free markets, will no longer equate the marginal benefits of taxed commodities with their marginal cost.
The resulting equilibrium in the economy will be allocatively inefficient.
Society will be wasting resources by producing the wrong output levels of different goods.
What should the government do?
The answer depends a good deal on the value judgements of the government in power.
The more the government dislikes the income distribution thrown up by the free market, a distribution reflecting differences in innate ability, human capital, and financial wealth, the more the government is likely to judge that the inefficiency costs of distortionary taxes are a price worth paying in order to secure a more equitable distribution of income and utility.
Conversely, the more the government feels able to tolerate the income distribution thrown up in a free market economy, the more the government can resist distortionary taxation and allow competitive free markets to allocate resources as efficiently as possible.
Thus one explanation for the differing attitudes to the market economy expressed in the election manifestos cited at the beginning of the chapter is a difference in value judgements about equity.
Caricaturing the argument so far, the Conservative Party supports a free enterprise economy because it considers the most important objective is to maximize the size of the national cake by allocating resources as efficiently as possible.
The Labour Party supports considerable state intervention because it considers that it is more important to divide the cake more fairly, even if this means having more allocative inefficiency and a smaller cake to share out.
But this is only part of the disagreement.
The pursuit of equity through redistribution taxation is not the only distortion that can lead to allocative inefficiency.
We shall consider only distortions in the next section.
Before leaving our simple tax example, there is one final point that it is important to make.
The Second Best
Thus far we have shown that when there is no distortion in the market for meals, a tax on films will lead to an inefficient allocation.
Because the market for meals is in competitive equilibrium we saw that the marginal cost curve for films also told us the marginal value of the meals being sacrificed to make the last film.
Hence, any tax on films, by driving a wedge between the marginal value of films and the marginal cost of films, drives a wedge between the marginal benefit of employing scarce resources in the film industry and employing these same resources in the meals industry.
Suppose, however, that there is a tax on meals.
What should we do in the film industry?
If we could abolish the tax on meals, then we could get back to free competitive equilibrium in both industries which we know is Pareto-efficient.
We sometimes call this the first-best allocation to remind ourselves that it is fully efficient.
Suppose, however, that we cannot get rid of the tax on meals.
The government needs some tax revenue to pay for national defence or its budget contribution to the European Community.
Given that there is an unavoidable tax on meals, do we allocate resources more efficiently by ensuring that at least there are no distortions in the film industry?
In a seminal article Professors Richard Lipsey and Kelvin Lancaster showed that the answer is ‘No!’
Suppose both industries are in equilibrium but there is a tax on meals.
The marginal cost curve for films shows the opportunity cost to private producers of the resources they employ to make films rather than meals.
But this is no longer society's opportunity cost of these resources in the film industry.
Why not?
Because producers are valuing the resources in terms of the price producers could get by transferring them to the meals industry.
But the price of meals to consumers is higher than the price of meals received by producers.
To check you understand this, try drawing a diagram like Figure 15–4 for the meals industry.
Since consumers of meals equate the value of the marginal utility of the last meal to the tax-inclusive price that must be paid, society's valuation of the last meal exceeds the net-of-tax price to which producers of meals are equating marginal cost.
Hence the private producers' marginal cost curve for films reflects the market value to producers of using these resources to   make meals instead, but it no longer reflects the opportunity cost or utility valuation of forgone meals to society.
It understates the social valuation of the meals forgone in order to make films.
Figure 15–5 shows what happens in the market for films when there is a tax-induced distortion in the market for meals.
DD is the demand curve for films and reflects the marginal valuation of the last film by consumers of films.
MPC is the marginal private costs to film producers of using resources to make films.
It shows what the resources could have earned in producing meals on which meal producers would receive the net-of-tax price.
MSC is the marginal social cost of using these resources to make films rather than meals.
It exceeds the marginal private cost to producers because the consumer benefits of extra meals exceed the value of extra meals to producers.
Figure 15–5 THE SECOND BEST.
DD shows the demand curve and marginal consumer benefit of films.
MPC is the marginal private cost of films and reflects what the resources could earn for producers if they were employed in the meals industry.
With a tax on meals, the consumer price and marginal consumer benefit of meals will exceed the net-of-tax price received by producers of meals.
Hence the social opportunity cost of using resources in films, the value of the marginal consumption benefits of meals forgone, exceeds the private producers' opportunity cost of using these resources in films.
MSC shows the marginal social cost of the forgone utility by using resources in films rather than meals.
With no film tax, competitive equilibrium is at E ';.
At the output Q '; the marginal social benefit of films is less than the marginal social cost of films.
Q *; is the efficient output of films at which marginal social cost and marginal social benefit of films are equal.
A tax on films equal to the distance E *; F would induce a competitive film industry to produce Q *;.
Consumers would pay  and producers would receive .
With no tax on films, competitive equilibrium in the film industry would occur at E '; where the demand curve crosses the private marginal cost curve which is also the competitive supply curve of the film industry.
At this output Q '; the marginal social cost exceeds the marginal social benefit as given by the height of the demand curve DD.
To equate the marginal social cost of films and their marginal social benefit it is necessary to levy a tax FE *; on films.
Competitive film producers would then produce an output Q *;, receiving a net-of-tax price  equal to their marginal private cost at this output.
Consumers would pay the tax-inclusive price .
Marginal social cost and marginal social benefit would then be equated at the point E *;.
In contrast to the first-best allocation, when we achieve full efficiency by removing all distortions, we have now developed the principle of the second best.
The principle of the second best says the following.
Suppose we are interested only in allocative efficiency.
However, there is an inevitable distortion somewhere else in the economy that we are unable to remove.
It is inefficient to treat other markets as if that distortion did not exist.
Thus in the film industry it is inefficient to aim to equate private marginal cost and private marginal benefit, the efficient outcome in the absence of a meals tax.
Rather, it is efficient to deliberately introduce a new distortion to the film industry to help counterbalance the inevitable distortion in the meals industry.
In effect, the theory of the second best says that if there must be a distortion, for example if the government has to raise some taxes, it is a mistake to concentrate the distortion in one market.
It is more efficient to spread its effect more thinly over a wide range of markets.
In the example of Figure 15–5 a tax on meals leads to too few meals being produced.
The only place the resources can go is the film industry, so too many films are being produced.
A tax on films helps redress the balance.
Several applications of this general principle will be found in the ensuing chapters.
The real  world in which we live unfortunately provides us with several inevitable distortions.
Given their existence, the argument of this section implies that the government may increase the overall efficiency of the whole economy by introducing new distortions to offset distortions that already exist.
By now you will rightly be wanting to know the source of these inevitable distortions that the government should take action to offset.
We now list the most important ones.
15–4 Market Failure
We began by showing that in the absence of any distortions a freely competitive equilibrium would ensure allocative efficiency.
We use the term market failure to cover all the circumstances in which equilibrium in free unregulated markets (i.e., markets not subject to direct price or quantity regulation by the government) will fail to achieve an efficient allocation.
Market failure describes the circumstances in which distortions prevent the Invisible Hand from allocating resources efficiently.
We now list the possible sources of distortions that lead to market failure.
1 Imperfect competition
It is perfect competition that leads firms to set marginal cost equal to price and thus to marginal consumer benefit.
Under imperfect competition, producers set marginal cost equal to marginal revenue, which is less than the price at which the last unit is sold.
Since consumers equate price to marginal benefits derived from the last unit, in general marginal benefit will exceed marginal cost in imperfectly competitive industries.
Such industries will tend to produce too little.
Expanding output would add more to consumer benefit than it would to production costs or the opportunity cost of the resources used.
This idea forms the theme of Chapter 17.
2 Social priorities such as equity
We have already examined how redistributive taxation in the pursuit of equity will induce allocative distortions by driving a wedge between the price the consumer pays and the price the producer receives.
We study the principles of taxation more fully in Chapter 16.
3 Externalities
Externalities are things like pollution, noise, and congestion.
What they have in common is that one person's actions have direct costs or benefits for other people which that individual does not take into account.
Much of the remainder of this chapter is devoted to analysing this distortion.
We shall see that the problem arises because there is neither a market nor a market price for things like noise.
Hence we cannot expect markets and prices to ensure that the marginal benefits of making a noise are equated to the marginal cost of that noise to other people.
4 Other missing markets: future goods, risk, and information
These are further examples of commodities for which markets are absent or limited.
In Chapter 14 we saw how moral hazard and adverse selection tend to inhibit the setting up of insurance markets to deal with risk.
As with externalities, we cannot expect markets to allocate resources efficiently if the markets do not exist in the first place.
We pursue this theme at the end of this chapter.
But we begin by looking more closely at the problem of externalities.
15–5 Externalities
An externality arises whenever an individual's production or consumption decision directly affects the production or consumption of others other than through market prices.
Suppose a chemical firm discharges waste into a lake, polluting the water and directly imposing an additional production cost on anglers (fewer and smaller fish, which are harder to catch) or a consumption cost on swimmers (less pleasant swimming and a dirty beach).
If there is no ‘market’ for pollution, the firm can pollute the lake without cost.
Its self-interest will lead it to pollute until the marginal benefit of polluting (a cheaper production process for chemicals) equals its own marginal cost of polluting, which is zero.
It takes no account of the marginal cost its pollution imposes on anglers and swimmers.
Conversely, by painting your house you make the whole street look nicer and give consumption benefits to your neighbours.
But you paint only up to the point on which your own marginal benefit equals the marginal cost  of the paint you buy and the time you spend.
Your marginal costs are also society's marginal costs, but society's marginal benefits exceed your own.
Hence there is too little house-painting.
In both cases there is a divergence between the individual's comparison of marginal costs and benefits and society's comparison of marginal costs and benefits.
Free markets cannot induce people to take account of these indirect effects on other people if there is no market in these indirect effects.
Divergences between Private and Social Costs and Benefits
Suppose a chemical firm discharges a pollutant into a river, the quantity of pollutant discharged being in proportion to the level of chemical production.
Further down the river there are food-processing companies using river water as an input in making sauce for baked beans.
There are also farmers with agricultural land.
At small levels of chemical output, pollution is negligible.
The river can dilute the small amounts of pollutant discharged by the chemical producer.
But as the discharge rises the costs of pollution rise sharply.
Food processers must worry about the purity of their water intake and build expensive purification plants.
Still higher levels of pollution start to corrode pipes and contaminate agricultural land.
Figure 15–6 shows the marginal private cost MPC of producing chemicals.
For simplicity, we assume that marginal private costs are constant.
It also shows the marginal social cost MSC of chemical production.
The divergence between marginal private cost and marginal social cost reflects the marginal cost imposed on other producers by an extra unit of the production externality of pollution that the chemical producer disregards.
The demand curve DD shows how much consumers are willing to pay for the output of the chemical producer.
If that producer acts as a price-taker, equilibrium will occur at E and the chemical producer will produce an output Q at which the marginal private cost equals the price received by the firm for its output.
However, at this output Q the marginal social cost MSC exceeds the marginal social benefit of chemicals as given by the corresponding point on the demand curve DD.
The market for chemicals takes no account of the production externality inflicted on other firms.
Since at the output Q the marginal social benefit of the last output unit is less than the marginal social cost inclusive of the production externality, the output Q is not socially efficient.
By reducing the output of chemicals society would save more in social cost than it would lose in social benefit.
Reducing the output of chemicals and the corresponding amount of pollution would allow society to make some people better off without making anyone worse off.
Figure 15–6 THE SOCIAL COST OF A PRODUCTION EXTERNALITY.
Competitive equilibrium occurs at E. The market clears at a price P which producers equate to marginal private cost MPC.
But pollution causes a production externality which makes the marginal social cost MSC exceed the marginal private cost.
The socially efficient output is at E '; where marginal social cost and marginal social benefit are equal.
The demand curve DD measures the marginal social benefit because consumers equate the value of the marginal utility of the last unit to the price.
By inducing an output a in excess of the efficient output Q ';, free market equilibrium leads to a social cost equal to the area of the triangle E '; EF.
This shows the excess of social cost over social benefit in moving from Q '; to Q.
In fact the socially efficient output is Q ';, at which the marginal social benefit of the last output unit equals is marginal social cost.
E '; is the efficient point.
How much does society lose by producing at the free market equilibrium point E rather than at the socially efficient point  E ';?
The vertical distance between the marginal social cost MSC and the marginal social benefit as given by DD shows the marginal social loss of producing the last output unit.
Hence, by expanding from Q '; to Q, society loses a total amount equal to the triangle E '; EF in Figure 15–6.
This measures the social cost of the market failure caused by the production externality of pollution.
Production externalities lead to a divergence between marginal private production costs and marginal social production costs.
Similarly, a consumption externality leads to a divergence between marginal private benefits and marginal social benefits.
Figure 15–7 illustrates a beneficial consumption externality as when painting your house or planting roses in your front garden gives pleasure also to your neighbours.
Since there are no production externalities MPC is both the marginal private cost and the marginal social cost of making your house and garden look nicer.
It is the cost of the paint and plants plus the opportunity cost of your time.
DD is the marginal private benefit of house improvements and, comparing your own costs and benefits, you will undertake a quantity Q of improvements.
But you do not take account of the consumption value these improvements have for your neighbours.
Since these are benefits too, the marginal social benefit MSB is greater than your marginal private benefit.
In comparison with the free market equilibrium at E, the socially efficient quantity of improvements is Q ';.
At E '; the marginal social benefit and marginal social cost are equated.
Free market equilibrium leads to too few improvements.
Society could gain the triangle EFE ';, measuring the excess of social benefits over social costs, by increasing the quantity of improvements from Q to Q ';.
Alternatively, this same triangle measures the social cost of the market failure that leads free market equilibrium to a social inefficient allocation.
Figure 15–7 A BENEFICIAL CONSUMPTION EXTERNALITY.
With no production externality, marginal private cost and marginal social cost coincide.
DD measures the marginal private benefit and free market equilibrium occurs at E. The beneficial consumption externality makes marginal social benefit MSB exceed marginal private benefit.
E '; is the socially efficient point.
The consumption externality leads to market failure.
By producing the output a instead of the efficient output Q ';, free market equilibrium causes a social loss equal to the triangle EFE ';.
Property Rights and Externalities
Suppose your neighbour's tree grows into your garden, obscuring your light and giving you a harmful consumption externality.
If the law says that you must be compensated for any damage suffered, your neighbour will either have to pay up or cut back the tree.
What is the smart thing for your neighbour to do, and how much compensation will you get?
Your neighbour really likes the tree and wants to know how much it would take to compensate you to leave the tree at its current size.
Figure 15–8 shows the marginal benefit MB that your neighbour gets from the last inch of tree size and the marginal cost MC to you of that last inch of tree size.
At the tree's current size S 1 the total cost to you is the area OABS 1 .
You simply take the marginal cost OA of the first inch, then add the marginal cost of the second inch, and so on till you get to the existing size S 1 .
The area OABS 1 is what you require in compensation if the tree size is S 1 .
Your neighbour is about to pay up this  amount.
But he has a daughter who is studying economics.
She points out that at the size S 1 the marginal benefit of the last inch is less than the marginal cost to you, which is also the amount you must be compensated for that last inch on the tree.
It is not worth your neighbour having a tree this big.
Nor, she points out, it is worth cutting the tree down altogether.
The first inch yields a higher marginal benefit to your neighbour than the amount that you require in compensation to offset the marginal cost to you of that first inch.
A tiny tree has little effect on your light and makes the garden next door look nicer.
Figure 15–8 THE EFFICIENT QUANTITY OF AN EXTERNALITY.
MB and MC measure the marginal benefit to your neighbour and marginal cost to you of a tree of size S. The efficient size is S * where the marginal cost and benefit are equal.
Beginning from a size S 1 you might bribe your neighbour the value S * EDSI to cut back to S * .
Below S * you would have to pay more than it is worth to you to have the tree cut back further.
Alternatively, your neighbour might pay you the value OAES * to have a tree of size S *;.
Property rights, in this case whether you are legally entitled to compensation for loss of light to your garden, determine who compensates whom but not the outcome S * of the bargain.
The efficient allocation or tree size S * occurs where the marginal benefit to your neighbour equals the marginal cost to you.
Above S * it is worth cutting back the tree since the marginal cost (and hence the compensation) exceeds the marginal benefit.
Below S * it is worth increasing the tree size and paying the marginal compensation that is less than the marginal benefit.
At the efficient size S * your total cost is the area OAES&SUP*; and this is the total amount of compensation you will be paid.
Notice that since a larger tree benefits one party but hurts the other party, the efficient tree size and efficient quantity of the externality will not be zero.
Rather, it occurs where the marginal benefits equals the marginal cost.
Property rights, in this case the legal right for you to be compensated for infringement of your garden and light, enter in two distinct ways.
First, they affect who compensates whom.
They have a distributional implication.
Suppose there was no law requiring compensation.
Would you just sit there and allow your neighbour's tree to grow to a size S 1 that inflicts a huge cost on you?
Of course not.
You would bribe your neighbour to cut it back.
You would compensate your neighbour for the loss of his marginal benefit.
It would be worth you paying to have the tree cut back as far as S * but no further.
Beyond that size, you would be paying more in compensation for the loss of marginal benefit of another inch than you would be saving yourself in reduced cost of the externality.
So you would pay your neighbour a total of EDS 1 S * to compensate for the loss of benefit in cutting the tree back from S 1 to S * .
Who has the property rights determines who must compensate whom, but it does not affect the quantity that the bargain will determine.
It must pay to reach the point at which the marginal benefit to one of you equals the marginal cost to the other.
Property rights thus have a distributional implication — who compensates whom — but also act to achieve the socially efficient allocation.
They implicitly set up the ‘missing market’ for the externality.
The market ensures that the price equals the marginal benefit and the marginal cost, and hence equates the two.
Sometimes economists say that property rights are a way to ‘internalize’ the externality.
If people must pay for it they will take its effects into account in making private decisions and there will no longer be market failure.
Why then do externalities like congestion and pollution remain a problem?
Why don't private individuals establish the missing market through a system of bribes or compensation?
There are two obvious reasons why it may be hard to set up this market.
The first is the cost of organizing the market.
If a factory chimney dumps smoke on a thousand gardens nearby it may be very expensive to collect 1 from each household to bribe the factory to cut back to the socially efficient amount.
If cars joining a crowded road take no account of the extent to which they slow down other road users, it may be almost impossible to rush from car to car offering or collecting bribes!
Second, there is the free-rider problem.
Suppose someone knocks on your door and says: ‘I am collecting bribes from people who mind the factory smoke falling on their gardens.
The money I collect will be paid to bribe the factory to cut back.
Do you wish to contribute?
I am going round 5000 houses in the neighbourhood.’
Whether you mind or not, you say: ‘I don't mind and won't contribute.’
Provided everybody else pays, the factory will cut back and you cannot be prevented from getting the benefits.
The smoke will not fall exclusively on your garden merely because you alone did not pay up.
Regardless of what other people contribute, there is no incentive for you to contribute: you are a free-rider.
But everyone else will reason similarly; hence no one will pay, even though you would all have been better off paying and getting the smoke cut back.
15–6 Environmental Issues
When, for either of these reasons, there is no implicit market for pollutants, there will be an overproduction of pollutants.
Because private producers fail to take account of the costs they impose on others, in equilibrium the social marginal cost will exceed the social marginal benefit.
If the private sector cannot organize charges for the marginal externalities pollution creates, perhaps the government can?
By charging (through taxes) for the divergence between marginal private and social cost, the government could then induce private producers to take account of the costs inflicted on others.
This argument for government intervention through taxes is examined in the next chapter.
Pollution taxes, especially for water pollution, have been used in France, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands.
But most policy takes a different approach, the imposition of pollution standards that regulate the maximum amount of allowed pollution.
Air Pollution
Since the Clean Air Act of 1956 governments in the UK have taken responsibility for designating clean air zones in which certain types of pollution, notably the smoke caused by burning coal, are illegal.
The number of designated clean air zones has increased steadily during the last 25 years, and Table 15–1 shows the dramatic reduction in smoke pollution in the UK.
Adding lead to petrol improves the fuel economy performance of cars.
However, lead emissions from car exhausts are an atmospheric pollutant that may be harmful to people's health.
Since 1972 the UK government has adopted a policy of progressive reductions in the quantity of lead permitted in petrol.
Table 15–2 shows that lead emission from petrol-engined vehicles has fallen since 1973 even though total consumption of petrol has risen by 20 per cent.
Water Pollution
Since 1951 governments in the UK have imposed increasingly stringent controls on discharges into inland waters.
Although we  tend to think of industrial effluent, sewage is a more important source of pollution.
During the 1970s regional water authorities in England and Wales spent (at 1989 prices) an annual average of 2.4 billion on water purification and sewage treatment.
Table 15–3 shows that this expenditure has been only moderately successful in reducing water pollution.
By the late 1980s an even more important problem has been recognized: water pollution from nitrates used as fertilizers on agricultural land.
The European Community has laid down tough standards for water purity which will take many years to achieve in countries like the UK.
Table 15–1 Smoke emission in the UK (million tonnes per annum)
Table 15–2 Petrol consumption and lead emission
Table 15–3 Water pollution in England and Wales (badly polluted mileage as % of total)
Evaluating Pollution Policy in the UK
Direct regulation of pollution has met with mixed success over the last 25 years.
In some cases, for example the smoke pollution which used to be especially acute in winter when smoke and fog mixed to produce dense and harmful ‘smog’, tougher standards have led to dramatic improvements in environmental quality.
Many rivers are also cleaner, and fish have reappeared.
In other cases, governments have tried to regulate but often been ineffective; it is hard to enforce regulations such as those that prevent ships discharging oil at sea.
In yet other cases there has been little attempt to intervene.
For example, coal-fired power stations continue to emit large quantities of sulphur dioxide, which the high chimneys are only partially successful in dispersing.
And ecologists continue to oppose government policies that allow new coal mines in previously green countryside, or permit the disposal of nuclear waste at sea.
Having described the consequences of anti-pollution policy in the UK, how should we assess its success?
Has the government been tough enough on polluters?
Recall from Figures 15–6 and 15–8 that the efficient quantity of pollution is not zero but rather the level at which the social marginal cost of cutting back pollution equals its social marginal benefit.
The fact that pollution still exists is not sufficient to establish that policy has not been tough enough.
What we can say is that where pollution control has been attempted it has usually taken a crude and simple form.
Calculations of the social marginal costs and benefits of cutting back pollution tend to be conspicuous by their absence.
In part this reflects the genuine difficulty in measuring marginal benefits.
For example, in considering how much to reduce lead emissions from cars it is not impossible to calculate the marginal social cost of producing cars with anti-pollution exhaust systems and the marginal social cost of cars that use more fuel per mile.
But even if doctors were unanimous about the effects of lead emission on health, how should society value a marginal increase in the health of current and future generations?
This is not merely a question of allocative efficiency, which we might answer by considering the resources tied up in looking after the sick or the extra output that healthier workers could produce.
It is also a question of equity, both within the current generation — poor inner-city children may be most vulnerable to arrested development caused by inhaling lead-polluted air — and across generations.
Devoting more resources to reducing lead pollution today may reduce the resources producing consumer goods for today's consumers, but will improve the quality of life for tomorrow's consumers.
Prices versus Quantities
Although it is difficult to reach a clear judgement about whether there is enough pollution control, we can discuss whether the current mechanism of pollution control is sensible.
We began this section by noting that, if free markets tend to overpollute, society can reduce pollution either by regulating the quantity of pollution (as it does) or by using the price system to discourage such activities by taxing them.
Would it be more sensible to intervene through the tax system than to regulate quantities directly?
Many economists believe the answer to this  question is yes.
One reason is that, if each firm were charged the same price or tax for a marginal unit of pollution, then every firm would pollute up to the point at which the marginal cost of reducing pollution was equal to the price of pollution.
Any allocation in which different firms have different marginal costs of reducing pollution is a socially inefficient way to reduce the total quantity of pollution.
By having the firms with low marginal reduction costs contract further and firms with high marginal reduction costs contract less, the same total reduction in pollution could be achieved at less cost.
However, there are two important qualifications to this argument.
First, it would be necessary to monitor the quantity of pollution of each firm in order to assess its tax liability.
Second, in order to assess the tax rate or charge for pollution it would still be necessary to   calculate the overall costs and benefits of marginal changes in the amount of pollution.
If the government has to make a decision on the socially efficient level of pollution anyway, it may be simpler to regulate the quantity directly.
Finally, there is the issue of the uncertainty of the effect of the legislation.
Suppose pollution beyond a certain critical level would have disastrous social consequences, for example irreversibly damaging the ozone layer above the earth.
By regulating the quantity directly it is at least possible to ensure that the disaster is avoided.
Indirect control through taxes or charges runs the risk that the government might do its sums wrong and set the tax too low.
Pollution will then be higher than intended, and possibly disastrous.
Thus, regulating the total quantity of pollution and conducting a series of spot checks on individual producers to see that they are not violating agreed standards is a relatively simple policy which may avoid the worst outcomes.
However, by failing to take account of differences in the marginal cost of reducing pollution across different polluters, it does not reduce pollution in the manner that is cost-minimizing to society, for that would involve the equalization across polluters of the marginal cost of reducing pollution.
There is no simple answer in an uncertain world where monitoring and enforcement also use up society's scarce resources.
Lessons from the United States
The United States has gone furthest in trying to use property rights and the price mechanism to cut back pollution in a manner that is economically efficient.
The US Clean Air Acts (19S5, 1970,1977) have established an environmental policy that includes an emissions trading programme and bubble policy.
The Acts lay down a minimum standard for air quality, and impose pollution emission controls to particular polluters.
Any polluter emitting less than their specified amount obtains an emission reduction credit (ERC), which can be sold to another polluter which wants to go over its allocated pollution limit.
Thus, the total quantity of pollution is regulated, but firms that can cheaply reduce pollution have an incentive to do so, and sell off the ERC to firms for which pollution reduction is more expensive.
In this way we get closer to the efficient solution in which the marginal cost of pollution reduction is equalized across firms.
When a firm has many factories, the bubble policy applies pollution controls to the firm as a whole rather than individual factories.
To achieve the specified overall reduction in pollution, the firm can cut back most in the plants in which pollution reduction is cheapest.
The bubble policy is efficient because it encourages equalization of the marginal cost of cutting back pollution at different plants within the firm.
Thus, the US policy manages to combine ‘control over quantities’ for aggregate pollution, where the risks and uncertainties are greatest, with ‘control through the price system’for allocating efficiently the way these overall targets are achieved.
15–7 Other Missing Markets: Time and Risk
The previous two sections have been devoted to a single idea.
When externalities exist, free market equilibrium will lead to an inefficient resource allocation because the externality itself does not have a market or a price.
People take no account of the costs and benefits their actions inflict on others.
Without a market for externalities the price system cannot be expected to bring marginal costs and marginal benefits of these externalities into line.
In this section we discuss two other types of ‘missing market’, those associated with time and with risk.
The present and the future are linked.
People save, or refrain from consumption, today in order to consume more tomorrow.
Firms reduce current output by devoting resources to training or building in order to produce more tomorrow.
How should society make plans today for the quantities of goods to be produced and consumed in the future?
Ideally we should like to organize everyone's plans today so that the social marginal cost of goods in the future just equals the social marginal benefit.
In Chapter 14 we introduced the concept of a forward market, in which buyers and sellers made contracts today for goods to be delivered in the future at a price agreed today.
Suppose there was a forward market for delivery of copper in 1995.
Consumers would equate the marginal benefit of copper in 1995 to the forward price, which producers would equate to the marginal cost of producing copper for 1995.
A complete set of forward markets for all commodities for all future dates would lead producers and consumers today to make consistent plans for future production and consumption of all goods, and the social marginal benefit of every future good would equal its social marginal cost.
In Chapter 14 we explained why only a very limited set of future markets actually exists.
You can trade gold one year forward but not cars or washing machines.
Since nobody knows the characteristics of next year's model of a car or a washing machine, it is impossible to write legally binding contracts which could be enforced when the goods are actually delivered.
Yet without these forward markets the price system cannot be expected to ensure that the  marginal cost and marginal benefits of planned future goods are equal.
Similarly, there is only a limited set of contingent or insurance markets for dealing with risk.
In Chapter 14 we argued that people are typically risk-averse and dislike risk.
Risk is costly to individuals because it reduces their utility.
But does society undertake the efficient amount of risky activities?
A complete set of insurance markets would allow risk to be transferred from those who dislike risk to those who are prepared to bear risk at a price.
The equilibrium price or insurance premium would equate the marginal cost and marginal benefit of risk-bearing.
The equilibrium price of risky activities would include the insurance premium, and the price system would ensure that social marginal costs and benefits of risky activities were equated.
However, we saw that problems of adverse selection and moral hazard would inhibit the organization of private insurance markets.
If some risky activities are uninsurable at any price, again we cannot expect the price system to guide society to an allocation at which social marginal costs and benefits are equal.
Future goods and risky goods are examples of commodities with missing markets.
Like externalities, they induce market failure.
Free market equilibrium will not generally be efficient.
As we have seen, an important problem which inhibits the development of forward and contingent markets is the provision of information.
For example, it is the problem of acquiring the relevant information about purchasers of insurance policies that leads insurance companies to face problems of moral hazard and adverse selection.
We now study some practical examples of how informational problems affect the way in which markets work.
15–8 Quality, Health, and Safety
In the real world, information is incomplete because gathering information is costly.
This may lead to socially inefficient allocations.
For example, a worker who is unaware that exposure to high levels of benzene, as happens in some chemical plants, might cause cancer will be willing to work for a lower wage than she would if this information were widely available.
The firm's production cost will understate the true social cost and the good will be overproduced.
In most countries, governments have accepted an increasing role in regulating health, safety, and quality standards because it has been recognized that this is a potentially important area of market failure.
Although imperfect information would be sufficient to cause a divergence between private and social cost, in practice the argument for intervention is usually reinforced by externalities.
With better information, the chemical worker would ask for a wage that compensated for the danger of illness but would still neglect the marginal cost that illness would impose on society through expensive health care, which uses society's resources but may be free to the individual.
Examples of government regulation in the UK are the Health and Safety at Work Acts, legislation controlling food and drugs production, the Fair Trading Act which governs consumer protection, and the various traffic and motoring regulations.
The purpose of such legislation is twofold: to encourage the provision of information that will allow individuals more accurately to judge costs and benefits, and to set and enforce standards designed to reduce the risks of injury or death.
Providing Information
Figure 15–9 shows the supply curve SS for a drug that is potentially harmful.
DD is the demand curve when consumers are unaware of the full extent of the danger.
In equilibrium at E the quantity Q is produced and consumed.
With full information about the dangers, people would buy less of the drug.
The demand curve DD’ shows the marginal consumer benefit with full information.
By moving to the new equilibrium at E’ society avoids the deadweight burden EE 'F from overproduction of the drug.
If information were free to collect, everyone would already know the true risks.
From the social get EE 'F we should subtract the resources that society expends in discovering this information.
In saying that the free market equilibrium would be at E, we are really saying that it would not be worth while for each individual to check up privately on each and every drug on the market.
But it makes sense for society to have a single regulatory body that does the checking  and a law whose enforcement entitles individuals to assume that drugs being sold have been checked out as safe.
Figure 15–9 INFORMATION AND UNSAFE GOODS.
Consumers cannot individually discover the safety risks associated with a particular good.
Free market equilibrium occurs at E. A government agency now provides information about the product.
As a result, the demand curve shifts down and the new equilibrium is at E’ where the true or full information valuation of an extra unit of the good equals its marginal social cost.
Providing information prevents a welfare cost E 'EF that arises when uninformed consumers use the wrong marginal valuation of the benefits of the good.
Certification of safety or quality need not be carried out by the government.
Sotheby's certify the quality of Rembrandts, and the private University College at Buckingham certifies educational attainments of its students.
People arrested on suspicion of drunk driving in the UK are allowed to send half their blood sample to a private certification agency to corroborate the results of the police analysis.
Nevertheless, two factors tend to inhibit the use of private certification in many areas of health and safety.
The first concerns the incentive to tell the truth.
If private certification firms are in business to earn profits, which they do by charging firms for a certificate attesting the quality or safety of a product, which then allows firms to sell more of the product at any given price, will not firms have an incentive to bribe the certifier to obtain the certificate?
And even if they do not, will people believe that they have not done so?
Firms issuing false certificates might be subject to lawsuits, but these are expensive.
Private individuals might not be able to afford to sue, and society might not wish to devote a large quantity of resources to court cases.
Second, a private certification agency would have to decide on standards.
What margin of error should be built into safety regulations?
How safe does a drug have to be before it receives a certificate?
These are questions on which society has views.
They involve externalities and may have important distributional implications.
Even where society relies on private agencies to monitor regulations, society will probably want to set the standards itself.
Imposing Standards
The public interest may be especially important when little is known about a product and where the consequences for society of any error may be catastrophic.
Few people would argue that safety standards for nuclear power stations can be adequately determined within the private sector.
In imposing standards, governments increase the private cost of production by preventing firms from adopting the cost-minimizing techniques that would otherwise have been employed.
Sometimes the justification is that the government has access to better information than the private sector and judges the true social cost to be in excess of the private cost.
The imposition of standards then increases private marginal cost, shifts private supply curves upwards, and reduces the overproduction of the good that occurred when the market ignored the divergence between private and social cost.
Frequently, however, the imposition of standards reflects a judgement that important externalities exist or is simply a pure value judgement based on distributional considerations.
One particularly contentious area in the field of health and safety is the valuation of human life itself.
Politicians often claim that human life is beyond economic calculation and must be given absolute priority whatever the cost.
An economist will raise two points in reply.
First, it is quite impossible for society to implement such an objective.
It is simply too expensive in resources to attempt to eliminate all risks of premature death, and in fact we do not do  so.
Second, in making occupational and recreational choices, for example being a racing driver or going climbing, people do take risks.
Society must ask how much more risk-averse it should be than the people it is trying to protect.
Thus, beyond a certain point the marginal social benefit of further risk reduction will exceed the marginal social cost.
It will take an enormous effort to make the world just a little safer, and the resources might have been used elsewhere to greater effect.
Zero risk does not make economic sense.
Economists have long been calling for safety regulations to be subject to cost-benefit analysis.
We need to know the costs of making the world a little safer, and we need to encourage society to make a decision about how much it values the benefits.
However society decides to value the benefit of saving human life, an efficient allocation would adopt health and safety regulations up to the point at which the marginal social cost of saving life by each and every means was equal to the marginal social benefit of saving life.
By shying away from the ‘unpleasant’ task of spelling out the costs and benefits, society is likely to produce a very inefficient allocation in which the marginal costs and marginal benefits are very different in different activities.
Suppose we assume that each regulation is enforced up to the point at which the marginal cost and marginal benefit of saving life are equal for that activity.
If we can measure the marginal cost directly, we can infer the implicit marginal benefit from saving life through that activity.
Economists frequently complain that such calculations reveal very different implicit marginal benefits across activities, which is unsurprising when those responsible for safety standards in building, motoring, medicine, and other areas make no attempt to reach a common view of the marginal social benefit from saving life.
For example, estimates for the implicit marginal social benefit from saving life in the UK range from 20 million in the case of building regulations introduced after the Ronan Point disaster to 50 for a rarely used test in pregnant women that might prevent some still-births.
Such wide disparities in the social marginal cost of life-saving suggest that society might achieve significant gains in allocative efficiency by adopting an integrated approach to a cost-benefit analysis of health and safety regulations.
Summary
1
Welfare economics deals with normative issues or value judgements.
Its purpose is not to describe how the economy works but to assess how well it works.
2
There are two concepts of equity or fairness.
Horizontal equity is the equal treatment of equals, and vertical equity the unequal treatment of unequals.
Equity is concerned with the distribution of welfare across people.
Decisions about the desirable degree of equity are pure value judgements.
3
A resource allocation is a complete description of what, how, and for whom goods are produced.
To separate as far as possible the concepts of equity and efficiency, economists use the concept of Pareto efficiency.
An allocation is Pareto-efficient if there is no reallocation of resources that would make some people better off without making some people worse off.
If an allocation is inefficient it is possible to achieve a Pareto gain, making some people better off and none worse off.
Many reallocations make some people better off and others worse off.
We cannot say whether such changes are good or bad without making explicit value judgements about the comparison of different people's welfare.
4
For a given level of resources and a given technology, the economy has an infinite number of Pareto-efficient allocations which differ in the distribution of welfare across people.
For example, every allocation that gives the maxi-mum attainable output to a single individual is Pareto-efficient.
But there are many more allocations that are inefficient.
5
Under strict conditions, competitive equilibrium is Pareto-efficient.
Different initial distributions of human and physical capital across people will generate the different competitive equilibria corresponding to each of the possible Pareto-efficient allocations.
When price-taking producers and consumers face the same prices, marginal costs and marginal benefits   are equated to prices (by the independent actions of individual producers and consumers) and hence to each other.
6
In practice, governments face a conflict between the objectives of equity and efficiency.
Redistributive taxation drives a wedge between prices paid by consumers (to which marginal benefits are equated) and prices received by producers (to which marginal costs are equated).
Free market equilibrium will not equate marginal cost and marginal benefit and there will be scope for Pareto gains.
Equilibrium will be inefficient.
7
Distortions occur whenever free market equilibrium does not equate marginal social cost and marginal social benefit.
Distortions lead to inefficiency or market failure.
Apart from taxes, there are three other important sources of distortions: imperfect competition (failure to set price equal to marginal cost), externalities (divergence between private and social costs or benefits), and other missing markets in connection with future goods, risky goods, or other informational problems.
8
When only one market is distorted the first-best solution is to remove the distortion, thus achieving full Pareto efficiency.
The first-best criterion relates only to allocative efficiency.
Governments caring sufficiently about redistribution might still prefer inefficient allocations with greater vertical equity.
However, when a distortion cannot be removed from one market it is not generally efficient to ensure that all other markets are distortion-free.
The theory of the second-best says that it is allocatively more efficient to spread inevitable distortions thinly over many markets than to concentrate their effects in a few markets.
9
Production externalities occur when decisions by one producer affect the production costs of another producer directly, as when one firm pollutes another's water supply.
Consumption externalities imply that one person's decisions affect another consumer's utility directly, as when one person's garden gives pleasure to the neighbours.
External effects shift indifference curves or production functions.
10
Externalities lead to divergence between private and social costs or benefits because there is no implicit market for the externality itself.
When only a few people are involved, a system of property rights may establish the missing market.
The direction of compensation will depend on who has the property rights, but the consequence would be to achieve the efficient quantity of the externality at which marginal cost and marginal benefit are equated.
The efficient solution is rarely to have a zero quantity of the externality.
Transactions costs and the free-rider problem may prevent implicit markets being established.
Equilibrium will then be inefficient.
11
When externalities lead to market failure the government could set up the missing market by pricing the externality through taxes or subsidies.
If it was straightforward to assess the efficient quantity of the externality and hence the correct tax or subsidy, and straightforward to monitor the quantities produced and consumed, such taxes or subsidies would allow the market to achieve an efficient resource allocation.
12
In practice, governments often regulate externalities such as pollution or congestion by imposing standards that affect quantities directly rather than by using the tax system to affect production and consumption indirectly.
Overall quantity standards may fail to equate the marginal cost of pollution reduction across different polluters, in which case the allocation will not be efficient.
However, simple standards may use up less resources in monitoring and enforcement and may prevent disastrous outcomes when there is uncertainty.
13
Moral hazard, adverse selection, and other informational problems prevent the development of a complete set of forward and contingent markets.
Without these markets the price system cannot equate social marginal cost and benefit for future goods or risky activities.
14
Incomplete information may lead to private choices which do not represent the best interests of individuals or society as a whole.
Health, quality, and safety regulations are designed both to provide information and to express society's value judgements about intangibles such as life itself.
By avoiding explicit consideration of social costs and benefits, government policy may be inconsistent in its implicit valuation of health or safety in different activities under regulation.
Key Terms
Problems
1
An economy has 10 units of goods to share out between two people.
(x, y) denotes that the first person gets a quantity x and the second person a quantity y For each of the following allocations say whether they are (i) efficient and (ii) equitable:(a)(10, 0)(b)(7, 2)(c)(5, 5)(d)(3, 6)(e)(0, 10).
What does ‘equitable’ mean?
If you were making the choice, would you prefer allocation (d) to allocation (e)?
2
Suppose the equilibrium price of meals is 1 and of films 5.
There is perfect competition and no externality.
What can we say about (a) the relative benefit to consumers of a marginal film and a marginal meal?(b) the relative marginal production cost of films and meals?(c) the relative marginal product of variable factors in the film and meal industries?
Hence explain why competitive equilibrium is Pareto-efficient.
3
In deciding whether or not to drive your car during the rush hour, you think about the cost of petrol and the time of the journey.
Do you slow other people down by driving in the rush hour?
Is this an externality?
Does this mean that too many or too few people drive cars in the rush hour?
Would it make sense for city authorities to restrict commuter parking in cities during the day?
4
Explain how an economist might defend laws making it compulsory to wear seat belts in cars.
5
In 1965, 200 people died when the steam boiler exploded on a Mississippi river boat.
This prompted Jeremiah Allen and three friends to form a private company offering to insure any boiler that they had inspected for safety.
The idea of boiler inspections caught on and boiler explosion rates plummeted.
(a) Would Jeremiah Allen's company have been so successful if it had certified boilers but not insured them as well?
Explain.
(b) Could this idea be carried over from boiler inspections to drug inspections?
If not, why not?
6
(a) Why might society wish to ban drugs that neither help nor harm the diseases they are claimed to cure?(b) It is sometimes argued that regulatory bodies will be blamed for bad things that happen in spite of the regulations (e.g. a plane crash) but not blamed so much for good things that are prevented (e.g. the quick availability of a safe and useful drug) by stringent tests and regulations.
Does this mean that regulatory bodies will tend to be too conservative and will over-regulate the activities under their scrutiny?
7
Why is it inefficient for different government departments to have different rules of thumb about the marginal value of human life?
8
Common Fallacies Show why the following statements are incorrect.
(a) Irresponsible firms discharge toxic waste with no thought for the damage inflicted on others.
Society should ban all such discharges.
It would be much better off without them.
(b) Anything governments can do the market can do better.
(c) Anything the market can do the government can do better.
ACID RAIN: A BITTER CONTROVERSY
Gases such as sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen are discharged into the atmosphere, dissolved in water vapour, and fall as acid rain.
Acid rain poisons fish, destroys forests, and corrodes buildings.
The following table shows data for European emissions of sulphur (‘000 tonnes a year).
It reveals the appalling pollution in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, mainly from power stations fuelled by low-grade coal.
In Western Europe, the UK is a big exporter of acid rain: prevailing winds blow it east, and Scandinavia is a big loser.
Installing and operating enough flue gas de-sulphurization plants to cut UK power station emissions of sulphur dioxide by 50 per cent would add 6 per cent to UK electricity prices.
Since much of the damage occurs in Swedish lakes and German forests, UK voters are unwilling to pay the extra cost.
It needs a concerted European policy, perhaps even with transfer payments between governments, to deal with externalities across national borders.
Europe is trying to agree a 20 per cent cut in sulphur dioxide emissions and a freeze on emissions of oxides of nitrogen (mainly from car exhausts).
But when different countries face a different marginal cost of pollution abatement, and inflict different amounts of marginal damage (polluting unpopulated areas is less costly than polluting densely populated areas), equal cutbacks for all is not the efficient solution.
For a given overall reduction, the efficient solution equates the marginal net benefit (damage reduction minus abatement cost) across different polluters.
The following table shows estimates by Professor David Newberry of Cambridge University of the efficient way to achieve a 30 per cent reduction in sulphur dioxide emissions in Europe.
BOX 15–2 A LOT OF HOT AIR?
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are gases that are useful in things like aerosols.
But they are thought to destroy the ozone layer, which protects the earth from the sun's rays.
Without this sunscreen, more people will get skin cancers.
As with acid rain, there is a major problem in co-ordinating the policy of different countries.
Each is tempted to act as a free rider: if other countries cut back on atmospheric pollution, everyone will enjoy the benefit.
But governments are beginning to get their act together.
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that deplete the Ozone Layer was concluded in 1987, and 46 countries, including most of the big polluters, have now signed.
The following table, based on estimates by the US Environmental Protection Agency, offers an optimistic assessment of the results of the Protocol:
DEPLETION OF THE OZONE LAYER (%)
A second type of atmospheric pollution is potentially of much greater significance, though as yet it remains the subject of considerable scientific controversy.
The greenhouse effect arises from emissions of CFCs, methane, nitrous oxide, and especially carbon dioxide.
Greenhouse gases are the direct result of pollution, and the indirect result of a reduction in the atmosphere's ability to absorb them.
Plants convert carbon dioxide into oxygen.
Chopping down forests to clear land for cattle, as world demand for hamburgers soars, may be good business in the short run, but its long-run effect on the accumulation of greenhouse gases is significant.
The consequence is global warming.
People in London and Stockholm may get better suntans, but in Africa the likelihood of drought and famine is magnified many times; and, as icecaps melt, the sea level will rise, flooding many low-lying areas.
In 1990 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change forecast that by 2070 the temperature would increase by 3.5C, implying a rise of 45 centimetres in the sea level.
As with acid rain and ozone depletion, international co-ordination of government policy is required to tackle the free rider problem.
But progress is likely to be slow for two reasons.
First, greater scientific uncertainty about the greenhouse effect provides an excuse for the big polluters who have the strongest interest in delaying a change of policy.
Second, in many cases it is the poorer countries who will be most affected by the greenhouse effect.
It is hard for them to convince the rich countries to make sacrifices on their behalf.
16
Taxes and Public Spending: The Government and Resource Allocation
By the 1980s many people felt that the government had too big a role in the economy.
They believed that high levels of government spending were pre-empting resources that could have been used more productively in the private sector, that high taxes were stifling private enterprise, and that the abolition of the complex system of government regulations, interventions, and subsidies would unleash a new wave of private initiative and energy.
These were not quack ideas that never made it in practice.
On the contrary, electorates in many countries turned to the political leaders who promised to implement these new policies — Mrs Thatcher in the UK, President Reagan in the United States, and Chancellor Kohl in West Germany.
This chapter is about the extent of government involvement in the economy.
How much should the government raise in taxation?
Are there good taxes and bad taxes?
If taxes are needed to pay for government spending, why do we need government spending in the first place?
We begin with three tables that provide some historical perspective.
Table 16–1 shows the scale of government spending in the UK over three decades.
It is important to distinguish government spending on goods and services schools, defence, the police, and so on— from government spending on transfer payments, such as social security and state pensions.
Whereas spending on goods and services directly uses up factors of production that could otherwise have been employed in the private sector, transfer payments do not directly pre-empt society's scarce resources.
Rather they transfer purchasing power from one group of consumers, those paying taxes, to another group of consumers, those in receipt of transfer payments or subsidies.
Table 16–1 shows that between 1956 and 1976 there was a moderate increase in the share of national income and national resources directly pre-empted by the government through government spending on goods and services.
It also shows that the Thatcher government found it difficult to implement its objective of quickly reducing this percentage.
Nevertheless, the share of national income going to government spending on goods and services is now falling.
The second row of Table 16–1 shows that government spending on transfer payments has also risen faster than national income.
In part this reflects increasing expenditure on state pensions as more and more people live to a ripe old age.
However, the most important source of the large rise in transfer payments was the steady rise in unemployment until the mid 1980s.
The subsequent decline in unemployment has also been responsible for the fall in the share of transfer payments since 1984.
The last row of Table 16–1 shows the turnaround in total spending since 1984.
One reason for trying to reduce government spending is to make room for tax cuts.
Table 16–2 picks out the most controversial aspect of the tax system, the marginal rate of income tax.
The marginal rate of income tax is the percentage taken by the government of the last pound that an individual earns.
In contrast, the average tax rate is the percentage of total income that the government takes in income tax.
A progressive tax structure is one in which the average tax rate rises with an individual's income level.
The government takes proportionately more from the rich than from the poor.
A regressive tax structure is one in which the  average tax rate falls as income level rises.
The government takes proportionately less from the rich.
Table 16–1 Government spending as a percentage of UK national income*
Table 16–2 Marginal income tax rates in the UK (Tax rates on an extra pound of income)
Table 16–2 shows that, as in most countries, the UK has a progressive income tax structure.
Figure 16–1 explains why.
We plot pre-tax income on the horizontal axis and post-tax income on the vertical axis.
The line OG with a slope of 45 degrees would correspond to no taxes.
A pre-tax income OA on the horizontal axis corresponds to the same post-tax income OA on the vertical axis.
Now suppose there is an income tax with a tax allowance OA.
The first OA pounds of income are untaxed.
If the marginal tax rate on taxable income is constant, individuals face a schedule such a OBC.
The individual gets to keep only a constant fraction of each pound of pre-tax income above OA.
The higher the marginal tax rate the flatter the portion BC of the schedule.
How do we calculate the average tax rate at a point such as D?
We join up OD.
The flatter the slope of this line the higher the average tax rate.
Hence, even with a constant marginal tax rate and a constant slope of the portion BC of the tax schedule, the presence of an initial tax allowance makes the tax structure progressive.
If we join up OH we get a line with a flatter slope than OD, which in turn has a flatter slope than OB.
The higher an individual's gross income, the smaller is the tax allowance as a percentage of this gross income so the larger is the percentage of total income on which the individual is paying tax.
Figure 16–1 A PROGRESSIVE INCOME TAX.
The line OG with a slope of 45 degrees shows what would happen in the absence of any income tax.
A pre-tax income measured on the horizontal axis would convert into the same amount of post-tax income measured on the vertical axis.
An income tax plus an allowance OA implies that the first OA pounds of pre-tax income are still retained after-tax.
If income above OA is taxed at a constant marginal rate, the  individual is then on the schedule BC with a constant slope.
The slope is less than 45 degrees because for each extra pound earned the individual is only allowed to keep a constant fraction of it.
Higher pre-tax incomes move the individual up BC and imply that the government is taking a larger and larger fraction of total pre-tax income.
The individual is falling further and further below the no-tax schedule OG.
With a rising marginal tax rate, the schedule falls even further below OG.
But Table 16–2 shows that marginal tax rates also rise with income.
The tax schedule in the UK looks more like the schedule OBDEF.
As individuals move into higher tax bands they pay higher marginal tax rates and move on to even flatter portions of the tax schedule.
The average tax rate now rises sharply with income.
The line joining OF has a much flatter slope than the line joining OD.
Table 16–2 shows that the first Thatcher government was able to reduce marginal tax rates substantially, especially for the very rich.
A millionaire paying an 83 per cent tax rate on all taxable income except the first 54 000 1978–79 was paying only 40 per cent per cent in 1990 91.
Table 16–3 Income tax reform 1975 90 (Marginal tax rates, %)
Table 16–4 Expenditure and revenue of UK central and local government 1987
Table 16–3 shows a worldwide move to cut tax rates, especially for the very rich.
Were the tax cuts designed to make the rich richer?
Or was their purpose to revive hard work and enterprise?
If so, will they work?
These questions go to the heart of the current debate and form the background to much of the discussion of this chapter.
16–1 Taxation and Government Spending
Table 16–1 shows that government spending, and the taxation that finances it, are now running at over 40 per cent of national income.
Table 16–4 shows the composition of government spending and revenue in 1987.
Table 16–4 shows that in 1987 82.4 billion, almost half of total government spending, went on transfer payments such as unemployment benefit and debt interest.
Of the remaining 92.1 billion spent directly on goods and services, the most important spending categories were the National Health Service, defence, and education.
Why is the government directly involved in providing defence, schools, and health services?
How much of each should be provided?
Would it make sense for these activities to be provided by the private sector in the same way as haircuts and cars?
If refuse collection can be ‘privatized’, why not defence?
To deal with these issues in democratic decision-making, we shall need a large dose of economics and a fair helping of political science.
Table 16–4 shows that most government spending is financed through taxation.
The most important taxes are income tax and expenditure taxes such as value added tax (VAT).
Since state provision of retirement pensions is included on the expenditure side under transfer payments, the pension contributions under the National Insurance Scheme must be included on the revenue side.
Against this background, we begin by discussing the reasons for government spending.
Then we ask how spending should be financed.
Are there good and bad taxes?
The answer depends on the criteria of efficiency and equity that we developed in the last chapter.
16–2 The Government in the Market Economy
In this section we consider the argument that can be used to justify government spending in a market economy.
We begin with public goods.
Public Goods
A private good is a good that, if consumed by one person, cannot be consumed by another person.
Ice cream is a private good.
If you eat an ice cream it prevents anyone else from eating the same ice cream.
For any given supply of ice cream, your consumption reduces the quantity available for others to consume.
Most goods are private goods.
A public good is a good that, even if consumed by one person, can still be consumed by other people.
Clean air and defence are examples of public goods.
If the air is pollution-free, your consumption of it does not interfere with our consumption of it.
If the Royal Navy is patrolling Britain's coastal waters, your consumption of national defence does not affect our quantity of national defence.
In fact, for a pure public good we must all necessarily consume the same quantity, namely, whatever quantity is supplied in the aggregate.
We may of course get different amounts of utility if our tastes differ, but we all consume the same quantity.
The key aspects of public goods are (1) that it is technically possible for one person to consume without reducing the amount available for someone else, and (2) the impossibility of excluding anyone from consumption except at a prohibitive cost.
A football match could be watched by a lot of people, especially if it is televised, without reducing the quantity consumed by any individual; but exclusion is possible — the ground holds only so many, and the club can refuse to allow the game to be televised.
The interesting issues in economics arise when, as with national defence, exclusion of certain individuals from consumption is effectively impossible.
Free-Riders
In the last chapter we introduced the free-rider problem when discussing why bribes and compensation for externalities might not occur.
Public goods are likely to be especially vulnerable to the free-rider problem if they are supplied by the private sector.
Since you get the same quantity of national defence as everyone else, whether or not you pay for it, it would never be in your interest to purchase national defence in a free private market.
Everybody else would adopt similar reasoning, and no defence would be demanded even if we all wanted defence.
Public goods are like a very strong externality.
If you buy defence everyone else gets the benefits.
Since marginal private and social benefits diverge, private markets will not produce the socially efficient quantity.
There is a case for government intervention to make sure marginal social cost and marginal social benefit are equated.
The Marginal Social Benefit
Suppose the public good is the purity of the public water supply.
The more infected the water, the more likely it is that everyone will be hit by an epidemic of cholera or some other disease.
Figure 16–2 supposes there are two people.
The first person's demand curve for water purity is D 1 D 1 .
Each point on the demand curve shows what the individual would pay for the last unit of purer water.
It shows the marginal benefit  to the individual.
D 2 D 2 shows the marginal benefit of purer water to the second individual.
The curve DD gives the marginal social benefit of purer water.
At each output level for the public good, we vertically sum the marginal benefit of each individual to get the social marginal benefit.
Thus at the output Q the social marginal benefit is .
We sum vertically at a given quantity because everyone consumes the same quantity of a public good by definition.
Figure 16–2 A PURE PUBLIC GOOD.
D 1 D 1 and D 2 D 2 are the separate demand curves of two individuals and show the marginal private benefit of the last unit of the public good to each individual.
What is the social marginal benefit of the last unit to the group as a whole?
Since both individuals consume whatever quantity of the good is produced, we must add up vertically the price each is prepared to pay for the last unit.
At the output Q the marginal social benefit is thus .
The curve DD showed the marginal social benefit and is obtained by vertically adding the demand curves of the two individuals.
If MC is the private and social marginal cost of producing the public good the socially efficient output is Q *; at which social marginal cost and social marginal benefit are equal.
Figure 16–2 also shows the marginal cost of producing the public good.
If there are no production externalities the marginal private cost and the marginal social cost of production will coincide.
The socially efficient level of production of the public good is at Q *;, where the marginal social benefit equals the marginal social cost.
What would happen if the good were privately produced and marketed?
Person 1 might pay a price P 1 to have a quantity Q produced by a competitive supplier pricing at marginal cost.
At the output Q the price P 1 just equals the marginal private benefit which person 1 derives from.
the last unit of the public good.
Would person 2 be prepared to pay to have the output of the public good increased beyond Q?
The answer is, ‘No’.
Because it is a public good, person 2 cannot be excluded from consuming the output Q which person 1 has commissioned.
But at the output Q, person 2's marginal private benefit is only P 2 , which is less than the current price P 1 .
Person 2 would certainly not pay the higher price necessary to induce a competitive supplier to expand production beyond the output Q. Person 2 is thus a free-rider enjoying person 1's purchase Q. And the total quantity privately produced and consumed in a competitive market lies below the socially efficient quantity Q *;
Revelation of Preferences
By constructing the marginal social benefit curve DD, the government can decide how much of the public good it is socially efficient to produce.
But how does the government find out the individual demand curves that must be vertically added to get DD?
If people's payments for the good are related to their individual demand curves everyone has an incentive to lie because of the free-rider problem.
People will understate how much they value the good in order to reduce their own payments, just as in a private market.
Conversely, if payments are divorced from the question of how much people would like, people will overstate their private valuations.
We are all for safer streets if we do not have to contribute to the cost.
In practice, democracies try to resolve this problem through elections of governments.
Different parties offer different quantities of public goods together with a statement of how the money will be raised through the tax system.
By asking the question, ‘How much would you like, given that everyone will be charged for the cost of providing public goods?’ society can come  closer to providing the efficient quantities of public goods.
However, since there are only a few parties competing in the election and many different aspects of government on which they are offering a position, this can be only a very crude way to elicit people's view of how much of any particular public good should be provided.
Government Production
The economist's definition of public goods relies solely on the fact that everyone consumes the same quantity.
We have seen that the free-rider problem implies that private markets will not produce the socially efficient level and that there is a case for government intervention on efficiency grounds.
But this merely says that the government must determine how much is produced.
It does not imply that the government must produce the goods itself.
Public goods are not necessarily the goods the government happens to produce.
For example, in the UK, as in most countries, national defence is a public good and is also produced largely within the public or government sector.
We have few private armies.
On the other hand, street-sweeping, though a public good, can be subcontracted to private producers, even if local government determines its quantity and pays for it out of local tax revenue.
Conversely, state hospitals in the National Health Service involve public sector production of private goods.
One person's hip replacement operation certainly prevents the busy surgeon from doing something else at the same time.
In the next chapter we examine why the public sector may wish to produce private goods.
Whether public goods need be produced by the public sector depends not on their consumption characteristics, on which our definition of public good relies, but on their production characteristics.
There is nothing special about street-sweeping, and it can as easily be produced by the public or the private sector.
In contrast, armies and navies rely on discipline and secrecy.
Generals and admirals may believe, and society may agree, that offences against these regulations should receive unusual penalties which would not be generally sanctioned in private firms.
Few people believe that insubordination is an important offence for street-sweepers and should be punished by incarceration or even death.
Hence it may make more sense for soldiers to be in the public sector than street-sweepers.
Where such considerations do not arise, for example in the production of uniforms, it is more likely that the production of defence goods will take place in private firms.
Transfer Payments and Income Redistribution
The government spends money on public goods because there is a market failure when public goods are left entirely to private markets.
Thus the motivation for this type of intervention is social efficiency.
In contrast, government spending on transfer payments is primarily concerned with equity and income redistribution.
By spending money on the unemployed, the old, and the poor (who in the UK are entitled to supplementary benefit if their total income from whatever source falls below a certain minimum level), the government seeks to ensure that the distribution of income and welfare that a totally free market economy would otherwise have produced is at least truncated: there is a minimum standard of living below which no citizen should fall.
The specification of this standard is of course pure value judgement.
Where does the money come from to pay the poor and the disadvantaged?
Primarily from those who can most afford to pay.
Table 16–2 shows that the income tax system in the UK is progressive.
Increasing marginal tax rates on income ensure that each individual's average tax rate, the proportion of total income paid in taxes, increases with income.
Taken as a whole, the tax and transfer system takes money from the rich and gives to the poor.
The poor receive not merely the direct financial transfer in the form of transfer payments such as supplementary benefit, but also the consumption of public goods that have been paid for by income taxes raised from the rich.
As we pointed out in the last chapter, not only is the amount of redistribution to be undertaken by the government a pure value judgement on which different individuals and different political parties will disagree, but there is an inevitable trade-off between the competing objectives of efficiency and equity.
To undertake more redistribution the government will have to increase tax rates, thereby driving a  larger wedge between the price paid by the purchaser and the price received by the seller of the good or service.
Since the price system achieves Pareto efficiency by inducing each individual to equate marginal cost or marginal benefit to the price received or paid, and hence to one another, taxes that imply that buyers and sellers face different prices ensure that the marginal cost to a seller no longer equals the marginal benefit to a buyer.
Taxes are generally distortionary and tend to reduce efficiency.
In Table 16–2 we saw that the Thatcher government succeeded in reducing marginal tax rates, especially for the very rich.
Opponents of the government argued that the objective as well as the consequence of the legislation was to increase the after-tax incomes of the rich at the expense of the poor.
The government argued that reducing distortions in the labour market by cutting income tax would lead to efficiency gains that would far outweigh the valuation that society should put on a more equal income distribution.
If society's resource could be used to make more output, even the poor might be better off in the long run.
Merit Goods and Bads
Merit goods (bads) are goods that society thinks everyone ought to have (ought not to have) regardless of whether they are wanted by each individual.
Examples of merit goods are education and health.
Merit bads are products such as cigarettes.
Since society places a different value on these goods from the value placed on them by the individual, it follows that individual choice within a free market economy will lead to a different allocation from the allocation that society wishes to see.
There are two distinct reasons for designating merit goods.
The first is a version of the externality argument we examined in the previous chapter.
If more education raises the productivity not merely of an individual worker but of all other workers with whom this worker co-operates, there is a production externality that the individual does not take into account in choosing how much education to purchase.
If individuals demand too little education, society should encourage the provision of education.
Free schooling to ensure a minimum level of education, communication, and social interaction might be one way to achieve this.
Conversely, if people take account of the costs to themselves but not the burden on the National Health Service in deciding whether or not to smoke and damage their health, society may regard smoking as a merit bad that should be discouraged.
We shall shortly see how the tax system, in this case a tax on cigarettes, may be used to offset externalities that individuals fail to take into account.
The second aspect of merit goods is where society believes that individuals are no longer acting in their own best interests.
Addiction to drugs, tobacco, or gambling are obvious examples.
Economists rarely subscribe to the value judgement of whole-scale paternalism.
The function of government intervention is less to tell people what they ought to like than to allow them better to achieve what they already like.
However, the government will sometimes have more information or be in a better position to take a decision.
Much as some people hate going to school, they will frequently be glad afterwards that they were made to do so.
Thus the government may spend money on compulsory education or compulsory vaccination because is recognizes that, left to their own decisions, individuals will act in a way they will subsequently regret.
16–3 The Principles of Taxation
This section is in three parts.
First we consider the different kinds of taxes through which the government can raise revenue.
Then we consider again the equity implications of taxation.
Finally, we examine the efficiency implications of taxation.
Variety of Taxes
Governments can raise tax revenue only if they can identify the activities on which the tax rates apply.
Before sophisticated records of income or sales were ever kept, governments raised most of their revenue through customs duties and road tolls, the two places where transactions could be easily monitored.
Income tax in peacetime was not introduced in the UK until the 1840s, and VAT — a general tax on goods and services (with a few specified  exemptions such as good and children's clothing)— was not introduced until the 1970s.
We briefly outline the main taxes shown in Table 16–5, grouped under three headings: taxes on income, or direct taxes; taxes on expenditure, or indirect taxes; and taxes on assets, or wealth taxes.
Direct Taxes
Individuals pay income tax on earnings from labour, rents, dividends, and interest.
In Chapter 14 we saw that the return on an asset is not just the dividend or interest payment but also the capital gain.
Although many economists would argue that capital gains, as for example when ICI shares are purchased for 2 and subsequently sold for 3, are as much income as the dividend component of the return on an asset, in practice the Inland Revenue assesses and taxes capital gains separately.
National insurance contributions by individuals are also a form of direct personal taxation.
Companies pay corporation tax calculated on their taxable profits after allowance for interest payments and depreciation.
They also make a national insurance contribution on behalf of their employees.
Indirect Taxes
Indirect taxes are taxes levied on expenditure on goods and services.
The most important source of indirect tax revenue is value added tax (VAT), which is effectively a retail sales tax.
Whereas a sales tax is collected only at the point of final sale to the consumer, VAT is collected at different stages of the production process.
Suppose a firm mines iron ore and converts it into 200 worth of high-grade steel, which is then sold to a car producer.
The car producer converts the steel into a car costing 3200.
A simple sales tax levied at 15 per cent would raise the cost to the consumer to 3200 + 480 (15 per cent of 3200) or 3680.
In contrast, VAT works as follows.
The steel firm has a value added or net output of 200 on which it pays 15 per cent or 30 in tax.
Passing the tax on to the car producer, the steel is sold for 230.
The car producer has a value added or net output of 3000 and pays 15 per cent or 450 in tax.
Since the car firm paid 230 for the steel, the final price to the consumer is 230 + 3000 + 450 = 3680.
As far as the consumer is concerned this is just the same as a 15 per cent sales tax.
This example makes it seem that the consumer price is raised by the full amount of the tax.
But a higher consumer price will reduce the quantity demanded.
In turn this will move producers back down their marginal cost curves and alter the net-of-tax price producers require.
Later in this section we show how to analyse these induced effects to determine how the burden of the tax is ultimately divided between producers and consumers.
Revenue from VAT is supplemented by other indirect taxes including special duties on tobacco and alcohol, licence fees for motor cars and televisions, and customs duties on imports.
Wealth Taxes
In the UK there used to be two taxes that tax wealth per se rather than the income that is derived from wealth.
The first was the tax on property values, which formed the main source of revenue for local government.
That is the tax that was replaced by the poll tax (a simple flat-rate tax per person) in the reform of UK local government finance during 1988–90.
The second, which still exists, is capital transfer tax, which applies to transfers of wealth between individuals, whether as gifts during life or as inheritances after death.
How does the UK tax structure compare with that in other countries?
Table 16–5 shows data for several advanced countries in 1983.
The most notable feature of the UK tax system appears to be its low reliance on social security taxes for state pension and unemployment provisions.
Table 16–5 also suggests that the UK relies quite heavily on indirect taxes rather than direct taxes.
Tax revenue is necessary to pay for government expenditure.
We now assess the UK tax system against our two welfare criteria, equity and efficiency.
How To Tax Fairly
In the last chapter we introduced two notions of equity: horizontal equity, or the equal treatment of equals, and vertical equity, the redistribution from the ‘haves’ to the ‘have-nots’.
In Table 16–2 we showed that income tax is progressive.
In taking proportionately more from the rich than from the less well off, income  tax reflects the principle of ability to pay.
There are two reasons society might think it fair that the rich should pay more.
First, society may wish to take from the rich in order to give to the poor.
Second, if money has to be raised to pay for public goods, society may wish to avoid taxing those whose incomes are already low.
The principle of ability to pay thus reflects a concern about vertical equity.
Table 16–5 Sources of tax revenue in 1983 (percentage of total taxes)
A second principle is sometimes applied in discussing the extent to which unequal people should be treated unequally.
The benefits principle argues that people who receive more than their share of public spending should pay more than their share of tax revenues.
Car users should pay more towards public roads than people without a car should pay.
And to some extent they do.
Car users pay heavy duties on petrol and must pay licence fees for running a car.
However, the benefits principle often conflicts directly with the principle of ability to pay.
If people who are most vulnerable to unemployment must pay the highest contributions to the government unemployment insurance scheme, it becomes very difficult to achieve a significant redistribution of income, wealth, or welfare.
If the main objective is vertical equity, the ability to pay.
principle must usually take precedence.
Although Table 16–2 shows that the income tax system in the UK is progressive, it is the entire structure of taxes, transfers, and public spending that we must examine before we can judge how much the government is effectively redistributing from the rich to the poor.
We have already mentioned two factors that make the entire structure more progressive than an examination of income tax alone would suggest.
First, transfer payments actually give money out to the poor.
The old get pensions, the unemployed get unemployment benefit, and, as a final safety net, anyone whose income from whatever source falls below a certain minimum is entitled to supplementary benefit.
Second, the state provides public goods that can be consumed by the poor, even if they have not paid any taxes to finance these goods.
In addition to pure public goods, such as defence, the state also makes free provision of certain goods, such as parks and swimming pools, which have part of the characteristics of a pure public good.
Although the whole population cannot squeeze into Hyde Park, quite a few people can enjoy its amenities without spoiling the enjoyment of others.
And since the rich tend to sit in their own gardens, public parks help redistribute enjoyment towards the poor.
As against these progressive elements of the tax, transfer, and spending structure, it should be noted that there are some important regressive elements that take proportionately more from the poor.
Beer and tobacco taxes are huge revenue-earners for the government.
Yet the poor spend a much higher proportion of their income — in some cases even a larger absolute amount — on these goods than do the rich.
Such taxes reduce the effectiveness of the tax, transfer and spending structure in redistributing from the rich to the poor.
Tax Incidence
The incidence of a tax measures the final tax burden on different people once we have allowed for the indirect as well as the direct effects of the tax.
The ultimate effect of a tax  can be very different from its apparent effect.
Thus to get a really good idea of the extent to which taxes (or subsidies) alter people's spending power and welfare, we need to examine the issue of tax incidence in more detail.
Figure 16–3 A TAX ON WAGES.
In the absence of a tax, free market equilibrium is at E and the wage is W. A wage tax makes the gross wage paid by firms higher than the net wage received by workers.
Measuring gross wages on the vertical axis, the demand curve DD is unaltered by the imposition of the tax.
Firms still choose the quantity of labour demanded to equate the gross wage to the marginal value product of labour.
SS continues to show labour supply, but as a function of the net wage.
To get labour supply in terms of the gross wage we must draw the new supply curve SS ';.
At each quantity of hours, SS '; lies vertically above SS by a distance reflecting the tax on earnings from the last hour worked.
The new equilibrium is at E ';.
The gross wage paid by firms is W '; but the net wage received by workers is W’;.
The vertical distance  shows the amount of the tax.
Whether the government collects the tax revenue entirely from firms or entirely from workers, the incidence of the tax is the same.
It falls partly on firms, who must pay a higher gross wage W', and partly on workers, who receive the lower net wage W’;.
The area of pure waste  will shortly be discussed in the text.
Figure 16–3 shows the market for labour.
DD is the market demand curve for labour and SS is the supply curve for labour, which we assume slopes upwards.
Thus a higher wage rate increases the supply of hours of work, but reduces the demand for hours of work.
In the absence of an income tax (a tax on wages), the labour market will be in equilibrium at point E.
Now suppose the government imposes an income tax.
If we measure the gross wage on the vertical axis, the demand curve DD is unaltered since it is the comparison of the gross wage with the marginal value product of labour that determines the quantity of labour demanded by firms.
Workers' preferences or attitudes are also unchanged, but it is the wage net of tax that workers compare with the marginal value of their leisure in deciding how much labour to supply.
Thus, although SS continues to show the labour supply curve in terms of the after-tax wage, we must draw in the higher schedule SS '; to show the supply of labour in terms of the gross or pre-tax wage.
The vertical distance between SS '; and SS measures the amount of tax being paid on earnings from the last hour's work.
Since DD and SS '; now show the behaviour of firms and workers at any gross wage, the new equilibrium will be at the point E ';.
The new equilibrium gross wage is W '; at which firms demand a quantity of hours L ';.
The vertical distance between A '; and E '; measures the tax being paid on earnings from the last hour of work.
Thus the after-tax wage is W’; at which workers are happy to supply a quantity of hours L ';.
Relative to the original equilibrium wage W, the imposition of the tax on wages has raised the pre-tax wage to W ';, but lowered the after-tax wage to W’;.
It has raised the wage that firms must pay but lowered the take-home wage for workers.
The incidence of the tax has fallen on both firms and workers even though, as a matter of administrative convenience, the tax may be collected by the government directly from workers.
The lesson from Figure 16–3 is an important one: the incidence or burden of a tax cannot be established by looking at who actually hands  over the money to the government.
Taxes usually alter equilibrium prices and quantities and these induced effects must also be taken into account.
However, we can draw one very general conclusion.
The more inelastic the supply curve and the more elastic the demand curve, the more the final incidence will fall on the seller rather than the purchaser.
Figure 16–4 TAXING A FACTOR IN INELASTIC SUPPLY.
If the supply curve SS is vertical, a tax A '; E per unit leaves the quantity L unaffected.
Since the demand curve DD is unaltered, the tax has no effect on the pre-tax wage rate.
The full incidence of the tax falls on workers whose after-tax wage is reduced by the full amount of the tax.
Figure 16–4 depicts the extreme case in which the supply curve is completely inelastic.
In the absence of a tax, equilibrium is at E and the wage is W. Since the vertical supply curve SS implies that a fixed quantity of hours L will be supplied whatever the after-tax wage, the imposition of a tax on wages leads to a new equilibrium at A ';.
Only if the pre-tax wage is unchanged will firms demand the quantity L that is supplied.
Hence after-tax wages fall by the full amount of the tax.
The entire incidence falls on the workers.
To check you have grasped the idea of incidence, try drawing for yourself a market with a relatively elastic supply curve and a relatively inelastic demand curve.
Show that the incidence of a tax will now fall mainly on the purchaser.
Taxation, Efficiency, and Waste
So far, we have been considering the equity implications of a tax.
But we must also think about the efficiency implications of a tax.
We can use Figure 16–3 again.
Before the tax is imposed, labour market equilibrium is at E. The wage W measures both the marginal social benefit of the last hour of work and its marginal social cost.
The demand curve DD tells us the marginal value product of labour, the extra benefit society could have from extra goods produced.
The supply curve SS tells us the marginal value of the leisure being sacrificed in order to work another hour, the marginal social cost of extra work.
Before the tax is imposed, the labour market is in equilibrium at E. Since marginal social cost and benefit are equal, this initial position is socially efficient.
When the tax is imposed, the new equilibrium is at E ';.
We have already discussed the incidence of the tax on firms and workers.
The tax A '; E '; increases the wage to firms to W '; but reduces the after-tax wage for workers to W’;.
But there is an additional tax burden or deadweight loss that is pure waste.
It is the triangle A '; E '; E. By reducing the quantity of hours from L to L ';, the tax causes society to stop using hours on which the marginal social benefit, the height of the demand curve DD, exceeds the marginal social cost, the height of the supply curve SS.
By driving a wedge between the wage firms pay and the wage workers receive, the tax induces a distortion which destroys the efficiency of free market equilibrium.
Must Taxes Be Distortionary?
Government need tax revenue to pay for public   goods and to make transfer payments to the poor.
Must taxes create distortions and lead to the waste or inefficiency which Figure 16–3 suggests?
Figure 16–4 showed what happens when a wage tax is levied but the supply of labour is completely inelastic.
Although the tax reduces the take-home pay of workers, there is no change in the gross wage or the equilibrium quantity of hours.
Since the quantity is unchanged, there is no distortionary triangle or deadweight burden.
The equilibrium quantity remains the socially efficient quantity.
We can make this into a general principle.
When either the supply or the demand curve for a good or service is very inelastic, the imposition of a tax will lead only to a small change in quantity.
Hence the deadweight burden triangle must be small.
Given that the government must raise some tax revenue, the smallest amount of total waste will be achieved when the goods that are most inelastic in supply or demand are taxed most heavily.
This principle finds practical expression in the UK tax system.
The three most heavily taxed commodities are alcohol, tobacco, and the oil being extracted from the North Sea.
For these commodities tax rates range from 50 to 90 per cent.
Alcohol and tobacco are generally assumed to be products with a very inelastic demand.
North Sea oil is in inelastic supply.
Having spent large amounts of money on exploration and drilling, oil companies are quite keen to recoup their investment, even if the government is taking a big slice off the top.
So far, we have discussed the taxes that would do least harm to the allocative efficiency of the economy.
Sometimes the government has the opportunity to levy taxes which will actually improve efficiency and reduce waste.
The most important example is when externalities exist.
Figure 16–5 TAXES TO OFFSET EXTERNALITIES.
Given private demand DD and supply SS free market equilibrium is at E with a quantity a With a negative consumption externality, the social marginal benefit is DD '; lying below DD.
E *; is the socially efficient point at which output is Q *;.
At this output the marginal externality is E *; F. By levying a tax of exactly E *; F per unit, the government can shift the private supply curve from SS to SS '; leading to a new equilibrium at F at which the socially efficient quantity Q *; is produced and the deadweight burden of the externality E *; HE is eliminated.
Cigarette smokers pollute the air for other people but take no account of this in deciding how much to smoke.
They give rise to a harmful consumption externality.
Figure 16–5 shows the supply curve SS of cigarette producers.
Since there are no production externalities, this marginal private cost curve is also the marginal social cost curve.
DD is the private demand curve showing the marginal benefit of cigarettes to smokers.
Because there is a harmful consumption externality, the marginal social benefit DD '; of cigarette consumption is lower than DD
In the absence of a tax, free market equilibrium is at E, but there is over-consumption of cigarettes.
The socially efficient quantity is Q *; since marginal social cost and marginal social benefit are equated at E *;.
Suppose the government levies a tax, equal to the vertical distance E *; F, on each packet of cigarettes.
With the tax-inclusive price on the vertical axis, the demand curve DD is unaffected, but the  supply curve shifts up to SS ';.
Each point on SS '; then allows producers to receive the corresponding net-of-tax price on SS.
After the tax is introduced, equilibrium is at the point E. The socially efficient quantity Q *; is produced and consumed.
Consumers pay the price P '; and producers receive the price P’; after tax has been paid at the rate E *; F per unit.
Only the particular tax rate E *; F per unit will guide the free market to the socially efficient allocation.
A lower tax rate (including a zero tax rate) leads to too much consumption and production of cigarettes.
A higher tax rate than E *; F will move consumers further up their demand curve and lead to under-consumption and under-production.
Why must the tax rate be exactly E *; F if the efficient quantity is to be achieved?
Because this is exactly the amount of the externality on the last unit when the efficient quantity Q *; is produced.
By levying a tax at precisely this rate, the government raises the price to the consumer above the price to the producer by the amount of the externality.
Consumers are induced to behave as if they took account of the externality, though in fact they take account only of the after-tax price.
Whenever consumption or production externalities induce distortions in the free market equilibrium allocation, the government can improve efficiency and reduce waste by levying taxes.
The fact that alcohol and tobacco have farmful externalities provides another reason for taxing them heavily.
16–4 Taxation and Supply-side Economics
We began the chapter by noting that many Western countries have become disenchanted with the extent of government involvement in the economy.
In part, it was felt that governments were spending too much.
Resources used to produce goods and services for the government cannot be used to make goods in the private sector.
We shall have more to say about this in the next chapter.
However, the major objection to high levels of government expenditure seems to have been associated with the need for correspondingly high levels of revenue collection.
Table 16–3 reminds us that some government expenditure is financed by borrowing.
In the UK this is known as the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR).
In Part 4 we shall examine the argument that a high PSBR leads to high inflation, high interest rates, or both.
For the moment we ignore government borrowing and consider the argument that high taxation to pay for high levels of public spending necessarily strangles the economy.
We have already seen that in order to pay for public goods and redistribution the government must raise tax revenues, which typically introduces allocative distortions and leads to a dead-weight burden.
Suppose the government adopts a less ambitious spending programme and is therefore able to reduce income tax rates.
What will be the consequences?
First, by spending less on goods and services, the government will free some resources which can now be used by the private sector.
If it were true that the private sector uses resources more productively than the public sector, the transfer of resources might directly produce more output.
The total supply of goods and services would rise.
Whether or not the private sector does use resources more productively on average than the government remains a contentious issue.
What about the effects of lower income tax rates?
Figure 16–3 suggests that income taxes introduce a distortion that leads to a level of work that is socially inefficient.
With lower taxes and a smaller distortion there would be a lower dead-weight burden.
Since the distortion leads to a level of work that is lower than the socially efficient amount, cutting income taxes would also increase the amount of work done in the economy.
How large could this effect be?
It all depends on the elasticity of labour supply.
The more inelastic the labour supply, the lower is the distortion introduced by any particular income tax rate.
When labour supply is completely inelastic as in Figure 16–4, income tax does not induce any distortion at all and there will be no allocative gain in reducing income tax rates.
In Chapter 11 we showed that an increase in the after-tax wage (as for example when income tax rates are cut) will have a substitution effect, tending to make people work longer hours, but an income effect, tending to make them work fewer hours.
With higher after-tax wages it takes fewer hours to earn any given target  income.
Hence we argued that, for people already in work, changes in after-tax rates have only a small effect on hours of work supplied.
Then we showed that increasing the after-tax wage would encourage labour force participation by those not currently in the labour force.
Hence, taking hours and participation together, the supply curve of labour input (hours times people) will not be completely vertical.
Cutting income tax will increase the supply of labour input, chiefly by attracting new workers into the labour force.
But the total effect on labour supply might not be as large as some proponents of tax cuts believe.
In contrast, the tax cut enthusiasts believe that income tax is a major distortion and labour supply is very elastic.
The socially efficient quantity of labour input would then be much larger than the equilibrium level under current tax rates.
One illustration of this view is the famous Laffer curve, named after Professor Arthur Laffer, one of President Reagan's most influential economic advisers.
Suppose, for example, that all government tax revenue was raised through income tax.
Figure 16–6 shows that with a zero tax rate the government would raise zero revenue.
At the opposite extreme, with a 100 per cent income tax rate, there would be no point working and again tax revenue would be zero.
Beginning from a zero rate, a small increase in the tax rate will yield some tax revenue.
Initially revenue rises with the tax rate, but beyond the tax rate t* higher taxes have major disincentive effects on work effort and revenue starts to fall.
Figure 16–6 THE LAFFER CURVE.
The Laffer curve shows the relationship between tax rates and tax revenue.
Moderate tax rates raise some revenue.
Beyond t *;, higher tax rates reduce revenue because disincentive effects greatly reduce the supply of the quantity being taxed.
At 100 per cent tax rate, supply and revenue will be zero again.
Professor Laffer's idea was that many ‘big government-big tax’ countries are now at tax rates above t *;.
If so, tax cuts would be the miracle cure.
Everybody likes a tax cut but the government would actually raise more revenue by cutting taxes.
By reducing the tax distortion and increasing the amount of work a lot, lower taxes would be more than compensated by the extra work and incomes to which the tax rates were applied.
It is not the shape of the Laffer curve that is in dispute.
Rather, what many professional economists in the UK, the United States, and other Western countries have disputed is that these economies do in fact have tax rates above t *;.
Most economists' reading of the empirical evidence is that our economies lie to the left of t *;.
Figure 16–3 implies that cutting income tax rates may eliminate some of the deadweight burden of distortionary taxation, but governments should probably expect their tax revenue to decline if such policies are put into effect.
Hence, if governments do wish to reduce tax rates without adding to government borrowing it is essential that they reduce their spending.
16–5 Local Government
Thus far we have been chiefly interested in the principles of central government.
In this section we examine the economics of local government.
Local government expenditure may cover a variety of things, from sweeping the streets to providing local schooling.
In turn this must be  financed through taxes.
Some of these taxes will be local, but some will come from central government revenue raised through the national tax system.
Finally, local government is responsible for some types of regulation, for example land use or zoning laws.
Economic Principles
Why don't we make central government responsible for everything?
Two arguments are usually used.
First, diversity matters.
People are different and they don't want to be treated the same.
Civic pride is necessarily local.
Second, people feel that central government is remote from their particular needs.
Even if central government wished to pay attention to local considerations, it would find it hard to do so efficiently.
We turn now to two important models of local government.
The first is the Tiebout model.
This model emphasizes diversity.
Some people want a lot of local expenditure on public services and are prepared to pay high local taxes; others want to pay lower local taxes even though this means lower public services.
If all local governments are the same, everyone will be unhappy with the compromise.
The Tiebout model is sometimes called the invisible foot: people will cluster together in the area providing the package of spending and taxes they want.
The invisible foot brings about an efficient allocation of resources through competition between local governments.
In practice, the invisible foot is sometimes a very imperfect incentive structure.
First, it may be hard to move between local authorities.
For example, being born in a neighbourhood may entitle you to a higher place in the queue for housing provided by that local authority.
Second, if much of local authority revenue comes from central government, the levels of spending and taxes may be insensitive to the wishes of local residents.
We discuss this more fully for the UK in Box 16–1.
Earlier in the chapter, we stressed the distinction between efficiency and equity.
Even if the invisible foot led to efficiency, it might also lead to inequity.
The rich are likely to cluster together in suburbs.
Then they pass zoning laws specifying a minimum size for a house and its garden.
This makes it impossible for the poor to move to that neighbourhood.
By forming an exclusive club, the rich have ensured that their tax contributions do not have to go to supporting the poor in their neighbourhood.
And the poor get stuck with one another in inner-city areas whose governments face the biggest social needs but the smallest local tax base.
The Tiebout model assumes that residents mainly consume the public services provided by their own local authority.
But when each unit of local government is responsible for a small geographical area, this may be a poor assumption.
If an inner-city supplies free art galleries, financed out of taxes on inner-city inhabitants, the rich still come in from the suburbs to make use of these facilities.
Conversely, inner-city inhabitants spend their Sundays enjoying countryside facilities supported by taxes raised out of town.
In these cases, provision of public services in one area confers a beneficial externality on neighbouring areas.
Economic theory suggests the right answer to this problem.
Unless the externality can be priced (charging suburban users but not city dwellers for entry to subsidized galleries and opera houses), the most efficient solution is to widen the geographical area of each local government until it includes most of the people who will use the public services it provides.
Thus, for example, it may make sense to have an integrated commuter rail service and inner-city subway, and to subsidize it to prevent people driving through congested streets; but only a local government embracing both the suburbs and the inner city is likely to get close to the efficient policy.
These two theories of local government pull in opposite directions, and the right answer is likely to lie somewhere in between.
The assumptions of the Tiebout model favour a lot of small local government jurisdictions to maximize choice and competition between areas.
The model emphasizing externalities across areas suggests larger jurisdictions to ‘internalize’ externalities that would otherwise occur.
Summary
1
In industrialized economies, government revenues come mainly from direct taxes on   personal incomes and company profits, indirect taxes on purchases of goods and services, and contributions to state-run social security schemes.
Government spending comprises spending on goods and services and transfer payments.
2
Government intervention in a market economy should be assessed against the criteria of distributional equity and allocative efficiency.
A progressively tax and transfer system takes most from the rich and give most to the poor.
The UK tax and transfer system is mildly progressive.
The less well off do receive transfer payments and the rich face the highest rates of income tax.
Although some necessities, notably food, are exempt from VAT, other goods intensively consumed by the poor, notably cigarettes and alcohol, are heavily taxed.
3
Externalities and public goods are classic cases of market failure where intervention may improve allocative efficiency.
By taxing or subsidizing goods that involve externalities, the government can induce the private sector to behave as if it takes account of the externality, thus eliminating the deadweight burden arising from the misallocation induced by the externality distortion.
4
A pure public good is a good for which one person's consumption does not reduce the quantity available for consumption by others.
Together with the impossibility of effectively excluding people from consuming it, this implies that all individuals consume the same quantity, although they may attach different utility to this consumption if their tastes differ.
5
A free market will undersupply a public good because of the free-rider problem.
Individuals need not offer to pay for a good that they can consume if others pay for it.
The socially efficient quantity of a public good equates the marginal social cost of production to the sum of the marginal private benefits over all people at this output level.
Diagrammatically, this implies that individual demand curves are vertically added to get the social demand or marginal benefit curve.
6
Except for taxes designed to offset externalities, taxes are generally distortionary.
By driving a wedge between the selling price and the purchase price, they prevent the price system achieving the equality of marginal costs and marginal benefits.
The amount of the deadweight burden is higher the higher is the marginal tax rate and the size of the wedge, but it also depends on supply and demand elasticities for the taxed commodity or activity.
The more inelastic are supply and demand, the less the tax will change equilibrium quantity and the smaller will be the deadweight burden triangle.
7
The incidence of tax describes who ultimately pays the tax.
The more inelastic is demand relative to supply, the more a tax will fall on purchasers as opposed to sellers.
8
Rising tax rates initially increase tax revenue but eventually lead to such large falls in the equilibrium quantity of the taxed commodity or activity that revenue starts to fall again.
Cutting tax rates will usually reduce the deadweight tax burden but might increase revenue if taxes had initially been sufficiently high.
Most Western economies do not appear to have reached this position.
If governments wish to reduce the deadweight tax burden and balance spending and revenue, it is necessary to reduce government spending in order to cut taxes.
Key Terms
Problems
1
Which of the following are public goods?(a) the fire brigade;(b) clean streets;(c) refuse collection;(d) cable television;(e) social toleration;(f) the postal service.
Explain and discuss alternative ways of providing these goods or services.
2
Why does society try to ensure that every child receives an education?
Discuss the different ways this could be done and give reasons for preferring one method of providing such an education.
3
How would you apply the principles of horizontal and vertical equity in deciding how much to tax two people, each capable of doing the same work, but one of whom chooses to devote more time to sun-bathing and therefore has a lower income?
4
Whereas a progressive tax takes proportionately more of a rich person's income, a regressive tax takes proportionately more of a poor person's income.
Classify the following taxes as progressive or regressive. (a) 10 per cent tax on all luxury goods;(b) taxes in proportion to the value of owner-occupied houses;(c) taxes on beer;(d) taxes on champagne.
5
There is a flat-rate 30 per cent income tax on all income over 2000.
Calculate the average tax rate (tax paid divided by income) at income levels of 5000, 10000, and 50000.
Is the tax progressive?
Is it more or less progressive if the exemption is raised from 2000 to 5000?
6
(a) Suppose labour supply is completely inelastic.
Show why there is no deadweight burden if wages are taxed.
Who bears the incidence of the tax?(b) Now suppose labour supply is quite elastic.
Show the area that is the deadweight burden of the tax.
How  much of the tax is ultimately borne by firms and how much by workers?(c) For any given supply elasticity show that firms bear more of the tax the more inelastic is the demand for labour.
7
Common Fallacies Show why the following statements are incorrect:(a) The only reason for taxation is to provide for shirkers by penalizing people who do an honest day's work.
(b) It is obvious that the government is supplying too many goods and services.
In a free enterprise economy it would be profitable only to supply a fraction of the amount to which the government is currently committed.
(c) The government spends all its revenue.
Taxes cannot be a burden on society as a whole.
BOX 16–1 POLL POSITION: UK LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS
Until the late 1980s, local government in the UK was financed from three sources.
First, domestic households paid rates, a property tax assessed on rateable values or hypothetical house prices.
Second, local firms paid business rates on their property.
The third, and much the largest source, was from central government through the rate support grant, which took some account of the needs of the area.
The Thatcher government believed this system has a bias towards overspending by local authorities.
Many poor households were exempt from domestic rates but still had a vote in the local election; they had an incentive to vote for high spending programmes.
Firms paid rates but had no vote at all in local elections.
Only about 20 per cent of local government revenue was being raised from households actually required to pay rates.
A subsidiary problem was a reluctance to raise rateable values, the basis of the property tax, in line with market prices.
Mrs Thatcher believed that greater local democracy would lead to a voter rebellion against high spending local authorities, forcing them to be less ambitious and more efficient.
The reform of local government, which took effect in Scotland in 1989 and the rest of the UK in 1990, made three changes.
First, education in state schools (the largest component of local expenditure) was moved from local to central government.
Second, local business rates were replaced by a uniform business rate, a single tax rate nationwide.
Simultaneously, the rateable values for business were moved more into line with market values, leading to enormous (and justified!) increases in the tax assessment for firms in the south-east, where property prices had risen substantially since the previous assessment of rateable values years earlier.
Whereas previously each local authority had access to its own business rate revenue, now the central government collected all this revenue and redistributed it to local authorities in proportion to the local population.
The consequence was to redistribute money from the rich south, where property prices were high, to the poorer north.
Third, domestic rates were replaced by the community charge or ‘poll tax’, a flat-rate tax per head with some partial relief for the poorest households.
The logic of the reforms was to move local government closer to the Tiebout model, making it more transparent that ‘you get what you pay for’.
Greater transparency is almost certainly a good idea.
In the text, we discuss the pros and cons of the Tiebout principle itself.
Whatever its merits, this principle should be clearly separated from the government decision about how progressive the community charge should be.
It was violation of the ability-to-pay principle that caused much of the public hostility to the poll tax.
If future policy decides to abandon the flat-rate community charge, this reopens the question of how a more progressive local tax should be designed.
This year's income may be a poor indicator of a household's true economic spending power, and there is something to be said for basing the tax assessment on property values.
But this creates difficult administrative problems about how often official valuations of property values are revised.
Some countries do use property taxes in this way.
Others, such as the United States, prefer a progressive local income tax, which may be simpler to administer.
17
Competition Policy and Industrial Policy
What do Durex, Valium, and Cornflakes have in common with electricity and coal?
The answer is that the London Rubber Company, Hoffman LaRoche, Kelloggs, the Central Electricity Generating Board, and the National Coal Board have all been the subject of investigations by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Chapters 17 and 18 are about the very large firms that exist when economies of scale are very  important .
This chapter is about firms in the private sector; the next chapter about public sector firms.
When economies of scale are important, industries will not be perfectly competitive.
There will be a few large firms in the industry.
In an unregulated free market, each firm will maximize profits by setting marginal cost equal to marginal revenue, which is less than price and marginal consumer benefit.
Since marginal cost is less than marginal consumer benefit, society would gain by expanding the output of such industries.
Imperfectly competitive industries are a source of market failure because free market equilibrium is no longer Pareto-efficient.
Different governments adopt very different solutions to this problem.
In the United States the Anti-Trust laws have been used to break up existing private monopolies and prevent the formation of new monopolies through mergers of existing companies.
European governments have tended to take a more lenient view of merger activity and have sometimes actively encouraged it.
Natural or inevitable monopolies such as electricity generation enjoy huge economies of scale.
In some countries they are private industries subject to state regulation; in other countries they are state-run or nationalized industries.
Whether nationalization improves the efficiency of resource allocation, or whether we would do better to privatize existing public corporations, is an issue we take up the next chapter.
This chapter analyses government policy towards private sector firms that are necessarily imperfectly competitive.
In some cases there are no clear and simple answers.
This is an area of economic as well as political controversy.
But at least we can sort out the issues involved.
We begin by discussing the social cost of monopoly and other forms of imperfect competition.
17–1 The Social Cost of Monopoly Power
In Chapter 15 we saw that, in the absence of externalities and other sources of market failure, competitive equilibrium would be Pareto-efficient.
Each firm's private assessment of its marginal cost would coincide with society's assessment of the social marginal cost of the resources employed.
Each firm's private assessment of the marginal benefit of output, namely the output price received, would coincide with society's view of the marginal value of output to consumers.
Competitive equilibrium would ensure that each industry expanded its output up to the point at which price equals marginal cost and therefore social marginal benefit equals social marginal cost.
No resource reallocation would make consumers as a whole better off.
When an industry is imperfectly competitive we say that each firm in the industry enjoys a degree of monopoly power.
Equating marginal cost and marginal revenue, each firm will produce an output at which price exceeds marginal cost.
This excess of price over both marginal revenue and marginal cost is a convenient measure of the firm's monopoly power.
When firms have monopoly power, price and social marginal benefit of the last output unit exceed the private and social marginal cost of  producing that last output unit.
From society's viewpoint the industry is producing too little.
Expanding output would add more to social benefit than to social cost.
How should we measure the social cost of monopoly power and inefficient resource allocation?
Later we take up the case of natural or pure monopoly where huge economies of scale allow only a single producer to survive in an industry.
We begin with a more general discussion of all forms of imperfect competition and monopoly power.
As we saw in Chapter 10, intermediate forms of imperfect competition require some economies of scale to limit the number of firms an industry can support.
Nevertheless, to introduce the idea of the social cost of monopoly power it is convenient to ignore economies of scale altogether.
We thus ask the following question: what would happen if a competitive industry were taken over by a single firm which then operated as a multi-plant monopolist?
Figure 17–1 shows how this question may be answered.
Under perfect competition LMC is both the industry's long-run marginal cost curve and its supply curve.
With constant returns to scale, LMC is also the long-run average cost curve of the industry.
Given the demand curve DD, competitive equilibrium is at B. The competitive industry produces an output Q C at at price P C .
When the industry is taken over by a monopolist, the monopolist recognizes that marginal revenue MR is less than price at each output.
The monopolist produces an output Q M at a price P M thus equating marginal cost and marginal revenue.
The area P M P C AC shows the monopolist's profits from selling Q M at a price in excess of marginal and average cost.
The area of the triangle ACB shows the deadweight burden or social cost of monopoly power.
Why?
Because at Q M the social marginal benefit of another unit of output is P M but the social marginal cost is only P C .
Society would like to expand output up to the competitive point B at which social marginal benefit and social marginal cost are equal.
The triangle ACB measures the social profit or excess of benefits over costs from such an output expansion.
Conversely, by reducing output from Q C to Q M the monopolist imposes a social cost equal to the area ACB.
For the whole economy the social cost of monopoly power is obtained by adding together the deadweight burden triangles such as ACB for all industries in which marginal cost and marginal revenue are less than price and social marginal benefit.
An early study by Professor Arnold Harberger suggested that the social cost of monopoly power, as measured by these deadweight burden triangles, was considerably less than 1 per cent of national income.
If social costs are really this small, perhaps there are more important things for the government to worry about in designing economic policy.
Professor George Stigler, a recent Nobel Prize winner in economics, has argued that ‘Economists might serve a more useful purpose if they fought fires or termites instead of monopoly.
Figure 17–1 THE SOCIAL COST OF MONOPOLY.
The industry has horizontal long-run average and marginal costs.
A perfectly competitive industry produces at R, but a monopolist sets MR = MC to produce only Q M at a price P M .
The monopolist earns excess profits P M P C CA, but there is a social cost or deadweight burden equal to the triangle ACB.
Between Q M and Q C social marginal benefit exceeds social marginal cost and society would gain by expanding output to Q C .
The triangle ACB shows how much society would gain by this expansion
However, other economists believe that the social costs of monopoly cannot be ignored.
Professor F. M. Scherer of Yale, whose work on industrial structure we cited in Chapters 8–10, has argued that in the United States the social cost of monopoly is large enough ‘to treat every family in the land to a steak dinner at a good restaurant’.
Moreover, Professors Keith Cowling and Dennis Mueller have argued that the social cost of monopoly could be as high as 7 per cent of national income.
Why is there such disagreement about the cost of monopoly?
First, the area of the deadweight burden triangle in Figure 17–1 depends on the elasticity of the demand curve.
In calculating the size of deadweight burden triangles under monopoly, different economists have used different estimates of the elasticity of demand.
Second, the welfare cost of monopoly is greater than the deadweight burden triangle itself.
Since monopoly may yield high profits to the firm, it is likely that firms will expend large quantities of resources in trying to acquire and secure monopoly positions.
In Chapter 10 we saw that existing oligopolists would have an incentive to advertise too much, not because advertising provides additional consumer information about the product, but because it raises the fixed cost of being in the industry, thereby making it harder for new firms to enter the industry.
How much should society view this advertising expenditure as a waste of resources?
Similarly, firms may devote large quantities of resources trying to influence the government in order to obtain favourable judgements which will enhance or preserve their monopoly power.
They may also deliberately maintain extra production capacity so that potential entrants can see that any attempt at entry will be matched by a sharp increase in production by existing firms, forcing price reductions which in the short run will be unprofitable for all but which may bankrupt the entrant first.
From the economy's viewpoint, resources devoted to lobbying the government or maintaining deliberate over-capacity may also be largely wasted.
For these reasons, the precise extent of the social cost of monopoly remains a subject of continuing controversy.
Different economists will continue to disagree about its measurement and extent.
Nevertheless, few governments believe that the social cost of monopoly is sufficiently small that it can safely be ignored.
We will shortly examine the policies which have been adopted to restrict the degree of monopoly power exercised by large firms.
Our discussion relates only to the efficiency losses arising from imperfect competition.
Society might also have views on two other aspects on monopoly performance: the amount of political power that large companies are in a position to exert, and the distributional issue of fairness in relation to the large supernormal profits that a monopolist can earn.
The Distribution of Monopoly Profits
In Figure 17–1 the area P M P C CA shows pure monopoly profits after all economic costs.
Should society tolerate such privately collected taxes?
Whether we think the high price P M charged by a monopolist is a rip-off or the just reflection of what consumers are prepared to pay is a pure value judgement about equity.
In passing, it is worth remarking that the ultimate recipients of monopoly profits are the monopolist's shareholders.
Since a large fraction of the stock market is held by pension funds and insurance companies which will eventually make payments to workers, monopoly profits may indirectly pay income to some relatively poor people.
Nevertheless, in addition to any efficiency argument against monopoly, society may decide that it dislikes monopoly profits purely on the grounds of equity.
Suppose the government imposes a profits tax on a monopolist: what effect would this have on the monopolist's output decision?
The simple answer is that it would have no effect!
Why not?
Because, whatever the tax rate (assuming it is less than 100 per cent), the way to maximize after-tax profits is to maximize pre-tax profits.
Provided the government does not take all the extra pre-tax profit in taxes, increasing pre-tax profits must always increase post-tax profits.
Hence the monopolist will produce exactly the same output as in the absence of a profits tax and, facing the same demand curve, will charge the same price as before.
Since it is always open to the government to tax away a monopolist's excess profits, it is the allocative inefficiency of monopoly on which economists have focused their criticisms.
17–2 Regulating Private Monopolies in the UK
Suppose it is recognized that economies of scale may lead to monopoly or other forms of imperfect competition that tend to misallocate resources.
Government intervention may take one of two forms.
Either the government can order large firms to be split up into smaller independent companies, which it is hoped will act more competitively (the so-called ‘structural approach’), or the government can leave monopoly firms intact but seek to control their performance, for example by monitoring prices and profits and ordering price reductions when firms appear to be exerting their potential monopoly power.
Figure 17–2 MONOPOLY WITH COST REDUCTION.
Facing the marginal cost schedule LMC, a competitive industry produces at E. If a monopoly can produce at the lower cost LMC '; it will equate this to MR to produce Q M at a price P M .
The deadweight loss to consumers from lower output and higher prices is measured by the triangle A, but society gains because output is now p produced using less resources.
The rectangle P measures the cost savings and it could outweigh the triangle A if cost savings are sufficiently large.
In the UK policy has typically followed the second route, seeking to regulate rather than remove monopolies.
One reason why this might be a sensible approach is that, if the original monopoly arose from technical economies of scale, breaking up large firms will not change technical know-how or remove the advantages to large scale.
Under these circumstances, market forces will tend to re-establish large firms again.
Indeed, this suggests that there may be some compensating advantages of monopoly, in particular the ability to operate at larger scale and with lower average costs.
Figure 17–2 shows how these advantages should be compared with the disadvantage of the deadweight burden caused by the failure to equate marginal cost and price and hence marginal cost and marginal benefit.
Suppose a competitive industry of small firms has the supply curve and long-run marginal cost curve LMC whereas a monopolist, by taking advantage of scale economies, would face the long-run marginal cost curve LMC ';.
The competitive industry would produce Q C to be in equilibrium at E, whereas the monopolist, equating MR to the lower curve LMC ';, would produce Q M to be in equilibrium at E ';.
Which outcome is better for society?
Begin from the output Q M produced by the monopoly.
If the same output were produced by a competitive industry, society would lose the light green rectangle B shown in Figure 17–2.
That is the quantity of extra resources that a competitive industry would use because it has higher average and marginal costs.
But a competitive industry would produce at E, not at E ';.
Using the long-run marginal cost curve relevant to the competitive industry, this move from E '; to E would produce a social gain equal to the area of the triangle AE '; E. Thus, the more a monopolist can achieve economies of scale and lower production costs, the more likely it is that the area of the rectangle B will exceed the area of the triangle A. On balance the cost savings arising from monopoly would then more than offset the deadweight burden triangle, and society would actually gain from monopoly.
Thus in the UK monopoly policy is relatively pragmatic.
Although the existence of monopoly power may provoke a government investigation, each investigation is a cost-benefit analysis attempting to identify the costs and benefits on a case by case basis.
Some investigations conclude that on balance the existence of a large firm is actually in the public interest.
This approach is fundamentally different from the approach adopted in the United States, where the law tends to assume that the very existence of monopoly power is against the public interest.
Competition Law in the UK
Legislation has been steadily extended since the Monopoly and Restrictive Practices Act of 1946.
Restrictive practices, which we discuss shortly, have been separately examined since the establishment of the Restrictive Practices Court in 1956.
Monopoly policy was comprehensively reassessed in the 1973 Fair Trading Act and has been amended in the 1980 Competition Act.
The 1973 Act introduced a Director-General of Fair Trading to supervise many aspects of competition and consumer law including the regulation of quality and standards discussed in Chapter 15.
The Director-General is responsible for a monitoring company behaviour and, subject to a ministerial veto, can refer individual cases to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) for a thorough investigation.
A company can be referred if it supplies more than 25 per cent of the total market.
The Commission can also be given cases where two or more distinct firms by implicit collusion operate to restrict competition.
There is no presumption that monopoly is necessarily bad, and the Commission is charged to investigate whether or not the monopoly acts against the public interest, a brief that may be widely interpreted though in recent years there has been increasing emphasis on the ‘maintenance and promotion of effective competition’.
The Restrictive Practices Court examines agreements between firms supplying goods and services in the UK, for example agreements on collusive pricing behaviour.
All agreements must be notified to the Director-General of Fair Trading, who will refer them to the Court unless they are voluntarily abandoned or judged of trivial significance.
The Court will find against these agreements unless they satisfy one of eight ‘gateways’ or justifications, for example that their removal would cause serious and persistent unemployment in the area.
Thus for restrictive practices the burden of proof lies on the companies to show that they are acting in the public interest: in contrast, the legislation on monopolies is more open-minded, requiring the MMC to make the case that companies are acting against the public interest.
The UK is now subject to the monopoly legislation of the European Community as well.
Article 85 of the Treaty of Rome is rather similar to the UK legislation on restrictive practices.
Agreements have to be notified and they are likely to be outlawed.
Article 86 bans the abuse of a ‘dominant position’ as a monopolist, but exactly what this means is rather vague.
The UK legislation, allowing any firm with more than 25 per cent of the market to be referred to the MMC, is more clear-cut.
Monopolies Policy in Practice in the UK
The MMC has wide powers to make recommendations, and the Secretary of State to act on these recommendations, yet on only a few occasions have companies been formally penalized as a result of MMC investigations.
More frequently, the MMC has relied on informal assurances that criticized behaviour will be discontinued.
In fact, it is only a slight exaggeration to say that the main deterrent effect of monopoly policy has been not the threat of what changes might be required as a result of the MMC investigation, but the threat of having to tie up a large quantity of senior executives' time to argue the firm's case in the event that its activities attract a reference to the MMC.
The Commission has investigated a wide range of cases, from beer to breakfast cereals and from contraceptives to cross-Channel ferries.
Because the MMC is charged to investigate each case with an open mind, its judgements have tended to stress different aspects of behaviour in different cases.
Certainly a high market share has not been sufficient to attract an unfavourable judgement.
For example, Pilkington's Glass (making car windscreens) and Rank Xerox (making copiers) were honourably acquitted in spite of huge market shares and healthy profits.
In both cases the MMC held that these companies were efficiently run and had contributed to substantial cost savings, the Schumpeterian view of monopoly to which we referred in Chapter 9 and illustrated in Figure 17–2.
On the other hand, cost reduction has not been sufficient to avoid censure by the MMC.
Hoffman LaRoche was praised as ‘a highly competent organization with a product range of high quality’, but its enormous profits, sometimes as high as 60 or 70 per cent on capital employed, were held to be unjustified and the MMC recommended that the price of both Librium and Valium be halved.
In only one instance, the tobacco industry, has the MMC recommended companies actually be split up; it recommended that Imperial Tobacco should sell its 42.5 per cent share in Gallaghers, but the Secretary of State did not accept this recommendation.
One other case deserves special mention.
As we noted in Chapter 10, oligopolists have an incentive to carry out socially unproductive advertising in order to make it harder for new entrants to meet the fixed costs of breaking into the industry, thereby leaving more of the market and the profit for existing firms.
In 1966 the MMC judged that.
Proctor & gamble and Unilever, the two giants of the detergent industry, were guilty of this practice, and it recommended that advertising be reduced and product prices cut.
In 1981 the Conservative government withdrew this restriction on advertising, partly in the belief that competition from ‘own brand’ soap powders sold in supermarkets would provide an effective check.
Advertising spending by Proctor & gamble took off immediately.
Restrictive Practices
Since restrictive practices legislation was first introduced, almost 5000 agreements have been registered, the vast majority of which were abandoned even before they were taken to the Court.
Most explicit price-fixing has gone.
Although these facts look impressive, they may overstate the success of policy against restrictive practices.
First, they may simply have forced collusive agreements underground.
Where oligopolistic market structures remain it seems likely that some firms will resort to informal agreements and the other collusive devices examined in Chapter 10.
An important aspect of recent legislation and policy has been to tighten up on ‘information agreements’, which could form the basis of secret collusion.
Second, the various ‘gateways’ have permitted some agreements to be ratified, and the wisdom of some of these ratifications has been challenged.
Finally, it is possible that tighter control of restrictive practices agreements between firms is one of the factors that provide an incentive for mergers, a subject we take up in the next section.
By formally merging, companies could continue their old practices within the merged company and take their chance if they got investigated by the MMC.
Assessing Competition Policy in the UK
To assess UK competition policy we need ideally to compare the evolution of the UK economy under the policy with the evolution that would have occurred under some different policy, for example a policy of laissez-faire or complete non-intervention.
Such an assessment would be a major undertaking.
At a more modest level, we can say that legislation on restrictive practices has eliminated many cases of blatant anti-competitive behaviour and that the Director-General of Fair Trading now has powers to promote the provision of better consumer information (e.g. the Trade Descriptions Act) and to monitor general company behaviour.
And the MMC has identified some practices, such as wasteful advertising, that most people would regard as undesirable.
If these seem relatively modest benefits, it is perhaps more useful to consider whether a more radical and comprehensive anti-monopoly policy would have been better for society.
We began this section by noting that, unlike the United States which takes a structural approach to anti-trust policy, in which the possession of monopoly power is itself regarded as objectionable, the UK has taken a more open view of the benefits of promoting competition.
Large scale may be necessary to achieve minimum efficient plant size, and the cost of breaking up large companies may be considerable, an argument we develop in Section 17–4.
Large scale may also promote better management, co-ordination, and research, a version of the Schumpeterian argument in favour of monopoly.
Co-ordination via cartels or single ownership may facilitate better planning when different products are close complements in production.
As we stressed in Chapter 9, the Rover Group may produce a large share of the motor cars manufactured in the UK but this does not necessarily mean it has significant market power.
When tariffs on imports are low and transport costs are moderate, domestic producers may face severe international competition.
Without knowing the size of the relevant market in which firms are competing, large size cannot immediately be equated with uncompetitive behaviour.
Nor is it obvious that the government should always oppose large profits.
As we pointed out in Chapter 14, profits are the carrot that encourages firms to take risks in a market economy.
Many firms take risks that do not come off.
But if potential risk-takers are assured that success will immediately invite investigation by the MMC and an order to cut prices and eliminate excess profits, there will be less risk-taking in the economy.
Society has to decide how much risk-taking it wishes to encourage and to allow a proper return to risk-taking as an economic cost against accounting profits.
These doubts about the merit of a blind pursuit of perfect competition lie behind the UK policy and the judgements of the MMC.
Thus policy has considered each case on its merits.
Notice, finally, that this approach suggests that monopoly policy should not be independent of other aspects of government policy.
Large firms make more sense when the UK is competing within a large European market.
We might wish to be tougher on large firms if the government is pursuing a policy of protection with high import tariffs.
17–3 Mergers
Two existing firms can join together in two different ways.
First, one firm may make a takeover bid for the other by offering to buy out the shareholders of the second firm.
Managers of the ‘victim’ firm will usually resist since they are likely to lose their jobs, but the shareholders will accept if the offer is sufficiently attractive.
In contrast, a merger is the voluntary union of two companies where they think they will do better by amalgamating.
When one firm is sufficiently large it is difficult for another firm to raise the money to buy out all the first firm's shareholders in a contested takeover bid.
Hence very large firms created by amalgamation are usually the result of mergers.
In deciding to get together the two firms reveal that they think this union will be in their private interest, but we must ask whether mergers are in the public interest.
Since mergers help to create monopoly power the discussion of this section is largely an extension   of the analysis of competition policy in the previous section.
It is important to distinguish three types of merger.
The production process typically has several stages.
For example, the first stage might be iron ore extraction, the second stage steel manufacture from iron ore, and the third stage production of cars from steel.
By a horizontal merger we mean the union of two firms at the same production stage in the same industry, for example the merger of two steel producers or two motor car manufacturers.
By a vertical merger we mean the union of two firms at different production stages in the same industry, as when a car manufacturer merges with a steel producer.
Finally, there are conglomerate mergers, where the production activities of the two firms are essentially unrelated.
For example, a tobacco manufacturer perceiving that the cigarette market is in long-term decline might decide to join forces with a perfume company or a sugar producer.
What do firms think they stand to gain by merging?
In horizontal mergers it is possible that a merger will allow exploitation of economies of scale.
One large motor car factory may be better than two small ones.
(Notice that this requires that each of the original companies were producing at an output below minimum efficient scale.)
In vertical mergers it is often claimed that there are important gains to co-ordination and planning.
It may be easier to make long-term decisions about the best size and type of steel mill if a simultaneous decision is taken on the level of car production to which steel output forms an important input.
Since conglomerate mergers involve companies with completely independent products, these mergers have only small opportunities for a direct reduction in production costs.
Two other factors are frequently mentioned as potential benefits of mergers.
First, if one company has an inspired management team it may be more productive to allow this team to run both businesses.
Managers of course are very fond of this explanation for mergers.
Economists have tended to be more sceptical.
Second, by pooling their financial resources, the merging companies may enjoy better creditworthiness and access to cheaper borrowing, enabling them to take more risks and finance larger research projects.
There may also be some economies of scale in marketing effort.
These managerial and financial gains could explain why mergers make sense even for companies producing completely distinct products.
If companies achieve any or all of these benefits they will increase productivity and lower the cost of making any specified output level.
These private gains are also social gains, since society can use less resources to achieve the same output.
If these were the only considerations, merger policy might be confined to ensuring that companies formed accurate assessments of the costs and benefits of mergers.
Social and private calculations would coincide.
However, there are two important reasons for private and social assessments to diverge.
First, the merger of two large firms will give them the immediate monopoly power that derives from a large market share.
The merged company is likely to restrict output and increase prices, providing private profits but a dead-weight burden to society as a whole.
Second, the merged company may be able to use its financial power as distinct from its power derived from current market share.
This danger is especially apparent in conglomerate mergers.
A car producer and a food manufacturer cannot merge to gain economies of scale in production or any direct reduction in costs; but they can use their joint financial resources to start a price war in one of these industries.
Because they have extra financial resources they will not be the first company to go bust.
By forcing out some existing competitors, or merely holding this increased threat over potential entrants, they may be able to increase their market share in the long run, deter entry, and charge high prices for every more.
In framing merger policy, the government must therefore decide whether the potential social gains from reduced costs and more efficient production are outweighed by the social costs of monopoly power and inefficient resource allocation between firms and industries that might arise.
Concentration and Mergers in the UK
British industry is becoming increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few producers, and oligopoly seems to be the commonest market 
structure in manufacturing industry.
By 1970 the 100 largest firms produced nearly half of the output of British industry.
The concentration of production in a few firms was considerably more marked in 1970 than it had been 15 years earlier, and many economists attribute around half the increase in concentration in the 1960s to the merger boom during those years.
From 1964 onwards many mergers were actively encouraged by a Labour government seeking to reorganize British industry into large modern units capable of taking on foreign competition.
Mergers have continued since 1970.
Table 17–1 shows the average number of mergers per annum of industrial and commercial companies, and the value of the assets involved.
The table shows a new UK merger boom starting in 1985.
Notice that it reflects less a dramatic change in the number of mergers and more a spectacular increase in the size of companies involved.
Nowadays not even the largest companies are safe from a takeover.
One reason for this change is the greater competition among banks and the more aggressive lending policies that ensue.
Several of the most recent supermergers have seen one company borrow large amounts in order to be able to afford to acquire another company.
Little fish can now swallow bigger fish.
Table 17–2 shows the composition of mergers in the UK since 1965.
The numbers refer only to mergers of large companies where assets worth over 5 are acquired through the merger.
These of course are the mergers most relevant to the
formation of even larger companies with potential monopoly power.
It can be seen that vertical mergers are relatively rare.
Whereas horizontal mergers, the type most likely to yield production economies of scale, were the vast majority in the 1960s, there has been a steady trend away from horizontal mergers and towards conglomerate mergers more recently.
Table 17–1 UK takeovers and mergers, 1972 88 (annual averages)
Since 1970 industrial concentration has continued to increase and mergers have continued to play a major role in this process.
Professor Keith Cowling and his research team have argued that mergers continue to explain half of the increase in industrial concentration in the UK.
Table 17–2 Proposed UK mergers: percentage by type
Merger Policy in the UK
This significant increase in industrial concentration through merger activity would not have been possible if the government had been operating a tough anti-merger policy.
In Section 17–2 we saw that the United States takes a structural approach to monopoly, believing that concentration and monopoly power are undesirable per se.
This has the natural corollary that the United States also operates rigorous controls on mergers that promote new monopolies.
In contrast, the UK takes a more neutral view of monopoly, requiring the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to demonstrate that a monopoly is acting against the public interest, and the same principle carries over to the assessment of prospective mergers.
Indeed, it is only since 1965 that mergers have been subject to public scrutiny at all.
There are now two grounds for referring a prospective merger to an investigation by the MMC:(1) that the merger will promote a new monopoly as defined by the 25 per cent market share used in deciding references for existing monopoly   positions, or (2) that the merger involves the transfer of at least 30 million worth of company assets.
Since the legislation was introduced in 1965, only about 3 per cent of all merger proposals have been referred to the MMC.
Thus for much of the period government policy has been to consent to, or actively encourage, mergers.
The reason for this may be understood using Figure 17–2.
By creating a larger firm with more monopoly power, a merger will tend to produce a dead-weight burden since the new firm will use this power to restrict output and drive up the price.
However, the merger may achieve a cost reduction and saving on scarce resources that more than offset this social cost.
In believing that the benefits would outweigh the costs, British merger policy reflected two underlying assumptions.
The first was that the cost savings from economies of scale and more intensive use of scarce management talent could be quite large.
The second was that the UK was effectively part of an increasingly competitive world market so that the monopoly power of the merged firms, and the corresponding social cost of the dead-weight burden, would be small.
Large as they were, the merged firms would still be small in relation to European or world markets, and would face relatively elastic demand curves which gave little scope for raising price above marginal cost.
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to suppose that all mergers were approved.
Most of the mergers actually referred to the MMC were found to be against the public interest, and the effects of the legislation went beyond the cases actually referred.
Investigation was a lengthy process taking many months, a delay during which company share prices could move considerably and upset the original negotiations about the terms on which the relative shares of the companies should be valued.
In practice, even the threat that a merger might be referred to the MMC was often sufficient to induce the companies to drop their merger proposals.
Were Mergers Successful?
Merging companies believed they could achieve significant gains in productivity and profits, and government policy assumed that these would offset any adverse effects from an increase in monopoly power.
Yet recent investigations of the post-merger record of these firms suggests that few of these gains materialized.
Even where post-merger firms did achieve productivity gains, they did little better than the productivity performance of the industry as a whole.
In contrast, mergers led to a significant increase in industrial concentration and monopoly power in the UK.
In terms of Figure 17–2, it is highly questionable whether the cost saving rectangle B was larger than the dead-weight burden triangle A. 
17–4 Regulating Natural Monopoly
In the theory of market structure developed in Chapter 10 we saw that the key relation was the size of economies of scale relative to the size of the market.
Most of the firms in private industry to which monopolies and mergers legislation is relevant are in fact oligopolists.
They do not control the entire market and are not free from the threat of entry from new firms or foreign competitors.
We turn now to the analysis of natural monopolies, the industries that really do have such enormous economies of scale that only one firm can survive in them.
These industries have falling long-run average cost curves, as for example in British Telecom, where the cost of transmission lines dwarfs the marginal cost of providing an extra phone call for a user already connected to the system.
Nor does the industry have to worry about imports or the world market.
The Problem of Natural Monopoly
Figure 17–3 shows an industry with steadily decreasing long-run average costs reflecting the technological advantages of producing a very large output.
In Chapter 10 we explained that only one private firm could survive in such an  industry.
With many firms, the firm that expands output will always be able to reduce costs and undercut its rivals.
Facing a demand curve DD and the corresponding marginal revenue curve MR, the resulting monopolist will produce Q M and earn profits P M CBE.
Figure 17–3 NATURAL MONOPOLY.
The socially efficient point E '; occurs where long-run marginal cost LMC equals marginal benefit DD.
A private monopolist sets MR = MC, produces Q M , and earns profits P M CBE.
The dead-weight loss under private monopoly is therefore the area AEE ';.
Since LMC passes through the lowest point on LAC, a natural monopolist with steadily falling LAC must face LMC below LAC.
If by law the monopolist was forced to charge a fixed price P C , the monopolist would face a horizontal demand curve P C E '; up to the output Q ';.
Since P C would then also be marginal revenue, the monopolist would produce at E '; where the marginal revenue and marginal cost coincide.
Although Q '; is the socially efficient output, society cannot force the monopolist to produce here in the long run.
Since E '; lies below the corresponding point on LAC at the output Q ';, the monopolist is making losses and would rather go out of business.
At this output the social marginal benefit P M exceeds the social marginal cost at A. The monopolist produces too little.
Social marginal cost and marginal benefit are equal at the output Q '; and the efficient point for society is E ';.
The private monopoly creates a dead-weight burden AEE ';.
Suppose you sat on the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and were investigating this monopolist.
What are your options?
If you split the firm up you will have a lot of small firms each producing at higher average cost, a waste of society's resources.
You could order the firm to produce at the socially efficient point E ';.
Then you will get the desired output Q ';.
However, the price P C will be less than the firm's average costs at Q '; so it will be making losses.
You cannot force private firms to make losses.
They will shut down instead.
Few countries allow unregulated natural monopolies to produce at E and impose the full dead-weight burden AEE '; on society.
The first solution is a regulatory body such as OFTEL, which regulates British Telecom.
The aim is to get as close as possible to the socially efficient allocation E '; while allowing the monopolist to break even after allowing a proper deduction for all economic costs.
For example, by ensuring that the monopolist produces Q at the price corresponding to average cost at this output, the social cost of the dead-weight burden can be reduced from AEE '; to GHE';.
An even better solution is to allow the monopolist to charge a two-part tariff.
A two-part tariff is a price system where users pay a fixed sum for access to the service and then pay a price per unit which reflects the marginal cost of production.
Thus the aim of a two-part tariff is to use fixed charges to pay for fixed costs and then to levy marginal charges to cover marginal costs.
It acts as a lump-sum tax on users of the system.
Hence in Figure 17–3 the monopolist can be instructed to charge P C for each unit of the good.
Consumers will demand the socially efficient quantity Q ';.
Since the monopolist is now a price-taker at the controlled price P C it will be loss-minimizing for the monopolist to produce Q ';, at which price and marginal revenue and equal marginal cost.
If the regulatory body does its sums correctly, it will then allow the monopolist to levy the minimum fixed charge necessary to ensure that the monopolist breaks even after allowing for all relevant economic costs.
The two-part tariff is not always a feasible solution.
If the fixed charge has to be very high it may induce people to abandon consumption of the commodity altogether.
Moreover, whereas it may be easy to collect fixed charges from consumers with telephone or gas installations, it is harder to enforce a fixed charge for the right to travel by rail and a fare per journey   reflecting marginal cost.
The costs of enforcing such a system might be enormous.
The third solution to the natural monopoly problem is to order the monopolist to produce at the socially efficient point E '; and the corresponding price P C but to provide a government subsidy to cover the losses that this will inevitably imply.
However, the government will wish to be closely concerned with the operation of the company to ensure that this does not provide a blanket guarantee to underwrite whatever losses the company makes through its own stupidity or inefficiency.
It is still socially desirable to produce the efficient output Q '; in the cost-minimizing way.
Thus, where the subsidy solution is adopted there is a pressure for the government to take over the entire running of the industry so that all operations can be carefully monitored.
Where this has been done in the UK these natural monopolies are called nationalized industries, and we discuss them more fully in the next chapter.
However, it is important immediately to dispose of one popular fallacy.
We have just demonstrated that natural monopolies cannot both survive as profit-making industries and produce the socially efficient output by pricing at marginal cost unless they have very favourable opportunities for levying two-part tariffs.
If such industries are nationalized in order that they can produce closer to the socially efficient output, it is inevitable that they will make losses and require a subsidy from the government.
The fact that nationalized industries make losses is not sufficient to prove that they are not minimizing costs or  that they are producing the wrong output from society's view-point.
Two problems recur in attempts to adopt any of the above solutions to the problem of natural monopoly.
The first is that it is hard to ensure that the industry really does minimize costs.
Unnecessarily high costs can be passed on under average cost pricing (solution 1), can result in a higher fixed charge to ensure break-even under a two-part tariff (solution 2), or can require a larger subsidy (solution  3).
In each case the regulatory body has the difficult task of trying to ensure that the management of the natural monopoly is as efficient as possible.
One practical attempt to overcome this problem of regulation is the ‘RPI — x’ formula, first introduced in the UK when OFTEL was established to regulate the newly privatized British Telecom (BT).
The government believed that BT could reduce the real price of phone calls in subsequent years for two reasons: unusually good opportunities for cost-saving technical advances, and a previous lethargy as a public industry which it was hoped privatization would dispel.
OFTEL was instructed to ensure that, on average, the nominal price of BT phone calls rose x per cent per year less than the inflation rate of the retail price index.
Initially, x was set at 3 per cent.
The second practical problem is regulatory capture.
Regulatory capture implies that the regulator gradually comes to identify with the interests of the firm is regulates, eventually becoming its champion, not its watchdog.
Clearly, the regulated devote considerable time, effort, and money to lobbying and otherwise trying to influence the regulator.
A sense of public duty is the only reason for the regulator to resist.
It can become an unequal contest.
More subtly, the regulated firm has all the inside information about its own activities, information which it is the whole purpose of the regulatory to try to acquire.
Of necessity, regulators have to build up contacts with the regulated.
At the end of long conversations, it is unsurprising that the regulator can feel quite sympathetic to the problems as perceived by the regulated.
Recap
In this chapter we have discussed aspects of competition policy, the process through which governments seek to prevent large private firms from abusing their potential monopoly power.
Some issues remain to be discussed, most notably the questions of whether some industries should be nationalized or whether existing public sector industries should be privatized.
This we take up in the next chapter.
We conclude this chapter by discussing industrial policy in a wider context.
17–5 Industrial Policy
Competition policy and industrial policy are closely related.
In Chapter 15 we set out the basic case for allowing free markets to allocate resources.
We argued that this allocation would be efficient only if market failures did not occur.
Competition policy aims to offset market failures arising from scale economies and market power.
When marginal revenue is less than price, profit-maximizing firms no longer set price (and marginal consumer benefit) equal to marginal cost.
Industrial policy is designed to offset other sources of market failure which arise in the production process.
In this section we highlight some of the issues that arise in industrial policy.
Inventions and the Patent System
In Chapter 14 we saw that information is a very special economic commodity which frequently causes indigestion in freely competitive markets.
It is hard to trade information: the buyer needs to see the information before being willing to offer a price, and having seen the information then has no incentive to pay for it!
Inventions — the discovery of new information about the production process — are a particular example of this general theme.
Suppose a company develops a product in secret, and then markets it.
If other firms can quickly imitate the new invention, competition will rapidly compete away the profits on this new product.
Since everyone can foresee that this will occur, few resources will be devoted to searching for inventions, even though they are socially valuable.
Inventions are an example of a public good, which we discussed in Chapter 16.
The problem arises because the inventor cannot privately appropriate the benefits since imitators cannot be excluded.
The solution to this market failure is a patent system, which confers a temporary  legal monopoly on the inventor who registers or patents the invention.
The temporary monopoly provides, before the fact, the assurance that if the search for a new discovery is successful the inventor will be able to cash up after the fact.
In the language of Chapter 10, it is a credible pre-commitment.
Why is it important that the legal monopoly should be only temporary?
Otherwise, successful inventors would have an entrenched entry barrier which would prevent competition from other firms or new entrants for all time.
The trick in designing a successful patent system is to provide a big enough incentive for invention, but not such a large and long-lived cushion that the benefits of competition are suppressed for ever.
The New Industrial Economics, which we introduced in Chapter 10, suggests that this is not a trivial problem, especially when considerations of strategic competition are introduced.
For example, there are documented cases of pre-emptive patenting by incumbent firms.
The incumbent may discover a new process or product, patent it, but not actually introduce it.
Potential entrants are aware that any attempt at entry will be met with the launch of this new product, which will place the entrant at a disadvantage.
Thus, pre-emptive patenting can be a highly effective strategic entry barrier.
This example shows that intelligent industrial policy and competition policy must work hand in hand.
Evidence of pre-emptive patenting is the type of information the Monopolies and Mergers Commission seeks in evaluating whether incumbents are abusing their market power.
Research and Development (R&D )
In many countries, including the UK, one of the chief aims of industrial policy is to promote R&D .
In Western Europe, the United States, and Japan, R & d accounts for between 2 and 3 per cent of national output.
Table 17–3 shows UK government expenditure on R & d in recent years.
Why should governments, even the Thatcher government, which is strongly committed to allowing market forces to work, spend several billion pounds of taxpayers' money promoting R&D ?
Table 17–3 UK government expenditure on R & d (% of GDP)
Roughly half the spending shown in Table 17–3 relates to military projects in the field of defence.
But what about the other half?
This seems to indicate widespread agreement that there are market failures in R & d which the patent system alone is insufficient to offset.
Economics can provide several insights into what may go wrong with market forces in R&D .
First, large projects can be very risky for an individual company.
Nowhere are these projects larger than in the development of a major new commercial airliner, and the chief executive of Boeing, the largest plane manufacturer in the world, has described each major new project as ‘betting the company’.
In other words, failure on one new project could threaten the very existence of the company.
In Chapter 14 we described why private individuals may be risk-averse, and this applies even to executives of large corporations.
Consequently, private firms may undertake less R & d than is socially desirable.
This implies that the social return on such projects exceeds the private return to those making the decisions.
If the private decision-makers require a large risk premium, or on average a high expected return, before being willing to assume such risks, why should society demand any less?
Essentially for two reasons.
First, the government may be able to pool the risks across a large number of projects in its portfolio.
Second, even if projects go wrong, the government can spread the burden very thinly across the population: 2 per cent on everybody's income tax rate for a year should cover even the biggest disaster.
Thus, the population as a whole should require only a small risk premium, much smaller than that required by executives in an individual company who may face personal disaster if the project turns sour.
And these arguments have generally  been found persuasive by governments.
Hence their provision of public subsidies for R & d expenditure.
It should also be noted that no patent system can be watertight.
Indeed, as we remarked above, to make it so would effectively be to suppress all future competition indefinitely.
In these circumstances, a further argument for public support of R & d may be because private firms realize they will not be able to appropriate for themselves all the benefits of their efforts.
Some imitation will occur, but it will be insufficiently clear-cut to guarantee that a law suit will not be protracted and expensive.
Moreover, other inventors may be stimulated by what they see to make a breakthrough in an entirely different area.
New breakthroughs build on past discoveries.
These provide additional motives for R & d support as part of an effective industrial policy.
Strategic International Competition
In Chapter 10 we discussed how individual firms might try to erect strategic entry barriers to preserve and enhance their market power.
Such considerations also apply in international competition between large firms.
For a concrete example, consider again the commercial airliner industry.
Effectively, there are three large airliner firms left in the world market.
Boeing is much the largest and has an entire product range, from the relatively small twin-engined 737 to the massive 747, the Jumbo.
Another American firm, McDonnell Douglas, has a smaller product range, and by the mid-1980s was wondering whether to get out of the industry entirely rather than compete in the next generation of civil airliners.
The European consortium Airbus Industrie, in which British Aerospace (BAe) has a stake, is a relatively recent entrant, still building up its product range.
Airbus Industrie asked the governments of its member producers (Germany, France, the UK, and Spain) for launch aid, a grant or loan on favourable terms to help with R & d on a new type of aircraft.
In addition to the standard arguments for R & d support, what extra issues does  international competition raise?
What must the U K government consider in deciding whether to put in taxpayers' money?
First, will Airbus succeed even without government support?
If the answer is yes, public subsidies are simply a transfer payment to Airbus shareholders, for which there is no strong economic rationale.
Second, will other European governments support Airbus even if the U K does not?
If so, the U K government may be able to act as a free-rider.
However, while it may be wise to attempt the free-rider strategy occasionally, governments that systematically try to do this will eventually get a bad reputation.
Suppose the U K government has decided that it cannot free-ride on other governments: either it pays its share of launch aid or the whole project collapses.
What are the benefits of providing launch aid?
If Airbus pulls out, McDonnell-Douglas may still survive, or it too may pull out of the industry, leaving Boeing the sole producer without fear of competition.
In that event, Boeing will surely cash up, raising the price of aircraft.
British airlines and ultimately British consumers will pay high prices, and Boeing can earn monopoly profits.
It may well be worth preventing this.
If the U K could be sure that McDonnell-Douglas would stay in, and provide effective competition to Boeing, it might be worth allowing Airbus to fold: European consumers would still get the benefit of cheaper planes.
But this strategy is risky.
And there are further considerations.
First, launch aid may be seen as a pre-commitment by European governments not to allow Airbus to be bullied out of the industry.
With such a commitment, McDonnell-Douglas may then decide to pull out if it concludes that the industry is not big enough for three profitable producers.
If so, launch aid will have directly enhanced the market share of Airbus.
Second, in the presence of such a pre-commitment, Boeing may conclude that there is no point attempting a price war to try to force Airbus out.
If European governments can display the credible threat to back Airbus if necessary, Boeing shareholders are only going to lose by an unsuccessful price war.
Hence, the pre-commitment may prevent a price war which might otherwise have occurred.
This example draws on the ideas of the New Industrial Economics of Chapter 10 to show how strategic international competition can provide a rationale for strategic industrial  policy.
Just as industrial policy is related to competition policy, so it is closely related to international trade policy, an issue to which we return in Chapter 32.
Sunrise and Sunset Industries
The final aspect of industrial policy which we examine concerns dynamic change, the rise and fall of industries and the firms within them.
Sunrise industries are the emerging new industries of the future, such as those in hi-tech.
Sunset industries are those in long-term decline.
Currently, sunrise industries include information technology and genetics.
Sunset industries in Western economies include the old heavy industries such as steel and shipbuilding which are now suffering from massive excess capacity as these industries have been undercut by more efficient producers in the Pacific basin.
Why not leave such changes to market forces?
What are the market failures that might justify government intervention through industrial policy?
We begin with the sunrise industries.
Three types of market failure have sometimes been put forward to justify the case for intervention, though it should be stressed that those who believe in the efficiency of market forces would argue that it is easy to exaggerate the importance of these factors.
First, there may be imperfections in the market for lending to new companies and new industries.
Banks and other lenders may be too risk-averse, or too unfamiliar with the new business, to lend the money needed through the early loss-making years.
Second, the market may be slow to provide the relevant training and skills: Catch 22 (until the industry exists, people won't perceive the need for developing such skills; but without the skills, the industry cannot exist).
Third, there may be important positive externalities when similar producers locate in the same place, as in the concentration of information technology firms in Silicon Glen in Scotland or Route 128 round Boston in the United States.
These arguments suggest that it may be possible to provide a rationale for an industrial policy to subsidize sunrise industries.
But certain questions must be answered satisfactorily.
First, why are markets so short-sighted and uninformed?
If existing lenders or trainers are getting it wrong, why don't new firms come in and do a better job?
If the answer is entry barriers, this again demonstrates the close relation between industrial policy and competition policy.
Second, even if markets get it wrong, can the government do better?
The strategy of trying to outguess the market by ‘picking winners’ is now highly discredited.
It seems implausible that civil servants or politicians can do better than trained analysts in industry and finance.
Rather, if such industrial policy is to be attempted, it seems preferable to diagnose the cause of the market failure and provide a generalized incentive which market decision-makers then take into account when undertaking their professional analysis.
Sunset industries present different problems.
For example, the government may or may not attach importance to local unemployment when industries with a heavy geographical concentration are allowed to go under all at once .
It may be desirable to spend what could otherwise be dole money on temporarily subsidizing lame ducks to ease the transition.
Sometimes, however, a sharp shock is required to signal the extent of the adjustment eventually required and the government's commitment to seeing that adjustment is actually made.
Strategic considerations may be important here too.
Suppose for example there are two remaining producers in an industry which has now contracted to the point when it can profitably support only one firm.
Each firm would like to be the one to survive.
They are playing an exit game of chicken.
It seems plausible that one of two things may happen, neither of which is socially desirable.
First, the industry survives with two firms for much longer than is socially efficient.
Second, the firm with the smaller financial backing will be the first to crack, even though it may be able to produce at slightly lower cost than its richer rival.
In such circumstances, an industrial policy that seeks faster and more efficient rationalization of the sunset industry may be advantageous.
Strategic international considerations may also apply.
In the late 1980s, the European steel industry had an enormous over-capacity, partly because it had been undercut by Korean, Japanese, and other producers in the Pacific, partly because of a wave of added Italian steel capacity in the 1970s.
Clearly, the European governments were engaged in a game to see who would close capacity to leave a profitable market share for the survivors.
In such circumstances, each country's steel industry needs effective government representation, and laissez-faire industrial policy may be a poor policy.
In fact, in the first half of the 1980s, British Steel achieved a larger reduction in its capacity than the steel industry in any other major EC country.
Far from being a free-rider, British Steel actually eased the adjustment problem for other European steel producers.
Summary
1
The social cost or dead-weight burden of imperfect competition and monopoly power arises because marginal cost is set equal to marginal revenue, which is less than price and marginal consumer benefit.
The social cost is measured by the cumulative difference between the value that consumers place on the lost output and its marginal production cost.
The social cost is higher still if oligopolists waste society's resources lobbying for monopoly power or incurring unnecessary expenditure to deter entrants.
2
For the UK the highest estimate of this social cost is 7 per cent of company output, but most economists think the cost is much lower.
Estimates refer only to the cost of allocative inefficiency.
The distributional implication of high monopoly profit is less important, since it could always be taxed away.
3
In the UK any firm with more than 25 per cent of the market can be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, which must then consider whether or not the monopoly is against the public interest.
The MMC takes account of a wide range of factors in making a judgement.
4
Anti-competition agreements between firms, such as collusive price-fixing, must be notified and are generally outlawed.
The Restrictive Practices Court does recognize certain gateways through which such agreements may be ratified as being in the public interest.
5
Mergers may be horizontal, vertical, or conglomerate.
Conglomerate mergers have the smallest scope for obvious gains through economies of scale but have become increasingly common in recent years.
Mergers account for about half of the increase in industrial concentration in the UK.
In spite of this, most studies agree that mergers have not on average improved the subsequent performance of the merging companies.
6
In principle, mergers can be referred to the MMC if they will create a firm with a 25 per cent market share or if they involve assets of over 30 million.
In practice, a very small number of mergers satisfying these criteria are actually referred to the MMC.
In part this may be justified because the UK competes in large world markets where the firms will have little monopoly power, but, given the documented lack of success of merged companies, successive governments may have encouraged too many mergers.
7
A natural monopolist with large economies of scale may continue to make profits by severely restricting output below the socially efficient level.
But when the average cost curve is falling the marginal cost curve lies below average cost.
Pricing at marginal cost might equate marginal cost and benefit but would entail losses.
Average cost pricing or two-part tariffs may come close to the socially efficient output while allowing the monopolist to survive as a private company.
Alternatively, the industry may be nationalized.
8
Regulators find it difficult to ensure that the regulated really do produce on the lowest possible cost curve.
The ‘RPI — x’ formula is one attempt to solve this problem.
Regulatory capture is also a danger.
9
Industrial policy seeks to offset market failures in production which do not arise directly from scale economies in the domestic market and the imperfect competition to which these give rise; offsetting the latter is the object of competition policy.
The two are frequently related.
10
Patents provide a temporary legal monopoly for successful inventors, and hence an incentive to look for inventions.
Otherwise the incentive for inventors would be low since they could foresee that profits on successful inventions  would quickly be competed away by imitators.
11
Many governments believe that the social return on R & d exceeds its private return.
In part, this stems from society's ability to handle risk better than the private individuals on whom it falls, and who therefore require large profits in compensation.
Some benefits of R & d may also spill over to other firms, creating an externality.
12
When international competition is strategic between superfirms, the industrial policies of national governments towards their own ‘national champions’ may be an important pre-commitment which affects the bargaining power of their firms in the international market.
13
Sunrise and sunset industries may involve other market failures.
Before taking this as a general licence for an active industrial policy to manage change, governments must ask why the market is not doing a better job, and whether intervention can itself improve on the existing situation.
Generally, picking winners has not been a success, but decentralized incentives may be effective if their rationale has been clearly identified.
Key Terms
Problems
1
With constant AC and MC equal to 5, a competitive industry produces 1 million output units.
Taken over by a monopolist, output falls to 800000 units and the price rises to 8.
AC and MC are unchanged.
How would you calculate the social cost of monopoly?
What is it?
2
Explain the difference between UK and US policy towards monopolies and mergers.
3
Why do sports clubs have both an initial membership fee and an annual subscription for people who are already members?
4
In 1986 there was a major debate about whether Westland Helicopters should be allowed to merge with the US helicopter giant Sikorsky, or whether it should be forced into a European partnership.
What arguments can be used to support each of these viewpoints?
5
Compared with other countries, a relatively large fraction of UK R & d expenditure by the government is devoted to defence projects.
Is this necessarily economically undesirable?
6
Quite apart from aid to sunrise industries, UK policy provides substantial tax breaks for those investing in small firms.
Do you think the issues discussed in this chapter can be used to justify such a policy?
7
Common Fallacies Show why the following statements are fallacious. (a) Monopolies make profits and must therefore be well-run companies.
(b) Monopolies create social waste.
Society should prohibit any firm from having more than 20 per cent of the domestic market (c) It does not matter what other governments do; ours should not get involved in industrial policy.
(d) Mergers are obviously beneficial; otherwise companies would not bother merging.
BOX 17–1
AIRLINE DEREGULATION IN EUROPE
Although the charter market for package holidays is very competitive, scheduled flights in Europe are heavily regulated.
The extent of airline regulation illustrates many of the principles we are studying in Part 3.
It is also of interest because the US airline deregulation provides a live case study of the effects of completing the internal market.
We discuss 1992 and the completion of the single market in Europe in Chapter 34.
Lessons from the United States
Internal US flights were deregulated in 1978.
With the removal of legal barriers to entry, the industry quickly became more competitive.
By 1984 the number of airlines had risen from 36 to 120, fares were down 30 per cent, and passengers use was up 50 per cent .
Planes were fuller so airline costs fell.
And a more frequent service meant greater passenger convenience.
Free marketeers rejoiced as their predictions came true.
But the story after 1984 was rather different.
Cutthroat competition led to a lot of bankruptcies and mergers.
By 1989 only 27 airlines survived, and the top 12 controlled 97 per cent of the market.
Fares were rising again.
Powerful incumbent airlines found three ways to erect strategic entry barriers and consolidate their market power.
First, they moved to a hub-and-spoke system.
Each airline had a single airport (the hub), out of which long-haul flights operated.
They operated a system of feeder services (the spokes) to get you to the hub.
The hub-and-spoke system made it harder for small airlines to mount an effective challenge to major networks.
Second, the big airlines also owned the computerized reservation systems (CRS) which travel agents use to locate empty seats.
By programming the computer to ensure that their own flights appeared first on the screen, incumbent airlines put new entrants at a disadvantage.
Finally, they offered ‘frequent flier discounts’.
Passengers clocked up bonus points by flying with a particular airline, but these could be cashed in only with the same airline.
These tactics illustrate how strategic behaviour can be used to consolidate existing market power.
And the US authorities operated a very lax merger policy: essentially, they approved all proposed mergers.
Thus some of the benefits of deregulation had been eroded by 1990.
Regulation in Europe
European scheduled air travel has been the subject of extensive regulation by government agreement.
Until the late 1980s, flights between two European capitals were restricted to one national carrier from each of the two countries (e.g. British Airways and Sabena on the London-Brussels route).
And competition was often nominal.
In some cases, the two airlines actually agreed to divide their joint revenue equally.
Fares were strictly controlled by international agreement.
Scheduled air travel was specifically exempt from EC Competition Law, Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome.
What would you predict that the consequences of such intensive regulation would be?
High fares.
It is alleged that London-Brussels is the most expensive journey per mile in the world.
And there is a second implication.
In Chapter 12 we argued that, when firms have extensive product market power, trade unions will succeed in grabbing a big slice of these excess profits for their members.
Hence the lack of competition shows up in abnormally high airline costs.
The following table shows how beautifully this theory fits the facts.
Apart from the UK, which has begun to deregulate the airline industry, all continental airlines pay workers substantially more than in the United States, even though countries like Spain and Portugal have much lower living standards in general.
The future of regulation in Europe
In 1987 the European Commission reached a deal with airlines in the European Community extending the block exemption from EC Competition Law until 1991 in exchange for some small steps towards immediate increases in competition.
The EC clearly intends to keep up the pressure.
For example, when the UK government approved the merger of Britain's two largest airlines, British Airways and British Caledonian, in 1988, the EC Commission exercised its power to override national policy and insisted on some tough additional requirements (e.g. BA giving up some of its routes from Gatwick) before approving the merger.
What principles should inform European airline regulation in the future?
First, we should distinguish general externalities from things that directly affect market structure and the degree of competition.
Externalities requiring the regulation of safety and noise can be treated separately from competition policy.
The US experiment indicates that, contrary to popular belief, existing safety regulations were quite adequate: the US industry's safety record did not deteriorate after deregulation.
Second, in a completely free market, the US experiment indicates that existing airlines can exert too much market power, less through scale economies and innocent entry barriers than through strategic barriers erected by predatory behaviour.
Some regulation is still required to promote competition.
For example, unlike the United States, mergers should be very closely scrutinized.
And in Europe there is one additional consideration that is relatively unimportant in the United States.
Many of Europe's major airports are heavily congested.
This means that the allocation of ‘slots’ the time flights can take off or land is extremely important.
At present, existing airlines have the good slots.
If they are allowed automatically to keep them, this becomes a major barrier to new entry.
The right solution is to auction off slots to the highest bidder.
If the reform of Europe's airline regulation is carried out intelligently, the gains will be substantial.
Cheaper flights, greater efficiency, and lower airline costs as sheltered workers are forced to settle for more realistic wages.
But the US experience warns us that, unless we do it right, deregulation will not automatically yield substantial benefits.
18
Nationalization and Privatization
‘In every great monarchy in Europe the sale of the Crown lands would deliver a much greater revenue than any which these lands ever afforded to the Crown…
When the Crown lands had become private property, they would, in the course of a few years, become well improved and well cultivated.’
Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations (1776)
This chapter deals with the boundary between the public sector and the private sector.
As suggested by the quotation above from Adam Smith, the father of modern economics, the controversy is more than 200 years old.
State intervention can take many forms.
In previous chapters we have discussed tax incentives, competition policy, and industrial policy.
The main focus of this chapter is whether these policies are sufficient, or whether it is necessary for the state to have direct control of certain industries through public ownership.
Conversely, if public ownership has in the past been tried and found wanting, should the government now return these public sector corporations to private ownership?
Nationalization is the acquisition of private companies by the public sector.
Privatization is the sale of public sector companies to the private sector.
In the UK, the great wave of nationalizations — industries such as rail and steel — occurred during the Attlee government elected in 1945.
By the 1960s, most countries in Europe had a significant sector of industrial production under public ownership and control.
The tide has truly turned.
Major privatization programmes are under way not only in the UK but also in countries as different as France, Japan, Taiwan, Mexico, Poland, and Hungary.
In this chapter we analyse the nationalized industries, explain how they have been run, and assess their performance.
Then we discuss the case for privatization.
Finally, we examine the UK privatization programme in practice.
18–1 Nationalized Industries
In Chapter 16 we distinguished between government production of public goods such as defence and government production of private goods such as steel.
The nationalized industries are basically the part of government production that covers the provision of private goods for sale through the market place.
Thus the nationalized industries include British Rail and British Coal, but not the provision of defence or the provision of social services such as education or housing, which are not sold commercially.
Nationalized industries tend to be much more capital-intensive than the rest of the economy, and it is precisely the presence of these large capital costs that generates the economies of scale that make many of these industries natural monopolies.
Nationalized industries or other forms of public ownership are not confined to the UK.
Other Western countries face the same problem of natural monopoly in these industries.
The precise extent and nature of public involvement differs from country to country (for example, France had a very large degree of state involvement in industry), but the basic pattern is essentially the same.
Whereas European countries tended to acquire public ownership of the assets of natural monopolies, the United States preferred to handle the same problems through public regulation of industries whose assets were left in private ownership.
Regulatory agencies set prices and specify quality and quantity of output.
Hence, when countries concluded that the public sector was too involved in the economy, the initial policy priorities differed in Europe and the United States.
Having few nationalized industries, the US emphasis was immediately on deregulation, which began with airlines in 1978.
In Europe, privatization came first, but deregulation is now also under way.
Reasons for Nationalization
We distinguish three reasons why governments may wish to nationalize industries.
The first is the natural monopoly problem, which we examined in the previous chapter.
Large economies of scale mean that marginal cost lies below average cost.
Social efficiency requires that prices be close to marginal cost but this will imply losses for the natural monopolist.
Public subsidy may therefore be desirable, but the public commitment to pick up the bills requires public monitoring to ensure that the monopolist continues to minimize costs and produce efficiently.
Public management may be the simplest solution.
Since private shareholders cannot be expected to subsidize the wider goals of society as a whole, public ownership may then be inevitable.
Second, externalities may be important.
The social gains from an efficient road or rail network may exceed the private benefit for which direct users are prepared to pay.
In Chapter 16 we argued that taxes and subsidies could sometimes be used to offset externalities and guide market equilibrium to the efficient allocation.
But taxing road use may be administratively difficult and expensive, and direct regulation may be preferable.
Third, important judgements of equity or distribution may be involved.
A private profit-maximizing railway would close most rural railway lines.
Society might judge that this severely reduced the welfare of citizens in remote areas or that it promoted regional dissent which reduced the sense of national unity.
Again, society faces two options.
It can order a private supplier to provide these services, perhaps with the carrot of an explicit bribe or subsidy, or it can directly take over production to run the industry in the interests of the nation as a whole.
We now consider the principles by which nationalized industries should be run.
We distinguish investment policy and pricing policy, though the two are closely connected.
Decisions on pricing will affect the rate of return on investment and the incentive to carry out new investment, but past investment, by affecting the current capital stock, will affect current marginal costs to which prices will be related.
Investment Decisions
In Chapter 13 we discussed the demand for capital and the investment decision by a private firm.
We saw that we can think about this on a stock basis at a point in time or on a flow basis per period of time.
Using the stock concept, at a point in time an investment project is profitable if the present value of net operating benefits the stream of future operating profits discounted at the interest rate at which firms must borrow funds — exceeds the initial purchase price of the new capital good.
Thus investment or additions to the capital stock will proceed up to the point at which the present value of the future profits equals the initial purchase price of new capital goods.
Equivalently, on a flow basis, firms compare the rate of return on a new investment with the interest rate at which they must borrow to finance the project.
Investment is profitable if the rate of return exceeds the interest rate.
Hence investment will proceed up to the point at which the rate of return just equals the interest rate at which firms can borrow.
Exactly the same principles carry over to social investment decisions provided we are careful to use social rather than private measures of costs, benefits, and the interest or discount rate.
We discuss these in turn.
The Initial Cost of the Capital Good
In the absence of any distortions, the private cost or market price of a capital good also measures its social cost, the opportunity cost of the resources used to make the capital good, or the value of the goods these resources could otherwise have made.
There are two reasons why society might consider that the social cost of a capital good is less than its private cost.
The first is unemployment.
If British Rail builds a railway line in South Wales by employing construction workers who would otherwise have been unemployed, the cost includes the wages of construction workers, but these do not represent a social cost if they would not otherwise have produced any goods.
Their  social opportunity cost may be close to zero.
Governments are sometimes suspicious of this argument because they are more accustomed to thinking as accountants about financial payments than as economists about production and distribution of goods and services that the price system is merely a mechanism to facilitate.
Nevertheless, you should be able to convince even an accounting-oriented government that it will save on unemployment payments if some of the unemployed are put to work.
A second reason why private and social costs may diverge is a production or consumption externality arising from the production of the capital good.
For example, the production of Concorde may generate advances in technical knowledge that would be of wider benefit to society.
Whether these are reflected in the market price that a private supplier of capital goods would charge depends on how well the patent system allows the private producers to reap the benefits of these advances.
If society gains more than the private supplier would gain, the social cost of the capital good is less than the market price that a private supplier would have to charge.
Valuing the Stream of Future Benefits and Costs
Whereas a private firm would simply use market prices to determine the stream of private operating costs and benefits, and hence the stream of future profits, to which the new investment gives rise, society will wish to value the social marginal costs and benefits of future output.
It will have to take into account externalities and distributional effects.
For example, the social profit in investing in rural transport almost certainly exceeds the private profit.
We shall shortly explain how prices should be set to reflect marginal social costs.
When a nationalized industry is committed to pricing in this way, it should use these prices to calculate the stream of social profit and the social rate of return on the investment project.
Choosing the Discount Rate
Private firms should invest if the rate of return on the project exceeds the market interest rate at which they can borrow funds.
That is the private opportunity cost of the funds tied up in the project.
Should nationalized industries use the same interest rate as private firms?
To assess the social opportunity cost of tying up resources in a project in the nationalized industries, we need to ask what would have happened to the resources had the project not been undertaken.
Suppose first that investment in the nationalized industries simply displaces private investment; resources used by British Rail are resources no longer available for investment projects in ICI or Shell.
Unless the nationalized industries use the same interest rate as private firms, there will be misallocation of investment resources between the private and the public sector: society can gain by reallocating resources to the sector with the higher rate of return.
This is a powerful argument.
Nevertheless, there are two reasons why society may wish to use a lower discount rate in public sector investment projects, thus requiring them to earn a lower rate of return than in private industry.
First, there is the question of risk.
In Chapter 14 we saw that risky activities on average will need to earn a higher rate of return to compensate for the higher risks involved.
But social risk can be reduced by spreading it thinly across a large number of people.
Private shareholders in Concorde would have required a high expected return to entice them into such a risky project.
A private Concorde producer could have borrowed only at a very high interest rate.
And as it turned out, private investors in Concorde would have lost a lot of money and minded terribly.
Even a disastrous outcome in the public sector can be financed by a fraction of a penny on everyone's income tax, which does not have nearly such disastrous consequences.
Hence, on average, risky projects in the nationalized industries do not require as high a rate of return as such projects in private industry.
The second reason arises from the fact that public projects do not displace just private sector investment projects.
Where public projects are financed by taxation, their effect is to reduce private household consumption by reducing the after-tax incomes that households can spend on goods and services.
When this happens, the social opportunity cost of the resources tied up in the public project is the return that households could have obtained on the same resources.
How do we measure this return?
Households will so arrange their affairs that the utility  return on future as opposed to present consumption is just equal to the real interest rate at which households can lend out money.
Why?
Because if the marginal utility of future consumption relative to present consumption differs from the rate at which households can convert current spending power into future spending power by saving and lending this money out at interest, households could improve their long-run utility by saving and lending a different amount.
This argument is spelled out in detail in Chapter 19.
Hence the rate of return on household savings is the relevant measure of the social opportunity cost of public sector resources that could have been used in private consumption.
But whereas firms borrow at the gross of tax interest rate to finance investment projects, households must pay income tax on interest earnings as a result of saving and lending.
It is the lower after-tax interest rate that measures the social opportunity cost of resources that could have been devoted to private consumption.
These two reasons — the public sector's ability to spread risk more thinly and the lower after-tax interest rate relevant to resources displaced from private consumption — justify the use of a public sector discount rate that is a little lower than the interest rate inclusive of tax and risk at which private firms must borrow.
The public sector should undertake some investment projects whose rate of return would be too low to justify the project in a private industry.
Pricing Decisions
If there are no distortions elsewhere in the economy, nationalized industries should set prices at social marginal cost.
Private marginal cost should be adjusted for any production or consumption externalities that arise, thus ensuring that society equally values the marginal cost and marginal benefit from the last unit of output.
Social marginal cost also takes account of any distributional value judgements the government wishes to impose.
Thus, for example, the price of a rural railway line should be less than the private marginal cost if society judges it a good thing to protect the living standards of people in remote areas or to foster a sense of national cohesion.
Conversely, bus fares should take account (among other things) of the social cost of the damage inflicted as a result of pollution from lead emissions from their exhaust systems.
We now consider some aspects of nationalized industry pricing that deserve special attention.
Short-run or Long-run Marginal Cost Pricing?
We have said that nationalized industries should price at social marginal cost, but should this be short-run marginal cost (SMC) or long-run marginal cost (LMC)?
In the short run capital or plant capacity is fixed but in the long run it is variable.
Thus LMC must also include the cost of providing plant capacity.
The once-and-for-all cost of building a plant is a stock concept.
The cost is incurred at the point in time when the plant is built.
But LMC is a flow concept, relating to the cost per period of producing output.
In Chapter 13 we explained how stocks and flows are related.
At the discount rate r the present value PV (a stock concept) of a permanent flow of c k per period is given by the perpetuity formula .
Conversely, the per period cost c k of an initial outlay PV can be expressed as .
The flow cost is the opportunity cost of the money or social resources tied up in the plant and is measured by the initial capital cost multiplied by the discount rate r.
In the absence of any divergence between private and social costs, it would simply be the interest payments on the money originally borrowed to build the plant.
Society will wish to evaluate this cost as the social cost of building the plant multiplied by the social rate of discount which we discussed above.
Figure 18–1 shows the short-run marginal cost SMC of producing output.
For simplicity, we assume that existing plant has a maximum capacity of Q units of output and the SMC is constant at the level c up to full capacity and then becomes vertical.
No matter how much is spent, output cannot be increased beyond Q given the existing level of plant or capital capacity.
Since SMC measures the marginal social opportunity cost in the short run of the resources used to produce this good, price should be set at SMC to equate marginal social cost and marginal social benefit.
Thus if  demand is low the industry should produce Q 1 and will operate at less than full capacity.
Given the higher demand curve D 2 D 2 , short-run marginal cost pricing will lead to a price P 2 and the industry will produce at full capacity.
Since output cannot be increased above Q, a price P 2 higher than c is required to ensure that the quantity demanded is no larger than the maximum available quantity that can be supplied.
Figure 18–1 MARGINAL COST PRICING.
For simplicity we assume that short-run marginal cost is constant at c until full capacity is reached, after which short-run marginal cost curves become vertical.
Thus SMC corresponds to plant with a maximum capacity Q ' and SMC 2 to plant with a maximum capacity Q 2 .
Suppose SMC is relevant and demand is D 1 D 1 .
In the short run the efficient output is Q 1 and price should be set at c.
If demand is D 2 D 2 , pricing at short-run marginal cost leads to a price P 2 on the vertical part of SMC.
LMC also includes the capital charge c k .
Beginning from the plant size with maximum capacity Q 0, in the long run society can gain the triangle ABE by expanding plant capacity until LMC equals social marginal benefit at E. At this plant size Q 2 the price is P 1 and still lies on the short-run marginal cost curve which is now SMC 2 .
Short-run marginal cost pricing equates immediate marginal costs and marginal benefits.
In the long run it is by making efficient investment decisions that capacity is adjusted to ensure that this price also reflects long-run marginal cost.
Suppose in the long run the industry can build more identical factories.
For example, with a slightly higher capital stock the industry will then face the short-run marginal cost curve SMC 2 with constant marginal cost c up to the new level of full capacity Q 2 , after which marginal costs become vertical.
But LMC also includes the per-period opportunity cost of the resources tied up in the capital stock, what we might call the capital charge c k , whose calculation we described above.
Figure 18–1 assumes that this capital charge c k is given by the vertical distance .
Thus we draw the LMC curve as a horizontal line at the height .
The long-run marginal cost of another output unit is both the marginal operating cost and the capital charge c k per unit of output.
Suppose the demand curve, reflecting social marginal benefit, is given by D 2 D 2 and that the industry begins with the capital stock for which Q is the maximum output and SMC the relevant short-run marginal cost curve.
Pricing at short-run marginal cost, the industry will charge a price P 2 .
Although this is the socially efficient output in the short run it is not efficient in the long run.
Once capacity can be varied society will wish to produce at point E, where marginal social benefit equals long-run social marginal cost LMC.
By increasing the capital stock until its maximum output is Q 2 society can gain the area of the triangle ABE, which reflects the excess of marginal benefit over marginal cost when output is increased from Q to Q 2 .
We can now see how pricing and investment decisions are interconnected.
In the short run output should be priced at SMC, which is the social opportunity cost of the resources employed.
However, in the long run society should invest if the present value of future benefits exceeds the cost of adding to the capital stock.
Instead of this stock evaluation of investment decisions we can use the equivalent flow evaluation.
The capital stock should be increased if the marginal social benefit exceeds the  long-run marginal cost inclusive of the capital charge.
Thus, although prices are set according to SMC, in the long run investment will change full capacity and shift the SMC curve.
If price exceeds LMC it will be socially profitable to increase capital capacity, and this process will continue until price and marginal benefit equal LMC.
Hence, although prices are set according to SMC, in the long run investment will adjust the capital stock and full capacity output until price also equals LMC.
In the long run the efficient allocation is at point E in Figure 18–1, where marginal benefit, SMC, and LMC coincide.
Peak Load Pricing
In Chapter 9 we argued that a private monopolist would make higher profits if it were possible to price-discriminate, charging different prices to customers whose demand curves were effectively distinct.
The problem with price discrimination in goods is that a secondary market is likely to be established in which low-price customers resell to higher-price customers, thus tending to equalize the prices customers actually pay.
Resale is not a problem when the commodity is a service (train journeys, electricity supply), which must be consumed as it is purchased.
Consider the problem faced by a producer of electricity.
It faces a high demand for electricity at breakfast time and dinner time, moderate demand throughout the rest of the day, and very little demand at night.
To cater for demand at peak times it has to build extra power stations, which are then idle during times of day when demand is lower.
Thus in the long run, taking account of the capacity cost of building the extra power stations, the marginal cost of supplying peak users is very high.
It does not make sense to charge all users the same rate, for users at different times impose very different marginal costs on society.
It makes sense to charge peak users higher prices to reflect the higher marginal costs they impose.
Peak load pricing is a system of price discrimination whereby peak time users pay higher prices to reflect the higher marginal cost of supplying them.
Peak load pricing has two attractive consequences.
Not only are peak users paying for the high marginal costs they impose, but also those users who would not mind consuming at a different time (e.g. households with night storage heaters, who can use electricity at a time when marginal costs are low) are induced by cheaper prices to switch to consuming at off-peak times.
By spreading total daily consumption more evenly, society reduces peak demand and has to devote less resources to building power stations whose number is determined by peak usage.
In terms of Figure 18–1, the efficient pricing policy makes prices vary with short-run marginal cost.
Off-peak users, with the lower demand curve D 1 D 1 , do not exhaust full capacity and pay the marginal operating cost c exclusive of capacity charges for the marginal plant.
Peak users with the higher demand curve D 2 D 2 , pay a higher price P 2 on the vertical part of the SMC curve through which their demand curve passes.
Given this efficient pricing structure, what is the efficient quantity of investment?
Investment should increase capacity up to the point at which the once-and-for-all cost of a new plant equals the present value of operating profits when the efficient pricing structure is in operation.
Equivalently, on a flow basis, the average daily price (in Figure 18–1, the average of the prices P 2 and c, weighted by the fraction of the day for which the demand curves D 1 D 1 and D 2 D 2 are relevant) should cover long-run marginal cost inclusive of capacity costs.
Thus in Figure 18–1 the efficient level of capacity might be Q if the weighted average of P 2 and c is equal to .
To sum up, prices should be set at short-run marginal cost.
This reflects the actual opportunity cost of the resources to society as a whole.
When there is a daily or seasonal pattern in demand, peak load pricing reflects the different short-run marginal costs of supplying different customers at different times of day or times of year.
When these principles are implemented, the amount of total demand met on the vertical part of short-run marginal cost curves will depend on the level of total capacity.
At low capacity, prices will frequently be high since they are set on the vertical part of the short-run marginal cost curves.
In the long run, investment and the efficient level of capacity should be determined to ensure that, when pricing at short-run marginal cost, average  daily or yearly prices equal long-run marginal cost.
Electricity Pricing in the UK
The following example combines the principle of peak load pricing with the idea of a two-part tariff that we introduced in Section 17–4.
(In the UK electricity generation used to be a nationalized industry known as the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB).
We expect the underlying pricing structure to remain rather similar when the electricity industry is privatized, but closely regulated, in the early 1990s.)
Marginal costs are highest during peak hours, both because LMC is high, reflecting the fact that peak demand requires additional capacity which is costly, and because SMC is high.
Figure 18–1 explains one reason why SMC is high during peak use.
At full capacity SMC is vertical and high prices are required to choke off demand.
However, Figure 18–1 is simplified by assuming constant average and marginal short-run operating costs up to full capacity.
In practice, the CEGB had a range of different power stations and used the less efficient higher-cost stations only when demand was at its peak.
When these stations are in use SMC is higher than during off-peak hours.
The CEGB operated peak load pricing in two distinct ways.
It used capacity charges to directly recoup costs of building plant, and then it sold electricity by the kilowatt hour.
In 1986–87 the CEGB charged area boards 10 for every kilowatt of basic demand plus 23 charge per kilowatt demanded during peak hours.
These capacity charges were intended to cover the annual cost of the interest payments (at the social rate of discount) on the money used to build the plant.
Peak users paid more because they force extra plant to be built.
In addition, there were energy charges intended to cover short-run marginal costs of operating the plant.
These too followed peak load principles.
In 1986–87 the CEGB had a complex structure of energy charges, ranging from 1.4 pence per kilowatt hour (p/kWh) for use at night during weekends to 3.8 p/kWh for use at breakfast time on a weekday.
In addition, there was a further surcharge of 2.5 p/kWh during the hour and a half of heaviest demand during the day, at whatever time that occurred.
Thus, the CEGB had explicitly tried to implement the pricing principles we have been discussing.
18–2 Nationalized Industries and Government Policy
When industries were first nationalized, many of them immediately after the Second World War, the government had two concerns.
First, that nationalized industries should broadly break even, and second, that they should be run not directly by ministers but through boards with a considerable measure of managerial independence.
In 1967 the government accepted many of the economic principles we have set out in the last two chapters.
Nationalized industries were directed to adopt marginal cost pricing.
The government fixed the social rate of interest or test discount rate at 8 per cent and urged nationalized industries to undertake explicit present value calculations for investment decisions using this discount rate.
This rate was considerably closer to the discount rate being used in private investment decisions than to the after-tax interest rate faced by households.
The government believed it more important to balance public investment against private investment by keeping their discount rates in line than to balance overall investment against consumption by using a test discount rate closer to the rate at which consumers would swap current for future consumption.
Finally, the government accepted the distinction between private and social costs.
Where, for example, British Rail wishes to maintain a loss-making rural railway for social reasons, the government attempted to value the divergence between private and social cost and made an explicit subsidy payment to British Rail.
Thus commercial considerations in running the railway could be kept distinct from the value judgements the government wished to adopt.
The 1967 policy was organized along classic first-best principles of Pareto efficiency.
Gradually, however, governments came to feel that second-best considerations could not be ignored.
In particular, they became increasingly worried about two things.
First, to the extent that nationalized natural monopolies made losses because marginal costs lay below average costs, the government became increasingly concerned  about the social cost of the distortions introduced elsewhere by the taxes required to finance these losses.
Second, governments became increasingly convinced that the commitment to meet any residual losses was leading to sloppiness and a failure to minimize costs.
These concerns partly explain the switch in policy in 1978 where first-best requirements for marginal cost pricing were partially replaced by a return to an emphasis on average costs.
The 1978 changes were (1) the introduction of a required real rate of return of 5 per cent, not on new investment projects, as the test discount rate implied, but on existing capital assets, and (2) the introduction of cash limits for each industry, a target profit or loss specified by the government in the light of the industry's circumstances.
In general these cash limits were tighter than the losses industries had previously been making.
The cash limits were intended to reduce the social cost of distortionary taxes elsewhere, to impose ‘financial discipline’ in the hope of attaining a performance that was closer to that which was cost-minimizing for any output, and to increase the bargaining power of management in wage negotiations.
Workers could no longer rely on wage increases that would simply increase the industry's losses and the government subsidy required.
The switch in policy in 1978 was reinforced by the 1980 Competition Act wherein the Monopolies and Mergers Commission was given powers to investigate nationalized industries as well as private companies.
These investigations were intended as ‘efficiency audits’ to check up on management performance.
These investigations such as the 1981 report on the CEGB have been quite critical of the way nationalized industries have been run.
Assessing Nationalized Industry Performance
Many people have strong views on whether or not the nationalized industries have been a success story.
Sometimes these views are based on reasoning that an economist would judge fallacious.
For example, unregulated private monopolists should have no difficulty earning profits.
Conversely, natural monopolies in the public sector which at times have been instructed to use marginal cost pricing will almost inevitably make losses.
Simple profitability is not the right yardstick by which to assess performance.
Similarly, at various times nationalized industries have been instructed to pursue social objectives or to help implement incomes policy by holding their price increases to less than the general inflation rate.
Assuming that the government has plenty of other policy measures at its disposal — tax incentives, subsidies to private activities, competition policy, industrial policy, and so on the key question in reaching an assessment is surely a simple one: are enterprises more efficient in the public or the private sector?
Remember that economists mean two things by efficiency: first, that firms are on the lowest possible cost curve (absence of slack and waste); and, second, that the balance of activities in the economy is Pareto-efficient: resource reallocation would not increase social welfare.
If, and some would say it is quite a big if, other policies can be used to get the right balance of activities in the economy, we can confine our attention to the narrower questions: are firms more likely to attain the lowest possible cost curve in the public or the private sector?
Many economists have tried to investigate this question.
Before reading further, think about the last few chapters and decide what you expect their empirical studies have found.
Evaluating the results of 30 studies conducted in different industries in different countries, George Yarrow of Oxford University reached the following conclusion.
Private sector firms tend to be more efficient than public sector firms, provided both operate in markets facing strong competition.
When effective competition is absent, or when other market failures are very important, the evidence is much less clear-cut, and sometimes favours public sector firms.
Was that what you expected?
We now develop this theme in more detail.
18–3 Private or Public: The Issues
Firms do not become efficient by accident.
It requires sustained effort and leadership by management.
We need to think about the differing incentives for managers in the public and private sectors.
Incentives for Private Managers
In theory, private managers' performance is monitored by actual and potential shareholders.
If managers do badly, the company's directors may be voted out of office at the annual general meeting of shareholders.
Moreover, if bad management is perceived by the stock market, share prices will be lower than they might have been and a takeover raider may see an opportunity to buy up the company, install a better management, improve profits, and hence make capital gains when share prices subsequently rise.
Together, these threats are supposed to discipline managers and keep them on their toes.
In practice, these threats are weak and not very credible.
In the first place, individual shareholders face a free-rider problem: provided other shareholders monitor the management, everything will be fine.
So everyone tends not to bother.
Second, takeover raids typically bid up the share price significantly, so again the incumbent management has considerable leeway before it is likely to get into trouble and be out of a job.
Finally, incumbent managers have a lot of insider information about the true state of the firm, information that is not available to either existing shareholders or potential raiders.
Because shareholders know all this, they try to give managers a direct incentive to care about profits and cost reduction.
Senior executives get large profit-related bonuses.
These are a carrot, for those who like carrots; but shareholders have no accompanying stick, which effective two-handed discipline would require.
In these circumstances, we cannot guarantee that private management will be efficient unless it is subject to effective competition and challenge, either from other competitors in the market-place or from a tough and watchful regulatory body.
When the private firm is very large, and therefore subject to little domestic competition, and also produces in a sector sheltered from imports and foreign competition, it is quite likely to be a relatively sleepy monopolist unless it has regulators to whom it must account.
And these regulators must be capable of resisting the regulatory capture we discussed in Chapter 17.
Incentives for Public Managers
Whereas private managers sometimes face a weak market mechanism for discipline and control, public sector managers face no market mechanism at all.
Now everything depends on the effectiveness of the government as a watchdog.
In principle, the government might do this at least as effectively as private markets.
It too can offer performance-related bonuses, and it does not face the free-rider problem which confronts individual shareholders.
On the other hand, its civil servants probably have less training in business evaluation than do private sector analysts, and, of greatest importance, there is the overwhelming political temptation for the government of the day to hijack the nationalized industries and make them an instrument of whatever is the pressing problem of the day.
Until the 1980s, nationalized industries were often instructed to cut prices to help control inflation, increase prices to help raise revenue for the Chancellor, take on workers to alleviate unemployment, and sack workers to curtail government expenditure.
Whatever else, privatization does act as a pre-commitment that there will be less political tampering with these industries.
On average, this seems likely to make it easier to run them more efficiently.
Thus we are sympathetic to Yarrow's conclusion.
Provided either competition or effective regulation provides adequate discipline on private managers, on balance, companies will tend to achieve lower cost curves in the private sector than in the public sector.
If, also, market failures are relatively unimportant, or can adequately be offset by other policies, then on balance, privatization is likely to be desirable.
But both caveats are important.
Privatization is not everywhere and always the best policy.
The Importance of Ownership
It follows from the arguments above that the transfer of ownership from the public to the private sector is not in itself the most important issue.
Neither public nor private owners happen to be great at monitoring managements.
If ownership transfer to the private sector has any direct benefit, it is only the one we cited above; namely, that it makes it less easy for governments to use industries to meet the requirements of other political dictates.
On the other hand, it should not be imagined that private industries are immune from such considerations.
If you doubt this, talk to any private oil company that has been involved in the North Sea.
Such companies have at times faced a petroleum revenue tax rate of over 90 per cent, considerably in excess of anything they were led to expect when they first went into the North Sea.
Thus, most economists agree that the key issue is not ownership itself but rather the severity of the market competition, or its substitute government competition policy, which the industry faces.
Sheltered monopolies will be sleepy and slack no matter who owns them.
Conversely, the major benefits of privatization are likely to stem not from literally returning ownership to the private sector, but rather from associated measures which make it clear to managers that they are expected to compete effectively and efficiently.
The litmus test of this assertion is the fact that so many UK nationalized industries managed to improve their performance in the run-up to privatization, while they were still in public ownership.
And industries such as British Steel dramatically improved their performance in the early 1980s, while they were nationalized industries for whom privatization at that stage was still a distant prospect.
Selling the Family Silver?
Some people worry that selling off state assets mortgages the country's future.
Others think privatization makes the state better off.
Is there any simple way through the confusion in the public debate?
You already know enough to work out the answer for yourself.
The market price of an asset is simply the present value of the income stream to which it entitles the owner.
Suppose a fair price is 100.
If we sell you the asset, we get 100 in cash but you get an asset worth 100.
Neither of us is better or worse off than before.
Of course, if we put too low a price on the asset we are selling, perhaps because we want large queues of buyers for this asset so we can claim how popular it is, we make a loss on the sale and you make a profit.
That is one way the government could be worse off by privatization.
How could the government be better off by privatization?
Essentially for the reason first advanced by Adam Smith in the quotation at the start of this chapter.
If nationalized industries previously had bad performances, they would have been worth little had they been sold at that stage.
If management policy is changed prior to privatization, the present value of future profits rises at this point, and it is this that is the source of improvement to the public finances, not the subsequent change of ownership.
Only if one believes that the prospect of privatization is the only way to improve management performance in nationalized industries can one attribute the benefit to privatization itself.
The British Steel example suggests that this belief is at best doubtful.
Finally, notice that the question of mortgaging the future hinges crucially on what is done with the privatization revenue.
If it is invested in physical capital for the public sector or used to retire outstanding government debt, it is not at all imprudent.
Only if it is ‘blown’, for example on a tax-cut-financed consumer boom, can the government be said to be piling up financial trouble for future governments.
18–4 Privatization in Practice
In the UK, privatization began not with sales of companies but with the sale of public sector council housing to incumbent tenants.
Between 1979 and 1983, local government sold almost 600000 houses or flats, and at the peak were raising 2 billion a year in revenue from this source.
Table 18–1 shows the principal privatization of public sector companies in the UK.
Note that revenue from sales was relatively small until the British Telecom flotation in 1984.
From 1986 onwards, the Thatcher government raised 4–6 billion a year by selling off some of the major public corporations — British Gas, British  
Airways, and British Steel.
And following the successful privatization of water supply, the early 1990s will see the privatization of electricity supply; the CEGB will be broken up into two companies (National Power and Powergen), from which the sale proceeds will dwarf the proceeds of previous privatizations.
Table 18–1 The UK privatization programme
Table 18–2 shows the price at which some of the early privatizations were offered for sale and compares this with the free market price established on the first day of trading on the stock market.
While it is of course very difficult to fix an offer price several weeks or even months in advance who knows how share prices in general will change in the meantime?— the table does seem to confirm our earlier claim that, on average, the offer price was set below the free market price.
Table 18–2 Offer prices and prices on first day of trading
Earlier, we stressed the importance of the extent of competition that newly privatized companies would face.
We discuss this under three headings.
Significant Competition and Little Market Failure
Examples in this category include Cable and Wireless, National Freight, Sealink, and Jaguar.
Generally, these companies have been highly successful since privatization, even after account has been taken of nationwide trends affecting all companies.
Special mention should be made of the National Freight Corporation, which was exceptionally successful after privatization.
This company was very special in the extent of both worker participation in management, and employee ownership.
It was not a typical privatization, since all shares were sold to employees — what we call an employee buyout.
Partly Competitive/Partly Regulated Industries
Examples of this kind of industry are oil, aerospace, and air transport.
Within this category, Britoil, Enterprise Oil, and British Aerospace had already been privatized by 1986, with British Airways and the British Airports Authority soon to follow.
It is too soon to reach any definitive judgement, given the relatively few companies privatized and the extreme movements of oil  prices which make it hard to compare that industry with others.
However, we can say that to date privatized companies in these categories, when measured against all other companies, have not displayed any dramatic improvement since privatization.
Market Power and Regulation
Having privatized most of the smaller companies first, by 1984 the government turned to sales of the giant corporations which are close to natural monopolies.
Whereas water and electricity were broken up into different private companies between which there might be a degree of competition, British Telecom (BT) and British Gas were essentially privatized intact.
We have considered at length why natural monopoly leads to socially inefficient outcomes: too little output and too high a price in that industry.
Moreover, in Chapter 10 we discussed how large firms enjoying a significant but not prohibitive entry barrier could erect strategic entry barriers to consolidate their market power.
In short, the privatizing of giant firms not subject to severe international competition is unlikely to be attractive unless it is accompanied by regulation.
Before discussing regulation in detail, we must make one obvious point.
Competition policy is the device already in place to combat market power.
At a time of large-scale privatization, one should be seeking to strengthen competition policy.
Privatization should not be seen as the signal for the government to withdrawn from the economy entirely.
The regulation of British Gas followed the general principles laid down for BT two years earlier, so it will suffice to concentrate on the latter.
As we discussed in Chapter 17, the first element in the regulation of BT was the ‘RPI — x’ formula, to apply over an initial five-year period and then be reviewed, and with x equal to 3 per cent.
Second, BT was required to guarantee certain public services such as public telephone boxes and the 999 emergency service.
Third, one small competitor — Mercury, a subsidiary of Cable and Wireless — was licensed to compete over part of BT's activities.
OFTEL was established as a regulatory body to supervise these arrangements.
Critics of this framework have argued that it is quite inadequate to cope with a firm with the market power of BT.
Because BT was not restructured or broken down into more manageable units which might compete with one another(the US solution to their phone giant AT & t ), competition between giant BT and tiny Mercury is unlikely to constrain BT much.
All the responsibility has been thrown on to the regulatory body OFTEL, when it might have been possible to help the market work better.