

The world in the year 2000
Prophets or clowns?
Back in January 1980 we made ten predictions about the decade ahead — and offered free resubscription forms to all readers if we scored less than five out of ten.
We scraped home by the skin of our teeth.
Wisdom:
We were right (and jubilantly so) that revolution in the Philippines would see off dictator Ferdinand Marcos.
And our prediction that the USSR would be the most troubled nation of the 1980s was quite prescient — we said specifically in those pre-Gorbachev days that Poland would be the thin end of the wedge and that the resurgence of ethnic identity would cause a flashpoint, especially among Muslims.
Our prediction that multinationals would begin media campaigns to buy social and cultural acceptability seems accurate: in recent years the television screens have been full of corporations boasting about their bigness instead of concealing it, as they used to, behind their brand names.
And our ideas about the energy crisis also seem to have been borne out — with enough new oil reserves discovered to allay fears of imminent exhaustion and with the nuclear energy debate becoming more and more an ideological issue.
But for our last point we had to rely on being half-right about two issues: we rightly predicted a Common Market between the US and Canada — but wrongly thought it would also include Mexico and Venezuela; and we predicted that unemployment would rise sharply in the West, causing more flexible working patterns — but were over-optimistic about the implications, seeing masses of people returning to school in middle life and then starting a new career.
Egg on face:
We were wrong about there being a Canberra Watergate, with Australian politicians found to be corruptly involved with mining companies — still, it was a nice try.
And we were also way off beam about unemployment being the greatest political force of the 1980s in the Third World — we predicted riots among the urban unemployed all over the world which simply haven't happened.
We were too pessimistic about manufacturing companies withdrawing from the the Third World as automation in the West took over — in fact there is much more manufacturing in developing countries now than in 1980, as our next issue will make plain.
And we were plain wrong that anarchism would be the most studied and talked-about movement of the 1980s — though maybe not so mistaken if you think that much Green philosophy is really anarchism by another name.
Dateline 2000
Imagine this is New Year's Day in the year 2000.
The ageing NI team is looking back on the key events of the last decade of the millennium.
The end of apartheid
South Africa now has a black-led but mixed-race government.
The effective unbanning of the African National Congress at the beginning of the decade gathered momentum very fast and the white minority was eventually forced to accept a negotiated settlement not dissimilar to that arrived at in Zimbabwe.
The new country rejected the new name Azania on the grounds that it had slave origins — and preferring the sense that it was a vital part of the continent as a whole.
There are already signs that its great wealth and influence are beginning to regenerate the whole southern half of Africa, particularly the previously beleaguered states of Mozambique, Angola and Zambia.
With luck this benign influence and economic motor could extend its benefits even deeper into the continent over the next decade.
Democracy in China
China discovered its own road towards a more democratic version of socialism in the course of the 1990s.
The democracy movement had been brutally suppressed in 1989 but idealism and popular opposition bubbled up again and found allies in the younger generation of Communist leaders that followed the death of Deng Xiaoping.
Whereas in the 1980s the reforming emphasis was on market economics without political openness (perestroika without glasnost), the China of the mid-to-late 1990s was driven by a concern for political openness for the first time in its history.
The Dalai Lama returned to Tibet as China conceded significant autonomy — though Tibet remained a part of the People's Republic.
Revolution in El Salvador
The 1990s was the decade which saw the victory of the FMLN guerillas in El Salvador.
They finally ousted the vicious Arena regime, which had long been backed by the US, ending a three-decade battle for social justice.
The initial signs were that the new government would follow the lead of the Sandinistas in Nicaragua in pursuing a mixed economy.
President Jesse Jackson's reforming US administration offered encouragement rather than sending in the marines.
Thus the Monroe Doctrine (according to which the US maintained Latin America as its legitimate ‘sphere of influence’) was as completely overturned as was Soviet control over Eastern Europe in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Love and peace revisited
The 1990s was the decade of idealism and optimism in the West.
After the inflation and eventual recession of the 1970s and the greedy pursuit of money in the 1980s, people (especially the young) rediscovered some of the faith in the future and the enthusiasm for change which had characterized the 1960s.
But this renewed social concern benefitted from the lessons of the preceding decades by being more realistic — and so arguably achieving more.
The across-the-board respect for green thinking had a lot to do with this change in atmosphere — so too did the disappearance of the ‘Soviet threat’.
The UN bounces back
The worldwide acceptance of the need for supranational controls on the environment — given that the holes in the ozone layer, the greenhouse effect and tropical deforestation affect the whole planet rather than individual countries — has lent new respect and strength to the United Nations.
And the greater integration of individual countries into trading blocs (Europe, North America, Southern Africa, Latin America) has made gentle progress towards some form of global administration (rather than government) seem more natural and inevitable.
AIDS contained but not conquered
The spread of the HIV virus has continued on a massive scale throughout the decade, to the point where fears of a global depopulation of Black Death proportions have come to seem more plausible.
There is still no vaccine to immunize people against the virus.
But at least drugs stopping the development of full-blown AIDS have kept down the death toll in the West.
In the Third World, and particularly in Africa, where these drugs are too costly, the tragedy has continued unabated.
Is it any coincidence that pharmaceutical companies have found medicines (which we have to keep taking and paying for) rather than a vaccine (which we would only have to take once)?
Rise of the Pacific
The 1990s saw Japan take over from the US as the world's dominant power.
This is driven by economics and the yen, closely followed by the ecu or European Currency Unit, has displaced the dollar as the world's most important currency.
But Japan has also begun to play a major foreign policy role, gaining great influence in the UN, the World Bank — and in the Third World, by virtue of its being the largest aid-giver.
The Pacific Basin became the world's key trading arena — and as a result the world was forced to take much more notice of Pacific Island groupings that had barely made the global news since World War Two.
The European Third World
Europe started the decade in a mood of great self-confidence as the barriers between East and West came down.
But the economic implications of the change soon came home to roost.
Outmoded smokestack industries in Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary were shattered by competition from the affluent West.
Huge unemployment resulted and East Europeans began to wonder if they had not been better off in economic isolation — though there was no going back on political reform.
The West began to see aid to Eastern Europe as more important than aid to the Third World —‘charity begins at home’.
Yet again Africa was the major loser.
Two Third Worlds
The term ‘Third World’ came to seem rather outmoded as developing countries divided into many different characters and degrees of prosperity.
More of them got in on the industrial act — Sri Lanka was the latest brave new industrializing country, while India finally took off as a major supplier of iron and steel on the global stage.
And those countries already in on the act surged ahead — notably South Korea, which moved into the top ten richest countries in the world.
Meanwhile the poorest nations of all were left even further behind as an effective ‘fourth world’.
The black death
Mental illness was a foreign concept to Aborigines until the arrival of whites in Australia.
Andrew McKenna describes the impact of a neurotic society.
Fifty years after the arrival of the First Fleet at Sydney Cove, JD Lang wrote of Australia's Aborigines: ‘(we have) despoiled them of their land, and given them in exchange European vice and European disease in every foul and fatal form…’
When Europeans commenced their invasion of Australia, what is thought of today as ‘mental illness’ was unknown amongst Aborigines.
The reason for its absence, or at least its lack of recognition, lay in the very fabric of Aboriginal society itself, the integrating force of which was religion.
Erratic behaviour, as well as physical illness, could usually be explained by the malignant magic of other tribes, of individuals, or of evil spirits, and could be cured by the observance of the correct social or spiritual mores of tribal life.
A ‘clever man’ could be called in to effect a cure, and tribal medicine was usually seen as a specialized branch of religion.
Pre-conquest black Australians understood themselves to be in a secure and meaningful cosmos, with an infinite past and an infinite future.
The arrival of the Europeans spread fear and insecurity throughout black Australia.
News travelled quickly of land seizures, massacres and savage reprisals against those who defended their homes.
The future became filled with doubt.
Death from unfamiliar diseases turned the world into a disjointed and meaningless place.
Few Aboriginal languages had words for ‘thank you’; reciprocity was a fundamental tenet of life.
The system of sharing broke under the onslaught of Western individualism.
Sharing is even more out of step with materialistic white Australia today than it was 200 years ago.
Nor was there a word for ‘suicide’.
The phenomenon remains extremely rare today in Arnhem Land and the Central Desert, where groups still live more or less traditional lifestyles.
But with ‘decultured’ Aborigines it has become such a problem that it has been labelled the Black Death.
The loss of land, for a people fundamentally dependent on it both physically and spiritually, has caused an acute crisis of identity.
Many Aborigines become disorientated as tribal societies crumble and black independence erodes further — they have become a marginalized minority.
Poor conditions, bad housing, unemployment and racism take their toll on black people's mental health.
Lacking white skills, disproportionately large numbers are incarcerated in penal institutions, alcohol rehabilitation centres and psychiatric hospitals.
Such signs of ‘maladjustment’ to Western society obscure its own neurotic nature.
The neurotic is unable to face the strange, feels threatened and undermined by it, and can often only deal with it through violence.
It may be that white Australians see Aborigines from a neurotic viewpoint.
Certainly the solutions to the ‘black problem’ of the past 200 years have been of limited vision — hostile, intolerant and frequently brutal.
Aboriginal life was once in balance with itself and with the world.
In the words of Aboriginal novelist Colin Johnson: ‘Life goes on within you and without you.
It is like a mighty river, not like some sort of psychedelic light show.’
The same can hardly be said of today's Australia.
Perhaps we should be looking at the mental state not of individuals but of society as a whole.
At Cross-Purposes on Abortion
Whose rights are paramount — the rights of an unborn child, or the rights of its mother?
Kathleen McDonnell argues that abstract moral principles are both unhelpful and inhumane ways of discussing the morality of abortion.
The practice of abortion probably dates back to the earliest human societies.
In some abortion was tolerated, but considered so serious that the fetus was buried with full ceremony.
In others, abortion was treated matter-of-factly, with the products of conception disposed of unceremoniously.
With the rise of Christianity, abortion came to be seen as a full-blown moral problem.
‘It was Christianity which revolutionized moral ideas in this matter by endowing the embryo with a soul’, wrote Simone de Beauvoir in 1952.
‘Abortion became a crime against the fetus itself.’
Christian moral philosophy is based on Aristotelian logic and a system of universal moral principles, known as the Divine Law.
It results from a process of logical, deductive reasoning, unsullied by personal feelings or practicalities.
Until relatively recently Western moral philosophers debating abortion have been concerned almost exclusively with when life begins — and hence when abortion is not permissible.
For instance, the Catholic Church once followed what was known as the ‘40-and 80-day rule’, whereby the soul was thought to enter the male fetus 40 days after conception and the female after 80 days.
Abortion of a male up to 40 days and a female up to 80 days was thus considered permissible until 1989, when the Church adopted its current position — that the soul was infused at conception — which effectively outlaws abortion.
Other cutoff points have also been prevalent: quickening, for instance, which is when a woman first becomes aware of fetal movement.
And viability, the point at which the fetus is able to survive outside the womb, is the limit accepted by most modern-day proponents of abortion.
Western moral thought has also been concerned with the related question of whether the fetus is a person, with all the attendant rights of a human being.
The utilitarian theorists — such as L W Sumner and Joseph Fletcher — reject moral absolutes, but still rely on deductive reasoning to arrive at moral principles and are much given to abstract statements like ‘a fetus is a human being which is not yet a person’.
One wants to cry out that there is a real woman involved here too, facing a real dilemma, experiencing real anguish.
The problems inherent in these purely deductive approaches to the morality of abortion are becoming more and more evident.
We understand now that life is a process, a continuum.
It does not infuse itself at conception — or any other magic moment.
Viability, similarly, will no longer serve as a moral cutoff point: sophisticated life-support systems can now sustain fetuses as early as 20 weeks and even that limit is being pushed further and further back towards conception.
The feminist response to abortion as a moral problem has been ambivalent.
Feminists and other progressives have always been uncomfortable with the whole notion of morality, viewing it as an essentially conservative concept that has been used to bolster traditional modes of thinking and undermine efforts for change.
In fact some pro-choice advocates go so far as to deny that abortion is a moral issue at all— a favourite slogan for a while was ‘abortion is a health issue, not a moral issue’.
But most feminists do not believe that abortion is merely the moral equivalent of a tonsillectomy.
We sense there is more to it than that, but we have not known how to come to grips with it without giving ammunition to our opponents.
Some of us have dealt with the dilemma by adopting the ‘clump of tissue’ argument.
‘Let's get something straight,’ wrote Michele Landsberg in the Toronto Star: ‘If a clump of living tissue is a human being, then an acorn is an oak tree and an egg is a chicken and the church should be giving names and funeral to every miscarried fetus’.
This approach, which dominated the abortion reform movements of Sixties' North America, is rooted in liberal humanism which values science and rational thought.
Humanists have no use for the Christian view that the fetus has a soul, finding it a backward and unscientific idea, shrouded in mysticism.
The ‘clump of tissue’ argument does indeed provide a challenge to the view that the fetus has full moral standing from conception.
But it does this by denying it any moral status at all.
Many feminists have become uncomfortable with this idea, but we haven't been able to find any other argument that didn't immediately pose a threat to our basic position that women must control their own bodies.
Consequently we have appeared to withdraw from the moral debate altogether.
And Right-to-Life ideology has filled the vacuum.
Their solution to the dilemma is, as we know, a very simple one: abortion is wrong.
Abortion is murder.
Many people abhor the extremity of this view.
But they do have a gut feeling that abortion is a moral issue.
And they see no-one but Right-to-Life addressing it.
But in fact feminists have been concerned with the morality of abortion all along — but in a distinctly different way from the moral philosophers and Right-to-Lifers.
What has appeared as an intense, bitter and irreconcilable polarization has occurred partly because our basic moral concerns have not been the same.
We have been talking apples — the rights and concerns of women — while they have been talking oranges — the rights and concerns of fetuses.
Rather than elevating the rights of the fetus to the exclusion of all the other factors, we have set ourselves the primary task of helping other women who face the dilemma of unwanted childbearing.
We took up the coathanger as our symbol — one of the grim tools women used to induce their own abortions before the operation was legalized — and we vowed that no more women should die, become maimed or made permanently sterile as a result of trying to get an abortion.
In our approach we have been motivated by what psychologist Carol Gilligan has called an ‘ethic of care’, which resists the subordination of human needs to so-called universal principles of right and wrong.
According to Gilligan, women's morality tends to be rooted in human relationships, in the concerns of daily life, rather than in abstract moral principles.
Male theorists have tended to view this approach as a weakness in women.
But, arguably, it is one of our strengths, a vital counterbalance to what Gilligan calls ‘the blind willingness to sacrifice people to truth’.
She argues that we need to rethink the theories of moral development altogether to encompass a respect for both the masculine ‘ethic of rights’ and the feminine ‘ethic of care’.
Both are needed for a truly human ethic.
Ironically this ‘ethic of care’ has a way of intruding into the lives of the most passionate ‘ethic of rights’adherents.
In 1983, for example, the Toronto Star gave a moving account of an evangelical Christian minister and his wife who went through a painful rethinking of their position on abortion after experiencing an unwanted pregnancy.
The woman had become suicidally depressed while pregnant with her previous two children and was devastated when she found herself accidentally pregnant again.
Although she decided, after an agonizing period of inward questioning, to continue with the pregnancy, it led her and her husband to reject their rigid moral position: ‘We will never pressure any woman not to have an abortion.
We've been there ourselves and now feel that it's too easy for churches simply to add to the guilt of those who have abortions.’
A true feminist morality would strive to root the abstract principles of right and wrong in the firm ground of our tangible day-to-day existence: because one of the inherent limitations of an ethic based solely on rights — whether it be the fetus's right to life or women's right to control our bodies — is that it is one-dimensional.
It assumes we are all atomized individuals with competing rights, rather than beings whose very existence is based on profound interconnections with one another.
Acknowledging this interdependence allows us to make the courageous leap of ‘letting in’ the fetus, of rejecting the idea that it is simply a clump of cells, of taking it into our moral accounting and allowing it to make some claim on our attentions.
The right of the fetus may not be the only — or even the main — consideration in the abortion issue, as anti-abortionists insist.
But it is an aspect that demands to be addressed.
Because there is no escaping the fact that we have, with full consciousness, terminated life.
This is most emphatically not the same as blaming ourselves or burdening ourselves with an unnecessary load of guilt.
It means accepting, as one grieving woman put it, ‘that there was something alive in you, and that you ended that process’.
Ultimately what we are talking about is acknowledging the seriousness of abortion.
The potential trap, of course, lies in defining what is a ‘serious’ enough reason to have an abortion.
Most Right-to-Lifers believe that only a threat to the life of the mother is sufficient justification and that most women seek abortions for essentially ‘trivial’ reasons.
But we know that this is not the case.
That we cannot cope with another child, that we are not ready for parenthood, that we cannot face raising a child without a partner, that we cannot afford a child, that our method of birth control failed, that we are the victims of rape, that we cannot bear the anguish of carrying a child to term and giving it up for adoption, that we cannot accept the responsibility of caring for a handicapped child — these are the reasons why we seek abortion in the vast majority of cases.
Far from being trivial, they are dilemmas of great consequence.
If abortion is a serious matter, so, too, are the life circumstances that lead us to choose it.
This is how one young abortion counselor expressed her conflict over ‘letting in’ the fetus: ‘I just couldn't kid myself any more and say there was nothing in the uterus, just a tiny speck.
Finally I had to reconcile myself — I really believe this, but it's not a thing you can say without emotion and maybe regret — that, yes, life is sacred, but the quality of life is also important, and it has to be the determining thing in this particular case.
I had to be able to say ‘Yes this is killing, there is no way around it.
But I am willing to accept that’.’
Worth reading on…
DEBT
A Fate Worse Than Debt, Susan George, Grove Press, 1988.
A well researched, highly readable account of the debt crisis.
A Journey through the Global Debt Crisis, The Transnational Institute, 1987.
Essential for schools.
A cartoon version of the debt tragedy featuring all the major actors and accompanied by information gems.
The Debt Squads, Sue Branford and Bernardo Kucinski, Zed Books 1988.
A useful and accessible analysis of Latin American debt, packed with pertinent facts and figures.
Adjustment With A Human Face — a study by Unicef edited by Andrea Cornia, Richard Jolly, Frances Stewart, Oxford University Press, 1987.
If you want to know the real effects of International Monetary Fund policies, this is the place to find out.
Essential facts about the growth of poverty.
The Money Masters: Banks, Power and Economic Growth, Ian Reinecke, Heineman 1988.
A recently released book examining how the de-regulation of Australia's banks has added to the burden of Third World debt.
AFRICA
Africa's Precious Few
Birth rates are falling everywhere in the world — except Africa.
This is not because Africans are illogical, irresponsible or short-sighted.
On the contrary.
It is largely because Africa is underpopulated.
Nigel Twose explains.
The statistics are thrown at us relentlessly: the population of Africa is growing faster than any other group in recorded history.
Nigeria's population will reach 532 million in the middle of the next century; Ethiopia's population will quintuple.
My God, the reader gasps, not five times as many Ethiopians!
If all that money we gave to Band Aid didn't do the trick, it must be because there are just too many of them.
The problem with doom-laden statistical predictions like these is that they draw attention away from the reasons why so many perfectly sensible people are choosing to have large families.
If we genuinely want to participate in the population debates, as opposed simply to joining the chop-off-their-willies brigade of population controllers, then we must try to understand those reasons.
And we do that by trying to see the world from the point of view of Africans.
Take slavery for instance.
Abolished just a little over a century ago, it merits just a short paragraph in many school textbooks.
But it is a deep and bitter memory in many African communities.
Nobody will ever know exactly how many millions of young men and women were taken as slaves to the Americas during those terrible four hundred years.
Nobody can ever detail all the trickery, kidnapping and war that took place to obtain those captives.
But what is certain is that the slaves themselves were the most able-bodied young people available and that the most valuable section of Africa's labour force was systematically removed from generations of agricultural families, whose farming routines were devastated.
‘What would have been Britain's level of development had millions of them been put to work as slaves outside of their homeland over a period of four centuries?’ asks Guyanese professor of history Walter Rodney.
His question is not only valid in a numerical sense, for it was not just the labour of those young adults that was removed.
It was their creativity and inventiveness too.
And if African destitution has its roots in this shameful period of depopulation, so too does what was to become a family's main defense against the poverty enforced on those left to fend for themselves without the strong young bodies they had counted on.
Eventually Europe's need for slaves declined to be replaced, in the nineteenth century, by a requirement for tropical export products — especially vegetable oils.
These products also demanded a large African labour force, both for the plantations themselves and for the roads and railways leading to the ports.
The railway between Pointe Noire and Brazzaville, for instance, was built with the forced labour of 127,250 men between 1921 and 1932 — 10,200 of whom died in the process.
In Malawi (then Nyasaland) in 1935 between 30 and 60 per cent of men were absent from their homes.
Different ruses were used to encourage Africans to leave their homes and work on the new colonial projects.
In villages throughout Africa today, elders will tell you the stories that they heard from their parents.
You can still hear the resentment engendered in the villages by these schemes because of the way they were so clearly causing poverty and creating severe labour bottlenecks on the farm.
And throughout the continent, people resisted these variants of forced labour (incidentally creating the persistent myth of the ‘lazy African’).
The most effective ploy for forcing strong young workers to leave their family farms was invented in South Africa, where Prime Minister Cecil Rhodes imposed a tax of ten shillings on all adult males.
To pay the taxes in cash, Africans would have to earn cash.
This scheme — which was widely adopted by colonial administrations right across the continent — killed two birds with one stone: it both raised money and it produced a large labour force which had previously been occupied with growing food for their families.
It also halted African development in its tracks.
In any country the rich can invest and reinvest their capital, producing greater and greater profits.
But the poor can only produce children.
Most Africans had and still have just this one significant resource over which they have any control: their labour power and that of their children.
In some parts of the continent, such as Senegal, that labour is used to grow cash crops.
In other parts of Africa, men migrate to the burgeoning cities in search of employment in offices and factories.
In countries like Burkina Faso and Mali, the only option has been to go south to the plantations of wealthier coastal countries like Ivory Coast.
But in every case, the migration results in fewer active young people to grow food for those left behind.
Despite the cataclysmic statistics the demographers throw at us, families in many parts of Africa today will tell you that at certain times of the year they suffer from a severe labour shortage.
Many studies have detailed the stress on the lives of married African women — and its effect on food production.
In Lesotho, for instance, over half of the women are having to cope with their farms alone because their husbands are away working in South Africa.
During the mid-Seventies a major study in Burkina Faso (then Upper Volta) investigated the reasons why hundreds and thousands of young men leave the country each year to look for employment in Ivory Coast.
The main reason people gave was blunt: to get the money to pay taxes.
They were then asked why they could not raise the money by staying at home and working on the land.
Ninety per cent of those interviewed said that the problem they faced was not drought; 80 per cent said it was not a shortage of land.
Instead the majority said it was because there were simply not enough people in the family to increase their agricultural production.
Almost 100,000 people were interviewed, yet these conclusions sound incredible to those of us raised on statistics of population explosions and global disaster.
They certainly sound illogical to international demographers.
And to those concerned with national population projections.
But they are perfectly rational to the people who were interviewed and to their families.
Their answers result in the supreme irony of lorry-loads of young men, having scraped together some money from their extended family, travelling for days in the backs of trucks as tight-packed as rush-hour subway trains.
They feel they have no choice but to migrate, just as their fathers felt they had no choice but to migrate.
But collectively their mass migration is ruining the country's development prospects.
Nor do the wages from the plantations compensate the families left in the villages for this loss of labour.
At independence most African countries were left with a single cash crop to export.
Nine of them are still dependent on just one crop for over 70 per cent of their income.
Nearly 90 per cent of Burundi's income comes from coffee, for instance.
This puts these countries in a very weak bargaining position.
So when, or if, the young men do return, all they usually bring with them are just a few of the pathetic petty accouterments of capitalism: a radio, a watch, perhaps a bicycle.
Meanwhile their parents — and wives — turn back to the only resource over which they do have some control, and produce more children: hoping against hope that this one might stay and help with the work on the land, or that one might be lucky enough to get an education and a job sufficiently secure and well-paid to bring security for all the family.
For the last forty years population growth has been used an explanation for African famine, allowing us to blame Africans for bringing their poverty upon themselves.
But it was European interests that systematically removed millions of young people.
It was our colonial system which created export-based farming and the tax systems which continued the depopulation of the villages.
And today, it is our systems's greed which continues to profit from neocolonial financial and trading relationships at the expense of any hope for sustainable African development.
Having children has been a perfectly logical response of families to the hardship and famine which have resulted from these processes.
Until we begin to recognise our responsibility for the current situation, we will not come close to finding a solution that will lead African families to choose to have smaller families.
Nigel Twose worked for Oxfam in the Sahel from 1979 to 1983.
He is currently employed at the Agency for Co-operation and Research in Development (ACORD) in London.
The NI apple alphabet
‘A’ is for apple.
And ‘S’ is for story that wouldn't go the way it was planned.
Robert Woods adopts a new approach to teaching the alphabet.
A was an apple.
B bit it and spoiled its smooth, symmetrical shape somewhat.
C chewed it, which hurt; D digested it, and that was disgusting, as you would know if you have ever been digested.
It was full of acid juices and smelt of bad breath and sewers, only worse.
E was enteric fever which B got shortly afterward — or Eee-By-God-I've-Got-a-Stomach-ache.
A, the apple, bequeathed these two E's as a bit of posthumous R, R being revenge which ought to come later, and shall.
F was flatulence.
Which is also a symptom of enteric fever.
G was green, the colour that B, the biter, turned when she had swallowed apple A. ‘H, IH’, she said, ‘especially in the stomach, but soon she ached everywhere else as well.
J was when she got all jittery, thinking that perhaps she should have washed the apple before eating because who knows what toxic chemicals it might have been sprayed with?
K was Ketone-Etone-Methyl-Tri-Di-Meta-post-Oxy-Chlorane, which was the toxic chemical it had actually been sprayed with.
L is what it ‘urt like.
M is for medicine which the doctor gave her, but it didn't help any.
N is ‘No, I'm afraid there isn't any cure for this disease,’ which is what the first doctor said.
O is ‘Oh dear, can I have a second opinion?’
P is ‘Pity the first doctor got it right,’ which is what the second doctor said.
Q is the quiet room where B lay, suffering grievously; R is the revenge of those who are eaten alive in this life to provide fleeting pleasures for Bigger and Brawnier B's who gobble them.
S is the seed of the apple A which sprouted out of the unwholsome manure that B became after she was dead and buried.
And in the fullness of Time the seed S grew into a beautiful Tree, which is what T stands for.
And the birds of the air sang in its branches and made nests; and the insects of the earth swarmed upon it or tunnelled into its leaves, or stems, or fruit, as is their wont.
And the insects were not disturbed because organic farming was then all the rage and Keton-Etone-Methyl-Tri-Di-Meta-post-Oxy-Chlorane had been banned, with the result that the tree gave rise to more apples; out of the downtrodden and digested came beauty and increase, and fruits of the earth, and all sorts of parable lessons which children are taught at their mothers’ knee in sweet little story-books.
And so far we've got a happy ending.
And U is untrue, which is what this story is.
You may have noticed the happy ending came rather pat.
All those seeds and apples were V, virile, and X, extremely bitter to the taste — not to say inedible — because of all the insects in them, which, since, Ketone-Etone-Methyl-Tri-Di-Meta-post-Oxy-Chlorane had been banned, flourished alarmingly; if there is one thing more off-putting than finding a maggot in your apple it is finding half a maggot in your apple.
And Y? is the reason I cannot find a genuinely happy ending to this story; there seems to be a choice between adding poisonous chemicals and not — both of which apparently lend themselves to doom and disaster for the earth and its creatures, rather than sweetness and happiness ever after.
That is because this is a simple story with only 26 letters in it, and solutions to the world's problems are very complicated indeed.
However, are we downhearted?
No.
Shall we give up, just because life is against us?
No.
Let's try the ending again.
Take it from R.
S is the seed that grew.
T is the tree it grew into.
U is under the tree, in the shade, under which it is very nice to sit.
V is very pleasant and wonderful to behold.
W is ‘We won't worry about all those complicated scenarios, which for all we know may never happen at all’.
X and Y are Extremely Wise, which let's hope the human race might become.
And ZZZ…
ZZZ…
ZZZ is sweet dreams.
If you can have them.
’ The black majority were to be the prime targets’
ANC WOMEN'S SECTION, EXILED IN ZAMBIA
I represent the African National Congress, the vanguard movement fighting for the liberation of the people of South Africa.
I represent millions of women in South Africa who are denied all basic human rights including reproduction rights.
This denial is exposed by the strategy of ‘family planning’ in our country, which is nothing more than a pillar of the apartheid programme.
Back in 1956 Philip Moore declared that: ‘A massive birth control programme is the only action that will permit European survival and at the same time be acceptable to the rest of the world’.
This is the ideology which underlies the aggressive population control programme launched by the regime in 1974 and based on recommendations of the Symposium on the Population Explosion in South Africa.
The Symposium was at pains to stress that it was the black majority who were to be the prime targets of any campaign.
In 1972 there were fewer than five fully-trained family planning doctors in South Africa.
By 1976 at least 1,221 staff had been recruited.
The programme began with a scheme to distribute the pill, free of charge, to all women.
However the pill is the method least preferred by the population controllers because it is taken at the discretion of the user.
The IUD comes closer to meeting requirements because, once inserted, it usually remains in place until it is removed by a trained person.
One technique is to fit the IUD while a woman is being given what she believes to be a routine pelvic examination.
A preferred alternative — also extensively administered to black women with or without their knowledge or consent — is the contraceptive injection, Depo Provera, which is banned in many Western countries but made available in South Africa by Upjohn Belgium.
But sterilisation is the ultimate means of ensuring effective population control.
The Abortion and Sterilisation Act of 1975 stipulates that written consent of the person who in law consents to an operation has to be obtained before a sterilisation is performed.
But the overwhelming majority of black women have the legal status of children.
This means that their own consent is not required, thus making their involuntary sterilisation perfectly legal in South Africa.
Today the white elite is exhorted to ‘educate the blacks they come into contact with’.
The magazine Fair Lady carries an advertisement in which a white woman addresses the reader: ‘I discuss family planning with my domestic and take her to the nearest clinic.
Apart from helping her, I have also helped myself with a domestic who is more efficient and devoted because her mind is free of family problems’.
Both industry managers and farmers show films and invite medical advisors to give lectures to their workers.
The question of whether the workers wish to co-operate becomes secondary as unwillingness carries with it the threat of losing their jobs.
In terms of the success of the programme, the 1976 statistics are very revealing: 90 per cent of the black target population were ‘protected’ as opposed to only’per cent of the white target population.
We the women of South Africa are not against family planning.
But there is a difference between women demanding family planning and women compelled to accept population control.
Beware the green con
The path of green consumerism is paved with good intentions — but it is also littered with pitfalls.
Juliet Kellner explains how to tread safely.
Today is Green Shopping Day.
This is the day that I, the consumer, am being asked to ‘use my buying power as a vote for the planet’.
It is a catchy slogan.
But can I really improve my relationship with the earth by going shopping?
The problem is that whatever I consume greenly or ungreenly constitutes a bite out of the earth's resources.
And as a member of the Western world, I currently take very large bites.
The average Westerner uses over 260 lbs of paper every year, for example— and as a copious reader and writer, I probably use much more.
Not only do I consume vast amounts of raw materials — I am also a high-level polluter.
In the US the average consumer creates nine lbs of hazardous waste every day and gives little indication of slowing down.
The extent of our devastation is changing the chemistry of the planet on a scale that would take nature hundreds of millions of years.
This harsh reality means that we must do everything possible to limit our impact on the earth.
And green consumerism is a step in the right direction.
The challenge is for consumers to control the movement so that we do not end up its victims.
We can do this best by recognizing its pitfalls.
My daughter fell into one of these quite recently.
Eager to be a good green, she spent her entire week's allowance on a giant aerosol spray because it announced itself as ‘environment-friendly’.
A few days later she discovered that although the can was CFC-free, it contained other greenhouse gases.
She had been hoodwinked into spending money on a product that she cannot, eco-soundly, use.
The manufacturer profited from the sale of the can by exploiting her good will towards the planet.
But the planet scarcely benefited at all.
My daughter had stumbled into Pitfall Number One for the unwary green consumer — the ‘Bit-Less-Bad’ trap.
The CFC-free aerosol is a bit less bad than one which spews out CFCs — that's one step forward.
But my daughter would willingly have advanced two steps and bought a non-aerosol product, had she been more honestly informed; the labeling on the can misled her.
An important task for the green consumer movement, therefore, is to make producers and retailers label their merchandise fully and honestly.
The movement must also persuade governments to add their muscle to this reasonable demand; accurate labeling should become a statutory requirement.
Another example of the Bit-Less-Bad trap is unleaded petrol.
This does not stop motorists damaging the environment but only stops them destroying it quite so violently.
This one-step change is not enough.
The real way to protect the earth is to stop motorists from being motorists — or at least to persuade them to use their cars only when absolutely necessary.
And nowhere on the advertising hoardings aimed at would-be green motorists, do we see suggestions that we should stop buying cars.
The logic of big business is to promote consumption.
So however green-tinted companies become they are unlikely to encourage people to consume less.
And this gives the green consumer movement another role: to make shoppers stop before they buy to ask whether they need a product at all.
‘We must consider not only the quality of the products we buy, but the quantity,’ thunders Jonathon Porritt from Friends of the Earth in Britain.
And unless the green consumer movement constantly reiterates this point, it lays itself open to being hijacked by industrialists who simply wish to look green enough to make naive shoppers purchase more of their wares.
The danger of this is very real.
Close examination of apparently-green producers reveals Pitfall Number Two for the Green Consumer — the ‘Green Image Game’.
An article written for marketing executives entitled ‘Selling to the greens?
It's not so simple’, urges industrialists to include a green benefit in the marketing of all products and services.
For example, adding a little recycled paper to a package enables them to claim that the item is made of recycled materials and convey a sense of ecological responsibility.
By making products sound as if they are good for the environment, manufacturers can ‘attract extra sales from around a third of the population’.
So caveat emptor viridis: let the green buyer beware.
You may have sacrificed the comfort of your ultra-soft toilet paper for what you think is the recycled stuff — but it is possible you are being conned.
Producers could be exploiting your wish to be ecologically responsible — without taking such responsibility themselves.
Green consumers are easy targets.
We are soft sells with dreams in our eyes and money in our pockets.
We tell market researchers, hands on our hearts, that we are willing to pay 25 per cent more — no problem — for goods that are environment-friendly.
The researchers listen and tell the producers who can hardly believe their luck — customers who say exactly what they want, and are willing to pay MORE!
Small wonder that green products, halfway genuine or frankly fake, are filling up the supermarket shelves.
In fact those with a ‘green image’ may be no better than the non-green products beside them.
But why are non-green products on the same shelf in the first place?
This is Pitfall Number Three —‘Niche-marketing’, by which each product is targeted at a specific market.
The supermarket may hand out pretty green-and-white leaflets boasting its environmental concerns.
But don't be fooled.
The owners' real agenda is to boost the profits they get from customers, green and ungreen.
Why else — when there are plenty of environment-friendly products now available — do supermarkets still stock non-green items?
And why do manufacturers still make them?
Freedom of choice is a feeble rejoinder when the issue is global suicide.
Buying green involves tackling this duplicity.
Customers need to know whether the company as a whole has an ethical policy — from parent company down to subsidiaries.
Otherwise we could find that we are ‘voting with our purses’ for manufacturers that are anti-ecological — but indirectly so.
Heinz was recently caught like this.
According to a Friends of the Earth bulletin, the company won a Green Manufacturer of the Year Award, and was on the point of signing a $114,000 sponsorship deal to support Green Shopping Day when it suddenly pulled out.
It had apparently been made aware of plans to alert green consumers to the slaughter of dolphins by Starkis — one of its subsidiaries.
The withdrawal showed how scared companies are of the negative publicity they might receive if they do not clean up their acts right down the line.
Environmental destruction can occur at many points in the life of a product, which leads us to Pitfall Number Four — the ‘Cradle-to-Grave Trap’.
A friend recently tumbled into this when he bought a CFC-free fridge.
He knew he had acquired an object which emitted other noxious gases — Pitfall Number One — but that wasn't all.
He did not consider the quantity of valuable raw materials and energy that had been consumed in the fridge's manufacture.
He also forget to find out whether the manufacturing process had been polluting or not.
Nor did he know whether the fridge had been manufactured to last or to become obsolescent quickly; nor whether it consumed more or less electricity to run than other models; nor whether, when it was defunct, its parts could or would be recycled.
Many of us ignore these things.
Yesterday I bought a juicer to feed my family in a healthier, more environment-friendly way — less red meat, more vegetables and more fruit — but I completely forgot to raise any of the above questions.
Had I remembered, who would I have asked?
The harassed sales assistant wouldn't have known the answers.
She would have written me off as a time-wasting nut.
We should insist that industrialists give us this information as of right.
We need to know exactly what damage a product is doing to the environment — from the mining of its raw materials to the end of its life.
We have already forced manufacturers to acknowledge some of our ‘green’ demands.
But we can't stop here.
If we do we'll be like the man in the cartoon who fell off the Empire State Building and shouted just before he hit the ground ‘I'm doing great so far’.
Green consumers have strength and it lies in our growing numbers and our deep personal conviction that we want a planet fit for our children.
Producers depend on us to buy their goods.
And this gives us the final say.
We have the real power — the power of the purse.
What you can do
Before you buy, ask if you really need a product, and if you do, choose one which will do least harm to the environment.
Join a consumers group and lobby for government legislation to make manufacturers label their products fully and accurately.
The labels should say exactly what a product contains.
They should also inform shoppers as to the product's environmental friendliness from cradle to grave — evaluated according to standardized criteria.
But remember that no label will ever tell you about a company's overall ethical policies.
Take heart: the green consumer movement has made a significant dent in manufacturing practices over a very short time.
You can help it do more by encouraging your friends and family to join it.
The magic word
Literacy campaigns push back the boundaries of ignorance and give people more chance of controlling their own destiny.
So runs the rhetoric.
But, as Daouda Api explains, the lucky charm of literacy often fails to work its magic.
Imagine an African peasant farmer trying to scratch a living from a few unyielding hectares.
What do she, her husband and children need to overcome their poverty?
Access to the more fertile land taken over by foreign-owned companies?
A political process that offers them power over their own lives?
A basic health service and clean drinking water?
Or do they need a mass literacy programme?
Since 1946 the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has been promoting literacy ‘both as a human right and as an instrument of liberation and development’.
Literacy is seen as the key that will somehow free the ‘victims of discrimination, oppression and indignity that illiteracy breeds’.
On this basis, precious resources have been allocated to mass literacy campaigns all over the Third World.
Many of these campaigns have been deemed successful by UNESCO's own criteria.
Yet the people targeted by them still live with economic stagnation, political repression, malnutrition and ecological crisis.
The simple fact is that many of the values of the mass literacy movement have been ill-conceived.
They have reflected the wishful thinking that informed liberal development politics in the post-War period.
They have not been relevant enough to the needs of the world's poor.
And they have been characterized by a Western bias that permeates education in general.
After four decades of UNESCO orthodoxy the three ‘sacred myths’ of literacy need challenging.
First, the view that oral culture is irrelevant or even hostile to the acquisition of literacy.
Second, the implication that indigenous languages have no part to play, and that mass literacy campaigns should use the official languages of government which are a direct legacy of European colonialism.
And third, the idea that literacy automatically creates social mobility, greater productivity and an end to poverty.
The spoken word
For most of the world's people spoken language has always been the most important form of communication — a reservoir of historical tradition and rich culture, as well as the basis of everyday life.
Most theorists and practitioners of mass literacy seem to accept the existence of a ‘great divide’ between non-literate and literate peoples.
They assume this oral culture to be inferior and a major contributor to the ‘backwardness’ of so-called primitive societies.
Critics of this view, such as Brian Street, argue that no such divide exists.
He demonstrates instead the extent to which oral and literate forms of language complement each other: ‘The development of writing takes place within an oral framework of thought and this may continue to dominate the uses of literacy’.
As long as people are told that their own oral language skills are irrelevant then demystifying the particular demands of reading and writing is going to remain difficult.
The empire's language
The second great myth of mass literacy campaigns is the denial of indigenous languages.
This is a by-product of the general educational systems established by European empire builders.
These were closely tailored to meet the economic and political needs of the colonizers: education became one of the major instruments for extending colonial power.
For Nigerians, for example, the mission school became the stepping stone to a position in the lower ranks of the British colonial administration.
If they learned to write English and accept a whole package of European cultural values — including Christianity — economic advancement and higher social status would follow.
The French strategy in their colonies was slightly different, in that it aimed to create a tiny, assimilated elite of ‘Black Frenchmen’(sic).
The geography and history of France dominated the curriculum —‘our ancestors the Gauls’— as well as an appreciation of Racine and Baudelaire.
Under both French and British rule, however, colonial education created a class who served and owed their allegiance to the colonizing power.
The growth of even limited literacy — and particularly the introduction of written records — laid the foundations for the dispossession of land, the setting up of a centralized bureaucracy and the suppression of indigenous cultures.
Given the colonial context it should not be altogether surprising that literacy experts have rejected the use of indigenous languages to propagate education.
Quite simply mastery of colonial languages gave a few people unfettered power.
Language and literacy was the the terrain on which the struggle between exploiter and exploited took place.
But for the vast majority of people — particularly in rural areas — indigenous language remains the most potent expression of their aspirations.
Too few mass literacy campaigns have even acknowledged this fact; Grenada, Zimbabwe and Burkina Faso are among the few exceptions.
Unless this question is taken seriously then the acquisition of literacy can become simply a more subtle means of social control and cultural denial.
The illusion of prosperity
The third ‘sacred myth’ of literacy is that transferring a set of technical skills to illiterates will of itself create the necessary conditions for economic growth and prosperity.
This assumption underlies literacy programmes both in the developed and developing world.
In the US, for example, the Adult Basic Education Programme claims that ‘anyone who becomes literate is automatically better off economically, is better able to find employment and become a better citizen’.
Educationists have allied with development theorists to extend these ideas to the Third World.
They claim that literacy brings ‘enhanced cognitive and intellectual competence’ and creates the adaptable, more productive ‘Modern Man’(sic).
They also suggest that there is a critical literacy threshold of 40 per cent: in other words two-fifths of a country's people need to be literate if it is to ‘modernize’ and make an ‘economic miracle’possible.
These mechanistic ideas formed the basis of UNESCO's highly influential ‘functional literacy model’, adopted by countries as diverse as socialist Tanzania and monarchist Iran in the 1970s.
This model was intended to enhance the practical skills and productivity of predominantly rural populations.
But the campaigns they inspired have helped to show that the forms and practices of literacy can never be ‘neutral’— they always have a political or ideological bias.
The Shah's dreams
In Iran during the early 1970s the Shah's regime launched an ambitious literacy project.
The underlying motives were mixed.
The Shah wanted to transform Iran into a modern state, downgrading agriculture and investing in industry.
He hoped this strategy would attract foreign investment by multinationals which believed that the more literate people there were, the bigger the market for consumer durables would become.
But at the same time literacy would get more villagers to ‘participate’ in the cash economy — and would help the Government to control the outlying areas.
Thousands of young people were drafted into the ‘Army of Knowledge’ which was to bring literacy into the countryside.
The teaching materials attempted to introduce commercial farming methods, greater bureaucratic controls and instil the superiority of ‘modern’ ideas.
The contempt of urban, middle-class educators for rural peasants was barely concealed: ‘the psychological attitude of the Iranian villagers creates a great obstacle to rural reconstruction’.
Many of the conscripted literacy teachers resented being sent to the countryside and their impact was more often than not damaging.
‘They are young and inexperienced and they come mostly from cities and know little about the problems of rural people.
They lack the ability to adapt themselves to, and identify themselves with, the community in which they work.’
The authoritarian nature of the Iranian example is typical of many literacy programmes in the Third World.
The relationship between Government educationists and villagers was a political one, and created the seeds of resentment and conflict that eventually spilled over in 1979 with the overthrow of the Shah.
Reading over the literature of that period it is remarkable just how crude and ethnocentric the thinking behind the literacy campaigns and education programmes were.
And yet they were founded on the theories and practices worked out by UNESCO ‘experts’.
A liberating force
Despite the rhetoric of UNESCO that literacy is an instrument of liberation, most governments have consciously avoided programmes that might promote independent thinking or encourage political action.
Yet if it goes hand in hand with a commitment to redistributing power and wealth, literacy becomes one of the tools a government can use to create a new society.
The critique of the development model of UNESCO led to a number of radical literacy campaigns influenced by the pioneering work of Paolo Freire in Brazil.
Socialist governments in Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Nicaragua and Grenada all implemented programmes that were avowedly ideological in character.
They aimed to raise people's consciousness of their position in society.
Collective discussion of what caused, for example, the appalling deprivation in the shanty towns became the starting point for using the new skills of reading and writing.
Teachers became ‘facilitators’, and most classroom materials were based on texts produced by the students themselves.
In these concrete examples, here at last was literacy that enabled the poor to see themselves as the makers of their own history, with the power to change their world.
But even the radical orthodoxy of Freire himself — at least as it is expressed in the celebrated book Pedagogy of the Oppressed — has recently been challenged.
Critics claim that Freire's ideal was a ‘classless’ environment for literacy campaigns, whereas in reality it inevitably tended to be urban, middle-class people who were passing on the skills.
Freire has been forced to admit that his practice can only really work if other conditions are also present.
He said of the Nicaraguan literacy campaign: ‘literacy only has meaning in a society undergoing revolutionary change’.
An African success story
A powerful, though less well-known, example of a literacy campaign within a revolutionary context can be found in Burkina Faso.
The colonial education system remained virtually intact after nominal independence in 1960: two-thirds of university students studied law or the liberal arts in a country where peasants make up 90 per cent of the population and agriculture is the mainstay of the economy.
Literacy, in common with all other economic and political interests, was a male and urban preserve.
The revolution of 1983 led by former President Thomas Sankara brought a new direction.
The power of traditional chiefs and the urban elite was replaced by Committees for the Defence of the Revolution in every village and workplace.
Women, peasants and young people were drawn into the political arena for the first time.
Sankara's government launched a series of onslaughts on the worst ills of chronic underdevelopment: ‘commando’ campaigns to immunize children against the common killer diseases, to roll back the desert by planting trees, to encourage peasant farmers and drive towards self-sufficiency in food.
Literacy has become one of the tools for maintaining the momentum of these revolutionary changes.
The task facing the Government was huge.
Burkina Faso had some of the lowest literacy levels in Africa: only one out of every ten citizens could read and write any language.
In February 1986 project ‘Alpha Commando’ was launched from 1,000 literacy centres throughout the country.
This programme targeted 36,000 leaders of rural organizations such as CDRs, credit unions and cereal banks.
Materials were produced in nine of the major national languages, and focussed on practical skills such as malaria prevention and new methods of soil conservation.
According to Agriculture Minister Seydou Traoré, Alpha Commando ‘emerged out of a concern for forging a new type of Burkinabe farmer, politically conscious of a role in building a national, independent, self-sufficient and planned economy.
This new type of farmer is one who refuses to submit to nature, who rebels against passivity and fatalism and who dares to innovate.’
Learning from the experience and shortcomings of the Alpha Commando the Government is now moving towards another mass campaign.
In January 1987 a pilot project in the village of Nomgaana gave 48 villagers (half of them women) an eight-week intensive course in literacy.
This was followed by four further weeks which trained them to pass on these new skills to other villagers.
And the method has now been adopted nationally: literacy instructors are trained by a core of part-time teachers based permanently in the countryside.
The use of indigenous languages in the Burkina literacy campaign is both practical and political.
It means that peasants do not have to learn a second language — French — before they come to grips with the written word.
Indigenous languages are also seen as a powerful means of developing pride in the country's own cultures and thus strengthening a sense of Burkinabe national identity (in all its diversity).
In the aftermath of Alpha Commando the emphasis is on producing follow-up materials in these languages: not just educational texts but newspapers in Mooré, Dioula and Fulfuldé.
At the same time, the complementary role of oral culture is encouraged in a myriad of ways.
As Thomas Sankara explained: ‘In all aspects of development, culture must play the critical role.
Culture is one of the best mediums we can utilize to communicate with our people.
In a society such as ours, based on oral tradition, we must use our cultural expressions as a means of getting messages across and transform attitudes on basic issues.’
Musicians and theatre groups tour the country putting on lively performances wherever people gather — under a tree or the night sky, in a schoolroom, a sports stadium or purpose-built cultural centre.
These are then followed by animated discussion, calling upon members of the audience to comment upon the social messages carried by the performance, including the literacy debate itself.
It is in this way that the apparent divide between literate and non-literate cultures simply disappears.
And it's not just theatre.
The very vitality of Alpha Commando has nurtured an explosion of artistic creativity in a whole variety of cultural forms — vividly printed textiles, documentary films, vast mural paintings and celebratory songs.
‘For us, culture has no walls, no barriers.
It is everywhere a part of our life and our struggle.’
The radical literacy campaign in Burkina Faso does not pretend that the process is a ‘neutral’ one.
The form as well as the content of the training are avowedly partisan and committed.
And the Burkinabes believe that the problems within the campaigns themselves can only be resolved through political choices and decisions.
In this way, then, literacy has been demystified and stripped of its special status as a ‘lucky charm’ for development.
By itself mass literacy does not bring about economic development.
Nor does it ensure freedom from exploitation and oppression.
Deep structural changes will be necessary in developing countries if literacy is to go beyond the citadels of the elites.
But literacy and the written word do have a part to play.
As the Uruguayan writer Eduardo Galeano observes: ‘If what is written is read seriously and to some extent changes or nourishes the consciousness of the reader, a writer has justified his or her role in the process of change: with neither arrogance nor false humility, but with the recognition of being a small part of something vast’.
For the rural people of the Third World time is short.
But a mass literacy strategy stripped of its ‘sacred myths’ could give new expression to a vigorous culture of resistance.
attitudes
The number of people so disabled by their distress that they have had to be cared for in institutions is relatively small.
The majority are cared for by their own families and friends, often at great emotional cost to themselves.
It can be as difficult for them to adjust as it is for the individual in distress.
Attitudes, of individuals, families, friends, whole societies, are absolutely critical to the maintenance of mental health and the relief of distress.
If we are conditioned by fear we make things worse.
We get angry because we cannot understand, because people don't get better or have changed.
Worst of all, we pretend that the distress, even the person experiencing it, doesn't really exist.
We can't even begin to understand something we don't think exists.
All of us have a part to play.
Effective help is not always as easy or obvious a thing to give as we might like.
For some people, any kind of heightened emotion, however ‘supportive’, can be disturbing.
We can't expect gratitude, any more than we want charity from others.
We have to learn what is appropriate to the particular individuals involved.
That can be a hard, long struggle.
But given the choice and understanding, most of us would probably still rather face up to distress.
When we do, we need all the help we can get.
’ My life is sacred too’
SUSAN, AUSTRALIA
There were complications with my pregnancy.
Without the abortion I'd only a ten per cent chance of survival.
I believe firmly in the sanctity of human life — all human life.
And that meant the child in my womb.
The operation — the abortion — would actually mean killing my child, my new son or daughter.
But my life is sacred too.
The magnitude of the problem shook me quite badly.
I had weeks of sleepless nights and my health got even worse.
At that stage I would have liked someone else to make the decision for me.
I was wracked by anxiety and guilt even before I made the decision.
I had no time for those who advocated abortions of convenience, as if the child was somehow an invading organism, like gonorrhoea.
But I'd also become disenchanted with pro-lifers who seemed to be saying that they loved my unborn baby but hated me!
I'm afraid I've lost a few friends and challenged a few others.
So what do you do?
You read all the books you can lay your hands on.
You listen to your friends and look for tell-tale signs behind their smiles.
You're all ears in case some TV or radio programme raises some point you hadn't thought of.
And you learn about the real necessity of acting and thinking for yourself.
Because it's your decision, and you've got to make it.
Would I abort if my child was likely to have some kind of deformity?
What if I had a 90 per cent chance of surviving, but my child had a similar chance of being badly handicapped?
Then I look in the mirror and think: ‘You're not Miss World, kiddo’, and I thank God that someone didn't determine that my appearance didn't come up to scratch.
I guess that's part of it: I never really wanted anyone else to tell me what to do, though I craved for them to make my decisions easier.
You have to work it through.
It has to be complex.
And afterwards?
The healing process — I mean working through things like guilt and remorse — that's all really valuable.
It sort of goes in tandem with recovering from the physical pain.
I've learnt that life is deeper than I'd thought and certainly not meant to be skimmed along.
It's so easy to forget that the name of the game is survival.
And it's so hard to sift between pro- and anti-abortionists, liberals and reactionaries.
I think there's a little truth in a lot of the groups.
Of course some of my pro-life friends have disowned me.
Others tried to understand and were concerned and helpful, rather than judgmental.
But you have to remember that when most people voice an opinion — including me right now — they do it from their own perspective.
You've got to take that into account as well.
And never judge.
I know how it feels to be on the receiving end of that.
No word for anxiety
Psychologists Aruna Mahtani and Afreen Huq look back with mixed feelings on their special project for Bangladeshi women in Britain.
Our training as mental-health professionals is supposed to be ‘colour blind’.
That sounds fine but in practice it means that people from black and ethnic groups get a raw deal because their particular problems are seldom acknowledged.
Even when they are provided for it usually amounts to their being dumped on the few professionals from black and ethnic groups.
So we decided to pilot a project involving Bangladeshi women from Tower Hamlets in the East End of London.
The largest Bangladeshi community in Britain lives in Tower Hamlets — at least 40,000 people.
Most of the migration came in the 1960s and 1970s.
Adjustment was difficult and the transition from a rural to an inner-city setting was hardest for women.
They found themselves confined indoors, isolated and without the networks of social support they were used to in Bangladesh.
Many of these women turned to their doctors with common symptoms of anxiety, such as palpitations, headaches, tearfulness, sleeping difficulties, chest pains, loss of appetite and lack of energy.
They were usually prescribed tranquillizers or even placebos like ascorbic acid (Vitamin C).
Since the underlying causes remained, the women visited their doctors with increasing frequency.
And in some cases they were referred to mental-health professionals like us.
We wanted to see how normal Western approaches to anxiety problems might work when applied across cultures.
Our first step was to get an anxiety-management package translated.
No easy task: there is no colloquial expression in Bangla for ‘anxiety’.
We used two approximations, dushchinta (‘undue worries’) and udhbeg (a word for ‘anxiety’ generally used only in its written form).
We knew we had to have a women-only group.
A mixed one would have been unacceptable to both the women and their families.
Bangladeshi women rarely go out alone.
Their cultural background is that of a small rural community where women tend to go out with family members or neighbours.
In Britain they are even less likely to go out due to fear of racist abuse and harassment, as well as language difficulties.
So we had to arrange transport for women who could not be accompanied to the group.
So many things in the standard approach had to be changed.
We had to translate many of the usual examples — we would normally compare learning to relax with learning to drive, for instance, which would not have been culturally appropriate.
At first we asked the women to rate, on a scale one to ten, the effect of relaxation on their level of anxiety.
They found numbers an odd way of expressing how they were feeling.
So we shifted our focus to words and shortened the range to five stages from ‘very good’ to ‘very bad’.
We were completely thrown when one woman asked if she could bring her daughter to the next session.
We said no.
But she brought her daughter, and four-year-old grandson, anyway.
We fumbled and asked the group how they felt.
They all accepted the newcomers, leaving us to deal with our discomfort.
It was a pilot project, so there were shortcomings.
We looked for too little back-up, naively taking on too much, like driving the women to and from the centre.
We did not collect as much objective data as we might have done with a white group.
We fell into the white stereotype of assuming that Bangladeshi women would find the use of various checklists and written records foreign.
Perhaps racism has conditioned us to a greater extent than we expected.
But the rapport between us and the women in the group was instantaneous, probably because we share not just a language and culture but a common experience of racism.
The importance of having bilingual and ethnic staff is clear.
We found that using a Western model across cultures has potential.
But it needs political, financial and personal commitment.
And the lack of response by the authorities in Tower Hamlets leads us to conclude that ‘institutional’ racism is very much alive and kicking.
Confessions of a loan shark
Young, hopelessly inexperienced, they roam the world like itinerant brushsellers, peddling loans to Third World countries and living like kings.
Ex-loan shark Sam Gwynne reveals his contribution to the international debt crisis.
It is an odd business, selling money door to door on the edge of the Western world.
It's odder still when the money comes not from the anonymous depths of the Eurocurrency market, but from the savings accounts of Americans living in Ohio.
I used to sell their money for a living.
I used to travel the world for a medium-sized Midwestern bank with five billion dollars in assets.
Along the way I was engaged in some of the startling ‘business as usual’ banking practices that have begun to plague the world financial system.
It is 1978.
Thanks to the repressive regime of President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines, I am happily resting in one of Manila's best hotels.
I am about to set in motion a peculiar process that will result in a $10 million loan to a Philippine construction company, a bedfellow of the Marcos clan — a loan that will soon go sour.
I am unaware that any of this is going to happen as I enter the hotel lobby on my way to dinner.
International banking is an interesting business anyway, but what makes it rather more interesting in this case — both to me and to the hapless Ohioans whose money I am selling — is that I am 25 years old with just one and a half years banking experience.
I joined the bank as a ‘credit analyst’ on the strength of an MA in English.
Because I happened to be fluent in French, I was promoted 11 months later to loan officer and assigned to the French-speaking Arab countries of North Africa, where I made my first international calls.
This is my third extended trip, and my territory has quickly expanded.
I have visited 28 countries in six months.
I am not alone in my youth and inexperience.
The world of international banking is now full of aggressive, bright, but hopelessly inexperienced lenders in their mid-twenties.
They travel the world like itinerant brushsellers, filling loan quotas, peddling financial wares, and living high on the hog.
Their bosses are often bright but similarly inexperienced 29-year-old vice presidents with wardrobes from Brooks Brothers and so little credit training they would have trouble with a simple retail installment loan.
Their bosses, sitting on the senior loan committee, are pragmatic, nuts-and-bolts bankers whose grasp of local banking is often profound, the product of 20 or 30 years experience.
But the senior bankers are fish out of water when it comes to international lending.
Many of them never wanted to lend overseas in the first place, but were forced into it by the internationalization of American commerce; as their local clientele expanded into foreign trade, they had no choice but to follow them or lose the business to the money-center banks.
The system is under severe strain.
In 1975, US banks had $110 billion in loans outstanding overseas.
By the end of 1982, the figures had risen to $451 billion.
By September 1987 the top nine banks had $36 billion in loans to Mexico, Brazil and Argentina alone1 — all countries that had to ‘reschedule’ debt to avoid catastrophic defaults.
As I walk through the hotel lobby in Manila I know that something is up.
I had arrived in the morning on a China Air flight from Taipei to be met by an ‘expediter’: someone who specializes in facilitating the arrivals and departures of important people.
The expediter —‘Joy’— was the envoy of a client of mine: the Construction and Development Corporation of the Philippines (CDCP), a local company my bank had been courting unsuccessfully for years.
Joy had bribed the security agents at the customs and immigration line.
We went through in two minutes what took other people an hour and a half.
He took me to a waiting Jaguar equipped with air conditioning, stereo system, and a very pretty girl: ‘at my disposal for the rest of my stay’.
The girl was unexpected.
Bangkok Bank gives me a silver Lincoln, but no girl.
The Saudis give me a stretch Mercedes and a clandestine litre of Johnny Walker Black, but no girl.
In the intricate world of Asian business, such things are done for a reason.
Yes I thought, something is up…
Now, hours later, I am met again by Joy under the hotel awning.
Wearing an immaculate white uniform, he takes my briefcase.
It contains $5,000 in traveler's checks, a $9,000 negotiable airline ticket, my passport and credit cards.
He disappears.
We are playing the ‘good faith’ game.
A minute later the red Jaguar slides up with my briefcase intact and the girl smiling prettily.
Off we go.
I am taken to an expensive restaurant in Makati, where the president of the company, whose name is Rudy, is throwing a gala dinner in my honor.
After eight courses, and enough liquor to intoxicate the Muslim population of Mindanao, Rudy announces, in slurred English, that he would like to borrow money.
He says he wants to buy earth-moving equipment for a reclamation project on Manila Bay.
‘How much were you thinking about?’
I ask, in equally slurred English.
‘Ten million,’ he says, and laughs.
As a loan officer you are principally in the business of making loans.
It is not your job to worry about whether you threaten the stability of the world economy.
In that sense, a young banker is like a soldier on the front lines: he is obedient, aggressive, and amoral; his efficiency depends precisely on this very narrow view of the world.
American banks, through the agency of loan officers like me, have made a number of questionable loans in countries whose balance of payments are so far in arrears that, according to Citicorp's Walter Wriston, ‘ability to repay’ is no longer the main consideration.
All that matters now is ‘access to the marketplace,’ meaning the ability to borrow even more.
The theory goes something like this: as long as a country can continue to borrow money, it will effectively be able to ‘roll over’ its debt indefinitely.
This way, the banks will be paid on schedule and the country will not become insolvent.
But the banks are cornered.
Unless they pump in more money, they stand to be forced into massive write-offs.
There is another curious aspect to this: even though the banks may allow a country such as Poland to ‘reschedule’ its debt — allowing it 20 years instead of 10 to repay for example— the interest payments keep coming.
And it is interest that hits the bottom line of a bank's profits-and-loss statement.
This means that Citibank can have a very good year even though many of its loans may be in serious trouble.
The banks might have been imprudent in making the loans in the first place, but they are both clever and scrupulous when it comes to protecting the value of their assets.
At the root of this worldwide lending problem is a very simple concept called ‘security’.
When you borrow money to buy a car, the bank claims the car as ‘security’.
If you default on your loan, the bank can sell the car and recoup the rest of its money.
But international banks cannot ‘collect’ a power plant in Thailand, or a hospital in Dubai.
As an international loan officer, I learned to forget about security and instead to develop a set of rationales that would make home office feel good about the loan, even though, technically, it was ‘unsecured’.
In Manila, I move dreamily through my appointments, fairly salivating at the prospect of a single $10 million loan.
The remainder of my trip includes stops in Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Tokyo and Seoul.
I develop a few prospects, and a severe case of dysentery.
But mainly I'm dreaming of that loan, writing pages and pages of pros and cons, imagining what it will be like inside the loan committee.
In spite of my enthusiasm and my growing sense of self-importance, one con keeps cropping up and is finally given life by a fellow banker from Chase Manhattan, whom I sit next to on the flight into Kuala Lumpur.
‘Who do you do business with in Manila?’ he asks, ordering our fifth round of scotch.
I tell him.
‘They're leveraged up to their ears,’ he says.
When bankers say that a company is ‘leveraged’, they mean that the company's debt greatly exceeds the owners' equity or share in the company.
I sneak a glance at the leverage ratio of CDCP.
It is seven to one.
One to one is considered healthy, two to one dangerous.
It suddenly occurs to me that it might be pure insanity to take this loan.
‘You better have Marcos' signature, in blood, on that one,’ the Chase banker says, laughing.
Back at home office in Cleveland, I am trying to remember all those three-hour lunches with five courses and two bottles of wine and what on earth I was talking about.
My telephone rings.
It is the chief financial officer of the earth-moving equipment company, a subsidiary of a major auto company and an old client of the bank.
‘I hear you've been talking to our friends in Manila,’ he says, chattily, as though the difference in our rank means nothing to him.
‘They want us to finance the purchase of your equipment.’
‘I know.
And we'd like you to give it a good, hard look,’ he says, in a voice meant to remind me that his company has a great deal of money lodged with us.
I assure him that a good, hard look will be given to this proposal and hang up.
Ten minutes later, the president of my bank calls about the same subject.
I am again told to give it a good, hard look.
What he means by this is that he wants to see the thing in loan committee, damn the company's leverage, and damn the balance-of-payments problems in the Philippines, period.
Instantly the wheels begin turning on this deal, my enthusiasm wanes.
Realizing that I may well end up the whipping boy if things go wrong, I attempt, in bankers' parlance, to ‘cover my ass’.
Let me explain.
When the international loan you are proposing is less than sound, you may secure the guarantee of a third party to shore it up.
The third party may be a private commercial bank, a government-owned commercial bank, or a foreign government.
A government guarantee is best of all.
If the guarantee party looks good on paper, most US loan committees will buy it.
Never mind that thousands of bad loans around the world were cheerfully supported by foreign governments.
American banks persist in the decades-old notion that ‘banks and governments won't default’.
That's fine with me, and I set about securing a partial guarantee from the Philippines' largest bank.
This strategy will not only secure the affection of my president and my client but will also advance my career.
It takes only a month, a few dozen overseas phone calls to get the guarantee from the Philippine bank, which is handing them out like free samples.
With the help of a co-operative credit analyst who is three months out of an English degree, we package a stunning little credit that sweeps through the loan committees without even a flesh wound.
I am tapped on the head by innumerable vice presidents, given a small raise, taken to the opera by the client, and sent to Hong Kong for the signing of the loan.
My Philippine loan went ‘bad’ very quietly about 18 months later.
Interest and principal payments simply stopped coming one day without notice.
It was impossible to get any sort of recent financial statement from the company, and it was equally impossible to track down the principal debtors, who were ducking a host of other creditors as well.
I had already moved onto a better job by then, along with all the other officers who had worked on the loan.
My successor spent several months on the intercontinental telephone lines trying to locate the debtors.
When he did, he was assured of immediate payment.
It never came.
Uncontrolled weirdness
It was 23 years ago today Sergeant Pepper taught the band to play.
It was the Summer of Love and the Beatles had a plan for ‘a kind of Western communism’.
Alan Hughes and Chris Brazier recall how it turned out.
Hey man, I've got a real groovy idea.
Positively far out.
Let's, like, build our own company that will look after the interests of creative people like us.
An underground company that isn't dominated by the grey men in suits.
Let's call it Apple Corps Ltd.
Apple Core, dig?
The language is so degraded now, itself so far out that it is impossible to take seriously.
And the blissed-out mid-Atlantic tones it conjures up hardly do justice to the Beatles' own thick and sardonic Liverpudlian accents.
Nevertheless when it comes down to it the Beatles and their Apple Corps bear some responsibility for the ridicule now habitually visited on that kind of language and the culture that spawned it.
‘A beautiful place where you can buy beautiful things…a controlled weirdness…a kind of Western communism.’
Paul McCartney's vision of Apple.
Project yourself back to 1967.
For some of you that may be a truly cosmic journey back into and beyond the womb (a journey utterly in keeping with the spirit of that most cosmic of years).
Those who have actual memories of the year are unlikely to have been party to the Party that was supposed to be the mythical Swinging Sixties — one of the authors was still unafflicted by puberty while the other was into his third year in a sheet-metal factory, so we certainly weren't invited.
No matter, because we're asking you to project yourself into the very heart of the Swinging Sixties myth — into the lives of the
Fab Four themselves.
In 1966 the Beatles had given up touring, a practice that had consumed their lives ever since they'd been catapulted into celebrity in 1963.
It had left them some time to take stock of their lives.
This helped them as a creative unit — in 1967 they came up with arguably their greatest single Penny Lane/Strawberry Fields Forever and with the album Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts' Club Band which, though it hasn't aged particularly well, was certainly a quantum leap forward for popular music at the time.
And they took part in the first worldwide television broadcast, singing All You Need Is Love live to an estimated audience of 150 million.
But giving up performing also helped them develop personally in other directions: John Lennon acted in a film called How I Won The War (of best-forgotten quality); George Harrison travelled to India to study the sitar and encounter Eastern religion; Ringo Starr concentrated on his expanding home and family; and Paul McCartney wrote some film music and travelled in Africa, though he also felt rather lost (he tried to think about God, he said, but nothing came).
All four of them experimented with drugs, most particularly with the hallucinogen LSD, which was the single greatest chemical contribution to the Sixties.
And all four of them discovered the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and his brand of Transcendental Meditation — and took it seriously enough to fly to India and study at his feet in Rishikesh (John and George stuck it out for two months, Paul for one and a homesick Ringo for only ten days).
All of this was a sign that they were taking control of their own destinies instead of being swept along by a tidal wave of money, fame and popular enthusiasm.
And Apple (the name was inspired by a Magritte painting that McCartney had recently acquired) was born out of that sense that the Beatles had to start taking responsibility for their world instead of being acted upon by a panoply of ‘men in grey suits’.
‘The aim isn't just a stack of gold teeth in the bank.
We've done that bit.
It's more of a trick to see if we can get artistic freedom within a business structure — to see if we can create things and sell them without charging five times our cost.’
John Lennon.
Apple would be everything to everyone.
It would be a record label for their own music and for the struggling artists just waiting out there for the benevolent despotism of the Beatles to pluck them from obscurity.
It would be a film producer, an electronics company, a retailing outfit and a publishing house.
It would be a huge multinational company — and by 1969 Apple had opened offices in Canada, the US, France, West Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Sweden and the Netherlands.
But most important of all it would be the business embodiment of the Youth Revolution which the Beatles helped kick into gear.
It would be proof that things could be run in an informal, creative and non-materialistic way.
And if a multinational company could be run like this then why not governments, why not the world?
Why not indeed?
It was the Summer of Love and the young were setting the controls for the heart of the sun.
Money couldn't buy you love but maybe the Beatles' bottomless pockets could buy the world a new order.
Or maybe love was all you needed after all.
‘We want to help people but without doing it like a charity.
We always had to go to the big men on our knees and touch our forelocks and say ‘Please can we do so and so…?’
We're in the happy position of not needing any more money, so for the first time the bosses aren't in it for the profit.
If you come to me and say ‘I've had such and such a dream’, I'll say to you ‘Go away and do it’.’
Paul McCartney.
On 7 December 1967 the Apple Boutique at London's 94 Baker Street opened its doors to the world, selling all the bright colours and bamboozling gaudiness of that most extraordinary period in the history of fashion.
All was floppy and shapeless, beads and flowers, rainbows and kaleidoscopes, thoroughly and wonderfully absurd.
Lennon called it a ‘psychedelic Woolworth's’.
The following April the Apple headquarters was established at 95 Wigmore Street.
Grey suits were conspicuous by their absence, though the Beatles emulated the corporate way in one respect — the 15 directors were all men.
The Managing Director and his Assistant were the band's two roadies.
The Head of Talent for the record company was Paul's girlfriend's brother.
It was that kind of place.
Friends of friends wandered around the place.
Eternal dreamers were taken at their word.
Everyone and his Long Tall Aunt Sally came to the party and got driven to their executive lunches in fancy cars at the Beatles' expense.
It didn't take long for the cracks to show.
Anyone with enough nerve could lay claim to the merchandise.
And they did.
Two of Apple's cars simply disappeared.
A house was bought and no-one knw who it belonged to.
Perhaps the most outrageous scam was operated by the post boys.
Arriving with sacks full of mail, they quietly left with those same sacks filled with lead from the Apple building's roof.
‘Apple was full of hustlers and spongers…people were robbing us and living on us.
Eighteen or twenty thousand pounds was rolling out of Apple a week and nobody was doing anything about it.
All our buddies that worked for us for 50 years were just living and drinking and eating like fucking Rome…it was just hell and it had to stop.’
John Lennon.
Apple Records got off to a fine start when its first release, Hey Jude, sold three million worldwide in its first month.
But selling Beatles records was the easy part, since EMI Records basically still did all the distribution work.
The other divisions were a disaster area.
The electronics and publishing projects never got off the ground.
The Apple boutique closed down after only eight months, most of the clothing having simply vanished.
The company's investment decisions were ludicrous and its executives were about as efficient at management as the Board of General Motors would be at writing and performing a Number One single.
As an example to the world that the young were powerful, that money was not the be-all and end-all, Apple could hardly have been a bigger failure.
In the middle of 1969, faced with utter chaos, the Beatles made the ultimate capitulation and called in middle-aged capitalist men in grey suits to straighten things out.
Paul invited New York lawyers Eastman and Eastman to take control (his girlfriend's father's firm).
A few weeks later John asked the notorious rock manager Allen Klein to do the same.
George and Ringo sided with John and Klein launched into a ruthless purge, clearing out the parasites and the dead wood — but consigning any trace of idealism to the trash can as well.
‘We've decided to close the shop down.
We're tired of playing shops.’
John Lennon.
It wasn't just the end of the Apple adventure — it was the end of the Beatles.
Within eighteen months McCartney was in court dissolving his connection to Apple and the other Beatles.
And as the Beatles died, so too did the decade: youthful optimism and a passion for ‘liberation’ gave way to the oil crisis, Watergate, unemployment and disillusion.
When people of the late 1970s and 1980s remembered those heady times it was the ludicrous lack of realism that they recalled rather than the idealism —‘hippie’ had become simply a term of abuse.
And a new generation of grey suits exerted greater control than ever before, as if the Apple saga had been read as a fable in which Youthful Naivety got its comeuppance from Business Sagacity.
The pendulum has swung from silly dreaming to grinding pragmatism.
But, who knows, the 1990s may yet see a synthesis of the two.
Imagine all the Apple seeds bearing fruit 25 years on.
Wow, like cosmic, man.
Dasbabu
The Bhagyanagar story began with Dasbabu, the Brahmin who originally invited Andrew and his team to the village.
He was the source of the villagers' security and their insecurity: he loaned or granted money in times of crisis but in return benefited from their respect and obedience.
The villagers still preferred this relationship of obligation to independence.
Dasbabu is still the boss in Bhagyanagar but nowadays takes on a more laid-back attitude to village affairs.
‘Since you left, I've been too busy in my work in town to get too involved here,’ he says.
The memory I have of Dasbabu from those days was of him speeding around Cuttack town on his solitary scooter, committed to one or another of his ventures.
They seem to have borne fruit, since he now owns three properties, four scooters and two buses there, all acquired within the last 15 years.
This impressive accumulation has inevitably raised some questions.
‘Malicious allegations!’ he says.
‘Jealous people asking how I could earn such money on a government salary.’
He began showing me an inventory (drawn up by his lawyer) of the ‘white’ money he had.
Dasbabu has an engaging personality.
He combines the obvious ‘Mr Fixit’ role that has brought him his wealth with that of an iconoclast.
His active part in trying to uplift the Harijan community (and himself) by inviting us 15 years ago to rebuild the village, is in stark contrast to other Brahmins who still stay safely hidden in the bamboo groves with their purity intact.
‘What to do?’ he says.
‘In this country, if you are poor it is a crime.
If you get rich, it is also a crime.’
And lying back with a smile, he glances over towards the colour TV in the corner of the room.
Kirtana
Kirtana was regarded as the poorest man in the village — but he was fiercely proud and once he had lost his land still refused to work on someone else's.
Instead he carried on his own trade as a basket-weaver.
‘Land,’ he said, ‘is my one problem.
If I had a little land then I would be fine.’
So much in Kirtana's life has stayed the same.
He is still the poorest man in the village.
He still has no land.
Tied up nearby, as before, is a solitary cow which he cares for on a 25-per-cent basis (the rest of the proceeds go to the owner).
He continues to make baskets.
One thing was forced on him, though.
The cyclone of May 1982 tore off a section of his asbestos roof.
‘I couldn't afford to replace it,’ he said, ‘so I put up my own, with bamboo.
It cost me 300 rupees ($19).’
He is resentful that no aid was given to him — another villager was given 3,000 rupees to repair his house because, says Kirtana, he knew the local member of the Orissa state parliament.
There have been two additions to his life since I left.
One is a rickshaw, which he hires for four rupees a day.
This works out at 1,460 rupees a year for a rickshaw worth just 2,000, so he could have bought ten rickshaws with the money he has given the owner over the last 15 years.
But he said loans were too complicated — this was easier.
He brings home about 10 rupees a day after eating his meal in the bazaar and paying for repairs to the rickshaw.
Others earn between 25 and 40 rupees a day.
‘I'm not as strong as I used to be.
Before I could pull 30 kilometres, now only half that.’
He finds the village roads with their mud ruts, gullies to cross and general hostility to smooth travel a great strain.
Maybe that is why he has to interweave the stationary activity of basket-weaving with the strenuous one of rickshaw pulling.
Kirtana has given up on owning any land for himself.
He concentrates his energies on survival and focuses his hope on the second addition to his life since my departure: a son, now quite as tall as his father and doing well at school.
His son's name means meteor or money.
Sarat
The son of the Harijan village President, Sarat was then 18 and still at school, alternating between thoughts of a government job and staying in the village to work on his father's land.
The second course would have been unusual and encouraging — and leadership in the village community would probably have fallen to him.
Sarat has turned out to be a very conventional young man.
He completed his studies and married a girl chosen for him by his parents.
They saw each other for the first time on the fourth night of the marriage ceremonies and now have a son.
Sarat has been working in his father's fields but in August was due to move to a clerical post in Cuttack.
As a Harijan he benefits from the Government's reservation scheme for these ‘backward classes’ and is thus assured of his job: there were only 40 eligible candidates from his category for 100 posts, whereas there were 5,000 higher-caste Hindus contesting the remaining 80 posts.
In the evening he takes classes for the village children and perhaps acts as a model for their future.
Ragu
Ragu's name meant ‘anger’— and his parents' choice seemed appropriate.
He was a fiery character of immense stubbornness who stood out against the new plans to merge his land into a co-operative pool that would benefit everyone.
There he is, the fighter himself.
We had so many arguments.
No, he wouldn't contribute his small plot to the common land.
So you won, Ragu, and in retrospect I think it was right that you did.
But more worrying is that Ragu is losing his present battle.
It started nine years ago when he got into a dispute on a pathway with a Brahmin and his wife.
‘Hitting a Brahmin means that you hit God himself,’ said Dasbabu.
‘He was bound to be punished.’
The punishment came a year later.
He found another Brahmin cultivating half an acre of land which Ragu had laid claim to and beat the man up with a stick, causing arm fracture, hospitalization and a court case.
On the verge of tears, Ragu says ‘I have had to sell three cows, one bullock and two gunts of land and all my good household utensils to fight this case.’
His wife, behind him, says nothing.
I asked why he couldn't just plead guilty.
‘No, you don't understand, I could never do that.
And anyway there were no witnesses, though they are bringing some forward who will pretend to be.’
After eight years of paying lawyers' fees, Ragu is longer attending court an is ignoring the summonses that arrive regularly.
He fears, indeed knows, that sooner or later the police will be sent to collect him.
The Brahmin has spent no money on the case — the state is representing him.
Chari Bewa
There are subdivisions within the Brahmin caste and Chari belonged to one of them: her dead husband used to conduct religious ceremonies for the Harijans of the area.
But because she was widowed, the community no longer supported her and she eked out a living for herself and her two children by selling her cow's milk together with any wood, grass or cow dung she managed to collect.
Chari Bewa's children are now both educated.
Her son is still studying and is two years beyond matriculation.
Her daughter, Subasi (meaning ‘sweet scent’) failed her examination.
She has been based at home for the last 10 years, collecting water, doing the cooking and waiting to get married.
But time is running out.
‘We cannot afford the dowry,’ says her mother.
‘Young men expect 12,000 rupees ($750), including a television.
Where can I get that money?
We have no land and I'm a widow.
If I have to, I will go to Dasbabu.’
Their only bargaining chip is her education.
As a result she is not allowed by her mother to supplement the family income by helping her in the fields, since to be seen doing it would mean she had become an illiterate villager again.
Nor does Chari allow her son to do field work.
‘He has taken up the priestly tasks of his father,’ she says.
But he only earns pin money for it — 60 rupees plus some cloth, rice and fruit for each wedding.
‘I owe it to these orphans to make their life as easy as possible,’ says this diminutive woman.
Narana
Full of ability and energy, a member of the Village Council at just 22, Narana was a very promising youth.
He worked as a servant to a Brahmin but wrote plays in his spare time and believed firmly in land reform.
Looking some people in the face I could see what 15 years of hard work had done to them.
Narana was one of them.
He no longer writes in the evenings but still has half an acre of land and now has four beautiful little children.
In the short time I talked with him, I saw that he had lost none of his character.
Saunti
Saunti was a 60-year-old beggar a bow-legged and bent figure with stick in hand who insisted that begging was a difficult, even skilled, occupation.
Saunti and his wife have both died.
The old man was walking beside the National Highway one evening four years ago on his way to a religious drama in another village.
Two trucks overtaking one another brushed him to the side.
He died instantly.
Three years before that his wife tried to cross the Kharusan River.
It is a short-cut from the bazaar but is only safe outside the monsoon, and then only if one is young.
This August crossing proved fatal.
Malatie
Malatie and her husband were prepared to make sacrifices so that their children might get a decent education: they were paying for two of them to attend a special boarding school for Harijans.
From 4.30 in the morning until nine at night her day was spent on hard household work.
Malatie looked at the photographs of each of her children with equal pride.
Things seem to have gone well for them.
Her eldest son still has the job he had then in an electronics factory 300 miles away; her daughter, who was a giggly schoolgirl 15 years ago, is now the mother of three boys; and her youngest son is now also married and works the family's half acre of land with his father.
The loss of Lardie Moonlight
Tribal people are sometimes thought to use primitive languages.
Not so, explains Barry Blake.
Aborigines, for example, have complex forms of verbal communication that make English seem crude and inflexible.
A few years ago an old Aboriginal woman named Lardie Moonlight died in Boulia, a small town in western Queensland.
Her death rated a few lines in the papers, but the full significance of her passing went unreported.
Lardie was the last fluent speaker of the Kalkadoon language, a language of such versatility and ingenuity that it stands as a monument to human intellectual development.
It is a commonly-held belief in Australia that the Aborigines have no real language, just a few words and no grammar.
Even many educated Australians think that the Aboriginal languages are primitive.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The Aborigines, like all human groups, had highly articulated languages.
Indeed no native language is primitive.
All express the complex experiences of their speakers.
All have large vocabularies and sets of rules for putting words together in sentences.
The death of Lardie Moonlight was not an isolated event.
Every year, on average, the last speaker of yet another Australian language dies and a unique intellectual instrument passes from use as a living language, at best recorded in the barest outline.
There were hundreds of different languages spoken on the Australian continent when the Europeans began to take over in the late eighteenth century.
More than half of them have now perished and only a score or more will survive into the next century.
Kalkadoon illustrates the kind of sophistication in language which we are losing.
It had, for example, a vocabulary rich in terms for animals and their anatomy and for plants and their parts.
It was also much more sophisticated than English in the words it used to describe kinship relationships.
When we use the term ‘uncle’ for example, the listener cannot tell from this whether we mean our father's brother or our mother's brother.
Aborigines always distinguish the two.
In the Kalkadoon language the mother's brother is bubi and the father's brother is pitarda.
They take a different approach too when describing grand-parent/grandchildren relationships.
If you were a Kalkadoon woman you would call your father's mother babi and she would call you babi in return.
And there is then a word babiwanjit for people who call each other babi.
There are many other distinctions which the Aborigines make which we do not — an illustration of the fact that the world does not come pre-packed into nameable entities waiting for each language to pin its names on.
In fact different groups of people see the world in different ways and develop words for their concepts.
In English, for example, we use the word ‘hole’ relatively loosely.
It doesn't matter whether this is a hole in a piece of fabric or a hole in the ground.
It might come as a surprise to find that the Kalkadoons would use two different words in these circumstances — a kili in fabric but a ndia in the ground.
But when you think about it there is an important difference.
One is a hole in a two-dimensional surface, the other a hole in a three-dimensional substance.
The words which different societies use for any object also indicate the way that they see it.
Take the word ‘policeman’.
In English this derives from the Latin politia, meaning administration and carries the idea of policing or administering an agreed form of government — protecting the state against the excesses of individuals.
The Kalkadoon had rather a different perspective.
Their word for policeman was kanimainjit —‘someone who ties people up’.
Any language must accommodate new concepts.
The Kalkadoon did not have words for European artifacts and ideas but they soon came up with new words as the need arose.
Sometimes they used their word formation system to do this.
Thus for policeman kanimai means to tie up and the suffix -njit indicates someone who is doing this.
They might alternatively borrow an English word as they did for bulaki meaning bullock.
Or they might extend the meaning of an existing word.
The Kalkadoons, for instance, used their word kajabi ‘kite hawk’ to cover ‘aeroplane’.
The Kalkadoon language and Aboriginal languages generally also make heavy use use of suffixes.
And these offer the possibilities of extra nuances which are unavailable in English.
See Cases in point opposite.
Kalkadoon is not the work of an individual nor is it the conscious product of any group.
Rather it is the collective unconscious creation of generations.
And it is not the only marvel to perish in this continent.
Scores of Australian languages have died with their last fluent speakers.
With each of is lost a distinctive system of concepts, a system for encoding and encapsulating experience, and a literature of songs and stories that probably contain elements that go back for thousands of years.
Some aspects of a culture can be displayed relatively easily.
Bark paintings are an example.
But language, because of its complexity and its technicalities cannot easily be revealed to a wide audience.
So few will ever be in a position to appreciate the magnitude of what has been lost.
Trashing lives
At night on the city rubbish tip in La Paz, strange things start to happen.
Susanna Rance reports.
Little Amaru looked down at the street and kicked a can with his red gumboots.
‘We're near home aren't we,’ he concluded.
‘Yes, love, how do you know?’ his dad replied.
‘Because there's rubbish.
That's life isn't it, Papi?’
The rubbish tip has been part of the scene since we moved to our market street seven years ago.
By day it is invisible: only a layer of dust remains on the stretch of pavement where vendors sit selling fruit, vegetables and spicy food.
Passers-by pause here to admire the spectacular view over shanty-town rooftops, across the crater-like basin of the city to the Andean ranges on the other side.
Above them towers the snow-capped Mount Illimani, symbol and guardian of La Paz.
As night falls, the scene changes.
The encroaching dark is a signal for people to emerge from nearby houses with boxes and bins to dump their trash.
At first a discreet pile, the mound grows steadily until it covers the pavement almost knee-deep for twenty yards.
Then the scavengers move in.
Flames flicker as they set light to the rubbish — not to reduce it to ashes but to see what is worth collecting.
Poking around with sticks, they hold up promising finds to examine them, while eerie shadows move between the fires on the black tip.
Among the regulars at our dump are a pack of stray dogs, rooting around for bones and scraps.
They compete with neighbours gleaning left-overs for their rabbits, sheep and pigs.
Another group combs the refuse for tins, bottles and plastic containers to be sold on junk stalls.
Then come the children for whom the nightly forage produces not only improvised toys but anything which can conceivably be sold to raise a bit of cash.
Some are street kids who rely on their ingenuity to keep alive.
They take their night's work seriously and do the rounds of local houses, carting bundles of trash to the tip for a few pennies, and getting first pick of each load.
David, aged nine, empties our bin in the yard to pick out the salvageable items before he crams the rest into a sack to take to the dump.
‘I can sell these in the sunday market for 50 pence,’ he says, carefully setting aside a bundle of Time magazines.
A bottomless dustbin, a plastic oil container and a private selection of empty bottles have already been added to his private junk heap, waiting to be collected one day when he has time.
To some the rubbish tip is an eyesore.
To others it means a chance to recycle whatever may still have a shred of use.
Nothing is wasted and only the dregs are left, charred and thoroughly sifted, by the time the municipal refuse truck comes through at dawn the next day.
In La Paz, social status is marked by altitude, with the well-to-do preferring the balmier climate at the bottom of the city basin.
Down there, trash is discreetly disposed of by aproned maids who run out with bins when the municipal truck comes by.
The best-class rubbish is found at the gates of high-walled mansions, their privacy protected by barking Alsatians and uniformed guards.
Up at the top of the city, the refuse trucks are nowhere in sight.
Dumps form haphazardly, filling crevices in the eroded landscape, littering wasteland and clogging streams.
Kids play on the tips amidst swarms of flies.
One organisation of shanty-town women, concerned about the risk to their children's health, did a survey to find out where dumps were located and what they consisted of.
The results were disconcerting: many tips were only yards from schools and markets.
And one of their main components was human excrement, since few houses have toilets in the poorer zones.
The women set up a project to make cheap, home-built latrines with local materials.
While that took shape, they organised a massive dump-clearing campaign, with voluntary teams working in each zone.
Pregnant women and grandmothers kept the children entertained with puppet shows at a safe distance from the tips, while others worked together to pile up, burn and bury the rubbish.
The Town Hall, afraid of bad publicity, sent a convoy of refuse trucks around the shanty towns the day before the campaign.
But the task of clearing hundreds of tips was too much for them to take on at the last minute.
‘We're living on top of a load of trash,’ said community leader Nelida, shovel in hand, a handerkechief tied bandit-style over her face against the dirt, smoke and dust.
‘We're getting contaminated and our kids are getting sick.
We have to deal with the problem ourselves, until the authorities remember we exist.’
Snorting disaster
The illegal drugs trade is ‘informality’ taken to its extreme.
Today cocaine earns Bolivia as much as its entire formal economy and provides a livelihood for one family in six.
Neil MacDonald looks at the havoc this is creating in a coup-prone land.
‘Wait!’
A ragged and hectic chorus fills the air.
The driver swears but brakes as yet another tin mining family climb aboard the truck already bulging with people and their belongings.
In the background the bleak, craggy, high Andes landscape of Potosi — the mining heartland they are abandoning.
The families are heading off for the only place where they can make a living these days: the jungle area of Chapare in Cochabamba. province.
Their future: to work as cocaleros — coca leaf growers, cocaine paste makers or just humble pickers.
In the middle years of this century Bolivia produced one third of the world's tin.
Now, in Chapare, it produces 40-45 per cent of the world's supply of cocaine.
‘We are being transformed from a nation of producers into a nation of smugglers and drug traffickers’, said one miners' leader.
The world price of tin collapsed in 1985, plummeting to less than half of what it costs Bolivia to mine it.
By the end of 1986 about 70 per cent of the 27,600 miners employed by the state mining company COMIBOL had been made redundant as mines shut down.
In view of this, the drugs trade looks like a Godsend.
It is not.
For Bolivia and its miners it means the loss of hard fought for democratic rights and freedoms and the emergence of a new era of lawlessness, inequality and poverty.
While the rest of the Bolivian economy slumps and the poor actually get poorer, the coca-barons are doing well.
Their BMW cars purr through the streets of the capital, La Paz.
Foreign imports such as colour television sets and hi-fi systems cram shop windows, catering to demands for conspicuous consumption.
Around the city of Santa Cruz, architects and builders thrive on contracts for luxury mansions.
As demand for the drug has grown in the developed North, cocaine production has skyrocketed — up 600 per cent since 1980.
The Foro Economico, a Bolivian think-tank, estimates that cocaine exports in 1985 reached a value of between $2 billion and $3 billion.
This figure is all the more staggering when put in context: it is over four times the value of all Bolivia's other export earnings that year and about equal to the entire country's official gross national product.
The collapse of tin and the rise of cocaine is turning Bolivian society upside down.
The drug mafia have become a new economic elite, beyond government control.
And the mining communities, for decades the only real counterweight to a coup-prone army, are disappearing.
The combativeness of the tin miners is legendary.
In a 1952 revolution they overthrew a military regime and won nationalization of the large mines under workers' co-management.
Units of the army were dismantled and replaced in some mining communities by miners' militias.
Each of the half-dozen military regimes since then has eventually foundered on the strength of the miners.
On many occasions the miners have fought behind barricades, sticks of dynamite in hand, as troops besieged the mines.
The Bolivians talk of two powers in the country — the state and the miners.
When the tin price collapsed, the miners formulated a plan to keep the mines open under their control with reduced costs.
The government rejected it.
When 5,000 miners tried to march in protest to the capital last August, troops halted them, the government declared a state of siege and workers' leaders were arrested under emergency powers.
In the end, the best the miners' union could achieve was redundancy payments averaging around $2,480.
Some miners used these payments to try and set up small businesses or farms.
For most, however, the road from Andean mining towns like Potosi or Llallagua runs to the informal economy — as street traders in the cities or the coca farms and drug factories of Chapare.
Redundant miners are not the only ones drawn by the drugs magnet.
Peasant farmers, the majority of the population, are switching from food crops to coca, which yields far higher profits, grows easily and provides four harvests a year.
The urban poor also find they can make more in one night treading coca leaves in makeshift drug factories in the jungle than an office employee earns in a month in the city.
Although it keeps the economy afloat, the flood of coca dollars has brought no developmental benefit.
This is because the money is not being invested productively.
Most of it leaves the country to be salted away in Swiss, Caribbean or Miami bank accounts.
Of the $2-3 billion cocaine earnings in 1985, the Foro Economico estimate that only $367 million stayed in Bolivia.
Poverty is widespread, with 60 per cent of the population living below the poverty line.
Bolivia has now become the second poorest country in the Western hemisphere after Haiti.
A daily diet consisting of nothing more than bread and sultana water (a drink made with coffee bean husks) is commonplace.
The weak domestic manufacturing sector is reeling too: 150 factories closed last year, laying off 30,000 workers.
The official rate of unemployment reached 20 per cent at the end of 1985.
The final blow for many firms was the government's abolition of import duties which resulted in a flood of cheap imports.
Government response to the crisis has hit the poor in a way that has become all too familiar in the Third World.
An IMF and World Bank approved austerity package — the ‘New Economic Policy’— has frozen wages, raised taxes and freed prices.
There are now thousands of street children in La Paz, Cochabamba and Santa Cruz, living rough without families and surviving by theft, child prostitution and drug dealing.
The New Economic Policy also has a more unusual aspect: the attempt to bring the coca-dollars into circulation.
State and municipal officials have been ordered to ask no questions about the source of citizens' wealth; and restrictions on dealings in foreign currency have been lifted.
The government is clearly on the horns of a dilemma.
On the one side, US aid has been made conditional on action against the drug trade.
On the other, the government needs the flood of coca-dollars, which is all that stands between Bolivia and total collapse.
This paradoxical state of affairs was demonstrated to British television viewers last summer by the odd spectacle of Home Office junior minister David Mellor stepping gingerly between rows of coca plants, while on a worldwide anti-drugs fact-finding tour, anxious not to offend his Bolivian government official guide by damaging any young plants.
Gestures at anti-drug action are made periodically by the authorities.
In December 1985, for example, Interior Minster Fernando Barthelemy launched an official campaign by symbolically uprooting 40 coca bushes.
Since then little more has happened.
Even the landing of US troops into Chapare last year caused considerable outrage but achievements were minimal.
Only the small fry are ever caught.
Operations are announced 10 days in advance, giving the godfathers plenty of time to pull out.
The coca mafia have become a law unto themselves.
In the east of the country they live on fortified ranches protected by private sub-machine-gun toting armies.
Periodic gang wars break out, Chicago-style and assassinations of rivals and double-crossers are common.
One incident last September became a national scandal.
Noel Kempff Mercado, a Bolivian scientist, his pilot and his guide were murdered after stumbling on a cocaine factory while on a scientific exploration in Huanchaca, Santa Cruz province.
Security forces delayed 50 hours before searching the region, allowing the murderers to escape the net.
The furore grew as it was revealed that the testimony of Major Ciro Jijena of the rural guard had been supressed.
He had accused the Minister of the Interior and police chiefs of taking bribes from drug traffickers.
In November Edmundo Salazar, a left wing parlimentarian who had fought to keep the case open, was murdered.
The Bolivian monthly Informe ‘R’ in its November issue described the Huanchaca incident as only the ‘tip of the iceberg’.
As in Colombia, drugs are gradually pervading every aspect of national life — from street-child dope pedlars to those in high office — and undermining any chance of effective democracy.
But Bolivia doesn't have to become a nation of drug traffickers.
There is natural wealth still untapped.
Only 5 per cent of the mineral-bearing land has been surveyed, according to a new book on the Bolivian tin crisis (The Great Tin Crash, Latin America Bureau, 1987).
But it will take international action to rescue the tin price and diversify investment.
The real problem is not one of crime — US troops have anyway been ineffective in stamping out coca production in in Chapare.
It is one of development: Bolivians need an alternative way to make a living.
The rich North has yet to show the will to solve its own cocaine problem by solving Bolivia's economic problem.
And it won't do that until it fully recognizes that it is poverty that provides the most fertile soil for the coca plant.
Brazil's electronic childminder
The Xuxa show fills the gap left by Brazil's scanty education system.
Moira Ashford writes from Sao Paulo
Brazil may be the only country in the world where the top TV presenter for children's programmes is a pouting, pulsating, scantily-dressed blonde.
Maria das Gracas Meneguel, better known as Xuxa, started her career as a fashion model.
Managed by former boyfriend and mentor, the football star Pele, she hit TV a couple of years ago.
Today the three-hour daily Xou de Xuxa (Xuxa's show) on TV Globo, tops the audience ratings and spawns Xuxa toys, Xuxa clothes and Xuxa records.
Xuxa's success has resulted in an unprecedented homogenization of children's viewing.
Three rival TV stations have launched their Xuxa shows, compered by Xuxa rivals.
One is a man, Sergio Malandro, physically a cross between a lorry driver and an Italian gigolo, who dresses up as a five year-old in short trousers.
In between cartoons, Xuxa dances, mimes to her own records, introduces guest artists, and exudes the Xuxa ethos of alegria — joy.
Happiness is to be had by dancing like Xuxa, jumping up and down like Xuxa waving coloured tassels, and of course, buying the advertised products.
‘If you haven't bought it yet, you've missed out’ she croons.
The life-is-a-party world of Xuxa has come to portray the official version of Brazilian reality, with its glossy blondes and creamy morenas — and very few blacks.
It's a far cry from the ragged, skinny reality of city streets and the rural hinterland.
One only has to look at the statistics to see how unrepresentative Xuxa's world is.
The majority of Brazilian children are black, undernourished and poorly dressed.
UNICEF estimates that some seven million Brazilian children are abandoned and another 36 million are deprived.
‘The worst thing about programmes like Xuxa's is that they force the idea down children's throats that life is a bed of roses,’ says Nilde Moreira Santos, a primary school teacher in the North-eastern city of Salvador.
‘It is common for parents with jobs to leave their children locked up at home with TV Globo as their only companion.’
Yet Brazil is fully capable of producing imaginative children's programmes when it wants to.
There is an honourable tradition amongst musicians, composers and poets of producing work especially for children — the late poet Vinicius de Moraes, singers/composers Chico Buarque, Gilberto Gil, Toquinho, have all produced memorable TV specials for children.
Before Xuxa's glitzy reign, TV Globo had a variety show, Balao Magico (the Magic Balloon), compered by four lively children (one of whom was Mike Biggs, son of Great Train Robber, Ronald Biggs.)
In São Paulo, the city offering the widest selection of TV channels, only the one owned by the State Government, makes any attempt to produce serious programmes.
It has quizzes, a children's newsreel and variety programmes that, though gay and colourful, include dramatic sketches with some imaginative and moral content.
But reception is poor and not many people watch it.
In a country where public education is sketchy, it is a double tragedy that TV air time is not used both to teach the three ‘R's and supplement the four hours per day schooling.
Although education is compulsory from age seven to 14 in theory, almost half the children in public schools never get beyond the first year and only one per cent continue to higher education.
The average Brazilian adult has only three years schooling and 26 per cent are illiterate (literacy being defined by the ability to sign one's name).
The drop-out and illiteracy rates for blacks is double that for whites.
Although absenteeism is higher in rural areas, it is in the cities that the television has become the ‘electronic nursemaid’.
A recent survey by educationalist Zaida Cavalcanti in the North-eastern city of Recife showed that middle-class children spend two-thirds of their spare time in front of the television.
Maria José Beraldi Andersen from São Paulo University estimates that the average child spends three to four hours in front of the TV daily.
But in cities this can be as high as six or eight hours — well above the time they spend in school.
‘One hundred per cent of the cartoons shown on Brazilian television are imported from the United States, and more recently, from Japan.
Andersen comments: ‘Analyzing these cartoons, I found that 80 per cent contained physical aggression or persecution.
It is hard to define the influence this has, but most children do not have the means to develop a critical faculty.
What I find totally condemnable is the consumerism in programmes like Xuxa's — creating wants which most parents have no means of satisfying.’
The Thatcher New Right market-led shakeup of the British education system has not been imported into Aotearoa.
But it's on the way, and the philosophical and political battles will be fought and the decision made, one way or the other, in 1988.
Prime Minister David Lange may be know internationally as the David who slew the nuclear giant, but locally he's better known as the man whose monetarist Minister of Finance, Roger Douglas, has led a successful crusade to corporatise government and unshackle the economuy.
Labour's promise in last August's election was that it would turn its prodigeous energies to social services in its second term.
Having gained that second term, Lange appointed himself Minister of Education, swapping his foreign affairs portfolio with Russell Marshall, thus signalling a major initiative in education reform.
Marshall hasn't so much tampered with Aotearoa education as launched a phalanx of studies and reviews which are now landing with thuds.
So weighty and at times contradictory are the findings and recommendations that David Lange has established another committee to sift through them and recommend government action in the reform of educational administration.
This is headed by a businessman, and some worried educators see its recommendations as a foregone conclusion, and its administrative brief as the thin edge of the wedge to structural reform.
What the weighty reports do have in common, is evidence that the high social ideals of a liberal egalitarian education system in practice fall short of the mark.
The New Zealand Council for Educational Research identified women, Maori, Pacific Islanders and other non-Europeans, the poor, disabled and rural dwellers as educationally disadvantaged.
However, these amount to some 60 per cent of all students.
The state of play in Aotearoa at the moment is: so now everyone knows about the inequities in paradise, what are we going to do about it?
Treasury, in its 295 page August 1987 document on education, opted predictably for an open market, hands-of policy in which schools, if left to their own devices, will become more efficient and accountable to their customers.
Treasury does, however, recognise a social dimension to education and recommends government intervention to help the disadvantaged.
Given the numbers of the disadvantaged, critics of Treasury ridicule the whole proposal.
Meanwhile the State Services Co-ordinating Commmittee has recommended that secondary schools be run by higher-paid managers instead of the traditional principals, with the right to sack teachers and determine their pay.
Thus let loose into the real world of competitive survival, it argues, teachers and therefore schools will become more accountable.
Teachers don't like the idea, and have said so loudly.
At the bottom of the argument about running state schools like a chain of McDonalds hamburger restaurants, handing out Big Mac gift vouchers to disadvantaged kids, is the issue of whether education is ultimately just a utilitarian service to the marketplace that can be understood in simple commercial language, or something more important and fundamental that warrants different treatment.
Treasury and other government agencies reduce education into commercial language to understand it.
Many believe the government recently took the confusion between public service and commercial logic to its ultimate fatuity in another areas when it announced it would shut down one third of all the country's post offices to provide the public with, in its words, a better postal service.
On past evidence like the post office closures, changes to education are likely to be draconian.
The government's propensity is toward a new Right solution to current ills; the political reality, given angry teachers and educationalists, is another matter.
The irony is that the Labour government has set up and funded handsomely a Royal Commission on Social Policy which will make its report at the end of 1988.
Early indications are that its findings and recommendations will not please the market lobby.
But given the speed at which this government is moving, few doubt that the new education reforms, what ever they may be, will be firmly cemented in place by the time the commission reports.
February Issue
CONSUMERISM
Clingfilm cloys
When local environmental officers in Birmingham, UK, reported last year that surprising amounts of chemicals were migrating into food from some types of clingfilm, they were attacked by the packaging industry.
A Government Minister announced there was ‘no cause for concern’.
Now the British Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is backtracking.
They admit that some people are eating too much of the chemical plasticiser (DEHA) found in PVC clingfilm.
Plasticisers are the molecules that give clinginess to clingfilm and make other plastic wrappers soft and flexible.
About 5,000 tonnes of plasticiers are used in 24,075 tonnes of plasticised food wrapping in the country annually.
There is growing concern about plasticisers migrating from such wrappers to fatty foods like pork, cheese, cakes, buns, pastries, sandwiches and chocolate.
A new report by the British Government recommends that overall dietary intakes of DEHA should be reduced and that it is unsuitable for cooking in microwave ovens.
But as the London Food Commission points out: ‘The problem for consumers at the moment is that they do not know which are the PVC clingfilms.
We need clear labelling.
More importantly we urgently need a limit on the amnount of packaging chemicals that can migrate into food.
The EEC's proposed limit should be halved to protect the public.’
From London Food News, No 7, Autumn 1987
DISCRIMINATION
Pay, race and gender
No less a person that the Director of the US Civil Rights Commission has called equal pay for work of equal value ‘the looniest idea since Looney Tunes’.
The voters of San Francisco disagree.
On 2nd November 1986 they said ‘yes’ to their city government paying its employees according to the principle of ‘comparable worth’.
It is the first time the North American public has been asked to vote on such an issue.
Ten States have begun to implement comparable worth principles and there are law suits pending against another thirteen.
Some large private companies are also quietly adjusting their pay structure to remove race and gender discrimination.
So in spite of Reaganite sneers and the activities of hostile employers' organisations such as the Equal Employment Advisory Committee, progress for North American women and minority people is being made.
CAMEROON
Volcanic suspicions
More that a year after the Lake Nyos gas disaster in northwest Camaroon, hundreds of survivors are still living in tempory camps.
The violent eruption which killed 1,700 people has never been satisfactorily explained.
The official version, blaming the disaster on natural causes, will be coming out shortly in the Journal of Volcanology.
But there remain other theories.
One, leaked to the NI, is of an explosion in a secret French underground chemical warfare plant.
Another surfaced in African Analaysis suggesting it was an Israeli atomic bomb test which set off the fatal discharge of poisonous gases and the monstrous tidal wave from the lake that swamped the surrounding countryside.
Photographers who flew over the area described the scene as resembling the aftermath of an atomic explosion.
Just before the disaster, Cameroon had establsihed diplomatic relations with Israel.
It is known that Israeli doctors were the first outside medical experts to reach the scene.
But since then they have kept a low profile and not made their findings public.
ENDQUOTE
‘War and rape are two activities not widely engaged in by women.’
Margaret Atwood, Canadian author.
‘You do not know who is your friend or who is your enemy until the ice breaks.’
Anonymous Inuit (Eskimo).
INTERNATIONAL DEBT
Adjustment with an inhuman face
Latin American nations used to be among the most prosperous of the nations of the South.
But that was before the economic cutbacks forced on their governments by international banks.
The continent owed nearly $400,000 million in 1985 — about $1,000 for every person living there.
It has been difficult to establish the impact and cumulative effects of the global recession and foreign indebtedness, but an International Labour Office report gives some idea.
First the good news: government measures have reduced the overall current account deficit from $41,100 million in 1982 to $3,600 million in 1985.
Now the bad: the strategy of reducing government deficits — devaluation and a squeeze on credit and wages —has its casualties.
In 14 countries income per head declined by 10 per cent over 1980-85, while in seven others the reduction was worse, at 15 per cent.
Open unemployment rose from 7 per cent to 11.5 per cent between 1980 and 1984.
Real wages fell by 28 per cent in Mexico, 35 per cent in Peru and similiar significant decreases in Brazil, Chile and Venezuela.
The result: a 38 per cent increase in people subsisting below the poverty line — from 47 million in 1980 to 65 million in 1985.
WASTE
Filth findings
The first global report on air and water pollution, food contamination and their effects on health has just been prepared by the United Nations Environment Programme.
Findings include:
Some 600 million people live in urban areas where the average level of sulphur dioxide pollution endangers their lives.
Another 1,000 million people are exposed to high levels of suspended particles from coal, wood and oil combustion and traffic dust.
Because of chemical pollution of rivers, the cost of producing safe, palatable drinking water has risen dramatically.
Due to population increases and the deterioration in water quality, the per capita availability of water for human consumption is decreasing.
In the Third World it will decline by almost 50 per cent by the year 2000.
The lowest concentration of lead in the blood of city dwellers was found in Tokyo; the highest in Mexico City.
Interestingly, petrol has been lead-free in Tokyo since 1976, while Mexican petrol has nearly the highest lead content in the world.
From Third World Network features, 197/87
AIDS EPIDEMIC
Action in Brazil
With the third highest number of AIDS cases in the world, the Brazilian Government is beginning to recognise the possibility of an epidemic.
The challenges are: decontaminating blood supplies, informing people and lack of resources.
Officially there are 2,102 AIDS sufferersin the country.
But unofficially doctors say the figure is closer to 3,500.
This indicates that around 350,000 of the 141 million population could be infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
With 60 per cent of the population living in ‘absolute poverty’ according to government statistics — and more being pushed below the poverty line by recent economic cutbacksa — the Government sais it can only afford to invest four per cent of its gross national product in the health system.
In developed countries the figure is closer to 10 per cent of GNP.
Lack of public awareness has been one reason for the spread of the killer disease.
‘Until early 1985 members of the gay community did not believe in AIDS,’ says the President of the Rio homosexual group, Pink Triangle.
It was not until August 1987 that the Government made it mandatory for blood banks to test donated blood, arguing that imported AIDS diagnosis kits could not be afforded.
In practise this has meant that 15 per cent of AIDS patients, the great majority of them haemophiliacs, were infected by blood transfusions.
Even now only half of donated blood is tested simply because of the lack of diagnosis kits.
Probaby the most hopeful news is that Brazil, the world's largest Catholic nation is going to put AIDS and sexual education onto the curriculum of state schools for the first time from February this year.
From People news features, November 1987.
SOUTH AFRICA
DIY demolition
The latest tactic in the South African authorities' battle with black squatters is to arrest the shack dwellers for trespassing and then offer to drop the charges provided they demolish their own homes.
A recent police swoop in and around Durban brought 45 arrests and 15 had to appear in court for failing to dismantle their homes according to the deadline.
One of the accused, 67 year-old Jabulelwe Majolo, has lived in the Durban area since before the Second World War.
He spent two days in the top security Westville prison on trespassing charges.
While the police made their arrests and dozens of rats from the nearby city dump — where the squatters scavenge to survive — ran in and out of the shacks, the community sang Nkosi Sikelile l'Afrika and waved placards against the Group Areas act.
From Southscan, A bulletin of Southern African affairs, Vol.2 No.10.
AIDS EPIDEMIC
Global update
The number of countries reporting the incidence of AIDS and the total number of sufferers have continued to increase.
As of 11th November 1987, 64,488 AIDS cases were officially reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) from 127 countries.
However total AIDS cases are estimated to be between 100,000 and 150,000.
WHO estimates between five and ten million people may be currently infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)— the virus that causes AIDS.
By 1991 at least one million new cases of AIDS could develop in people already infected with HIV.
The largest number of cases, 43,533, has been reported in the US, where the disease was first recognised in 1981.
In the Americas, Europe and Australia, most AIDS cases occur among 20 to 49 year-old homosexual or bisexual men and intravenous drug users.
However cases of AIDS acquired through heterosexual contact has increased from one per cent to four per cent of all sufferers.
Europe, with 7,512 cases, is considered to be facing an epidemic.
WHO estimates that between a half and one million Europeans are infected with the AIDS virus.
Highest per capita incidences are found in Switzerland, Denmark, France and Belgium.
Africa reports 6,298 cases.
The major factors here in the transmission of HIV are heterosexual intercourse, transfusions of contaiminated blood, use of unsterilised needles and mother-to-baby transmission.
This last is a significant source of infection in those areas where five to ten per cent of pregnant women hasve been recorded as HIV positive.
NEW TECHNOLOGY
Computer mayhem
For underdeveloped countries the computer makes it possible to leapfrog certain stages of development by slashing paper bureaucracy, streamlining production and improving health care.
But the computer explosion in the Third World is producing a lot of fallout.
As one international expert put it: ‘Computers don't clothe, don't cure, don't feed.
Their power begins and ends with information.’
Many governments are rushing into computers without carefully examining their needs.
Take China: in 1984 it imported $300 million worth of components to make 120,000 computers.
By 1985 at least half of them were lying idle, stored in warehouses because of shortages of skills and software programmes.
The Chinese currently spend 10 to 20 per cent over and above their capital outlay on servicing their new computers over three years compared with just three per cent in the US.
This alone may cost China $80 million between 1985 and 1988.
Difficulties may be more fundamental in countries where even pencils and paper have to be imported.
In some African francophone countries it is not unusual for government data-processing offices to close down for lack of paper.
From Media Development, Journal of the World Association for Christian Cmmunication Vol.
XXXIV.
NORTH KOREA
Bribe the masses
North Korean citizens were given a one-month salary bonus just before the opening of the World Youth Festival in Pyongyang in July.
This might have something to do with pacifying the masses, since the 15,000 foreign delegates had unprecedented freedom to mingle with ordinary North Koreans, normally isolated from foreigners.
Kim Il Sung may have feared rumblings of discontent at the money spent on building the sports arenas and on entertaining delegates to the Festival.
This is the largest international event to have taken place in this reclusive country.
It was marred only by some Scandinavian delegates protesting human rights abuses during the opening ceremony.
From Far Eastern Economic Review, Vol. 145, No. 29, 1989
CHRISTIANITY
Third World belief
Christianity has had far more success in winning adherents among the nations of the South, than in retaining Christians in its European heartland.
Third World Christians already outnumber those in North America and Europe — and the margin will have widened greatly by the year 2000.
This shift in the centre of gravity from the rich North to the less developed world will increase the Third World's influence in the denominations and certainly change aspects of faith.
Expected changes include: greater emphasis on helping the poor; a weakening of the main churches' toleration of the other great religions; and the disappearance of celibacy among the Roman Catholic clergy of Africa and Latin America.
The new majority sees itself as dispossessed.
Their saviour is not the triumphalist Christ the King of old Christendom.
New Christendom's saviour is Jesus the liberator, the crusader against injustice.
He will comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable.
From World Development Forum, Vol. 7, No. 10, 1989
PEACE
Peace or Satan?
School officials in Pasadena, Texas have detected something satanic in the peace symbol: they see it as an upside-down broken cross that signifies the defeat of Christianity.
They are shortly to be voting on new student dress regulations that will allow school principals to ban the sign from their institutions.
School administrators learned the symbol's devilish significance at a seminar on cults last spring at the University of Houston.
The peace sign itself was devised by British pacifists who combined the semaphore signs for N (nuclear) and D (disarmament).
Could the Texas school officials have a hidden agenda?
This is a state where the arms industry provides a large number of jobs.
Information but not comment from Time magazine, Vol. 134, No. 1, 1989
ENVIRONMENT
Ozone-friendly freezers
Make the dumping of fridges with ozone-damaging chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) illegal, says a new report from Friends of the Earth UK.
Government action is urgently needed to:
clear up consumer confusion
standardize labels on new fridges
set up a national network of registered depots for fridge and CFC disposal
provide fiscal incentives where appropriate.
There are, in the UK, more than 30 million domestic fridges which use CFCs as the refrigerant and as part of the foam insulation in walls and doors.
The CFCs are reasonably safe while they remain in the leakproof sealed units but not so when fridges are dumped and crushed.
The CFCs in the refrigerant can be safely removed and recycled.
But dealing with those in the foam (which contains four times as much) is more difficult — attempts to develop disposal methods have run into high costs.
There are over two million tonnes globally ‘banked’ in fridges; described as a ‘time bomb of CFCs ticking away’.
Out of 25 manufacturers of fridges in the UK, only Amana and Indesit have a scheme up and running to recover the CFCs from their old fridges.
At the other end of the spectrum, AEG and Siemens — while keen to promote their green image — have declined to offer a CFC recovery service.
The first local authority fridge disposal schemes have also been launched, under pressure from local environmental groups keen to extend last year's aerosol bans to practical action on fridges.
From Fridges and CFCs, available free from Friends of the Earth, 26-28 Underwood Street, London N1 7JQ.
HOUSEWORK
The second shift
Some 15 years after the start of the modern women's movement in the US, most men still do little of the housework or child care, still feel enormously threatened by wives who work or (worse) earn more than they do, and still abandon their children financially or emotionally after a divorce.
Arlie Hochschild in her book The Second Shift interviewed 10 couples over 12 years, from 1976 to 1988.
Over that time only one sign of ‘progress’ surfaced: the spouses didn't share the household duties any more equitably, but now they ‘imagined they did’.
In fact the husbands who said they were helping tended to be the ones who did the least.
In more ‘traditional’ couples the men were actually more likely to pitch in at home — perhaps, Hochschild hypothesizes, because they felt less threatened.
From Mother Jones, Vol. 14, No. 5, 1989
CONSUMPTION
Thrill of Paris
Below is an advertisement from the Indian firm, Bhilwara, which manufactures underpants (which they call wearunders) under license from France.
(space for advert)
For the man who plays many roles, here come the very best wearunders via the grand fashion avenue of Paris, Champs Elysees, manufactured with French technique.
And they'll reach out to the best part of your body.
Only our wearunders recognize the many roles a man plays.
And there's a model for each of them.
The macho male, the business man, the romantic.
Not every man can separate these roles.
But remember, every woman can.
Now there's one thing less you'll bring back from abroad.
CHILDREN
UN Convention
The UN General Assembly is set to ratify this month the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 10 years after the ‘Year of the Child’ was proclaimed.
UNICEF UK has organized a petition urging the British Government to be one of the first to ratify the Convention after it has been adopted.
It can be signed by anyone under 18 and will be handed in at 10 Downing Street, later this year.
(space for cartoon)
Copies of the petition available from UNICEF UK, 55 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3NB.
Please provide a stamped, addressed envelope.
POLLUTION
Garbage islands
The dumping of toxic trash from the West in poorer nations, who are under great pressure to earn foreign currency, ranks alongside the ozone layer and the rainforests as one of the major environmental issues of our times.
A US company, Admiralty Pacific, touches two out of the three environmental bases, in making an offer to the Marshall Islanders in the Pacific.
The Marshall Islands are one of several low-lying Pacific nations threatened with inundation as sea levels rise because of the influence of the ‘greenhouse effect’.
Admiralty Pacific would like to send 25 million tonnes of garbage to the islands over the next five years.
It will, the company says, protect the atolls from the rising tides.
ICEF Occupational Health Newsletter 2, 1989.
Published by the International Federation of Chemical, Energy and General Workers' Unions, ave.
Emile de Beco 109, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium.
ENDQUOTE
‘Revolution is not something fixed in ideology, nor is it something fashioned to a particular decade.
It is a perpetual process embedded in the human spirit.
When all today's isms have become yesterday's ancient philosophy, there will still be revolutionaries.
No amount of rationalization can avoid the moment of choice each of us brings to our situation here on the planet.
I still believe in the fundamental injustice of the profit system and do not accept the proposition that there will be rich and poor for all eternity.’
Abbie Hoffman, a US spokesperson for the 1960s anti-Vietnam War movement.
1936-1989.
Jokes often reveal truths in Cuba.
One story going the rounds in Havana recently has Fidel visiting his barber.
The barber asks: ‘Fidel, what do you really think of glasnost?’
Fidel does not respond.
The barber repeats the question every time Fidel comes for a haircut.
Finally an annoyed Fidel replies, ‘Why do you keep asking me that question?’
‘It makes your hair stand on end,’ the barber answers, ‘and it's easier to cut.’
BRIEFLY
SOUTH KOREA
Crying Shame
The cost of tear gas is a matter of some concern in South Korea.
In the anti-government protests between 10 and 26 June, the police in their characteristic Darth Vadar uniforms fired more than 20,000 rounds a day.
This totalled some 351,200 rounds at a cost of seven million dollars.
Their trigger fingers are obviously becoming more itchy; last year they took nine months to fire off 313,000 rounds at demonstrators with a total bill to the Korean taxpayer of $6.7 million.
In 1989 Seoul plans to host the Olympic Games…out of doors?
THE RICH
Worth a million
Six directors of a fund management company in the City of London, Mercury Asset Management received more than one million pounds ($1,600,000) each as wages for their last year's work.
The Chairman, Peter Stormonth Darling was paid 1,050,000 ($1,680,000), but the highest paid director who was unnamed in the annual company report, received 1,265,000 ($2,024,000).
Besides the top six, coming in just below the million pounds for their year's labour were two directors grossing 900,000 ($1,440,000).
Of course these wages do not include the company's pension contributions to the individuals concerned.
But to be fair, they include special compensation for loss of share options in the parent, Mercury International, when it was floated as a separate company earlier this year.
AUSTRALIA
It's the same the whole world over…
The growing divide between rich and poor might be expected in those bastions of the New Right, Thatcher's Britain and Reagan's US — but Australia?
Bob Hawke's Australian Labor Party has guided the economy for the last three years, but the latest issue of Economic Record show that there are now over 30,000 millionaires in the country, with one tenth of the population owning 60 per cent of all wealth while two million live below the poverty line.
Detailed breakdown on wealth figures in Australia are set out in a series of tables in Australian Society include comparative figures for 1984 and 1986 where the total wealth of the richest 118 has increased by 250 per cent— over A$5,000 million — at a time when the total wealth has increased by 20 per cent .
PHILIPPINES
Quick ‘n dirty
The World Bank is not celebrated for its radical reforming zeal.
Yet it has just produced a highly confidential report urging the Philippines Government to abandon its gradualist approach to land reform — which effectively favours the landlords — and quickly move to help the landless and poor.
The report says that the slow pace of reform will prolong the civil war in large parts of the country, while rapid reforms will siphon off peasant discontent and in turn reduce military activities and spending.
The report, produced at Manila's request, was fiercely critical of the land reform programme of Marcos, and warns that this time implementation must not be allowed to drag on.
It argues that the Government should:
Impose a ceiling of seven hectares for all private farms and ban the sale and transfer of land above the ceiling.
Expropriate land and redistribute it to tenants and farm workers.
Include all land, not least the sugar and coconut plantations.
Use the value of the land declared by the landlord for tax purposes as the basis of compensation for expropriated land.
Ask for a one-time up-front payment of $30 from each beneficiary, instead of payments spread over 30 years (as presently planned).
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
Out the back door
Hard currency leaves the bankrupt countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America in false-bottomed suitcases or in electronic transfers from banks.
The methods can be elaborate — from under-invoicing exports to setting up corporations in the Bahamas.
Destinations range from banks in Zurich to real estate in Manhattan.
Such capital flight, according to Multinational Monitor, is sapping local economies and draining central bank reserves throughout the underdeveloped world.
Some idea of the problem: in Zaire President Sese Seko Mobutu and his clan are reported to have $5,000 million invested in Swiss bank accounts and foreign real estate.
Yet his Government has seldom been able to service its foreign debt, which stood at $4,200 million by 1983.
More than half the money borrowed by Mexico, Venezuela and Argentina during the last ten years has effectively flowed out the back door, often in the same year or month it flowed in.
Between 1979 and 1984, according to the World Bank, Argentina's capital flight was 60 per cent of inflow.
In total, wealthy Latin Americans salted away at least $180 billion outside their continent…just under half the region's current foreign debt.
Sometimes the same bank that has been making the public loan to the government also stores the overseas private deposits from private nationals.
At least half of Citibank's International Private Banking assets of $26 billion, it is estimated, belong to Latin Americans.
This compares with Citibank's total loans to Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Venezuela of $10.3 billion; meaning the bank comes close to owing more money to Latin Americans than it is owed.
In practice this boils down to the governments being saddled with the bulk of the foreign hard currency debts, while it is private individuals in those same countries who hold most of the hard-currency assets.
Subsequent government/IMF austerity measures will hit some harder than others.
POLLUTION
Drive carefully
All gasoline-powered cars harm the environment, but the polluting effects of driving can be minimized by using the car carefully.
Those who don't, aggravate the pollution, reduce the lives of their cars and sometimes their own lives too.
Though high-pollution drivers often have old cars, the speed-obsessed owners of sports cars are equally guilty of environmental thoughtlessness.
Watch out for the features detailed in the diagram — taken from Blueprint for a Green Planet.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
Conversion at a cost
Two Indian women, members of the nomadic and isolated Ayoreo tribe tracked down December 1986 in the Paraguayan jungle and taken to the New Tribes Mission base, have died in a flu epidemic.
Such deaths are normal consequences of Western contact with previously isolated tribes.
But such sad results does not dissuade the Protestant fundamentalists in their hunt, via motorboats and spotter planes, for any remaining indigenous people who need to be converted to their form of Christianity.
The deaths of the two Indians was reported by another, captured as a child thirty years ago and subsequently used to track down members of his own tribe.
But on his recent visit to the Mission base he was prevented from meeting with the newly contacted group.
ENDQUOTE
Eating alone
is a disappointment,
but not eating
matters more, is
hollow and green, has
thorns like a chain of
fish hooks trailing
from the heart,
clawing
at your insides.
Hunger feels like
pincers, like the bite
of crabs, it burns,
burns and has no fire.
Hunger is a cold fire.
Let us sit down soon
to eat with all those
who haven't eaten;
let us spread great
tablecloths, put salt
in the lakes of the
world, set up
planetary bakeries,
stables with
strawberries in snow,
and a plate like
the moon itself from
which we can all eat.
For now I ask
no more than the
justice of eating.
Pablo Neruda, ‘The Great Tablecloth’
BRIEFLY
PHARMACEUTICALS
No more aphrodisiacs
The sale of non-prescription drugs promoted as aphrodisiacs has been banned in the US from January 8, 1990.
Among the ingredients contained in these products are: anise, cantharides (or ‘Spanish fly’, a chemical derived from the dried bodies of beetles), estrogens, fennel, ginseng, golden seal, Korean ginseng, licorice, mandrake, minerals, nux vomica, sarsaparilla, strychnine, testosterone and vitamins.
The US Food and Drug Administration has no evidence to show that any of the materials traditionally used as aphrodisiacs are either effective or safe.
Only male sex hormones, which are potent compounds associated with potentially serious side-effects, are known to influence libido.
COMMUNICATIONS
Pap propaganda
A group of US magazine publishers have come up with a novel weapon for the US Information Agency's propaganda efforts in Eastern Europe: their unsold magazines.
The group, including some of the nation's largest magazines, agreed that their publications would be ideal tools to show East Europeans how Americans live.
The plan is for publishers to donate their unsold magazines, presumably gaining a tax benefit in the process, and these will then be shipped overseas.
Poland and Hungary are the initial targets.
The US Embassy in Warsaw already has requested 80 magazines that it would like to receive, including Ad Week, Bon Appetit, Dog World, Motor Trend,
Vogue Patterns and Playboy.
The NI is not on the list.
THE SEA
Driftnet holocaust
Asia's driftnet fishing fleets may be slaughtering more than 100,000 dolphins a year in the Pacific Ocean, according to Greenpeace.
‘It's what I would call an ecological holocaust,’ said the leader of the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior II.
The ship is monitoring 20 driftnet boats from Japan and Taiwan in the Tasman Sea between Australia and Aotearoa/New Zealand.
Environmentalists have dubbed driftnet fishing the ‘Wall of Death’ because the fine-mesh nets hang like deadly curtains for up to 50 km.
In the North Pacific Ocean, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea have more than 1,000 of these vessels fishing at the height of the season.
They set something like 50,000 km of net a night, enough to go around the equator one and a quarter times.
JUNK FOOD
Delinquent poison
The removal of foods with excessive amounts of added sugar, artificial colourings and preservatives has worked a ‘minimiracle’ on many children with severe behavioural problems.
Hyperactivity and aggression was defused within days of radical diet changes, according to Dr Peter Mansfield in Which?
Way to Health.
Junk food, he said, could be affecting the behaviour of 10 per cent of children in the UK.
Parents with problem children should stop them from taking canned drinks, coloured squash, sweets, biscuits and cake for a week.
NUCLEAR POWER
Down but not out
Within the next 25 years, about 360 nuclear-power plants throughout the world will be decommissioned or ‘retired’.
The question then arises ‘What to do with them?’
There is no definite answer to this question, says Cynthia Pollock Shea of the US environmental research group, Worldwatch Institute.
‘Dismantling them will require special techniques not yet perfected, and new sites to store the radioactive wastes,’ she warns.
The total price tag is likely to range between $63 billion and $470 billion.
‘Because many of the plant components are contaminated with radiation, the structures simply cannot be demolished with a wrecking ball,’ said Shea.
LITERACY
Female education
Nearly 1,000 million adults in the world, most of them women, can neither read nor write, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) said.
Launching International Literacy Year 1990, UNESCO Director General said that the absolute number of illiterates had begun to decline for the first time in history.
However there was one area where advancement was particularly slow — the education of women and girls.
Asia accounts for 666 million illiterates, three-quarters of the world's total.
But the highest rate of illiteracy is in Africa, with 54 per cent of the adult population.
TURKEY
Kurdish intifada
The Turkish government is closing down journals and magazines which air anti-government opinions.
This is happening particularly to those publications which print stories on the Kurdish intifada.
Censorship of the Turkish press is part of the general crackdown by the Government to halt an escalation of the Kurdish insurgency in south-east Turkey.
Since 1984, 2,100 Kurds are feared to have been killed — although Kurdish organizations believe the number is much higher.
The editors of two Socialist Party publications, Eyler and Teori have been told their magazines must stop publishing.
And the editor of Towards 2000 is in hiding after police broke into his office and home, seeking to detain him.
Why?
He had written sympathetically about the plight of the Kurds.
SOVIET UNION
Free trade zones
The Soviet Union has announced plans to set up what it calls ‘Special Economic Zones’ similar to those created in China.
According to the State Planning Committee, these zones will aim to attract joint ventures and Western companies with concessions such as long-term leases, low rents, tax concessions, low service costs and customs duties.
The first two zones are planned for Vyborg, north of Leningrad, and Nakhodka, the principal foreign trade port of the Soviet Far East.
Western companies are particularly interested in the Nakhodka site because of its proximity to Japanese markets.
The area is rich in raw materials such as timber and construction materials and it is also planned to attract ship repair, machinery manufacture and electronic assembly plants.
COMMODITIES
Cocoa conflicts
Cocoa is the third largest foreign-currency earner for Third World countries after coffee and sugar.
It is exclusively produced in tropical countries and mostly consumed in the industrialized North.
The cocoa trade provides a stark reflection of the power relations behind South-North trade.
Until recently, West Africa was the pivot of the cocoa trade, producing the highest quality and the most beans.
However throughout the 1980s prices have declined in a glutted market.
With prices at their lowest level for 14 years, small farmers are turning away from the crop, even though it is often their only source of income and their governments' only source of foreign exchange.
Without the foreign currency to service their debts, countries like Ghana, Ivory Coast, Gabon and Senegal face ruin, at a time when IMF-imposed austerity programmes appear to be stimulating social disorder throughout the region.
RACISM
Canada's backlash
Large lapel buttons have been selling across the country depicting a white man in front of three other men: an Oriental wearing a coolie hat, a Sikh in a turban and a black man clutching a spear.
The caption reads: ‘Who is the minority in Canada?’.
The button is just one of several items attacking minority groups, according to an article in Maclean's.
Others include a handbill in Manitoba saying that the game-hunting season has been cancelled due to an animal shortage.
In place of the usual hunt, the handbill says, ‘there will be an open season on Indians…
These welfare recipients must be thinned out every three years.’
EMERGENCY AID
Dumped drugs
Many of the pharmaceuticals sent to Armenia after the 1988 earthquake were useless, and, in some cases, dangerous.
International relief supplied more than 5,000 tonnes of drugs and consumable medical supplies, syringes, needles and other equipment.
Medecin sans Frontieres and the Armenian Ministry of Health made complete inventories of this aid.
They had to destroy 20 per cent of the drugs.
Eleven per cent were useless and eight per cent had expiry dates before their arrival.
Among the useless items were many types of vitamin preparations, nasal sprays and drugs for the treatment of tropical diseases such as malaria and bilharzia.
Only 30 per cent of the drugs could be used by health workers in the disaster area.
ECONOMICS
Ballooning prices
Consumer prices rose a record 86.3 per cent in Third World countries in 1989.
Among’ industrial nations the rise was only 4.5 per cent, up from 3.4 per cent in 1988.
Latin American average prices were heavily increased by runaway inflation in two of the region's most important countries: Argentina 3,079 per cent and Brazil 1,287 per cent.
That meant Argentinian shoppers were paying roughly 30 times more for the same basket of goods at the end of 1989 than at the beginning of the year.
PESTICIDES
Chemicals wilt
Farmers in the US Midwest are reducing their use of chemical fertilisers, weed-killers and insecticides.
‘I've been here 18 years and I am amazed at how many more conservation concerns there are today,’ said an Iowa agriculture official.
‘These people have to make a living off the land and they have to drink the water that's under it.
They don't want to louse it up any more.’
According to an Iowa State College survey, 78 per cent of the state's farmers say that modern farming is too dependent on herbicides and insecticides.
Many farmers are rediscovering the largely abandoned practices of crop rotation and manure spreading.
Despite corn acreage increasing by ten per cent last year, nitrogen fertilizer sales dropped by more than ten per cent.
ESPIONAGE
CIA's killing fields
The role played by the CIA and US State Department officials in the 1965-1966 bloodbath in Indonesia has just been meticulously documented in stories run in The Washington Post, The Boston Globe and other quality US daily newspapers.
US officials in Jakarta furnished the names of about 5,000 Communist activists to the Indonesian Army and then checked off the names as the army reported that the individuals had been killed or captured.
‘They probably killed a lot of people, and I probably have a lot of blood on my hands,’ the investigating journalist was told by Robert Martens, who had spent two years compiling the lists in the US Embassy in Jakarta.
‘But that's not all bad.
There's a time when you have to strike hard at a decisive moment.’
Anything between 250,000 and 500,000 Communists and suspected supporters were murdered following what has been debatably described as ‘an abortive coup’.
SOUTH AFRICA
Ratners ends apartheid gold
Ratners, the giant British chain of jewellery stores, have agreed to stop selling jewellery made with South African gold.
This comes after political pressure and picketing throughout the country by End Loans to South Africa and other anti-apartheid groups.
The action had been taken after Nelson Mandela's call to intensify sanctions and for people to boycott South African goods in a final effort to end apartheid.
Ratners are the largest British retailers of gold jewellery with 31 per cent of the market and recently acquired a large retail chain in the US.
Until now, they have bought most of their jewellery from Italy which sources 91 per cent of its gold from South Africa.
South Africa earns about 40 per cent of its export income from gold but produces only one-third of the world's supplies.
Until the Ratners decision almost all gold jewellery sold in Britain was made with South African gold.
POVERTY
The maple leaf pines
A new system of income security to help Canada's poor has been proposed by The Canadian Council on Social Development.
Called WIN — Work and Income for the Nineties — it offers a package of reforms to promote a better life for all Canadians.
Something is obviously needed when:
Almost four million Canadians live under the poverty line, about a million of them children.
About half the impoverished households have one member employed, but their wage is totally inadequate.
The 1988 poverty line is Can$11,600 for a single person in cities, or Can$8,600 in rural areas.
For a couple with one child it is Can$20,400 in cities, Can$15,000 in the countryside.
Most new jobs are in the ‘service sector’: store clerks, fast-food take-out workers, office workers.
They are often transient, non-unionized and low-paying.
INDIA
Urchin power
India has over 179 million child labourers, 135 million aged between five and fourteen.
Not surprisingly, more than a hundred million cannot read or write.
Most of them work in farming.
But 18 million younger than 15 work elsewhere, often in hazardous industries like the match or firework factories of Tamil Nadu or Agra's glass-bangle sweatshops where blazing furnaces reach temperatures of 1,400 degrees centigrade.
In the mining industry more than half the labour force are children under 15.
ANIMAL RIGHTS
Sows in prison
There are about eight million pigs on British farms, of which about 800,000 are breeding sows.
More than half the sows are kept in close confinement systems.
Pigs by nature are rooting, foraging and exploratory animals, happy to wander for up to six hours a day.
But with this factory farming system, sows are confined in narrow stalls or tethered in rows by neck straps or girth straps shackled to the floor.
There is usually no bedding and the sows stand or lie on concrete.
They have no exercise, cannot turn around and in pregnancy have difficulty getting up or lying down.
Lameness, sores, hip problems and psychiatric disorders (manifested by bar biting) are common.
A string of official reports both from the European Convention for the Protection of Animals and the House of Commons has condemned close confinement of sows.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council is the latest to call for a phasing out of the system.
Find out more from:
Compassion in World Farming, 20 Lavant Street, Petersfield GU32 3EW
DANGEROUS PRODUCTS
Whiter than white
The Nigerian government is fighting an uphill battle to discourage its people from using ‘beauty’ aids which whiten the skin.
Although 34 medicinal soaps and creams which contain bleaching agents such as mercury compounds have been banned, they are still popular.
These bleaching creams usually contain hydroquinone, a photographic chemical which peels off the natural top layer of the skin, exposing the body to harmful radiation.
Moreover, mercury in the banned products can be absorbed by the skin and lead to hypertension, stroke and heart failure.
CORRUPTION
Swiss banks' new-found ethics
African heads of state will in future have to explain the origins of any large sums of money they deposit in Swiss banks.
Switzerland's all-powerful Federal Banking Commission recently announced new directives.
These require foreign heads of state and their legal representatives to explain away the funds they are depositing.
Several African heads of state, including Gbassingbe Eyadema of Togo, Omar Bongo of Gabon and Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire have publicly acknowledged their Swiss bank accounts.
ZAMBIA
Passing the buck
The Zambian government has banned the sale of unpasteurized milk direct from farmers to consumers because it may contain high concentrations of the pesticide dieldrin.
Linked by the UN to cancer, dieldrin was recently the cause of a major meat export problem for Australia.
In Zambia it is widely used to control termites and as a pesticide in maize fields.
Water running off the maize fields is contaminated with dieldrin, then drunk by cattle.
Since the ban, it appears farmers have been selling their milk to pig farmers, so the problem may simply shift from milk to pork.
TREES
Tasmania stumped
The Canberra administration has put the bite on the Tasmanian State government, to protect 360,000 hectares of tall forests from clearfelling.
The 300 foot high gum trees on the south west of the island are among the last such reserves in the world; many are 200-300 years old.
The area also has a range of fragile eco-systems and rare plants including button grass, alpine meadow and snow gum.
The Government's investigation found that a third of the timber harvested nearby had been wasted, burnt on site or left to rot.
This conservation success, however, is qualified.
The finding protects only half the area's tall forests.
And there is no guarantee the Tasmanian Government will comply with Canberra's wishes.
Their record on ecological concern to date has been appalling.
UNITED NATIONS
US parsimony
Relations between the US and the United Nations have soured since the rise of the New Right on Capitol Hill.
The advent of the Reagan administration, and its alliance with the powerful pro-Israeli lobby has been bad news for the UN agencies.
Since 1985 the US has been withholding a portion of its annual dues as a way of policing the UN.
Anti-imperialist, anti-Zionist rhetoric from the podium, or a hint of criticism of the actions of multinational corporations in the Third World could provoke a further tightening of the screw.
At the moment the US owes over $467 million in back dues and $70 million in peacekeeping assessments.
The debt endangers the success of Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar's diplomatic initiatives to end the Iran-Iraq war.
Plans to send 350 troops to observe the cease-fire are threatened because there just isn't the money to pay for them.
CHINA
Moonlighting army
Soldiers have long been described in Chinese history as economic leeches and political predators.
Esteem for the scholar is matched by disrespect for the general.
‘You don't use good iron to make nails, and you don't use good men to make soldiers,’ goes a popular saying.
Now cuts in defence spending — from 17.5% of the national budget in 1979 to 8.2% this year — has pushed the military into commercial ventures to supplement their allocations.
Double-digit inflation has also pushed down the average soldier's standard of living.
The People's Liberation Army was told at the National People's Congress in March to meet its financial needs by making a profit out of business operations…it sounds close to privatising the armed forces.
The result?
Units have encouraged commercial activities, with individuals keeping a share of the profits and being exempt from square-bashing, sentry-duty etc.
Ventures have included flying tourists in transport aircraft.
The navy's ships have even engaged in smuggling in cars and other electronic trinkets from Japan.
URBANIZATION
Superbarrio to the rescue
Three rockets explode in Mexico City, the signal that a family is about to be evicted.
The police are standing by.
Neighbours arrive to talk to officialdom; they voice strong opposition but are careful not to provoke trouble.
Behind the solidarity is Superbarrio.
In red stockings, a long yellow cape and a face mask he looks a Latin American version of Superman.
In fact he is the symbol of the Mexicans'long struggle for decent housing in the world's biggest city.
The real identity of Superbarrio is known only to a few.
But his background is evident.
Wearing the uniform of the wrestling ring, where masked men representing the forces of good fight others representing evil, Superbarrio has found other pursuits more of a challenge.
Since June 1987 he has been found representing working people's rights to employment, water, light, drainage and decent accommodation.
Today he talks to police, leads protest demonstrations, confronts Government deputies.
Behind the gaudy clothes Superbarrio embodies the revival of popular organizations, and the realisation of the power of a people united.
ARMAMENTS
Exports of death
In July news was leaked of Britain's biggest ever arms deal, possibly the biggest export deal the country has ever had.
Worth at least £10 billion ($16.5 billion), the equipment to be sold to Saudi Arabia includes:
About 50 Tornado aircraft, both the attack and defence versions.
Tornado is produced by a holding company Panavia, in turn owned by British Aerospace (42.5%) together with the West German Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm (42.5%) and Aeritalia of Italy (15%).
Fifty Hawk aircraft from BAe.
Ninety helicopters from Westland.
Six minesweepers to be built by Vosper Thorneycroft at Southampton.
The building of two airbases by BAe's recently acquired subsidiary, the Dutch construction firm Ballast Nedem.
Training and other support facilities.
All this comes on top of the five billion pounds (eight billion dollars) Saudi deal for Tornadoes in 1985.
A major incentive to buy British rather than American was the reluctance of the US Congress to approve sales of advanced military equipment to Middle Eastern countries.
Lobbying by pro-Israeli support groups was blocking this.
The Saudis want all this equipment because they feel threatened from both sides — by Iran and by Israel.
Worried that they might have been dragged into the tanker war in the Gulf, they bought intermediate-range missiles from China in May.
China had, of course, supplied the same missiles to Iran.
Talk of a pre-emptive Israeli strike against the missiles meant the Saudis felt they needed stronger air defences to guard the missiles…and so the British arms sellers moved in.
As for the human rights record of Saudi Arabia, Amnesty reports the detention of political prisoners for long periods without trial — eleven have been incarcerated since 1979.
The kingdom also uses the amputation of limbs as a punishment, imposes the death penalty, and has frequently been accused of torturing prisoners.
All this is on top of it's infamous repression of half the country's population — the women.
Whitehall is unmoved by all this; human rights violations are forgotten when perpetrated by a pro-Western government with ready cash.
PHILIPPINES
Lowest of the low
Among the countries of South East Asia, a recent World Bank report regards the Philippines as having the highest level of poverty and the lowest calory supply per head.
Even if the economy kept growing by six per cent a year until 2000 AD, real wages would fall three per cent from current levels.
The confidential report, The Philippine Poor: What is to be Done says about 30 million Filipinos, out of the country's 56 million population live in ‘absolute poverty, in the sense of having an income that did not enable them the satisfy basic needs’.
Poverty is worst in the countryside, particularly because of the inequalities in land ownership.
More than half the small peasant farms are squeezed onto just 16 per cent of the land.
Burkina Faso
At first sight Burkina Faso — the ‘Land of the Incorruptible’— would not appear to have enough wealth to make corruption possible.
Much of its countryside is fighting a losing battle against the southward march of the Sahara while its capital, Ouagadougou, is a pleasant, overgrown village without a trace of gloss.
Under French rule, what was then Upper Volta was used as a labour reservoir for those parts of the Empire more blessed with natural resources — and even today about 1.5 million Burkinabe have to find work in neighbouring countries.
Nominal independence in 1960 brought a succession of inept, mostly military governments.
Drought in the 1970s and again in 1983 brought four-wheel-drive Toyotas emblazoned with aid-agency logos but aid failed to alleviate the chronic poverty faced by the peasants who make up 90 per cent of the population.
In 1983 a group of leftist army officers led by Thomas Sankara seized power.
Committees for the Defence of the Revolution were set up in villages and workplaces to mobilize local support.
The power of traditional chiefs was curbed and for the first time women and young people were drawn into the political process.
The ruling National Revolutionary Council (NRC) started to develop a more self-sufficient economy.
Rejecting overtures from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the NRC began to revitalize the agricultural base by guaranteeing prices of basic food crops and promoting the use of local textiles.
Intrusive Coca-Cola culture was confronted by using African dance, music, film and popular theatre to raise awareness of key issues.
The country was buoyant with a new self-confidence: health posts were set up and a vaccination campaign immunized 2.5 million children.
Improved farming and soil conservation were promoted under the slogan of a ‘Green Burkina’.
An innovative renewal programme gave the urban poor legal protection, provided basic amenities and encouraged self-help work.
Women were given rights to property, credit facilities and access to literacy programmes.
Sankara took his idealism seriously.
Reckoned the world's poorest president, his most valuable possessions were a car, a refrigerator and four bicycles.
But in 1987 tensions surfaced between Sankara, who wanted to divert resources to the rural sector, and Captain Blaise Compaor, who represented the relatively privileged government employees and trade unions.
The split led to Sankara's assassination in October 1987.
Since then the country has been plunged into uncertainty as Compaor struggles to consolidate his power and turn back the clock.
The military have resumed their parasitic role, the basic-needs development strategy has been jettisoned, foreign investment encouraged and the IMF has stepped in.
A heavily armed convoy signals Compaor's passage around the capital, Ouagadougou.
An air of fear has replaced the sense of purpose which marked the Sankara years.
Where has all the conscience gone?
India's young idealists of the early Seventies gave up bright futures to work with the poorest.
Mari Marcel Thekaekara was one of them — she finds the ‘development professionals’ of the Eighties with their five-star expense accounts decidedly difficult to take.
I came of age in the early 1970s.
A Calcuttan.
Schoolgirl dreams evaporated as we witnessed the Bangladesh war.
Genocide.
Then millions of refugees flooding the city.
Final examinations bombed by a Naxalite raid.
Gurudev and Gandhiji on the floor in smithereens.
The Pope and Kennedy too.
I was horrified at 15.
University was a diet of John Donne, Beowulf, Chaucer, cultural festivals, Rabindra Sangeet, Ravi Shankar, Indian classical dance, ballet, Carole King, Joan Baez, Pink Floyd, the Stones.
Scripture — all of it, the Bible, Qu'ran and Gita.
Conversations screamed around cricket and politics.
The Marxists had won.
Student power, Danny the Red, Tariq Ali, debates on the irrelevance of the education system.
Then Catholic Action geared its guns: contemporary Christmas — Christ born in a five-foot diameter sewage pipe, birthplace of countless Calcutta babies.
‘Know India’ project at 18.
New statistics hurled at us: 70 per cent of our fellow citizens live below the poverty line.
Translated this means illiteracy, homelessness, hunger, deprivation and death.
God didn't will this.
Men did.
Landlords and multinationals.
Christ, why ME, Father Beckers?!
Study groups and analysis.
Group dynamics and leadership training.
Capitalism and colonialism and neo-colonialism.
Sartre and Camus and Kafka.
Jonathan Livingston Seagull, The Little Prince, Hope for the Flowers5.
If you don't devour all of them, you're illiterate.
The Russian model, the Chinese Revolution, Paulo Freire — none of them will do.
Evolve the Indian alternative.
We were the Seventies people.
And the network spread.
All over the country there were activists, community organizers, doctors, health workers, journalists, lawyers.
People in villages.
People in the mines.
People in trade unions.
People who were infused with a fervour which drove them on.
They were determined to change the world.
And unbelievably, they were convinced they could do it.
Many were from middle-class city backgrounds.
Scorning the establishment, they left homes and heartbroken parents.
They shed jeans and cut hair to become part of the proletariat.
They changed names and language to identify with the people.
They lived in mud houses without electricity or water, revelling in the glory of the mission.
Nothing was too difficult, no sacrifice too great.
The cause was everything.
They marched on, goaded by a fanaticism which made everything possible, a manic gleam in the eye.
They fought for land rights and minimum wages.
They held legal aid classes and conducted adult education schools.
They led processions and demonstrations, delivered babies, saved lives.
Many of them died triumphantly.
In jails, at the hands of landlords, vested interests, police, during the Emergency.
They sang ‘We Shall Overcome’ with faith in the words, convinced that the kingdom was at hand.
Many of them got burnt out.
The loneliness, the below-the-poverty-line lifestyles.
Identification with the masses brought them the people's problems — tuberculosis, malnutrition, diarrhoea and dehydration.
Emotional problems, breakdowns — the deprivation and hardship took their toll.
Many were forced to opt out.
These were the Seventies people.
The establishment thought they were crazy, quixotic, unrealistic, even ridiculous.
Then came the Eighties.
The Seventies people who survived were now thirtysomething.
A decade and a half with its blend of idealism, fanaticism, commitment and fervour now churned out kids and families.
A 20-year-old crusader who could live on rice, salt and chillies once a day had to decide whether she could foist that option on her kids.
Can I opt for tuberculosis for my five-year-old daughter, even supposing my husband and I include the possibility in our life options?
Those who decided they couldn't afford children struggled on.
The others reorganized their lives.
They became part of the development game.
Commitment and dedication remained, but tilting at windmills had to stop.
So radicalism had to be watered down.
Lifestyles remained simple but identification with the masses was impossible if kids had to get a decent education.
My own life is contorted with conflicting ideas, plans and decisions.
My children's cousins are in the US or the UK with the best education facilities open to them.
Ideology and all, can I cripple my five-year-old's creativity at the appalling government school because I opted to work in a backward area?
Even if I fight to improve the school (the battle began two years ago but victory is nowhere on the horizon) my child is a child for 10 years more.
Can I risk having her curse me 10 years hence because my ideology ruined her education?
Therefore I compromise and send her to Calcutta with her grandmother and suffer pangs of guilt both for packing her off and for conforming to my elitist background.
Compromises and all, the Seventies network stands.
But along the way most activists realized the futility of trying to struggle with no funds and impossible odds.
At this point funding agencies too were staffed by people with commitment and genuine concern for development problems.
This was reflected in the relatively low salaries and simple lifestyles of their staff.
But in the Eighties the picture changed completely.
Audited accounts were demanded by the Government, and funding agencies demanded a more efficient accounting for development money.
Thus was ushered in the era of management in the development game.
Accusations began to be levelled at the Sixties and Seventies people.
They were well-meaning and full of idealism, but inefficient and unprofessional.
Therefore professional ‘management’ people began to appear in funding agencies.
It is true that planning, professionalism and efficiency were needed.
After all, why should anyone balk at accounting for public money publicly?
And setting targets and measuring sticks to evaluate projects would definitely increase efficiency if done properly.
However an alarming argument which crept in, and seems here to stay, was that the ‘cream’(so called) in terms of personnel was going to private industry.
Since development is far more important, it was argued, we should attract the cream to ourselves by offering competitive and lucrative wages.
And this is where the crunch comes.
Development now offers proper ‘management’ salaries to its staff without the attendant rat-race problems.
So scores of yuppies are being drawn into the development game.
Corporate yuppie culture is oozing insidiously into the development world and the old order is slowly and inexorably crumbling.
But development is not industry.
There are no profits.
We're dealing with people, not commodities.
And when management ‘perks’ include business as usual at five-star restaurants on expense accounts, who's paying?
Does the little old lady, the widow, the pensioner, the schoolgirl know that her precious pound is going into a ‘management’ meal at a five-star restaurant, the inside of which she herself could never afford in her wildest dreams?
It doesn't just look bad.
It STINKS!
How does anyone justify such expenditure?
Where has all the conscience gone?
The second terrifying thing about the Eighties is that it's the age of the professional.
Right now the development game is ‘in’ and everyone's jumping on the bandwagon.
Together with ‘efficiency’ and good management principles has come the crying need for experts to take charge of every field.
Doctors, lawyers, media people, architects, educators — in every field the experts are crucial if there is to be professionalism.
Agreed.
But at what price?
Theirs?
I was shocked to hear that ‘professionals’ called in as consultants were being paid 200 rupees ($12) a day plus travel and expenses.
The average government teacher is paid 200 rupees a month, without expenses.
Nobody thinks there's anything warped or convoluted about the arrangement.
But I do.
The committed ones will continue to come.
We've carried the game pretty well until now.
But the development world has to stop trying to buy people.
We don't need to compete with industry.
Throughout the ages people have answered the call.
Let the yuppies go.
And make room for real people.
Mari Marcel Thekaekare has been working for the last seven years on a project she and her husband started, working with tribal people in the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
INFORMAL COLOMBIAN
Miguel: pimp, thief, drug-dealer, drummer and bottlebuyer in Cali.
When I was six my mother died and my father went away to live with another woman.
I left school and fell in with some gamines (street urchins).
We would would go out with catapults and shoot chickens — pow — and sell them to restaurants.
We would shoplift and sell the stuff to fences in the Zona Negra.
I began to go around following a teenage girl known as Crazy Eneas.
Eneas was bad-tempered, carried a knife and acted like a man.
When she realized I was a good thief and knew how to use a knife, she got to like me.
By the time I was eight-years-old I was going around with a prostitute.
Occasionally I earned an honest living.
I sold newspapers for a bit.
Then cakes and sweets for a woman.
She would pay me 10 per cent commission for everything I sold.
The main honest job I had during my teens was as a drummer for a piano player who worked various bars and dance halls around the Zona Negra.
Then, after a spell in prison, I took charge of a lodging house called La America.
The owner had known me for a long time and asked me if I could run a brothel.
I said,’ yes’.
He didn't care how the place was run.
He just came for the money every day.
All I took was the three pesos for the room.
I didn't charge the prostitutes anything.
I kept the rooms clean and made sure that no-one robbed or attacked the clients.
To make more money I sold marijuana.
It was good business.
I used to buy a half a pound for 400 pesos and make thousands of papelitas to sell at 50 centavos.
Then one day a man shot one of the prostitutes, Rosita.
She had no family so I arranged the funeral.
I paid 100 pesos for them to tidy her up and put her in a 900 peso coffin on which I paid a 200 peso deposit.
Then I arranged a wake and everyone who came to the wake contributed.
I rented a car and two buses for the funeral.
Anyway, in the end I made 1,800 pesos on the funeral.
Rosita was a bit old but she kept her body in good condition and the men liked her the best.
She would sometimes do 20 in one day.
When I met Socorro everything changed.
I used to be wild but she reformed me.
I left the lodging house and started work as a bottle-buyer.
We have lived together for 11 years now and she washes bottles in the store where I sell mine.
AN URGENT MESSAGE FROM NI TO ITS READERS
ARE YOU BACKING A RETURN TO THE KILLING FIELDS?
In the 1970s more than one million Cambodians died at the hands of Pol Pot of the Khmer Rouge.
Now Pol Pot is poised to return to power.
You would expect the governments of most democratic countries to be horrified by this prospect; but no.
Most Western government's are actually helping Pol Pot by giving diplomatic support to the Khmer Rouge at the United Nations.
That is not all.
The United Nations feeds Khmer Rouge soldiers.
And the British SAS has helped to train Khmer Rouge allies.
What is going on?
Ask the question!
And demand change!
What is your country doing to prevent Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge returning to power?
Don't be fobbed off by meaningless answers from politicians.
If you do not get a satisfactory answer ask and ask again until you do.
Or you can contact Oxfam UK (274 Banbury Road, Oxford, OX2 7DZ) and get their Cambodia Information Pack which will give you background on the situation and advice on what questions to ask evasive politicians.
Persist!
The fate of seven million Cambodians is at stake.
They have a right to survive.
If your government is supporting murderers you have the right to know why.
Write to the following:
Your MP (TD/Congressperson/Senator)
Your Prime Minister/President
Your Foreign Minister
Send a copy to the relevant opposition leader.
Now!
Your letter could save lives.
The taste of salvation
Sugar was the revenge of the slaves, ravaging the health of the West.
But the deadly diet of the rich is now being exported to the Third World.
Geoffrey Cannon explains how you can save the planet by saving yourself.
Until the middle of the nineteenth century, the Highland Scots were the tallest and heaviest of the European peoples.
The average height of a man was six feet, while seven-foot giants were by no means uncommon.
Of 600 crofters evicted from Glen Tilt at the end of the eighteenth century, not one was less than six feet in height or measured less than 17 inches around the calf.
People remained active long after their eightieth year, and ages of over a hundred were common.
The staple diet of the Highlanders at this time was oatmeal porridge, cakes made from barley or stoneground oat-flour, vegetables, milk, butter, eggs and cheese with occasional fish, beef, venison, wild fruits, honey and the famous Scottish soups.
But things have changed.
Today the rates of premature death are higher in Scotland and Northern Ireland than in any other Western country.
What has happened?
Dr Walter Yellowlees has spent much of his life working in the Scottish county of Perthshire, where he has daily encountered diseases related to poor nutrition such as diabetes, coronary heart disease, high blood pressure and above all cancer.
‘When visiting patients at mealtimes,’ he says, ‘I have been repeatedly appalled at what was on the family table: things like tinned vegetables, white bread, biscuits, sweet drinks, and, in place of porridge, the ubiquitous sweetened breakfast cereals.’
His observations reinforce the findings of the Royal College of Physicians — that whole fresh food is healthy and highly processed food is not.
Their report concludes that people should be ‘enabled and encouraged to eat foods which are closer to the natural grain, vegetable or fruit than the highly processed and refined products which now form a large part of our food.’
Dr Yellowlees goes further.
He explains Scotland's dietary changes in terms of the Highland Clearances which destroyed the peasantry.
Small industries were destroyed and people driven to the cities where they were forced to switch from home-grown food to imported processed food.
In England too, industrialization meant that peasants became the first working class and were alienated from the earth and its fruits.
They were subsisted on primitive versions of the ‘store food’ that wrecks the health of the dispossessed urban poor all over the world today: white bread and flour, white sugar and fat, some salted meat or fish, pitifully little fresh food.
Sugar was one of the most destructive elements of the new diet.
The British sweet tooth was cultivated by sugar traders who formed the third side of the triangular slave trade: British cotton goods were exported to Africa, African slaves to the West Indies and West Indian sugar to Britain.
Rotten teeth and all other sugar-related diseases are like a revenge of the slaves.
Today Britain is notorious as the country with the worst food in the world — and therefore the worst record of suffering and premature death from non-infectious diseases.
It shares this reputation with countries that were once British colonies and which massacred native peoples who had lived in harmony with nature: Canada, the US, Australia and Aotearoa/New Zealand.
The British swept aside traditional food-and-agriculture systems in all the countries they ruled, replacing them with food-store and cash-cropping.
And the destruction continues even now as Third World countries are devastated by the highly processed, chemicalized food and agriculture exported to them by the West.
‘Now that we know British food is just about the worst in the world,’ says Jonathon Porritt, director of Friends of the Earth UK, ‘how ironic it is that we and other rich nations are exporting fat and sugar to starving people in Africa and Asia.
Early colonists ravaged native populations with syphilis and typhoid.
Now it's heart disease and cancers.’
This is done not only in the name of trade but also of aid.
Nutritionists from the London School of Hygiene report that refugees in Africa are dying in their thousands from vitamin-deficiency diseases caused by the sugary, fatty food supplied by aid agencies.
Sri Lanka is a good example of this dietary imperialism.
Its national policy has opened the door to the West: and that means Western food.
Advertisements reflect this fad.
‘Write in your own handwriting ‘I'm a Vegemite Kid’,’ reads one.
Village hoardings are covered with adverts for Astra margarine — a product made of saturated fat so hard that it stays solid even in tropical heat.
In the supermarkets of Colombo and Kandy, Puffa-Puffa-rice breakfast cereal is on sale for the equivalent of three dollars a packet.
Hoardings for Nespray — the Nestlé dried milk — are everywhere.
And fly-posters promote a ‘Build a Motor Bike Contest with Coca-Cola’.
Not everyone in Sri Lanka is deceived.
‘What has happened to mankind (sic)?’ asks a doctor in a Daily News article, side-by-side with the ads for Lemon Puffs, Orange Crush and Lakspray.
‘Cardiovascular and coronary heart diseases are a major public-health problem,’ he writes.
‘The diet should not have excessive calories and saturated fats.’
Sri Lanka would never have such problems if the country relied on its own resources — if it cultivated appreciation of native food and agricultural systems which have evolved over centuries to meet the population's needs.
People in the Sri Lankan countryside have got the right idea.
By the bus-stop outside the baby-elephant orphanage at the Udawattakelle Forest Reserve, a little roadside shop sports a massive Coca-Cola sign.
‘That's for tourists,’ commented the owner, handing me a king coconut.
He slashed the top off.
‘No chemicals,’ he said.
‘Natural.’
Our problem in the West is that we have forgotten where food comes from, and therefore we ignore its real value.
But food and agriculture are the original environmental issues.
It is a law of nature that when food and agriculture become business commodities, the health, the culture and the very identity of that nation will eventually be destroyed.
This has happened all over the Western world and we must now start to pick up the pieces.
As Jonathon Porritt says: ‘Our environment starts with ourselves, and with our own wholeness and health.
We can begin to clean up our act by eating whole, fresh food and by working for a high-quality, environmentally benign food supply’.
Healthy eaters look for food which has good nutritional quality.
Green eaters go further, buying food with good environmental quality as well.
For example, most people buy free-range eggs not only for the extra taste and nourishment, but also because they approve of the conditions in which the hens are kept.
Refusing to buy Outspan oranges from South Africa is making another sort of green choice.
In the 1980s, what came out of the mouths of environmentalists was mostly green; what went in, was often junk.
In the 1990s, thinking and talking green means acting, and therefore eating green.
Saving the planet and saving yourself are indivisible.
It is no accident that the words ‘health’, ‘whole’, ‘healing’ and even ‘holy’all derive from the same root.
Geoffrey Cannon is secretary of the British Guild of Food Writers and author of The Politics of Food.
He wishes to make contact with anybody in the world who is concerned to protect the quality of indigenous food and agriculture systems.
Please write to him at 6 Aldridge Road Villas, London W11 1BP.
1 ‘The Highland Problem’ by Ronald Taylor, in Mother Earth,(UK Soil Association, Summer 1948).
2 ‘On the state of the public ill-health: premature mortality in the UK and Europe,’ by J Catford and S Ford, in British Medical Journal, 1984. 3 Jonathon Porritt, director of Friends of the Earth UK, at the Royal Society of Arts' Caroline Walker Lecture, October 1989.
What you can do
Buy fresh produce.
Organically grown fresh fruit and vegetables are better for you and the environment.
Choose wholegrains
.
Wholemeal cereals, bread, pasta and rice are rich sources of fibre, carbohydrate, B vitamins and protein.
Avoid unethically produced food.
And tell shopkeepers why.
Eat simply.
As a general rule, the fewer ingredients in your food, the better it is for you.
Cases in point
One of the most interesting features of Aborigine languages, is their use of suffixes.
Take, for example, the sentence:
Maribai ingga lungu
The woman goes away
This could be turned into the future by add the suffix -mi.
Maribai ingga-mi lungu
The woman will go away
But suffixes can also be added to nouns.
If you consider ideas like killing or biting, for example, Kalkadoon uses a suffix -tu to indicate who is carrying out the action — in grammatical terms to mark the ‘subject’ of the transitive verb.
Thus:
Kalpin-tu la-mi tuar
The man will kill the snake
Tuar-tu ija-mi kalpin
The snake will bite the man
The word order in these Kalkadoon sentences is the same as in English, but it does not have to be.
If in English you reverse the positions of man and snake you change the meaning.
But in Kalkadoon the -tu suffix will show who is doing the killing or the biting so there is not need to put the words in any particular order.
It might be varied for emphasis, to express a different point of view, or for stylistic effect.
This is similar to European languages like the Latin (also dead) and Russian.
Indeed, like Latin, Kalkadoon had a set of ‘case’ suffixes including:
-ku ‘for’
-bia ‘at’, ‘on’, ‘in’
-biangu ‘from’
But Kalkadoon also has one remarkable feature not well developed in European languages and that is the ability to shuffle words from one case to another to indicate various subtle semantic differences.
Consider the following sentences:
Kalpin yuu-mi yarraman-bia
The man will climb on the horse
Kalpin-tu yuu-ndi-mi yarraman
The man will ride the horse
The first uses the locative case suffix -bia to signal ‘on’.
But in the second the word ‘ride’ suggests that the man is doing something to the horse.
So the -tu suffix is added to the man.
But yarraman also loses its suffix and the verb yuu now gains the suffix -ndi to indicate that yarraman is still a location (the man is still on the horse).
This is an ingenious way of combining two ideas, the idea of the horse being affected and the idea of the horse being a location.
Kalkadoon is certainly not a primitive language without much grammar.
However the ingenuity of the language does not stop there.
If we want to indicate that the man is not going to ride a specific horse but any horse or horses in general, then we can move yarraman into the dative case which is marked by the suffix ku.
And once again we have to add another suffix -yi to the verb to indicate the switch.
Kalpin yuu-ndi-yi-mi yarraman-ku
The man will ride horses.
This is still a fairly simple example, even though there are now three suffixes on the verb.
It is also possible to add various other kinds of suffix to indicate notions such as completed activity, ongoing activity, habitual activity or possible activity.
It is not possible even to outline here the workings of the language.
But this should at least hint at the complexity of a system of intricate, well-ordered ingenuity.
The apple, the madman and a very clever pig
Knowledge could prove a useful ally in the battle between Good and Evil — but only if it falls into the right hands.
A fruity tale by Robert Woods.
Well, regarding this business of Buffy and the apple, you know — the pig doesn't come into it until the end.
Buffy was a young man at the time, just setting out on the journey of life, if you know what I mean.
He'd finished school and was trying to decide between art college to become a painter and university to be a poet; his family wanted him to train for accountancy but he wasn't having any of that.
Good friends we were, Buffy and I, all through school, even though he was much the cleverer.
That was before he saw the apple.
We both saw it, actually.
More and more fruits they seemed to be importing in those days, all colours.
Purples and reds and deep shining oranges, and yellows straight out of Gauguin.
They were gleaming under a stripy awning outside the greengrocer's, from all sorts of exotic places: a piled cornucopia of temptation on the lovely dark green artificial grass.
I remember years ago, when apples, bananas and oranges were the only fruit you could buy.
Dates were for Christmas, anything more unusual like melon was immoral and Kiwi-fruit hadn't been invented.
But on that day there was a new variety of fruit, a single example, perched on top of the pile.
It was Buffy, the curious one, who asked whether it was an apple.
The greengrocer was large, round and taciturn with a white apron wrapped completely around his waist like a sheet which brushed the floor.
‘In a manner of speaking, I suppose,’ he said, ‘It's the apple.’
You couldn't describe its colour, except that there seemed to be depths within it, and depths within depths.
I was all for passing by on the other side of the road, but Buffy wouldn't let it drop.
‘The apple that grew in the Garden of Eden.
The Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.’
The greengrocer seemed unperturbed by the import of what he was saying.
He might have been discussing bananas.
Buffy laughed.
‘The publicity schemes they do think up,’ he said.
‘No, sir.
Not an advertising slogan.
No more than the truth.’
‘You mean they've identified the species of tree — some evolutionary left-over from pre-history which they are propagating?’
‘No, sir.’
The greengrocer spoke with exaggerated patience as though explaining something to a backward child.
‘That's not how the knowledge of Good and Evil spreads.’
Buffy picked the apple from the pile and shuddered.
‘Ugh, it's been bitten.’
Scars of flesh showed pale against the skin.
‘Course it has.
Twice.
Once by Eve, once by Adam.’
‘Don't be silly, it would have rotted if it was that ancient.’
‘The fruit of the Tree of Knowledge?
God's special fruit go bad?’
The greengrocer looked mildly reproving; he didn't seem to mind being called silly, or that the quality of his goods was being impugned.
I don't think I have ever met a more phlegmatic man.
‘What would happen if I ate it?’ asked Buffy.
‘You would acquire knowledge of good and evil I should imagine, sir.’
‘Don't I know about that already?’
‘A young gentleman of your tender years, sir?
I should hope not indeed.’
He sounded respectably shocked, like a deferential old-school valet.
I don't think Buffy had been called ‘sir’ in a shop for a long time, let alone‘young gentleman’.
‘I don't believe it would have any effect at all,’ said Buffy.
‘Well, sir, I wouldn't advise feeding this little fruit to a nudist colony.’
‘Why not?’
‘They might cover themselves up, sir.
‘And they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.’
Genesis three verse seven.’
Buffy looked puzzled.
‘Just my little joke, sir,’ said the greengrocer, although he didn't look like a man who made jokes.
‘All right, tell me what things I might learn.’
‘You would see into the hearts of men, I should think, sir.
See the true motives for their actions.’
‘That wouldn't worry me.
No-one nowadays believes in goodness ruling the world.’
‘If you say so, sir.’
‘Though of course you'd see all the unexpected good motives as well.
You might get some pleasant surprises,’ said Buffy.
‘You might, sir.
You would certainly get, shall we say, a different perspective on things.’
‘I don't think it would be terrifically interesting.’
‘Oh, I think I could promise you it would be that.’
There was a pause.
Buffy was waiting.
‘Well, go on.
What else would I know?’
‘I should imagine, sir, Consequences,’ said the greengrocer.
‘Wouldn't you think so, sir?’ he added, turning to me.
Well, I tried to turn it into a joke — not a very good one, I admit — but I said something about that party game called consequences, you know where everyone writes down innocent things that get strung together because nobody knows what the others have written and it gets all mixed up so you get a silly story with a stupid ending.
It was my sole contribution to the conversation.
They both ignored me.
‘I mean, sir, you might see all the things that a perfectly innocent, well-meaning act could lead to.
Like, say, crossing the road.
I dare say someone could cross a road with the best of intentions — to help an old lady perhaps, or to look at a fruit-shop — then slip on a banana-skin and cause a perfectly horrible accident.
You'd see all that in advance.’
‘You'd see into the future you mean?’
‘Quite so.’
‘You could change the world.’
‘If you think knowledge can change the world, sir.’
‘Oh yes, it can certainly do that.’
‘I'm willing to believe you.’
‘It is tempting.’
‘To some no doubt, sir’.
‘You're not Satan, are you?’
‘No, sir,’ said the greengrocer gravely.
‘But I would say that, wouldn't I, even if I were?’
He made a question of it, and Buffy laughed.
And I will say this for the greengrocer, he never at any time tried to pressurize Buffy into buying the apple.
He even seemed reluctant to allow him.
It was Buffy pushing all along the line.
‘You'd know everything if you ate that, wouldn't you,’ said Buffy.
‘Yes.’
‘How much is it?’
‘Oh you can't buy knowledge, sir.
And I couldn't sell it to you — not for my life, I couldn't.’
I dragged him away after that.
I couldn't see why the man kept it in the shop if it wasn't for sale.
But there was one odd thing, I remember.
The shop floor had sawdust on it to absorb the dirt and bits of squashed fruit.
There were footprints in the sawdust; and it seems to me, looking back, that some were oddly shaped.
Like an animal's, if you like, a sheep or a goat's cloven hooves.
But it's only an impression and I can't be sure.
It couldn't really have been like that.
Although you couldn't see the greengrocer's feet because of the apron.
The High Street Fire happened that night.
There is a precinct there now — you can't tell where the High Street was, let alone the shop.
I watched the fire on the TV news with Evie.
The three of us had been going to spend the evening together but Buffy had slipped off.
I couldn't say where he spent that evening, not for certain.
One thing is for sure though: Buffy changed after that.
He broke with Evie for a start.
When I asked why, he said he had seen through her, though she always seemed like a nice girl to me.
I dated her myself, as a matter of fact — well, actually, we're married now.
We'd had the odd fling even while she was supposed to be engaged to him — the night of the fire was when we started it.
At the time I didn't think he suspected, I'm not so sure now.
He said and says nothing, just that I'll find out some day but by then it'll be too late.
And he gives me a look of a kind that I don't altogether like.
Oh, and he signed up for accountancy of course.
He said he understood quite enough of life already and there was nothing more he could learn by painting it.
We used to have fun, Buffy and me.
That stopped suddenly.
He couldn't bear crowds, he said — all that humanity together.
And he started to cry.
I told him he should be able to see the good in people as well as the evil, so he ought to be happier.
But he muttered something about proportions and how the odds were stacked.
I still visit him occasionally.
Evie doesn't come — she says he makes her uneasy.
It is understandable.
They are quite kind to him in the asylum but of course a strait-jacket can't be that comfortable.
And they daren't let him out.
Not since they found the top half of the greengrocer.
They never did find the bottom half.
After all that time the greengrocer's hand was still clutching the fruit and it hadn't decayed — the apple, I mean; the greengrocer's torso was quite rotten.
The apple had three bites out of it.
Of course the police didn't know what it was: they threw it in the pig-bin.
We have long talks together, Buffy and I. Sometimes in his ravings he talks of an all-knowing, super-intelligent pig.
He says it ended up as bacon just the same.
Robert Woods is still a left-wing sleeper working undercover for a right-wing UK newspaper.
Hand to mouth
Next time you bite into a Chilean apple, spare a thought for the person who picked it.
Holly Johnson and Laura Clarke report.
Darkness envelops the village of San Jos de Penuelas in Chile's central fruit-growing region beneath the Cordillera.
Only candlelight and the murmur of voices indicate that life exists inside the shadowy shacks.
The apple-picking season ended in April but the pickers remain because they have no money to leave and there is no work anyway.
Tonight the labourers have gathered at a friend's house to discuss whether the new government will resolve their biggest problems like the lack of decent housing, running water and electricity.
A union organizer has travelled from Santiago to explain how the new union, El Libertador, is co-ordinating a plan to enable seasonal workers to qualify for government-subsidized housing.
The apple pickers or temporeros desperately need the union's help.
This year they earned only $3.50 a day during the harvest.
And that only lasted from mid-February to late April.
Some labourers had jobs for about a month beforehand when the trees were thinned and again in May when pruning started.
But this was such specialized work that only a lucky few got it, none of them women.
After apple-picking some temporeros pack tobacco but this is small-scale work lasting just two or three weeks.
As always, this winter most labourers will live a hand-to-mouth existence until the grapes are ready for thinning in late August.
After that they will pick summer fruit until next winter grinds around.
Picking apples is hard work.
The men climb ladders to reach the most inaccessible fruit while the women collect apples in hessian sacks which they heave down the field slung over their backs.
Teams of ten people work in rows, each under the scrutiny of a team-boss who determines the pace of picking.
The days are relentlessly hot and long, and the temporeros are hungry most of the time.
They report to work at 8.30am on an empty stomach.
No lunch is provided and it does not take long to eat what little they bring — a bit of salad, some bread and maybe a hard-boiled egg.
After the long day finishes, most pickers labour an extra hour to earn a rest on Saturday afternoon.
Sunday is paid overtime but few can afford to take time off.
Seasonal work is so uncertain that the pickers are forced to work whatever the conditions just to make a few extra pesos.
The lack of organization among temporeros is integral to the country's busy fruit production and export business.
Only about 10 per cent of the Chile's estimated 400,000 temporeros belong to any kind of union.
And the slick export companies and landowners are anxious to keep it that way in order to retain total flexibility in hiring, firing and wage levels.
There is no legal mechanism for collective bargaining by agricultural workers.
The re-emerging unions have pressed the newly inaugurated democratic government to modify its code of labour practices.
But it is unlikely that collective bargaining by farmworkers will be implemented since the Government has a minority in the Senate — with nine senators bequeathed by former president Pinochet.
Moreover many right-wing senators are landholders who will not be enthusiastic about altering the status quo.
Yet temporeros must organize if they are to improve their working and living conditions.
And this is beginning to happen.
In one area of the central fruit-growing region, north-east of Santiago, 600 seasonal workers have joined a new union set up to address the needs of the seasonal labourers and their families and to negotiate with employers.
Local and migrant labourers, supported by sociologists and the Catholic Church, run a social centre which houses 50 migrant labourers and offers communal lunches, child care for under-ten-year-olds, recreational activities, vocational training and preventative health care.
They also provide temporeros with off-season work.
The project serves as a model of organization for temporeros elsewhere.
And tonight, three hours south in San Jos de Penuelas, the seasonal labourers who are talking by candlelight around a table seem to be taking the first steps towards the same kind of self-determination.
Little emperors revisited
Sue Robson gives the myth of the Chinese spoilt brat a beating.
When we go to lunch in the little street round the corner the proprietors' three-year-old son rushes to meet us.
We are made to wait while he shows his new toys; a scarlet tricycle, a pull-along duck, a space-age gun playing the tunes of eight different police sirens when you pull the trigger.
The other customers in the restaurant ignore him.
If he starts playing with the keys attached to the back of their belts, they push him away.
Chinese parents and teachers complain that today's children are being spoilt.
Usually ‘only’ children, they are plied with expensive toys by an adoring circle of parents, grandparents, aunts and uncles.
‘Little emperors’, they are called.
‘If he wanted the stars in the sky,’ one parent told me, ‘you would try to get them for him.’
But to my Western eyes, children here are remarkably un-spoilt.
It is just that the rules are different.
Here, in China, people talk with horror of children playing games we happily permit in the West: teasing and even hitting an older relative, for example, to see them pretend pain and fear.
In my view this restaurant's three year old is a model of good behaviour: his tantrums are rare and only once did he complain about a lack of attention by peeing on the floor right between my feet and his mother's.
But China's children are expected to behave like little adults.
This requirement may have been part of our own history too.
Philip Aries' book Centuries of Childhood argues that in Europe's early history, children's lives were similar to those of adults.
That was before a new seventeenth-century protectiveness evolved special ways to treat kids.
In China today you only very occasionally hear someone using a baby voice or baby language when speaking to a child.
And a British teacher I knew used to point out to me the oddness of Chinese children's drawing styles compared with those of Western children.
While Western infants are quite happy to draw in ways that are characteristically ‘childish’ Chinese children rule careful lines and get quite frustrated in their attempts to produce pictures that do not look childish.
Chinese parents do, of course, shower love and attention on their children but it is always made quite clear that child's-play has to remain well within the limits of normal social behaviour.
The same control applies to adults in their treatment of children.
You hardly ever see a parent hit a child.
That would constitute too great a loss of face.
But when I inquired about this I was told: ‘they belt the kid later, in private’.
Indeed there have been several cases in the press recently of 10- or 11-year-olds being so severely beaten for under-achievement at school that they died.
A lot is expected of children here — and few allowances are made.
Another thing you rarely see is people crying — be they children or adults.
Tears are saved for very serious troubles.
So the adult response to a child's tears is more likely to be a brushing aside than an extension of sympathy.
On an acupuncture ward I watched a doctor insert long copper needles into the scalp of a one year old and saw the baby howl when every ten minutes the needles were twisted to stimulate the body energy.
The parents laughed, showed toys and jogged the baby up and down while wiping his tears.
Older children bore the pain in stoic silence.
And while Western influences may be partly responsible for some more flexible attitudes towards education, rote learning and recitation are still primary in Chinese schools.
‘Look’, a teacher may demonstrate, ‘this character is an ideogram for water — mountain — fire — up — down — middle’.
But to write the word themselves Chinese children — those spoilt and individualistic ‘little emperors’?— will practice writing individual strokes for hours on end until they can get this horizontal or that vertical line exactly right.
It is difficult to imagine the average Western school-child being so uncomplainingly diligent.
Trashing the past
Old skills are junked as China moves towards being a throwaway society.
Sue Robson ponders the loss in a changing land.
The vegetable market closes at dusk.
People hurry home with bits of meat loosely wrapped in squares of brown paper, leaving the ground littered with straw rope and abandoned baskets.
There is very little waste paper and no plastic, for foodstuffs are not pre-packaged here but sold from a farmer's barrow or the back of a bike.
A flimsy paper-bag costs as much as a Chinese pound of beansprouts.
But the hand-woven wicker baskets used to carry oranges, lotus root, carrots and green celery from the countryside are dismantled in the market place, usually to be flung into the river.
These beautifully crafted panniers would sell for high prices in the West, but hours of labour and generations of skill are treated casually here.
Everywhere in China sophisticated hand-made tools are used, and the Chinese assume that because anyone can make such things they have less value than, say, a plastic bag.
So a friend was embarrassed when I wanted to examine every object his family had made: the weathered pitchforks crafted from branching joints of trees; strong rope twisted from straw; bundles of sesame-seed stalks used as firewood after the seeds had been eaten; hand-woven winnowing baskets, and heavy clay pots for keeping water cool in hot summers.
There was even a deep cellar under the chicken run that served as the family's fridge.
Chinese family economies are generally more adaptable and ingenious than those of Western house-holds.
A woman who farms land all year can make straw rope, pots and pitchforks in slack periods; she can cook noodles for the local factory; she grows her own cotton to stitch into winter padded jackets; and — unlike most of her Western counterparts — can strip down and mend her bike.
The same ingenuity applies to farming methods.
The Chinese are expert at land use: they feed a quarter of the world's population on seven per cent of its arable land in a country littered with vast deserts and mountain tracts.
A single piece of land may have rice growing in water, fish farmed amongst the rice, and ducks swimming on top eating the parasites that prey on rice.
According to ancient ideas, the balance of yin and yang forces comprise an organic whole.
Hence Chinese farmers maintain a balance between different species — and generally without the use of heavy machinery or artificial fertilizers.
While understanding technology in the West is usually a specialist's job, in China everyone is expected to understand the principles behind homespun machinery.
The vendor at our market weighs the vegetables carefully in a hand-held scales.
He tells you the price per Chinese pound, and then merely points to the scales to show the weight.
Sometimes he calculates the price on an abacus and then indicates the total.
But if as a Westerner you cannot read the abacus, or the scales, it is bad luck, because the assumption is that everyone shares the skills that enable them to do this.
Another really good piece of basic, practical machinery whose workings are accessible to everyone, is the bicycle standing outside my front door.
Like all Chinese bikes, it is an all-purpose workhorse: so strong it will probably go on and on, until like most other bikes on the road its seat leather is worn right through and every part has been patched by street-corner bike repairers.
It bears little resemblance to bikes popular in the West, which was ruefully noted by the Shanghai Bicycle Factory recently.
They are now sacrificing the durability of their traditional line to manufacture a good-looking, light version aimed at an export market where people trade in bicycles regularly.
There are many other examples of the same thing.
It looks as if this non-specialized homespun world which requires so many skills from so many people, is about to change towards glossy factory-made consumerism.
Indeed, the government recently criticized those resourceful street-corner repair shops, where a spare part can be created with the most basic of equipment rather than ordered from a factory.
It is finally uneconomical to go on and on repairing the sturdy Liberation trucks, the government argued: far better to stimulate the economy by buying a glossy new vehicle, and throwing away the old.
Harmony in abundance
What do Buddhism, ducks and human excreta have in common?
Sue Robson discovers why China is the greenest country of them all.
In southern China, every bit of land is used not once but three times.
Rice grows in water.
Fish swim in the water amidst the rice.
Ducks paddle on the water, above the rice and fish.
Travelling around China I was continually amazed by the ingenuity with which the Chinese use and re-use every scrap of what we often dismiss as waste.
China has a fifth of the world's population, but only seven per cent of its arable land — mainly in the densely populated eastern strip.
Although the land mass is huge — stretching from Korea to Pakistan, the USSR to Vietnam — only a small proportion of the land can be farmed, which is why over centuries the Chinese have become experts at using scarce resources.
In a way they are the world's ultimate green consumers.
Take that paddy field, well stocked with fish, rice and ducks.
The Chinese produce an extremely high yield, largely without recourse to chemicals since these are too expensive for most people.
Instead, ducks catch pests before they attack the rice and their manure fertilizes the soil.
The central plains of China have been farmed continuously for thousands of years and you begin to wonder how they have stayed fertile.
In the city, the reason becomes obvious.
Waves of smell hit you as peasant women cycle past towing brown-encrusted oil drums filled with the precious produce of the city's latrines.
Whereas we treat human excreta as something to be neutralized with chemicals and politely disposed of, the Chinese see it as one more resource.
Outside every field you find a home-made latrine, waiting for passing cyclists to contribute valuable fertilizer.
The conservation of scarce resources is a principle applied to everything.
Plastic bags are just reaching China and are still too precious to be readily disposable.
More usual is the reed basket, carefully woven by peasants for carrying all kinds of vegetable produce to market.
Heavy plastic or hessian sacks are treasured and used repeatedly.
It is the same with bottles.
There is a deposit on every jar and bottle, and people take their own to shops for refilling.
The first time I bought a soft drink at a roadside stall and began cycling away, I roused a despairing cry: the bottle was worth almost as much as the fizz inside it.
In the home too, conservation is meticulous.
Chinese cooking uses far less energy than Western boiling, baking and roasting: cutting food into slivers means that any dish is cooked in minutes.
The cooking is especially economical in terms of meat.
To make a multi-course banquet for six people, student friends brought round a piece of fatty meat about the size of a small steak — just enough to flavour the piles of cheap vegetables.
Every part of an animal is used: chicken's feet, fish eyes, offal and fat are great delicacies.
Vegetables that Westerners often feed to livestock — such as rape — make lovely dishes.
The average Chinese household is also much more energy-efficient than its Western counterpart.
Rooms are smaller, windows are fitted with makeshift insulation, and any waste is burnt in the stove.
In place of our large pieces of coal, the Chinese burn briquettes shaped from coal dust.
Homes are generally colder than in the West, and student dormitories unheated: people habitually wear so many layers of clothing that they look almost round.
Chinese thrift is more from necessity than idealism; the world's concern about the hole in the ozone layer is bad news to the billion Chinese about to acquire a refrigerator per household.
But Chinese people do have an inbuilt respect for the natural balance of things.
Notions of universal harmony are encoded in the religions of Daoism and Buddhism.
And they are most apparent in traditional Chinese medicine, which uses non-chemical treatments like herbs, massage and acupuncture.
Chinese doctors consider it incredible that Westerners release unknown side-effects on their children by feeding them drugs.
Traditional China is gentle with nature.
And it is ironic that just as we are beginning to turn to it for answers to environmental questions, it has begun aspiring to Western ways.
What's in a name?
Sue Robson gets a grip on Chinese handles.
Teacher Li, Little Brother Wang, or Great-grandmother Hou, are all entitled to their titles.
Indeed titles are everywhere in China today, with little trace of the fact that the Cultural Revolution sought to banish such indicators of rank and position.
Nowadays you are careful to address Interpreter Ni, Professor Chen and Party Secretary Yang by their handle as well as their name — and can cause serious insult by forgetting to do so or by introducing them to each other in the wrong order.
Our own Western family titles —‘sister’, ‘aunt’, ‘grandfather’— are quite inadequate in Chinese.
They omit vital information: younger or older sister?
Grandson or ‘outside grandson’ ie. one born to a daughter now married and by definition a part of her new family?
Aunt on whose side of the family?
In a society of close family bonds, a mother's younger sister is quite a different thing from a father's older sister.
Then there is the problem of addressing acquaintances and strangers.
A toddler I know refers to me as ‘English aunt’— even if he does mix it up and call my male friend ‘foreign aunt’ too.
You address older men respectfully as ‘grandfather’ or call a younger girl friend ‘little sister’.
There are regional differences too.
‘Comrade’ is still widely used, but people from Western China often say ‘friend’and Westernised southerners may use ‘miss’or ‘waitress’and in this city we say ‘teacher’.
To the man who calls: ‘Buy apples, teacher!’
I've only just got used to responding: ‘Two pounds please, teacher’.
The use of titles encourages you to see individuals as set firmly into their social slots.
And people have a fine sense of who to butter up and who to ignore.
They know exactly who can help you buy a train ticket, who can iron away which problem.
As in Confucious' system, everyone has their place.
Senior professors at our university, for example, may earn less than the staff at the nearby Westernised hotel and considerably less than the street corner cobblers or entrepreneur peasants, but they get massive banquets and use of the university's chauffeur-driven cars.
Indeed definitions of status are so precise they are even numbered.
A teacher is status level 21, Chairman Mao was level three.
Only at level 14 and above can you buy a soft sleeper train ticket.
To a Westerner, the closely-knit quality of Chinese life is hard to comprehend.
If my colleagues in England have a low opinion of me, I can take another job.
At any rate, home offers some respite.
Not so in China.
Work units allocate accommodation, so your dorm mates are likely to be the people you work with all day.
Geographical mobility is rare and job mobility rarer.
Society cushions you, defines you, but will never erase a bad opinion of a single youthful mistake.
A friend of mine was unhappy at university some years ago, and may — or may not — have committed a minor sexual indiscretion.
After graduation she was assigned a job in her home town.
The man in question followed her, denounced her, and wrote letters to everyone in power.
Now she wants to move to another town to work, but her employers won't let her — they simply refuse to hand over her records.
The minor mistake she may not even have made — for society's judgment, not actual guilt, is what counts — is likely to dog her forever.
But like many Chinese people my friend would be terrified to live abroad.
Her view of the West is that society's bonds are too loose there.
Look, for instance at all the lonely old people whose families do not care for them.
Western society seems cold and people seem to care only for money.
Friends passing in the street may simply fling a quick ‘hallo’ at each other.
While Western commuters hoist newspapers in front of faces and shut out the rest of society, Chinese people will use a train journey to chat and offer snacks to each other.
The 18 course banquet
In this new series of letters, Sue Robson will be writing to us from a small-town university in the Yangste River Valley, China.
She starts by telling us of her welcome.
China has changed since I was here two years ago.
In Beijing shops are stocked with increasing quantities of expensive electrical goods.
Working mothers ignore more traditional staples to buy the newly-arrived white sliced bread.
Even at a quick glance there are signs that social divisions are growing.
Well-dressed older men now pay the higher fare to travel through Beijing by minibus, avoiding the slow, jammed and steamy buses on which the youngest and strongest men fight their way to a few rickety seats.
That leaves mothers, children and older people behind in the mad scramble for the doors when the bus arrives, to stand packed together jolted and elbowed for the long slow journeys.
But when we left the capital with its taxis playing Strauss over Beijing Radio and travelled on the diesel train through the countryside, we found that in the rural areas change comes more slowly.
Big black pigs still snuffle around as women scrub their clothes in muddy pools; chickens pick around mud-bricked homes whose elaborate tiled roofs are adorned with stone beasts.
The golden sweetcorn still hangs out in the sun to dry.
As the train pulled into our urban destination, seen dimly through the coal-fire smog, our future academic colleagues lined up to greet their strange and jet-lagged guests.
We were escorted to our accommodation.
It was a Soviet-built apartment with a walk-in wardrobe and red velvet curtains partitioning rooms.
We found it embarrassingly palatial.
And in a city feeding largely on rice and noodles in a thin soup of stock and vegetables, we learned our hosts were planning a splendid welcoming banquet.
Abundance, even superfluity, is the key to Chinese hospitality.
Our university hosts led us into a room bedecked with tinsel and flashing fairy lights, and seated us around a circular table covered with elaborate cold starters.
As young waitresses brought in a series of unfamiliar hot dishes, our hosts used their own chopsticks to fill our bowls again and again.
Between 18 or so delicious courses, as our hosts turned the revolving centre of the table to urge more of this dish or that, compliments were tossed back and forth.
Greetings became elaborate as the leader indicated the four glasses in front of each of us.
‘This red wine is to wish you a warm welcome.
This mao tai (strong spirit) is to your continuing success with us.
The third — light beer — is for your good health.’
Someone pointed to the fourth glass — Chinese cola — and asked what that was for.
He looked nonplussed for a moment, then improvised fast.
‘And this, to your safe return home.’
At times there were shocks.
‘Have some of this,’ our host urged ladling out generous portions.
‘It's delicious.
It's monkey brain.’
There was a gasp, as we stared at the cream-coloured glutinous substance floating in a thin gruel.
‘It's a kind of mushroom.
We call it monkey brain because it looks that way.’
Quite the opposite happened with the ‘sea cucumber’: slimy, chewy, sweaty black and fed to us in quantities — then redefined as ‘sea slug’.
As one course followed another we began to wonder whether the meal would ever end.
A whole fish in a rich sweet-and-sour sauce came as a relief to those of us who knew that fish tends to come near a banquet's close.
By the time the waitresses had brought an extra course of fruit in deference to Western tastes, the banquet had done its work.
We had been plied with hospitality so great that no one could go away hungry.
Indeed when our hosts tried to press still more on a woman's plate and she blurted, ‘I can't — I'd be sick,’ they looked quite delighted.
THEN NOW
In 1971 the children were on the march, carrying the Cultural Revolution into the countryside.
Here was a country striving for the noblest ideals, breaking new ground…
Straight up!
Yes, these primary schoolchildren did seem regimented.
On the other hand they were allowed to criticize their teachers, something unthinkable before the Cultural Revolution.
General Chen Chung Kwei and his men helping peasants hoe the fields in 1971.
If he could have looked ahead through time at his counterpart in the late 1980s, would he have been scornful of his sunglasses, his insignia of rank, his fat-cat complacent air?
And anyway, did he really make a habit of such manual labour?
(Well, from the train we often caught sight of such scenes…)
The people love the army.
Truth is Lies.
The army loves the people.
Lies is Truth.
1986.
If modernization carries the seeds of freedom, then modernization will have to wait!
Deng Xiaoping has warned that there may be 60 or 70 years of ‘plain living’ ahead for his people.
Of course much of China goes on just the same, shrugging off time.
It's easy to romanticize this basically squalid lifestyle and the repression is bound to slow down development.
But for the Business Studies and Public Relations students on the right in 1986 things looked pretty rosy.
Ten days before the massacre in Tiananmen Square this year, the atmosphere in Beijing was ecstatic.
As foreign photographers, we were treated like heroes.
Everybody was so HAPPY.
Everyone supported the students.
Everyone felt that history was being made.
Bei Da University, Beijing.
Students huddle round a professor of politics who gives an analysis of the current situation.
Nine days later came the massacre, and soon after they came to Bei Da, beating and killing.
The Innocent Anthropologist
…being the book that demystified anthropology
These ‘Notes from a Mud Hut’ very nearly failed to survive at all.
Under siege from termites, goats, mice, rainstorms and — on a final stopover in Rome — thieves, the precious pieces of paper were only a little more vulnerable than the author himself.
Nigel Barley's book is partly about being human within an academic context he sees as largely hypocritical about fieldwork.
‘The conventional myth seeks to depict the battle-scarred anthropologist as a lone figure wandering into a village, settling in and ‘picking up the language’ in a couple of months; at the most, we may find references to translators being dispensed with after a few weeks.
Never mind that this is contrary to all known linguistic experience.’
His own experience of a year living with the Dowayo people in Cameroon is told differently.
He was faced there with one of the world's many tonal languages — conveniently forgotten in Western schools which teach only European languages and imply that all languages work in much the same way.
One of Barley's more crashing mistakes occurs on a first and valuable meeting with the rainmaker.
Excuse me,’ I said, ‘I am cooking some meat.’
At least that was what I had intended to say; owing to a tonal error I declared to an astonished audience ‘Excuse me.
I am copulating with the blacksmith.’’
Barley's savage wit ranges over bureaucrats, police, customs officials, Dowayos, Americans, Germans, French — and his own British.
‘My immediate family knew only that I was mad enough to go to savage lands where I would live in the jungle, menaced by lions and snakes, and might be lucky to escape the cooking pot.
It came as some comfort to me when I was about to leave Dowayoland that the chief of my village said that he would gladly accompany me back to my English village but that he feared a country where it was always cold, where there were savage beasts like the European dogs at the mission, and where it was known there were cannibals.’
What does it take to begin to understand and respect the ways of a culture so different from one's own?
Without the benefit of continuous interpretation and hindsight, much of the world of this book would be as incomprehensible to the reader as it was initially to its innocent anthropologist.
Elderly men clammed up when Barley asked questions in the presence of his assistant, who was felt to be too young; men rushed howling from the room when he casually asked about circumcision in a sister's presence.
‘To begin with I was distressed to find that I couldn't extract more than ten words from Dowayos at a stretch…
One day, after about two months of fairly fruitless endeavour, the reason struck me.
Quite simply, Dowayos have totally different rules about how to divide up the parts of a conversation.
One must talk to people physically present as if on the telephone, where frequent interjections and verbal responses must be given if only to assure the other party that one is still paying attention.
When listening to someone talking, a Dowayo stares gravely at the floor, rocks backwards and forwards and murmurs ‘Yes’, ‘It is so’, ‘Good’ every five seconds or so.
Failure to do so leads to the speaker rapidly drying up.
As soon as I adopted this expedient, my interviews were quite transformed.’
Barley was useful to the villagers as a source of transport, of money and of continual amusement through his language-learning efforts and his uncomprehending questioning.
Only occasionally did villagers become impatient, thinking he was only pretending not to understand — they believed he was an ancestor in a white skin who was obsessed with privacy simply to maintain his secret.
At other times, converse sets of taboos could be quite useful.
Barley was not terrified of ‘that most horrible of birds, the owl’, would pick up ‘a chameleon, whose bite is held to be deadly’, and handled the claws of an ant-eater, believed to be potentially lethal.
Yet when a scorpion rushed straight at him, he ran out of his hut to cry to a six-year-old child outside ‘There are hot beasts within!’
‘The child peered inside and with an expression of profound disdain stamped the scorpions to death with his bare feet.’
The Innocent Anthropologist manages to value the culture and symbolism of the Dowayos while respecting the needs created by the author's own cultural background.
An upholstered armchair, a cream cake, a flat desk-top, are all objects of luxury to those who finally return to ‘stumble around their own culture with the clumsiness of returned astronauts, to be simply uncritically grateful to be a Westerner, living in a culture that seems suddenly very precious and vulnerable’.
In a book that returns time and time again to the issue of cultural hypocrisy, the most biting satire is saved for those whose three years in Cameroon teach them nothing.
Between the jokes, the discomforts, the basic truths and the anthropological unravellings, Barley conducts an unrelenting war on cultural complacency and self-satisfaction.
High Horse Riderless
…being the book that looked beyond the Machine Age
My occasional brushes with office work leave me filled with inarticulate rage.
I feel as though I have run up against ‘The System’ in all its indifferent, anonymous power.
Why should I, or anyone, be expected to perform tasks which mean nothing to me, and into which I can put nothing of myself?
And yet for most people there seems to be no real alternative — and they expect none.
People work nine to five and then escape the 10, 20 or more miles back home to the suburbs.
This whole attitude to work seems to me to be missing something of deep significance.
LTC Rolt's book High Horse Riderless, written in 1940, analyses what that something is.
The book is a passionate plea for craftspersonship and for creativity in labour.
His central argument is that the root cause of our modern ills is the frustration of the human creative instinct.
The only positive freedom is the freedom to use our creativity — and when machines are used as a substitute for labour rather than as an extension of our abilities, they deny us that freedom.
The progressivist dream of a world freed by machines from the necessity of labour misses this fundamental truth.
Rolt had first-hand experience of the changes sweeping through industry during the 1930s.
Apprentice-trained as an engineer, he found that his skills were increasingly obsolete.
Wages depended not on skill or responsibility but on quantity of output, regardless of quality.
Machines were replacing human skill and workers were being reduced to mere machine minders.
As an engineer, with a craftsperson's interest in machines, he could not believe that they were the real villains of the piece and he set about looking for the deeper fault underlying their applications.
His goal was to discover a way of reconciling mechanism and science with the harmony which he perceived in the natural world, and with a life of individual creative freedom.
In mediaeval times, Stephen Harding's phrase Laborare est orare (‘to work is to pray’) sums up the central role which labour played in people's lives.
Work was not a means of gaining reward but was humanity's true function in the divine order and the highest expression of human creativity.
But as attitudes changed labour came to be seen as the fight of the soldier of God through a hostile world, a fight in which the end justified the means.
This shift in the religious attitude, which saw humanity as alienated from nature, laid the foundations for the Age of Reason.
Because the spirit of this new age was fundamentally materialistic, scientific invention focussed on reducing the labour needed to produce a given article so it could be made in greater quantity and at less cost.
Nowhere does quality of product or job satisfaction enter the accountants' equations of profit and loss.
Nowhere does anyone question whether these developments benefit the people doing the work.
Work is geared to making as many articles as possible as cheaply as possible.
We are persuaded by advertising to buy goods which are shoddy and of little intrinsic value.
Nothing is worth keeping because no love went into its making and stainless surfaces can never mellow with use.
There is no continuity, no history, no meaning, and it is to this that Rolt ascribes our feelings of futility and alienation.
We find little solace at home but go out again in search of mass entertainment or slump in front of the television, seeking not to think but to forget.
Scientific utopians believe that the spirit of humanity will achieve its highest expression when it has been freed from the ‘slavery’ of labour.
Rolt warns that this is not so because that spirit can only express itself in creative activities in which work and leisure are facets of one whole.
So is there an answer?
Rolt argues that we must look beyond the present system altogether.
If we wish to reclaim responsibility for ourselves we must aim for self-sufficiency because only then can we have control over our lives.
Specialization of function leads inevitably to dependency.
We must husband a real wealth which lies in the land and its fruits: a self-sufficient society can only be built upon an agricultural basis.
The city should serve the country, not vice versa.
Modern scientific knowledge can be used by such societies and Rolt gives two guiding principles for the use of technology: ‘That mechanical methods should only be employed in work provided the qualitative result achieved is better in the eyes of both maker and user’; and ‘That no man (sic) should make any use of a machine or a scientific process unless he possess a comprehensive knowledge of its principle, function and purpose, and is already skilled in the use to which it is to be applied’.
What a revolution there would be in our behaviour and attitudes if we were to stick to those two principles!
If we pursue the organic life of individual responsibility and self-sufficiency, then knowledge and wisdom, work and leisure, art and religion, life and death, become indivisible parts of one art, the art of the good life.
This message is as relevant now as it was in 1940 and is more urgent than ever as the myth of material progress loses its power.
An Area of Darkness
…being the book that saw into the heart of India
VS Naipaul's grandfather, succumbing to the pressure of a labour recruiter, left his home village in India and went to work in a sugar factory in Trinidad.
Born a Brahmin and trained as a pundit, he supplemented his income by performing priestly functions for other Indian labourers.
The family became rich enough to send VS Naipaul to university in England.
An Area of Darkness is about his first trip to India.
It is the story of his search for cultural and historical identity and is, in this sense, a personal exploration as well as a travel book.
Throughout his journey Naipaul is preoccupied with India's poverty and how to come to terms with it.
Seeing people ‘diminished and deformed’ so they ‘begged and whined’his reactions range from hysteria and fear, to anger and contempt, then compassion and pity.
But all of these, he realizes, degrade the poor: ‘It is your gaze that violates them, your sense of outrage that outrages them’; and ‘it (is) compassion like mine, so strenuously maintained, that denies humanity to many.’
But, according to Naipaul, the typical Indian reaction to the poverty of their country is worse.
They glorify it: it's so sad that it's beautiful.
It becomes the subject of innumerable short stories and songs, of films that reduce their audiences to tears.
And this glamourization obliterates the social reality.
People actually don't see the real poverty that surrounds them.
So nothing is done.
Naipaul learns that the only positive reaction is acceptance; but in a whole year he doesn't achieve it.
He is eventually overcome by a kind of fatigue which numbs his senses so that poverty is no longer all-pervasive.
In this mood of comparative calm he is able to separate ‘the pleasant from the unpleasant…the ruins from the child defecating among them…things from men’.
Maybe because this is a personal mission rather than travel for its own sake, Naipaul is equally honest and painstaking in his analysis of other Indian issues.
The caste system, he says, will never be abolished by social reform or positive discrimination in favour of Untouchables.
It will only change when the psychology behind it has changed; and this psychology is based on two die-hard principles which together constitute almost the last vestiges of his own Indian-ness.
They are: a horror of the unclean; and the assurance (confirmed in the Bhagavad Gita) that people are born unequal.
So the Brahmin maintains his status by virtue of the Untouchable sweeper who cleans up after him.
Gandhi was right: for the caste system to go everyone must clean latrines, and Untouchables must be seen as Harijans, Children of God.
In many ways An Area of Darkness pre-empts Naipaul's later work, India: A Wounded Civilization — about the devastation wrought by a thousand years of foreign rule.
India, as a nation, has lost its confidence; this is reflected in its underlying defeatism and passivity, its confusion of identity.
Accustomed to foreign rule, its own values and traditions, the vocabulary of its art and architecture, have all been destroyed.
What is left is an infinite capacity for mimicry.
In the past they imitated the Persian Moguls; in the future it will perhaps be the Russian or Americans; today it is the British.
But the British are responsible for a double humiliation.
The England of the Raj was not even genuine — it was a fantasy-self, grandiose, magnificent, larger than life.
England never interacted with India; it merely turned the country into a fairy-tale playground.
In the light of this, it is not surprising that upper-class Indian mimicry of the British lifestyle — the clubs and golf courses, the social etiquette and refinement — now appear incongruous to the point of schizophrenia.
Naipaul goes to Bombay, Delhi, Benares, Kashmir, Calcutta, Madras; he makes a pilgrimage in the Himalayas; and finally visits his grandfather's village in eastern Uttar Pradesh.
But throughout his travels little strikes a chord with his own diminished Indian-ness.
Only his sense of caste remains — it's ‘in the blood’— and his personal detachment, stemming, perhaps, from the more general Indian pessimism.
This first trip to India affected Naipaul profoundly.
On his return to England he wrote: ‘It was a journey that ought not to have been made; it had broken my life in two.’
The honesty and horror implicit in this statement suffuse the book: An Area of Darkness is a shatteringly powerful account.
Tell My Horse
…being the book by black
America's first great woman writer
A book about voodoo in Haiti written in the 1930s might seem an unlikely candidate for an NI Classic — especially since it has just gone out of print.
But enthusiastic reviewers have been known to nudge recalcitrant publishers into action.
And Tell My Horse weaves together rituals, stories and social comment into one of the most enjoyable and absorbing works I have ever read.
Here in Zimbabwe, my copy is always out on loan.
I had to retrieve it to write this and they are lining up already for its release.
Zora Neale Hurston was lucky enough to grow up in Eatonville, Florida, a black town run by blacks, so that she was spared the experience of racism in her formative years suffered by most black Americans.
She recorded much of this early life in her fascinating (if rather coy) autobiography Dust Tracks On A Road and revisited a fictional version of Eatonville in her most famous novel Their Eyes Were Watching God (both of which still are in print).
What is striking about these two books is the sense they convey — little less unusual now than when they were written — of a strong and independent black community, in which people found their own way rather than having it mapped out for them by white expectations.
The spontaneous self-confidence of her writing voice, when you first discover it, comes over as a triumph of the human spirit — but also as a terrible indictment of the society that makes such a voice so rare, so virtually impossible.
At 14, Hurston left home to work as a housemaid, then went back to school and on to university, where she studied literature and later anthropology.
She began to write and gained attention (even notoriety) as the most prominent woman among the black literati (‘niggerati’, she called them) of the Harlem Renaissance of the 1920s.
But she coupled her playwriting and stories with a serious interest in anthropology, and made numerous field trips to the Caribbean.
Tell My Horse was the result of one of these trips, written in 1936 as a study of voodoo which, like the ‘hoodoo’ of the Southern US, she saw as the African spiritual source underlying the fervour of black Christianity.
Hurston's method is based on respect for people and their beliefs, enjoyment of their proverbs, songs and stories, participation in their rituals.
Yet while she empathizes with her Haitian contacts and admires the beautiful and mysterious celebrations she sees performed, she never forfeits her sense of humour nor her commitment to the truth.
She shows that it is possible to enter another culture imaginatively without losing oneself; more — that from such ‘grounded’ learning one can make something new and authentic that is one's own.
As with the storytellers she quotes, social and spiritual insight meets in Hurston's writing.
‘Gods always behave like the people who make them,’ she writes, opening the chapter on ‘that boisterous god, Guedé’who ‘does and says the things that the peasants would like to do and say’.
She continues: ‘The people who created Guedé’ needed a spirit which could burlesque the society that crushed him, so Guedé’eats roasted peanuts and parched corn like his devotees.
He delights in an old coat and pants and a torn old hat.
So dressed and fed, he bites with sarcasm and slashes with ridicule the class that despises him.’
For the mulattoes, she says ‘pay Guedé no attention at all.
He belongs to the blacks and the uneducated blacks at that.’
The title of the book is a translation of this god's opening words ‘Parlay Cheval Ole’ when he ‘mounts’or possesses someone.
Hurston's blend of scepticism, humour and common sense makes her a reliable and radical commentator.
Her dry observations on race, class and gender in the Caribbean are made almost in passing, but her knowing smile gives them a ring of authority.
Jamaica, for example, is described in a very funny passage as ‘the Rooster's Nest’.
Among the privileged classes, white male parentage is so stressed to the exclusion of black female that ‘you get the impression that these virile Englishmen do not require women to reproduce.
They just come out to Jamaica, scratch out a nest and lay eggs that hatch into pink’’ Jamaicans.’
Hurston continually makes links between Haitian and Western abuses.
And by seeing connections, she rejects the superior, alienating attitude often adopted by Western commentators towards other cultures.
So readers are helped to appreciate the beauty of Haiti's traditions and to understand its problems, rather than invited to stare in horrified fascination at ‘exotic’ or ‘primitive’rites.
To Hurston, people are people and life is life, whether in New York or Port-au-Prince, whether black or white.
She doesn't avoid the painful issues that divide us — but, as few writers can, she makes us laugh at them and bring them down to size.
Burger's Daughter
…being the book about white South Africans of conscience
Nadine Gordimer has written eight collections of short stories and nine novels, most of which have been widely translated.
She is often seen as the ‘unofficial interpreter’ of life in South Africa.
While black South Africans are imprisoned and their works banned, she travels and is published with reasonable freedom.
She is often criticized for exercising a weaker voice than she ‘should’ but replies that those critics who live ‘safe from midnight arrests and solitary confinement’are unreasonable in the extreme in calling for those in oppressed lands to take risks the critics themselves would avoid.
Besides, there is no doubting where she stands.
‘Art is on the side of the oppressed,’ she writes in her stimulating book of essays, The Essential Gesture.
‘For if art is freedom of the spirit, how can it exist within the oppressors?’
We meet the heroine of Burger's Daughter, arguably her best novel, at the awkward age of 14: the first stirrings of womanhood, the growing pains and the explorations.
In the hands of a writer as skilled in her craft as Nadine Gordimer, with her ability to shape a character and her eye for detail, the tracing of a girl's development through adolescence and early adulthood might be enough of a story in itself.
But Rosa Burger's emergence is inextricably entwined with events that are far larger than any individual, yet deeply part of each person around her.
Rosa is the daughter of white people committed to fighting apartheid.
She grows up in a household which defies the law by bringing black and white people together, one in which the challenging of racism is a 24-hour living presence and is the only thing that really matters.
Constant surveillance, clandestine meetings and the arrest of family and friends are part of everyday life.
Both her parents are put in prison and her father dies there, a hero, a martyr to the cause.
This is the story then, not of personal development against a colourful political background but of what it really means to live as a white person of conscience in a country whose rulers decree that individuals should be ranked according to the colour of their skin.
And of what it means to be born into ‘the struggle’: to be expected, without question, to be part of it.
She absorbed her parents' convictions, says Rosa, much as children ‘learn to eat with a knife and fork’.
as if , for a young woman, the quest for identity is not painful and confusing enough, she must find a way of lifting the burden everyone implicitly assumes she will carry.
And to do this she must get away, must ‘know somewhere else’.
She thinks of this step in terms of her ‘defection’.
At last, in Europe, where ‘nobody expects you to be more than you are’, she finds a few answers.
But there are no easy ones.
Gordimer knows the ins and outs of South Africa, its people and politics, far too well for any smooth analyses or soft options.
Rosa has to come to terms not only with what her inheritance means to her but also with accusations that her parents' brand of Communist radicalism ducks the real issue — the oppression of the black majority by the white minority.
And then there is the anger of her adopted black brother, who smashes down the martyrdom of her father: ‘I know plenty blacks like Burger…’
And this is Gordimer's great strength: the tangling of the personal and the political.
How much harder it is to turn away from Rosa Burger, from her internal wrangling and the external forces that bear down on her, than from a faceless newspaper report.
Or from Jessie Stilwell in Occasion For Loving, who watches a white woman on the lookout for adventure fall in love with a black man, and who proclaims from her liberal stance: ‘We don't see black and white and so we all think we behave as decently to one colour face as another.
But how can that ever be, so long as there's the possibility that you can escape back into your filthy damn whiteness?’
Or from the black servant who protects his white employers when fighting breaks out, in July's People.
White and black, male and female, racist and revolutionary, Gordimer's subtle, lyrical writing lures you inside these people's heads.
It is an enlivening but uncomfortable place to be.
Rosa Burger, by the end of the book, is a woman in her mid-twenties.
As a person in her own right she takes up her destiny.
But beyond her is that other destiny as yet unfulfilled — the struggle for justice in South Africa today.
The Color Purple
…being the book that made black women's writing popular
‘Womanist is to feminist as purple is to lavender.’
When The Color Purple was first published it was greeted by a resounding critical silence.
When it won the Pulitzer Prize in the US in April 1983 it started to gather a bit more grudging attention and the occasional baffled or withering review (the London Sunday Times, for example, described it as ‘drearily predictable’).
Only when it was made into a glitzy film by Steven Spielberg did it become widely read and talked about outside feminist circles.
The story of Alice Walker's rise to bestsellerdom emphasizes how the literary star system selects and tokenizes particular works while ignoring others.
This is especially true of black women writers, who tend to be plucked out of context to lend a splash of colour to a pallid white landscape — like a single exotic flower among drab, overwatered shrubs.
Perhaps it is the extraordinary popularity of The Color Purple that has led some critics to accuse it of being an uncontentious, sentimental and harmless piece of libertarianism, a family homily that is not just optimistic but eventually even utopian.
Here Alice Walker finds herself in a typical double bind: the cultural and political conditions of her novel are deracinated; it becomes immensely popular among white middle-class readers who, unsurprisingly, have read few other black writers; it is accused of assuaging white guilt, of being charmingly apolitical…
The book possesses an appeal which touches readers who, if informed in advance of its provocative politics and disturbing subject-matter, might hurriedly discard it.
If I had told my grandmother that it is about an extended black family, child abuse and homosexual love, then she would not have touched it; as it was, she loved it.
And whenever I teach Adult Education, it is the one novel I can count on to stir the most sluggish class into enthusiasm, to question their own racial attitudes, to move the least enlightened man to a twitch of shame and the most reactionary to a glimpse of new possibilities.
The entire novel is written in a series of letters: Celie's semi-literate ones to God (the only confidante she can find) which tell of her ugly sexual experiences as a child and wife, her separation from her beloved sister Nettie and ultimately her triumphant love for her husband's beautiful lover; Nettie's letters to Celie; and finally Celie's to Nettie.
Just as the novel's form is radical, so too is its content.
Alice Walker focusses upon incest and child abuse in a black family, and portrays a black lesbian relationship as tender and liberating.
Through anger, self-confidence, love and eventual forgiveness a difficult happiness is forged, not just for Celie but for those whom she loves and those who have abused her.
It is a happiness that depends upon bonds between the individual and her community; the inner self and the outer world.
The unity of the ending is a fairy tale happy-ever-after that provides a jolting contrast to the grimly realistic descriptions of misogyny and racial hatred.
Far from being a piece of inappropriate sentimentality, such utopianism has a toughness of purpose.
It celebrates black women as dynamic and effective, affirms their ability to survive the grimmest experience, and makes their radiant subjectivity triumph over the normal deeply negative representations of them.
The unrealistic ending becomes a piece of courageous rhetoric; just as the novel itself refuses to accept unhappiness as a logical conclusion, so black women must refuse to accept it.
They can and must change their own lives and the lives of those around them.
The Color Purple is a complex, layered book but it is also immediately and compulsively readable.
Like many of the finest works by black North American women — Toni Morrison, Maya Angelou, Gloria Naylor — it possesses the passionate, paradoxical resilience of an oppressed and abused people.
It does not just ‘tell us how it is’ but also how it can and ought to be; like the South American novel, it combines realism with magic.
Moreover, it stands in dazzling contrast to the sombre pessimism of most novels by white writers who seem to suffer what Alice Walker herself defines as a debilitating sense of ‘cosmic guilt’ and who have largely ceased to believe that literature can actually do anything.
In inventing a powerfully compelling fictional world in which women learn to recognize their own power, the book is politically committed, subversive and dynamic in a way that Spielberg did not begin to recognize.
Son of the Revolution
…being the inside story of China's Cultural Revolution
On the very first evening the Chinese student Liang Heng talked to the American teacher Judy Shapiro, who later became his wife and co-author of Son of the Revolution, he poured out the story of his troubles during the ten years of the Cultural Revolution.
His mother was called a counter-revolutionary and his father was made to divorce her; his schooldays were postponed as cities all over China exploded into violence; his father was publicly denounced and sent to a reform camp; and Liang Heng and his sisters were sent to labour in the countryside.
At the end of that evening, Judy said, she had learnt more about China than in her previous six months there.
Even under China's ‘open door’ policy a few years ago, young Chinese people were still reluctant to talk about the traumas of the Cultural Revolution.
Who would dare tell a foreigner?
Who would want to relive such a time of pain?
And who could be sure that such secrets could be kept from the spy network still strong in every dormitory and classroom?
After two years living and working in China, this book still had a lot to tell me.
Son of the Revolution is a painful book to read, partly because its simple storytelling brings Liang Heng's childhood so vividly to life.
If it can be called a childhood, that is: from the nursery where he learned to be ‘Chairman Mao's Good Little Boy’ onwards, his early life was racked by one political movement after another.
The unrelentingness of each succeeding movement, and the thoroughgoing cruelty of former classmates and neighbours only concerned to save their own skins, shapes a nightmare world.
But the book is painful too simply because its figures try so hard to serve the system.
Bullied, beaten, criticized, indoctrinated, sent to the countryside and sacked from the newspaper job he loved, Liang Heng's father goes on working for Communism even after his health is wrecked.
It takes a lot of gratuitous cruelty perpetrated in the name of dogma to make him criticize the Party, as when the ‘Attack the Evil Winds of Capitalism Team’ tells the old peasant Guo Lao-da to kill the six ‘capitalist’ducks he owns.
What shall I do?
My ducks have supported me my whole life.
Do they want us to starve to death to fight Capitalism?’
Hush,’ whispered Father.
‘They could blow out your brains for saying less.’
Then he spoke softly with him until the fire burned down very low.
I was already asleep in the kitchen when Guo Lao-da went out to kill the ducks.’
This book is the true story of a decade in which physical and mental torture became so common that the wonder is not that so many were killed or driven to kill themselves but that so many more survived.
On the brink of suicide himself when imprisoned for writing to a friend who had been called a counter-revolutionary, Liang Heng wonders, ‘Why should two good people like my parents be forced to divorce each other?
Why should (my sister) Liang Fang raise a machine gun against her fellow teenagers?
Why did the peasants fear the cadres so terribly if they were representatives of ou great Communist Party?…
Why had the Revolution given us all so little when we had sacrificed everything for it?’
Small wonder that the genuine social achievements of the Revolution came to seem as naught from within this whirlwind.
The events of this book are two decades old now.
Do they matter any more?
When Liang Heng returned to China from his life in the US, as related in the sequel, little had changed.
And when he went on teaching practice, Liang Heng found himself transmitting the same old dogma: ‘The blind obedience that made the Cultural Revolution possible was being fostered still.
No-one was being taught how to think…
There seemed to be no way to ensure that the same tragedy would not be replayed.’
Newspaper reports from China say that, after the demonstrations and massacre of Tiananmen Square, the tragedies of enforced self-criticism, betrayal and indoctrination are being replayed now.
‘We've been used to this since the anti-Rightist movement in 1958,’ observes an elderly economist of great distinction, trained in Germany in the 1930s.
‘Our children had to do it in the Cultural Revolutiion ten years later.
But now my grandson — it's really disgusting.
He says to me when I'm helping him to learn this rubbish: ‘It's not true, is it Grandad?’
And I say to him: ‘Shut up, memorize it, get a hundred marks and stay out of trouble’’
Sue Robson
MOZAMBIQUE SPEAKS
You want to know what is happening in a Third World trouble-spot.
You open the papers or switch on the radio or television and find out.
Or do you?
What you usually get are the impressions of Western journalists.
Next month's NI does things differently.
We went to Mozambique and asked Mozambican journalists to write and Mozambican artists and photographers to illustrate what is really happening in their war- and famine-torn country.
Stories include:
Inside Renamo — what makes the organization with the worst atrocity record since the Nazis tick?
And just who are its backers?
Emergency — 100,000 dead.
But what are the politics behind the famine?
Strange deals — how has Marxist Mozambique become the blue-eyed child of the IMF and the World Bank?
Chained to the giant — can Mozambique escape economic dependence on its destroyer — South Africa?
Flowers in the rubble — despite the war, culture booms.
Wits and guts — a plucky young woman's tale of escape.
Children of war — what do you do with a six-year-old who has been trained to kill?
The hidden cost of living
Driving your car when you could have walked is like cheating at cards — you do it because you can get away with it.
So how can protecting the environment be left to individual conscience?
Michael Jacobs suggests a better way.
JOKE: How many therapists does it take to change a light bulb?
Answer: Six — one to do it and five to share the experience.
Another joke: How much does it cost to change a light bulb?
Answer: A few cents for the new bulb plus — the odd tree killed by acid rain; a small rise in global temperatures from carbon dioxide emissions; a proportion of the ecological disasters caused by marine oil spillages; and the occasional nuclear accident.
Not very funny admittedly — but true.
All this damage is caused by the use of non-renewable fuels which provide electricity; it is the real cost of a light bulb.
Similar kinds of costs are inflicted by other electricity-guzzling household items such as stoves, fridges, washing machines, hot-water systems and air conditioners.
This light-bulb joke has many variations.
For example, what does it cost to make a battery?
Answer: manufacturing a battery uses 50 times more energy than it generates and the mercury it contains is an atmospheric toxin, especially if the battery is incinerated after disposal.
Even an innocent-looking cup of coffee creates soil erosion because of over-production on coffee plantations, and chronic water pollution during processing.
Oh, and plantation workers sometimes earn as little as 25 cents a day…
These are sick jokes.
They are at the expense of people who have nothing to do with the production or consumption of a product — but who end up paying the costs.
The hidden costs of electricity, for example, are paid by the foresters and fishing communities whose livelihoods depend on trees and fish destroyed by acid rain.
The hidden costs of hamburgers are paid by people with skin cancer — because the trays hamburgers are packed in emit a gas that depletes the ozone layer.
The greenhouse effect and radioactivity from nuclear waste hurt people not even born.
Coffee is cheap because the plantation workers and their families are subsidizing it.
So next time you complain about the price of products in the supermarket, remember what you don't have to pay for.
Perhaps every coffee jar should carry a label: ‘Special Offer — 10,000 per cent off!’.
Economists call these hidden costs ‘externalities’: costs which are external to the consumer and the producer.
Imagine that products are like boxes.
When a firm sells something, all the production costs should be inside the box with the consumer paying the full amount that it has cost to make the product.
But in fact the box has holes: many of the costs spill out, falling onto other people.
So the box is lighter than it should be and the price the consumer pays is too low.
Passing the muck
Sometimes these external costs are paid in money.
The West German timber industry loses around $800 million each year from the effects of acid rain.
And agriculture pays further costs of $600 million in the loss of soil fertility which is also the fault of acid rain.
But often the costs are not quantifiable.
How do you measure the cost of brain damage to a child?
And what price do you place on the species made extinct in the rainforest?
Nearly all environmental problems are ‘externalities’.
If consumers had to suffer all the pollution caused by the products they bought, they wouldn't buy them in such damaging quantities.
It is precisely because costs are passed on to third parties that we let them occur.
Environmental degradation is a genuine case of passing the muck.
There is an exception — the contamination of food and water by chemicals used in agriculture or food-processing is an externality.
If you buy a fruit or vegetable coated with pesticide residues then you are the person being poisoned.
You are paying the cost of the pollution yourself — although lots of other people may pay too, such as the workers spraying the pesticides and future generations whose water supplies are polluted.
This is why there has been such a rapid growth of organic foods and mineral waters.
Consumers may not care what happens to others but they are certainly worried about the costs they pay themselves.
But all the other environmental problems affect people too indirectly to make them act.
How many people will voluntarily give up driving cars to prevent acid rain or global warming?
If I act alone it won't have any significant effect on the problem.
So if I don't know that you will co-operate with me, why should I lose out by voluntarily cutting down on my consumption?
Because only co-operative action can tackle environmental problems, they will not be resolved by unhampered market forces.
Indeed, it is precisely market forces which bring them about.
Environmental problems occur through the combination of millions of independent economic decisions by individual consumers and producers.
These decisions are taken privately, without reference to what everyone else is doing, because nobody can know what everyone else is doing.
Added together, market forces generate an overall result which no-one can predict.
This is the ‘invisible hand’ which the economist Adam Smith argued brought general prosperity.
But it can equally be an ‘invisible elbow’ which brings the earth's precarious ecological balance crashing down like a pile of cans in a supermarket.
Bronzed, rich and dying
To protect the environment we must force consumers and producers to make decisions which take wider interests into account.
We need to ‘internalize the externalities’— to bring all the costs back into the box so that the consumer pays the full price.
Market forces have to be controlled and there are two main mechanisms for doing it.
The first is regulation.
Consider the case of the stereotypical Californian — tall, fit, bronzed, driving carefree down the freeway.
In fact 98 per cent of Southern Californians suffer from the effects of photochemical smog — the thick pall of carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxides and ozone which hangs over the 660,000 square miles around Los Angeles.
Stinging eyes, headaches, heart attacks and respiratory diseases are common; Southern Californians have one of the highest premature death-rates in the US.
Autopsies have revealed teenagers with the lungs of 50-year-old smokers.
On two days out of three in 1988 the air exceeded national health standards.
On 75 days the smog was so bad that schoolchildren were advised to stay indoors.
Why?
Because Southern Californians drive nearly 100 million miles every day in their cars — carefree perhaps but not cost-free.
Exhaust emissions are mainly responsible for the smog, exacerbated by the area's famous sunshine — which reacts chemically with the pollutants — and its geography, which traps the air above the main cities.
By last year the crisis had reached such proportions that Southern California introduced radical new regulations to control air pollution.
The new Air Quality Management Plan is the most comprehensive of its kind: not perhaps in its approach to tree conservation — the paper it is written on stacks three feet high — but in its determination to force producers and consumers to stop passing on their muck by law.
The new regulations cover every source of air pollution from barbecue lighter fuel — which is now banned — to pesticides.
Their main thrust is against motor vehicles.
It is now compulsory for all firms with more than 25 employees to have a ‘car journey reduction plan’, cutting down on the use of cars to get to work.
Firms can comply however they like — setting up car pools, introducing a four-day week, increasing work at home, moving nearer to residential areas.
But failure to do so brings fines of up to $25,000 a day.
The scheme offers incentives too.
Highways are being split down the middle, with special ‘car pool lanes’ for vehicles carrying more than two passengers, allowing them to cruise past the traffic jams.
A whole new car-pool road is even being built in Orange County.
The regulations are forcing people to stop using petrol as the major vehicle fuel.
Within ten years 40 per cent of cars, 70 per cent of trucks and all buses will be forced to run on methanol, natural gas or electricity.
And new drive-in establishments like banks and fast-food bars are to be banned.
The price of happiness
Southern California has decided that the way to control pollution is by law.
But other places are experimenting with a different mechanism: controlling the market.
In West Germany, France and the Netherlands, factories which emit pollutants into rivers are taxed according to the volume and strength of their emissions.
This gives them a direct financial incentive to reduce pollution: doing so means lower taxes.
In some areas of the US, ‘pollution permits’ are sold, allowing the owner to discharge a certain volume of pollutants.
By controlling the total number of permits available, the authorities can determine the overall amount of waste discharged.
Some economists believe that this kind of market mechanism is the most effective way of reducing pollution.
Several types of market mechanism are under discussion — like the ‘carbon tax’ whereby fossil fuels are taxed according to their carbon content.
This raises the cost of coal, oil, and gas, encouraging greater energy efficiency and the development of renewable alternatives.
Such a tax would be levied internationally.
Another possible scheme is the introduction of ‘Pollution Added Tax’ whereby products would be taxed according to their environmental unfriendliness.
Throwaway products would be heavily penalized, while recycled items would be tax-free.
When such a scheme was introduced in Oregon in the 1970s, it resulted in 90 per cent of bottles being saved for recycling.
Both mechanisms mean that prices will rise: we will be paying the full cost of the things we buy.
And because higher prices would hurt the poor more than the rich, it is essential that environmental problems are not seen in isolation from social ones.
The ‘cost of greening’ must be fairly shared — by reducing taxes and increasing welfare benefits for the poor, and by subsidizing essential items like electricity, water and transport.
This is all very well, you might say, but what effect would this have on Western living standards?
Does ‘green’ mean less?
In terms of the consumption of material things, the answer is probably yes.
But the quality of people's lives will improve in other ways.
They will be healthier.
They won't have to travel so far to work.
They will have more leisure and less stress.
Expenditure patterns will shift to services instead of goods: education, arts and entertainment, leisure, communal activities and personal development will all play a bigger part in our lives.
And who knows, people might even be happier.
Sweetness and plight
Slavery on sugar plantations is a thing of the past.
Or is it?
Peter Cox investigates.
‘We suffered all kinds of punishment,’ one witness told the Brazilian Justice Ministry.
‘We were hit with rifle butts, kicked and punched.
I tried to escape, so did my uncle.
He was shot and killed by farm gunslingers1.’
The word is peonage — a vicious system of forced labour, common in many parts of Latin America, Asia and even in the southern US.
A recruiter entices the poor and the homeless with promises of employment, good wages, food and shelter.
Then they are trucked long distances to toil on remote plantations where they are held prisoner and compelled to work at gunpoint.
The victims aren't paid cash — they receive notional ‘credits’, which are offset by extortionate charges for the tools they use and the hammocks they sleep in.
‘Life for these people is worse now than it was under slavery,’ says Wilson Furtado, of the agriculture federation in Bahia state, Brazil.
‘Then the owners had some capital tied up in their slaves so it cost them if one died, but now they lose nothing.’
No matter how hard the victims work — cutting sugar cane or felling trees — they can never actually break even.
A loaded rifle keeps them in line, but it's debt that keeps them working.
This form of modern-day slavery also exists in the Dominican Republic where thousands of Haitians are bought or rounded up by the military to work in appalling conditions on sugar-cane plantations.
Confronted with overwhelming evidence assembled by the International Labour Organization and the Anti-Slavery Society, the Dominican Government defended itself thus:
‘We consider that the anti-slavery associations could turn their efforts towards seeking fairer prices and access to the markets of the developed countries for the products on which the living and working conditions of millions of workers throughout the world depend.
One of the worst forms of slavery today is practised by the developed countries when they keep down the prices of basic products by subsidizing and dumping products and so competing with those that are vital for the countries of the Third World2.’
The plight of non-Western nations whose economies are dependent on cash crops such as sugar, is identical to the position of the victims of peonage.
Both are held to economic ransom by a system that ensures they can never free themselves of debt — no matter how hard they try.
The more they produce, the more indebted they become.
In 1981 the Dominican Republic earned $513 million from its sugar exports, yet by 1983 its income had dropped almost by half — to $263 million, despite increasing its production by 84,000 tonnes.
This disastrous decline in income saw the Dominican Republic's debt swell from $600 million in 1973 to a staggering $2,400 million in 1983.
And not only sugar producers have been crippled: plummeting prices for commodities in general have impoverished many Third World economies, leading to widespread starvation.
‘At the height of the Ethiopian famine in 1985 Oxfam was alerted to the plight of several million people who faced starvation, on the sugar-producing island of Negros, in the Philippines’, writes Oxfam worker Belinda Coote.
‘Unlike the barren, drought-stricken images of Ethiopia during the famine, Negros, with its green fields fringed by tall coconut palms gives every appearance of being lush and fertile.’
How could one of the richest islands of the Philippines become the setting for another Ethiopia, where an estimated 85,000 children under six were suffering from moderate or severe malnutrition?
Well, partly because the corrupt Marcos regime mismanaged the industry.
Also the US market for Philippine sugar disappeared (being replaced by corn syrup), throwing a quarter of a million sugar workers out of their jobs.
And the land — rich and fertile — was exclusively used for sugar cane which prevented self-sufficiency in food production.
A disaster was waiting to happen.
Like so many cash crops, sugar is not a genuinely useful product — it has no nutritional value and is of no benefit in times of hardship.
Although there is no dietary requirement whatsoever for it (indeed, considerable scientific evidence shows that increasing sugar consumption correlates with greater risk of diabetes and several other common Western diseases5) it does possess one very special characteristic.
It is addictive.
Like other primates, humans crave sweet things — the tip of our tongue is specially equipped with thousands of tiny taste buds which react strongly to sweetness.
This feature usefully serves other primates, which consume considerable amounts of ripe fruit: rich in vitamins, minerals and fibre.
Humans however, have learnt to isolate sugar from the rest of the plant.
And the result is an effective biological addiction for many people — as any would-be dieter will confirm.
From the producers' point of view, the powerfully addictive quality of sugar became an important asset, resulting in an almost infinitely elastic demand.
When first introduced into Europe in the 14th century, sugar was reverently referred to as ‘white gold’, and commanded a market price equal to that of silver.
By the early 1800s it had even become a staple food, with annual consumption running at about 10 kilos per person in Britain.
But today, Western consumption has peaked at about 50 kilos per person annually, and worldwide over-production has brought acute problems to producer nations.
For centuries European colonies grew sugar to satisfy the Northern market: Europe was a major purchaser of sugar on the world market until 1975.
Now it is one of the largest exporters in the world — exports jumped by 514 per cent in the decade between 1975 and 19857.
How could this happen?
Basically through agricultural subsidies.
Last year, sugar was traded on the world market at five cents a pound.
Yet within the European Community, farmers received 18 cents a pound to produce it!
No wonder Third World sugar producers feel discriminated against.
In fact the US Agriculture Undersecretary believes that European sugar policies cost less-developed nations about two billion dollars a year in lost export earnings.
Why don't producer nations simply switch crops and either become more self-sufficient in food, or produce a different cash crop?
This course of action is difficult for a number of reasons.
Firstly, many countries have management arrangements with Western corporations whose main concern is making a profit.
They are not concerned with particular local food requirements and they usually control the most fertile land for cash cropping.
Also, a Third World country which depends on an export crop for foreign exchange simply cannot change crops in times of recession — it takes several years and many dollars to restructure an industry and to plant new crops.
In fact in times of recession, sugar producers tend to produce more sugar, in the hope of earning more currency.
This of course, simply depresses world prices further, making matters worse for them.
Just as the colonial nations developed sugar from beet when they were threatened with disruptions to their cane sugar supply in the 19th century, so modern chemistry is developing sweeteners in the laboratory that rely even less upon raw materials.
Corn syrup (isoglucose) can be made from milling maize or wheat — and is presently threatening both cane and beet producers.
Other sugar substitutes like saccharin, cyclamate and aspartame, are all targetted at dieters, combining a sweet taste with no calories (although each one of them has faced questions concerning safety).
As more and more economically attractive sources of sweetness are developed, so the importance of the Third World producers declines, as does their ability to command fair prices on the world market.
Like an overworked slave, their usefulness has been exhausted.
Only the debt remains.
Iraq
Iraq is blessed with the vital natural resources denied its Arab neighbours.
Huge expanses of fertile land and unlimited supplies of water give it enormous productive potential.
And Iraq has oil — the means to make its agriculture fruitful and its industry productive.
Ten years ago the Iraqi economy was growing faster than any other in the region.
Oil had stimulated new industry, cities were being modernized rapidly and ambitious plans promised change in the countryside.
Many Iraqis felt they had paid a heavy price for progress — the country was run by a tightly-knit group of military men who in the name of the Baath (Resurrection) Party suppressed all opposition.
But the Baath's successful programme of development could hardly be ignored and the country's prospects looked healthier than those of many neighbours.
Then came war.
When President Saddam Hussein ordered his army into Iran in September 1980, life in Iraq changed radically.
Today every able-bodied man is liable to serve at the front — in a war in which casualties are sickeningly high.
Almost every family has lost a member: the war penetrates every area of the nation's life.
Development programmes have all but ceased.
In an effort to disguise the effects of the war economy, the government maintains some prestige urban projects and has continued key agricultural schemes.
But the grand plans of the 1970s have been abandoned.
Then, Iraq's oil income was rising rapidly: in 1979 it received over $25 billion.
Today, the oil glut and effects of war have more than halved the figure and there are few other industries able to boost export earnings.
Iraq has become a debtor state, owing over $50 billion to its Arab Gulf neighbours, the countries which keep a battered economy afloat.
War has not improved the Baathist regime's unenviable record on civil rights.
The Party has long been dominated by members of the Sunni Arab minority, who have shown little patience with the Kurds of the north or the Shiite Arabs of the south.
The Kurds have been victims of particularly intense repression: there have been fresh attempts to destroy the Kurdish autonomy movement, with the result that a host of Kurdish guerrilla groups now fight with Iran against the Baghdad government.
For the present, the Baathists' dream — that Iraq should become the model for Arab development — is over.
This is a bitter reverse for many Iraqis, eager to reassert their country's ancient traditions.
During the 1970s, the government began a long programme under which medieval mosques would be restored and some of the glory of Iraq's Islamic past reasserted, with Baghdad, Basra and Mosul again seen as centres of Arab culture.
The government also sponsored a series of excavations among the dusty mounds that litter the Mesopotamian plain.
Here stand the remains of the great cities of the Fertile Crescent — Babylon, Nineveh, Eridu, Nippur — the evidence that Iraq saw the beginnings of urban civilization.
For the present, Iraq's priorities lie elsewhere.
Until peace comes to the Gulf, it will remain a society struggling to survive.
Leader President Saddam Hussein
Economy GNP per capita $1,467 (US $15,390)
Monetary unit: Dinar
Main export: Oil.
Over 90 per cent of export earnings comes from oil.
Small quantities of chemical products and consumer goods are exported to neighbouring Arab countries.
The imposition of a war economy has frozen plans for the development of manufacturing, and shortages of electricity, spare parts and labour have disrupted existing industries.
Some major agricultural schemes have gone ahead — notably in drainage and irrigation in the south — in an effort to improve poor productivity and cope with a soaring food import bill.
Rural areas have suffered badly from labour shortages as manpower has been directed into the war effort
Underground Economy
By the standards of most Canadians Rita Allen's life is simple — even spartan.
She earns between $800 and $1,000 a month, lives in one furnished room, and has just a few possessions of her own.
A colour television, a sewing machine and a record player are her material monuments to a steady, six-year regimen of demanding and often tedius work.
Yet for Rita Allen, life in Canada has brought promise of a fuller future — a kind of future she couldn't have contemplated before.
‘Here I find myself going to school’, says Rita.
‘And in Jamaica I would not have been able to do it.
I find myself working for more money, bettering myself.’
Rita has hopes of eventually studying to be a nurse.
But more to the point she also hopes her children will be able to get a good education before heading off into the world.
It's this dream which prompted Rita to leave her Caribbean home for Canada six years ago.
Facing an uncertain future in Jamaica as a single mother supporting four children,(her husband had just left her), Rita took up the invitation of a relative who had emigrated to Canada and came to try her luck.
She intentially overstayed her visit and in six months time was doing ‘day's work’ in people's homes.
She had wanted to get a babysitting or live-in job, ‘but everying wanted papers for that and I didn't have any.’
Rita's sorrow today at having to leave her children thousands of miles away is well concealed by her satisfaction at being able to support them from afar.
‘I can send everything to my children’ she says.
‘I can buy clothes, food and everything and send it to them.
My children are much better off now.’
There are disadvantages to this life, of course.
As an illegal immigrant Rita takes whatever work she can get.
She now works six hours a day as a domestic worker — a job which in itself has few rewards.
Then there is the question of her legal status.
For six years Rita has lived the knife-edge existence of an illegal immigrant: invisible to the social services and institutions that citizens and landed immigrants can count on; and constantly afraid of being discovered by immigration officials and deported.
It's difficult to think of Rita as a fugitive from the law.
She seems the very essence of kindness and honesty.
A devoutly religious person, she has arranged for our interview to take place in the church where she spends much of her free time, in advance of today's Good Friday service.
In keeping with the occasion, Rita is decked out in holiday finery — an immaculate grey suit and a tasteful, blue woven hat.
There is something stoic and self-contained about Rita but something warm and friendly as well.
She maintains a studiously upright posture as she talks, yet her voice is gentle, her expression open and kindly.
Rita speaks of her life in Canada matter-of-factly, accepting both the good and the bad with equanimity.
‘I don't really like the work I do’, she confesses, ‘because some of it is very hard and very dirty.
I don't want to do housework for the rest of my days — working in other people's houses — but I have to do it until something better comes along.’
Not surprisingly though Rita gets along well with her various employers, some of whom know she is working illegally, and some of whom don't.
‘Most of them are really nice to me’, she says.
‘And they reccommend me to other people.
I get more work because they say I am good.
Even though I am saying it myself, I think it's true.
I always try to be nice to the kids.
I do all the work, and sometimes I even do things they don't tell me to do.’
The broader circumstances of her life have been more trying, however.
As an illegal she is completely outside the net of social welfare benefits.
Not being covered by state-run health insurance has been a major worry because ‘sometimes I get very sick and I can't find the money to go to the doctor,’ says Rita.
Fear of the authorities is a constant concern.
‘Sometimes you hear a knock on the door and you don't even want to answer because you don't know who it is.
You don't know if it's immigration.
There are people who encouraged me not to worry, not to be scared, but it's hard.
It's something you think about a lot.’
Rita decided to quell her anxieties, after hearing about an amnesty program for illegal immigrants, by turning herself in to immigration authorities.
A technicality defeated her attempt to become legal, however — she hadn't yet been in Canada the requisite five years.
And though she has faith that her lawyer's appeal will be successful, she is bitter and baffled by the attitudes of the bureaucracy.
‘After I went to immigration’, recalls Rita, ‘and I told them I was separated because my husband abused me, I thought they would look down on me and have more sympathy, and see what they can do.
But they just tried to push me out.
I think some of them don't have any feelings for other people.
You're working and you're not bugging anyone and you turn yourself in — they don't come and pick you off the street — and still they do this.’
For most of her time in Canada, Rita has been a non-person in the eyes of the state.
Yet she has grown to be very much a part of Canadian society.
She's developed a steady business and a strong social life at her church.
And she hopes her youngest children will be able to join her in Canada.
Like most other immigrants, Rita came here following a dream and it's a dream she doesn't want to give up.
‘There is nothing for me to go back to,’ she says, ‘nothing for me to live off.
I want to live and I want my children to get an education.
That's why I want to stay.’
Stephen Dale
food for thought
Home at last.
Tea.
But no tealeaves in the cups (teabags have seen to that).
Fred begins to feel an appetite for something a bit more substantial than speculation.
Facts!
He wants facts!
But there are no facts about the future.
Only educated guesses.
Fortunetellers make educated guesses too — mostly about what they think their ‘subject’ would like to hear.
So the NI hired Monsieur W, an exclusive (and very expensive) clairvoyant to read the world's cards just for Fred.
Monsieur W, like the NI, believes that these are times of great opportunity and great danger.
He's not so sure that ideas can make the difference between the two.
But he agrees that the dangers are easier to foresee — the opportunities have to be realized by human determination, individuals working together.
He's not prepared to bet on our willingness to do that.
The tarot cards he uses are used in many parts of the world to play card games, where their association with ‘fortune’ refers more to luck than knowledge.
people
danger
There are now about 5,300 million people in the world.
By the year 2020 there will be about 8,100 million, and by 2100 perhaps 11,300 million, or more than twice present levels.
By 2025 the population of India will have doubled to more than 1.4 billion and almost caught up with China.
By the same year the population of Nigeria is expected to reach more than 300 million, making it larger than the US.
opportunity
In the end, the only way to stabilize the world's population is to end exploitation and improve living standards.
There's no clearer example of the way expectations and attitudes affect our behaviour.
In Cuba the rate of population increase fell from 2.5% per year in 1960 to 1.0% in 1982 while life expectancy reached 75 years, the same as the US.
But in South Africa, with a per capita income twice as high, the rate of population increase rose from 2.4% to 3.1% during the same period and life expectancy stayed at 63, similar to China or India.
It's not just a matter of absolute numbers, either.
Some of the changes could have a transforming impact — by 2056, for example, the majority of people in the US will no longer be of white, European extraction.
poverty
danger
The total number of people living below the poverty line ($370 per year) in the ‘developing’ world will only decline slightly from present levels (1,125 million) to about 825 millions by 2000.
In Africa, the number living in poverty is set to increase from 180 millions today to 265 millions in 2000.
Eastern Europe is predicted to be the only place where the number of poor people as a percentage of the total population will actually grow, although figures ignore poverty in the ‘developed’ world altogether.
opportunity
In South Asia the total number of people living in poverty is expected to fall from over 500 million today to some 360 million by 2000, and in East Asia from 290 millions to 60 millions.
There is even expected to be a slight fall in Latin America to less than 50 millions.
These estimates are, however, based on optimistic and fairly conventional predictions for economic growth.
places
danger
The largest city in the world in 2000 will be Mexico City with a population of some 24.4 millions, more than double the size of any city in 1960 except New York.
Sao Paolo in Brazil will be only just behind with 23.6 millions.
Only two cities in ‘developed’ countries (New York and Tokyo) will still be in the top 10.
In 2005 or 2006, for the first time, more people will live in cities than in rural areas.
opportunity
Modern cities, though they get a bad press (usually from the cities themselves), also have their attractions.
The potential for access to education, health care and employment is improved.
They are the generators of the material prosperity which is now taken for granted in the West.
They will form the basis for the average 3.2% growth rate in developing countries (5.4% in China, 3.4% in India) predicted for the 1990s.
The key question is how the poor majority in these cities will organize themselves politically — not least to deal with environmental issues.
things
dangers
Modern cities will almost have doubled their annual production of waste per head during the twentieth century, while the proportion of this waste that is biodegradable will have fallen from more than 90% to under 50%.
The number of cars will grow from 400 million today to 700 million by 2010, and in the Third World alone 16.6 billion tonnes of carbon will be emitted annually by 2025.
In many cities traffic speeds are now slower than they were in the age of the horse, and in California the average speed is expected to drop for 53 kilometres per hour now to 24 by 2000.
opportunities
The realization that this is no future at all could finally bring about radical change, which is still within our grasp.
By 1992 there will be more than 16 million miles of fibre-optic cable in place, each of which can carry 160 times more information than a copper wire.
Added to satellite communications, this could drastically reduce the need, among other things, for commuting in cities.
In terms of‘carrying efficiency’, the bicycle is roughly twice as efficient as the car, the bus seven times and surface rapid rail twelve times as efficient.
Conversion to renewable sources of energy could have a major impact, particularly in rural areas; the Department of Energy estimates that renewable energy resources in the US exceed annual use by 250 times.
land
dangers
By 2000 the arable land in use per head will have fallen to 0.25 hectares from 0.37 hectares in 1975; in Africa it will almost have halved from 0.64 to 0.39 hectares.
The long-term dangers of land degradation from irrigation and chemical fertilizers are growing.
Between 1980 and 2000 the number of people experiencing acute fuelwood deficit or scarcity will have increased from 1,395 million to 2,986 million.
Estimates that 11 million hectares of forest are being lost every year have recently been revised upwards to 17 million.
opportunities
Only 40% of the world's potential arable land was in use in 1975, and that will have increased to just 50% in 2000.
In Africa, just 30% of the potential will be in use.
Since 1970 Japan has shown how rice yields can be raised on average 0.9 per year; matched with a major international effort to protect soil, conserve water and restore the productivity of degraded land, there is no reason why the basic nutritional needs of the world cannot be met.
And there is no reason why consumer-led movements in the West (and particularly Japan) cannot make it as unacceptable to use tropical hardwoods in the future as it is to use, say, CFC aerosol sprays today.
weapons
dangers
The world still spends more than $1,000 billion per year on arms — more than the total income of one half of the world's population.
Military spending since 1960 has doubled in the North and grown six-fold in the South.
The Soviet Union is still capable of ‘delivering’ more than 5,800 megatonnes of nuclear destruction on 10,700 warheads, and the US more than 3,800 megatonnes on 12,800 warheads.
Just one nuclear submarine on one side can still destroy all the major cities on the other.
opportunities
The so-called ‘peace dividend’ is slow to materialize, and not surprisingly, with an estimated $250 billion a year of vested interests potentially available for more constructive purposes.
In the US, for example, spending $1 billion on guided missiles creates about 9,000 jobs; the same amount spent on local transport would create 21,500 jobs and on educational services 63,000 jobs.
Under these circumstances, extracting tribute from Third World peoples for debts incurred without their knowledge or agreement by Third World governments is, if nothing else, economic nonsense.
life
dangers
One of the most massive undertakings of modern science is the project to ‘map’ the human genome, the genetic secrets of the DNA that helps to mould our physical and mental characteristics — the secret of life.
By 2050 we may be able to buy a compact disc holding our complete genome.
Huge ‘ethical’ issues arise.
Is it right to create, as we now can, new or ‘cloned’ forms of life?
Can property rights extend over these forms of life, as the companies involved in the research claim that they do?
The growth of AIDS has given us some early warnings of the dangers.
Consider this.
If everyone is screened for genetic disorders, for which there may be no cures, what are those people then to do, and who is to have access to the information — prospective employers, insurers?
How is the temptation to create only ‘pure’ people (or a smaller and smaller number of ‘super-productive’plant and animal species, ‘owned’by their creators) to be avoided?
opportunities
More than 4,300 genetic disorders have been identified as depending on a single faulty gene; they include cystic fibrosis, haemophilias and Huntington's disease.
According to the World Health Organization it may soon be possible for these disorders to be controlled or even eliminated — but since there is no cure, this can only mean by early detection in the fetus and abortion.
In agriculture, biotechnology may have a major impact on crop yields — the yield from cassava in Africa could be quadrupled if the plant could be made resistant to African cassava mosaic virus.
Paths are made by walking
The 1970s and 1980s have been the decades of feminism.
Debbie Taylor follows the trail through her own life.
The white woman picked a branch of magenta bougainvillea flowers and put them in a glass on the table.
She took out her paints to capture their exuberance, their hectic colour: essence of Africa, she thought.
There was a knock on the door.
She had started dreading these.
It would be another woman from Naledi looking for work as a maid: dressed in her best in the blaring midday heat: thick cardigan and skirt, heavy shoes.
The woman would bow her head, maybe bob a slight curtsey, address her as ‘madam’.
‘Madam’: a barefoot young woman with a paintbrush in her hand, dressed in shorts and flimsy tee-shirt, young enough to be her daughter.
No, she didn't want a maid.
No, her servant's quarters were already occupied.
No, she didn't want any other work done.
‘Leave me alone!’ she wanted to scream, longing for just one day without a reminder of her wealth, her guilt.
She went back to the table and looked at the flowers.
In those few minutes the colour had drained out of them and they had wilted in the glass like faded tissue paper.
The first issue of the NI devoted to women came out in 1977, the year before my sojourn in Botswana.
Spare Rib — the UK's first feminist magazine — had already been going for five years.
By 1975 all the classics — like Greer's Female Eunuch and Friedan's Feminine Mystique — were best-selling paperbacks and the basic principles of feminism had become everyday parlance in the West.
I read Millett's Sexual Politics by the light of an oil lamp, with mosquitos whining in my ears, and tried to make it make sense in Africa.
In the NI's first editorial by a woman, Maggie Black described the beauty of a 15-year-old Ethiopian girl she met on the road to Selekleka and mourned the transience of that beauty ‘if policies don't change fast enough to avoid her back being bent, her hands calloused, her body broken, by the time she is 30’.
The magazine's message then was the same as it is today: that ‘women hold up half the sky and a great deal more besides’ and that development will at best hobble along until women's disproportionate contribution to the work, wealth and well-being of their communities is both recognized and rewarded.
In an attempt to focus attention on what was seen then as the ‘plight of women’, the United Nations had decided that 1975 would be International Woman's Year.
Following that initial spate of concern, the ten years between 1976 and 1985 were declared the ‘Decade for Women’.
If that young Ethiopian girl has survived the droughts, famines and wars of these intervening years — not to mention the torments and dangers of childbirth for a circumcized and infibulated woman, whose vagina must be re-sealed after each birth — she will be 26 today.
‘What can I do for a child?’
Dikeledi, the tough woman, who smoked and swaggered and whose voice was as hoarse as an old man's, turned tear-filled eyes on the white woman's face.
‘They say some man has given me a disease.
They say this disease has made me barren.
They say there is no cure.’
The white woman knew she was expected to offer a solution, some medical advance that would undo the damage to her friend's body, to her life.
But she knew there was nothing she could do.
White South Africa had taken the black men, herded them into workers' barracks and townships, kept them supplied with beer and prostitutes, then sent them back home with their rand, their tuberculosis and their venereal disease.
Those gold mines had stolen much more than gold from Africa.
I was born into the first generation of women who could actually choose — without risking death in an illegal abortion — when and whether we would have children.
It seems hard to believe that we flower children of the 1960s and 1970s never doubted for a second that we would eventually find fulfilling jobs.
All the radical soul-searching was born of basic economic security.
It was not all easy.
Though the space was suddenly there for us, we still had to come forward and claim it.
The first women doctors and lawyers, the women artists and writers, the politicians and trades unionists, the women who came out as lesbians; and before them the witches and the suffragettes: the paths we walk so freely are paths they laid down for us.
These paths were made by the feet of generations of women — our mothers, their mothers, their grandmothers — walking.
And not only their feet.
These brief oases of super-wealth were a direct result of exploitation of the developing world.
And it was and is women's labour that underpins the economies of every developing country.
Our liberation has been bought dearly.
They sat inside, drinking tea from enormous enamel mugs.
Billowing smoke from the fire made the white woman's eyes water.
She wiped them surreptitiously and repeated her question: ‘Surely a woman is better off without a man?’
The black woman shook her head vehemently.
Yes, her brother-in-law had beaten her and treated her cruelly.
Yes, the men did drink and go with prostitutes.
Yes, many husbands kept all the money from the maize crop even though their wives had done most of the work.
But no.
A woman is not better off alone.
A woman and man should work together.
‘And why have men become cruel and lazy?’ the white woman asked, irritated at the other woman's refusal to condemn the opposite sex.
‘It's because of money,’ answered the other simply.
‘Long ago we depended on each other.
Today the men just want money.
It makes them greedy and lazy.
They don't care about their families.
And they don't listen to the elders.’
After nearly eight years of working as an editor of the NI, I have facts embedded in my brain and figures coming out of my ears.
I could quote you a mile of statistics.
Facts about woman's access to contraception and the annual death toll of illegal abortion; about the number of children they want and the number they lose to malnutrition and disease; facts about rape, incest and infibulation.
I could reassure you with talk of progress and produce another pile of evidence to back me up: more family planning, more education, more employment, constitutional changes.
I could tilt your opinion back the other way with other evidence: about the feminization of poverty, about women's loss of land, the ravages of the debt crisis — of any crisis — on the most vulnerable: on the women and their children.
I also could point out, again, the shameful irony that the most dramatic advances for women have been almost entirely confined to the industrial world; that the worst declines have been in poor countries among those very women whose work creates the wealth that buys us our freedom.
Where are the teachers and lawyers and journalists who pay their cleaners and child-minders even half what they earn themselves?
Who is it that sets the going rate for our work?
The white woman stared into her wine-glass as her friend started speaking.
The other woman's voice sounded hollow and dull, as though under water.
‘He made me dress up in clothes like my mother's.
When I got older he left me alone and started on my younger sisters.’
Another woman reached for the speaker's hand and started stroking it.
‘I can't bear it when my husband touches me,’ the dead voice went on.
‘I lie there pretending to be asleep then I feel this thing pressed against me.
I hate it.
I hate him.
He says he can't help it, that he can't control himself if he's asleep.
But that means I can't ever trust him, really.’
When she had finished there was silence as the other seven women thought of their lovers, their husbands, their brothers and fathers.
Every man seemed implicated, by virtue of sheer anatomy.
There was an almost audible hiss of sisterhood, a collective shrinking from the flesh of the enemy.
Eventually they led the one who had spoken into the middle of the room.
They took her in their arms and lifted her gently so that she could feel their support along the length of her body.
Then they went back to their separate homes, to their men, trying to balance the love and the hate in their hearts.
Nawal el Saadawi — Egyptian novelist, ex-Minister of Health, imprisoned by Sadat for her writing — stayed with me briefly in the autumn of 1985.
She was one of five Third World feminist writers the NI had commissioned to visit countries in the rich world and comment on women's lives there.
She came to visit my consciousness-raising group in Oxford.
She looked round at us and asked: ‘Have any of you left your husbands because of this talking that you do?
How has it changed your lives?’
We felt shamefaced.
This woman had been to jail because of her beliefs.
Suddenly our long hours spent talking and laughing and crying together seemed trivial by comparison.
But perhaps we were mistaken to feel guilty.
The white woman knelt with the black women in a circle in the moonlight.
She was panting from running, dancing, chanting, crawling, beating the ground.
Her palms and knees were bleeding from thorns in the sand.
She started shivering as her sweat dried in the freezing winter air.
She looked round at the others, spitting dust from their mouths, coughing, shaking with cold.
Nine old women walked round the circle carrying thin branches with the leaves stripped off.
They were mothers, grandmothers, widows: the elders, the teachers of the young.
They knew the words of all the songs, the plots of every story, the intricacies of every movement and rhythm.
It was their job to instill respect into these 50 young initiates — respect and the essential knowledge of womanhood: bitter knowledge; sweet knowledge.
They ordered the young women to remove their upper garments and then to bend forward until their foreheads touched the cold sand.
Then one of them — the initiates never found out which one — walked slowly around the circle of naked backs, giving each a single stinging lash with her whip.
Changing the world (part one)
The New Internationalist has changed a lot over the years.
And so has the team that produces it.
But Dexter Tiranti was there at the naïve and idealistic beginning — and is still here in the careworn (but still idealistic) present.
The marketing executive pushed back his chair, revolving slowly to face the sales graphs on the wall.
‘Look, son, if it's not about sex, how to convert your loft into a spare bedroom or a new diet guaranteed to lose ten pounds in two weeks, then this new magazine of yours won't sell.
Anyway, where's the advertising potential?
What's the profile of your proposed readers?
Is it ABC1 with high disposable income?’
We only caught about half of what was coming across.
And even that did not make for encouraging listening.
Somewhere off Fleet Street, dressed in unaccustomed collars and ties, we were hearing the current publishing wisdom from one of the professionals.
It was back in 1972 and we were testing the waters, talking about this new magazine we wanted to launch which would campaign for an end to world poverty.
Wet behind the ears, we were.
And the outlook was bleak.
A monthly on the Third World from a big publishing stable had just had the plug pulled after only the sixth issue.
And the Robert Maxwell empire was just about to launch a new magazine called World Development.
Collapse and competition: the omens were not good.
But Oxfam and Christian Aid — our backers — were in too deep now.
They had been persuaded by the energy, enthusiasm and idealism of Peter and Lesley Adamson, both scarcely three years out of university.
Launch capital of 100,000 had been committed, with the idea that the publication would be self-supporting by the end of that time.
Four other staff members, including Troth Wells and myself, had been taken on.
Our combined experience of running and selling a monthly magazine was not large.
It was not small either.
It was non-existent.
But then we had the 1960s behind us.
We were the children of Marcuse, Marx and Mao.
We had brought down the President of France.
And hadn't we got rid of the American troops from Vietnam?
With a little help from the Vietcong perhaps.
The brief now was modest by comparison: launch a magazine which would help change public opinion about the causes of world poverty.
The widening gap between rich and poor was a stain on our civilization.
Oxfam and Christian Aid had recently had a chastening experience.
The British Government had cut the overseas aid budget by more money than the two charities had ever raised in their entire histories — and neither the media nor the general public had produced a murmur of protest.
Spending some money on development education at home could, they thought, be cost-effective in the long run.
Backing the talent of the Adamsons with this new magazine could be a vital way of influencing public opinion.
The two organizations were worried nonetheless.
A lot of money was going into this untried publishing project.
So the agencies appointed a board of directors composed of their senior staff to supervise their funds.
Once a month we reported to them on the editorial, marketing and financial developments of the magazine.
The treks to London; looking through reports and papers on the train; the uncomfortable suits; worried, tense questioning and pressure, pressure, pressure.
Seven-day working weeks seemed to merge into one another.
Those are my memories of the early years.
After one year, with inflation at 28 per cent and mail costs arbitrarily doubled, the two founder agencies said ‘enough’.
They could not foot the increased deficit.
So we sent out letters to other potential funders saying the New Internationalist would close in two months time…unless.
Positive replies came back.
The cheques were not only from trusts and churches in Britain but from agencies in Australia and Canada too.
These sums of money were vital.
But equally important was the proof — measured not in words but hard cash — to Oxfam and Christian Aid that the magazine was valued by others, not just at home but, astonishingly, five or ten thousand miles away as well.
Perhaps we were doing something right after all.
The gesture of international support stiffened backbones.
Support for the magazine was to continue.
The frazzled NI team took heart.
By 1980 the money was no longer needed.
Our circulation had risen to 30,000, enough for economies of scale in printing to become effective.
The magazine in the UK was self-supporting.
And by now close relationships had developed with aid agencies in Canada, Australia, Aotearoa(NZ) and the US.
These alliances have been invaluable to the NI: the key card up our sleeve which no other publication could produce and which the hard-boiled marketing executive could not have understood.
How could you quantify, in sales and revenue graphs, the work in Australia of the Community Aid Abroad volunteers in Carlton?
Every month for four years they met in Melbourne to stuff the magazines into envelopes for Australian subscribers.
They did it free because they thought the information and arguments within the 32 pages were worth spreading.
And their enthusiasm and commitment established the magazine in Australia.
What price Oxfam Canada's support to this day with office, phone, and photocopier for the NI's Canadian team?
How do you measure the contribution of organizations like Canadian University Service Overseas or the Methodist Church, who bent the rules to allow us to mail their supporters with our advertising literature?.
These agencies helped not just with marketing but with information.
They work in partnership with small co-operatives, consumer groups, churches, clinics and nurseries throughout the Third World.
And the experience they gathered could be channelled to us, keeping the New Internationalist in touch with the experience of peasants and ordinary working people.
Yet despite the heartening experiences of the last 199 issues of the magazine, can we really say that we have affected public opinion?
With the marketing of babyfoods, yes.
Here was a clear example of Western corporations using hard-sell marketing techniques on vulnerable mothers who couldn't afford the product.
Infant formula was not only expensive and inferior to breastmilk but was downright dangerous when fed to babies unsterilized and mixed with inevitably polluted water.
This story was first exposed in the August 1973 issue of the New Internationalist.
And it was so appalling that it had a genuine effect on public opinion.
The saga still continues but there has been a severe clampdown on the activities of babyfood companies, and undoubtedly millions of Third World babies' lives have been saved.
But examples like this are few and far between.
In the meantime, the 1980s has become Thatcher's decade.
Her success both nationally and internationally, has reflected a what's-in-it-for-me? attitude.
We find ourselves swimming against the tide.
We know that magazines like this don't change public opinion by themselves.
But they they can help.
People's ideas need intellectual support, they are not engraved on stone.
The self-centred and materialistic climate of the decade corrodes ideals and concerns about social justice, narrowing perspectives to the point where conversations comprise little more than house prices or retiling the bathroom.
If the NI can do something to focus eyes on a more distant horizon, it has a valuable role.
To some extent this means preaching to the converted.
And there is a financial logic to this too.
It doesn't make sense to promote to audiences which are not in some way sympathetic.
You will never see the NI advertised in the gutter press, in popular newspapers with racist and sexist presumptions.
This is for no better reason than that few readers of such newspapers would respond and we would get a very low return on our advertising investment.
Instead we appeal to those with some concern about the state of the world and we get a warm response.
Still, we are not slow to evangelize.
Our policy is always to debate with the middle ground, extending the metaphorical hand to people who may not agree.
But profound changes in attitude scarcely ever come through reading.
They occur far more through personal experience and the give-and-take of discussion with friends, neighbours, drinking companions and colleagues.
Nothing is as powerful as a two-way dialogue, the proposition countered by the ‘Yes, but…’ which in turn can be satisfactorily answered by the proposer.
C Wright Mills without a trace of elitism referred to the ‘backyard opinion-makers’, those articulate people who can remember the facts to substantiate their point of view.
It might be that they lead the opinions of a group of three people, ten people or thirty, but those opinion-makers are the key.
And they are you, the New Internationalist readers.
You turn up in unexpected places.
I remember landing at Christchurch airport in Aotearoa (NZ) ten years ago.
There was a friendly country-town atmosphere in the airport hangar we passengers walked into.
Collecting my bags I noted one channel for Australians and New Zealanders, another for all others.
I found myself the only ‘other’.
Walking past the tall, bulky uniformed customs officer there was that familiar feeling of trepidation inspired by the sight of a uniform.
Deliberately avoiding eye contact and slightly quickening my pace were not enough to get me by.
‘Good afternoon.’
He seemed surprised to see me.
‘Hmmmph?’
Decidedly noncommittal.
‘Have you anything to declare?’ waving a clipboard with everything from narcotics to firearms printed on it.
(Inward groan, this is going to take time.)
‘No, just a small present for the people I'm visiting.’
‘What are you here for?’
‘Business’
‘Oh yes, what business?’
‘Publishing’(Sounds vague and respectable enough)
‘Can you be more specific?’
‘Well, I work with a publication called the New Internationalist.’
‘Oh really?’
With inward dismay I noted his eyes glint with interest.
‘That issue a couple of months ago was far too soft on transnational corporations' involvement with the Latin American military.’
‘Well,’ I stammered, ‘we gave some useful facts.’
‘The trouble with you lot,’ he said swinging his uniformed arms, clipboard and all, ‘is you're too liberal.
The whole National Security ideology of Latin America is a cloak for gross torture and death-squad activity.
And who does all this violence benefit?
It's the North American companies.
Sucking that continent dry, that's what those parasites are doing.
‘Yes, I've been a subscriber for a couple of years now.
Did you hear your office in Christchurch was fire-bombed yesterday?
Me, weakly.
‘Oh, really?’
‘Mind you, it's probably not the New Internationalist those racists were after.
It's the Stop the All Blacks Tour (of South Africa).
You just share the same offices.’
A quiet town, I had thought.
Customs officers?
The same the world over, I had thought.
Surprising where you, the opinion-makers, turn up.
Date with a diaphragm
Take one woman, somewhat nervous, somewhat inexperienced.
Add sundry contraceptive devices and technologies.
Put them together in a lonely hotel room to await the first night with a new lover.
Juliet Kellner remembers it well.
My first encounter with contraception happened in a rainy city in the industrial north, hundreds of miles from home, in an unfriendly hotel.
There I was, sitting forlornly, chin on knees, on an oceanic bed dotted with small paper bags and smaller cardboard packets like so much flotsam — waiting for my lover.
The first paper bag, by my left knee, had held the four little packets now strewn beside it.
Each packet contained still more card and paper — a foil-covered card studded with a necklace of pills and a long accordion-pleated leaflet.
The pill: the most reliable of all contraceptives.
It had been awkward for me to ask our family doctor to prescribe it: he knew my husband and I had parted some time ago.
So he'd be sure to realise I was planning to sleep with a lover.
The embarrassment made me postpone going to the clinics for weeks — until the last possible moment, in fact: the day before I was due to board the train that bore me off to this hotel room in Manchester.
I wished later that I hadn't been so shy.
Because when I read the leaflet on that crucial afternoon, it turned out that I couldn't start swallowing the pills on any old day: the course had to begin at a particular point in my menstrual cycle.
It was obvious really, when I stopped to think.
But one rarely thinks that clearly about things one has no experience of.
Oh, well, I thought.
Never mind.
I had organised two more fallback packages that would come in handy now.
One contained a huge tube of spermicidal cream, like a monstrous tube of toothpaste.
Gingerly I squeezed a bit on my fingertip.
It was very shiny, very fluffy, very pretty — more like icing than toothpaste.
But it smelled awful.
Good grief!
Would the smell put me off sex?
Worse, would it put him off?
With my confidence about as durable as a wet tissue, I thought I'd better do whatever needed to be done with it well before he arrived, and then wash it off my fingers and anywhere else visible and smellable.
It was time to open the next package.
That contained a sort of hinged plastic oyster shell, which opened to reveal a tiny rubber trampoline: the diaphragm.
Well, it was tiny for a trampoline, but it looked far too big to push inside a person.
Hasty hunt for more instructions.
The diaphragm, I read, had to be smeared with spermicide, squeezed tight between fingers and thumb to make it narrow enough, then inserted at an implausible angle.
Practice was obviously required.
I was unaccustomed to exploring my own body so I was relieved I had plenty of time before my lover was expected.
The thought of inserting the diaphragm was worrying me quite a bit.
I wanted peace and quiet to get it done unpressured.
So I duly smeared and squeezed.
But it just wouldn't stay folded.
As soon as I loosened my grip the tiniest fraction — say to alter the angle of insertion from one that caused grievous bodily harm to one that was only very uncomfortable — the damned thing sprang into a new incarnation as a frisbee and shot across the room.
Then it had to be washed (to remove the carpet fluff from the cream).
Then the carpet had to be scrubbed (to remove the cream from the carpet).
then the frisbee had to be dried carefully (with a towel that didn't moult).
And then the whole process had to begin again.
Of course the harder I tried to insert it, the tenser I became, and the less my body would accept the foreign intruder.
Soon it was time to stop, hum a tune, take a few calming breaths, and generally try to kid myself that nothing unusual was happening here.
During one of these rest periods, I decided to read the instructions some more.
Once I got the hang of it, I had been telling myself smugly, there would be nothing to stop us having a marvelous time for a glorious night and a day…
But there was.
If you want to make love more than once, said the notes — and with years of celibacy to make up for, I certainly did — it would be a good idea to insert another dollop of cream.
For this, it continued, I would need an inserter like a little spatula.
Alternatively, I could insert a thing called a pessary, which appeared to be a very small torpedo of solidified spermicide that dissolved internally.
I looked urgently in the bag for more apparatus.
No spatula.
No torpedo.
Nothing.
Oh, no — did this mean going through the uncouth rigmarole of extrication, re-smearing and reinsertion in the presence of the newly-beloved?
Further gloom was cast by the next piece of information.
The spermicide didn't stay hostile to sperm for more than a few hours.
If I did manage to get the rubber disc in now, but then he arrived an hour or two late, and then we went out for a romantic candle-lit dinner, and then we chatted for a while…the spermicide would have decided to cease hostilities at just about the time I needed it to be at its most fierce.
It was time for a radical rethink.
It was nearly five o'clock — close on closing time.
I could go out and buy spatulas and torpedos, but I'd have to be quick.
I discarded my unfamiliar new slinky satin pyjamas for my familiar old sweater and jeans and headed for the nearest shops.
It was cascading rain and freezing cold.
December in Manchester is no place to start a love affair.
And where, oh where, were all the chemists?
I got to the chemist five minutes before closing time and the place was jam-packed with the elderly and respectable.
There is nothing wrong about buying contraceptives, I kept telling myself.
It is failing to buy them that is wrong: bringing unwanted babies into the world, defoliating the planet, using up its mineral resources…
But it was no good.
How on earth was I supposed to ask for ‘a sort of little spatula thing…for, er,…for, er…’ without everyone looking at me?
I hovered in an agony of embarrassment, until —
Saved, in the nick of time.
In front of me were rows and rows of condoms: plain, ribbed (ribbed?), thick, thin, multicoloured…
‘I'll have some of those,’ I said boldly, pointing wildly in their general direction and proffering a large banknote.
I hoped to heaven the pharmacist wouldn't ask me difficult questions like ‘how many?’ or ‘what size?’.
How could I admit I didn't know?
I prayed that condoms were like stretch stockings and all came in one size.
Mercifully, she said nothing, but silently handed me yet another package and my change.
I stuffed it all into my pocket and raced back through the rain to the hotel, my hair in soggy fronds and my feet squelching.
This is not how I'd imagined it, I thought ruefully.
I was going to be seductive, with satin pyjamas and satin-smooth hair — and a discretely protected reproductive system.
I ran up the stairs to my room.
With any luck I'd have time to dry my hair and dive back into the satin whatsits before he arrived.
I threw the final package on the bed, wrenched off my boots and was standing in damp socks, pummelling my hair with a towel, when the door flew open.
It was him.
They'd finished work early, he explained.
He'd tried to ring me with the good news but I had been out.
Then he saw the array of paper bags and packages on the bed.
‘What's all this?’ he said, picking them up one at a time.
‘Are we going to need all these?
Looks like a wild night.’
And after I'd explained, and we'd laughed a good deal, and taken off each others’ wet clothes, it was.
It's the thought that counts!
Use the NI Products for Change Catalogue for your gifts this Christmas.
Dear reader,
Here's a thought that counts…twice over.
First by responding to this catalogue you will be ordering attractive, good quality and unusual gifts that anyone would be delighted to receive.
Second, every product in the catalogue has a message.
The result is that you will be using your buying power to say something positive about the changes we need in our world.
Take a look at our NI 1990 Third World Calendar.
Always popular, this year in the calendar we have gathered together one of the most beautiful collections of positive images of life in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
You can catch a sneak preview of some of the other pictures in this large (almost 2 foot x 1 foot) photo calendar by checking on the Third World Greetings Cards you'll see around the catalogue.
We use five of the calendar pictures as cards — like the Mauretanian camel race, life on the steps of the Shive Dragon Temple in Burma, or Andean Indians winnowing grain.
Close by the Greetings Cards in the catalogue is the NI 1990 Third World Almanac.
This is the second year in the life of this photo diary and all the painstaking work that went into launching the publication appears to be appreciated.
We found in a questionaire to buyers last year that the Almanac topped the charts as the item that most surpassed their expectations.
This time we have given the Almanac a few ‘tweaks’ to ensure it is even more effective.
NEW this year is a giant Arno Peters Jigsaw Puzzle map of the world.
Assemble it with friends and children.
Show off by knowing which countries fit together.
Or perhaps you might find out more about where our world's oceans, rivers and mountains are?
Either way you'll see the earth from a different cartographic viewpoint.
Environmental concerns have never been higher on the shopping list.
So the attractive stationery printed on recycled paper is likely to be even more popular.
And the big sheets of wrapping paper — with bold designs on 100 per cent recycled paper — are a must for wrapping up gifts.
If you want to be more upfront about your concerns, try one of our new T-shirts.
Displaying this message should appeal:
‘Only when the last tree has died and the last river been
poisoned and the last fish been caught will we realise we
cannot eat money’
It is found on our long-sleeve cream T shirt, the short-sleeve version and on our kitchen tea towel.
Do you know someone who would appreciate the sentiments?
A word of advice; look at the small print very carefully.
For there you will see just how modest the prices are.
Garments are substantially less expensive than those in the High Street.
The giant jigsaw is good value.
And high quality greetings cards can be twice the price of those shown here.
Not least, the Calendar and the Almanac have remained at the same price as last year despite all the inflationery pressures.
Save yourself the hassle of pushing through the crowds this Christmas by using this Products for Change catalogue, and remember we will promptly refund your money if you are not pleased with what you have received.
You'll know that when you select NI products you'll be buying gifts that are a pleasure to give as well as to receive.
Best wishes,
Dexter Tiranti
(NI Co-editor)
P.S. Just pointing out you are bound to need some wrapping paper.
Why not take ours?
There are ten sheets on recycled paper with a cheerful bold Third World design, and they are extra big in size this year.
The good doctor
Guruji treats madness with herbal medicine in a village near Delhi.
Sudhir Kakar, trained as a psychoanalyst in the West, finds much to admire in his work.
Jharsetli, a village 40 kilometres north-west of Delhi, lies in the heart of the prosperous farm belt of Haryana.
Similar to other villages in the area in most respects, a part of it has acquired a semi-industrial facade because of its proximity to the main highway.
There are small repair shops with antique lathes and grinding machines.
Worn-out truck tyres stacked in heaps announce the arrival in the village of the industrial era.
There is an appealing air of grubby vitality in this part of the village, a seediness not of decay but of impending birth.
The dharmashala in which the doctor — Guruji, as he is commonly and respectfully known — works and lives was constructed many years ago by some pious rich people as an inn to provide poor travellers and pilgrims with shelter.
Guruji took over the building in 1963 and hung out a simple sign with the inscription Manasik Chikitsa Kendra —‘Centre for the Treatment of Mental Illnesses’.
The inn-hospital is a decrepit, single-storied structure.
Lying almost at the outer edge of the village, a couple of hundred yards off the highway, Guruji's domain is isolated from the rest of the village and has an aura of self-sufficiency.
Despite the faint purr of traffic from the highway and the whiff of exhaust fumes, the inn has the quality of a stage village with its temple, its pond in which water buffalo wallow, its pair of pie dogs taking their ease under pipal trees, and the surrounding fields.
Guruji seems very much at home in these surroundings.
He is a 60-year-old man with humorous eyes that belie the apparent strictness of his manner.
Dressed in a freshly laundered dhoti, a clean white turban wrapped neatly around his head and a rough khadi coat buttoned up to the collar, he walks with the gait of a man accustomed to expect deference.
Resolving medical problems, admonishing the transgressors of rules, arbitrating disputes, cracking jokes with a deadpan expression on his face, Guruji is clearly the hub of this community and the force that holds it together.
The bulk of his clients comprise severely disturbed psychotic patients from nearby villages and towns.
To watch him interview these patients is to watch a master at work.
Two men walk up with a patient between them.
He is a middle-aged man who drags his feet as he walks.
His hair is unkempt, his eyes bloodshot, his face haggard from exhaustion.
‘Where do you come from?’
Guruji asks them.
They mumble the name of a nearby village.
‘What is wrong?’ he asks the patient gently.
The three men start to speak at the same time.
The patient has great difficulty in being coherent.
One of his companions interrupts.
‘Don't believe a word he says, Guruji.’
‘Why shouldn't I believe him?
Because you think you are normal and he is mad?
‘Don't believe what he says, Guruji.’’
He mimics the man.
He turns back to the patient, his expression gentle again — there is no trace of a professional ‘caring’ in his words or the jarring chord of insincere concern in his voice.
‘What is wrong with you?’
‘Don't fight with me.
I…
’ The patient's speech is again jumbled.
‘Brother, I haven't understood you.
Is your throat dry?’
The patient nods.
Guruji asks one of the companions to fetch a glass of water.
The man drinks the water but is still unable to speak.
Guruji looks inquiringly at the companions.
They explain that the patient is engaged in a legal battle with his brother over some land.
Recently he has become uncontrollably excited in the court, shouting, screaming and ready to hit anyone who tries to restrain him.
‘So you have come to me after fighting so much!’ continues Guruji, smiling.
Then in a feigned scolding voice: ‘I won't keep you here.
Tomorrow you'll also fight with me, will you?’
The patient is visibly relaxed.
He nods his assent and then, realizing he's made a mistake, vigorously shakes his head in denial.
Guruji speaks to all of them.
‘Go and sleep inside.
I will check his pulse tomorrow morning.’
Guruji clearly feels he has a mandate to aid the patient's struggle, not only against his illness but also against those who by their conduct either ‘cause’ or perpetuate the illness.
Most therapists in the West, although they pay lip service to the patient's interest, find it economically and professionally imprudent not to act as the agent of the family and society.
‘In your tradition’, he once said to me, ‘largactyl is given and the patient is made to sleep.
As long as he is asleep he won't trouble anyone.
The patient's family is satisfied and so too is the doctor.
As far as the patient is concerned, he is too drugged to complain.
How convenient for everyone!’
At any given time, there are generally eight to ten patients living in the dharmashala together with their family caretakers.
They are severely disturbed, the most common presentation — from a Western psychiatric viewpoint — being catatonia, a schizophrenic disorder manifested in posturing, mutism, facial grimaces and mannerisms.
In the acute excitement stages, when delusions of grandeur, loquacity and hyperactivity prevail, the patients require physical restraint.
The medical regimen is generally uniform.
It starts in the morning with a ‘purge to the head’— a ‘nasal’ treatment in which medicine is administered through the nose and eyes, which is extremely painful — and continues with regular administration of herbal tranquillizers, digestive powders and a sleeping pill at night.
All the medicines are prepared on the premises by the patients, participating quite literally in the process of their own cure.
I attribute Guruji's healing success to two main factors.
The first is his personality.
It is clear that he has a well-defined professional identity and authenticity which have their roots in his strict adherence to his own therapeutic tradition (ayuverdic medicine), in contrast to the ‘flexibility’ and eclecticism of many therapists in the West.
The second is that his treatment of psychotic patients fulfils most of the criteria for an ideal milieu therapy.
His institution is small and near the population it serves.
It is open and there is much movement between the inside and the outside.
Patients have many of their personal belongings and their own clothing available to them.
Small groups of patients and their family members come together with the staff members in meaningful work (preparation of medicine) and social interaction.
We know that such a humane, therapeutic community which provides predictability, certainty and continuity of experience can gradually replace the patient's pseudo-reality with a new reality, promoting a resolution of painful tensions and enhancing self-esteem.
Guruji himself, however, emphasizes the physiological rather than psychological explanation for his therapeutic successes.
‘In Ayurveda,’ he says, ‘the cure of mental illness takes place primarily on the plane of the body.
We try to determine the bodily functions that have become disjointed…the patient should have a good sleep, eat properly and the bowels must move more regularly.
If these three functions are put back in order then the patient is already half cured.’
The world seen through the eyes of Indian healers and the tongue of their tradition seems, at first, very different.
Human freedom, for example, in the traditional Indian context implies an increase in the potential to experience different inner states while limiting action in the outer world to stereotypes and unquestioning adaptation.
In the West, the notion of freedom seeks to increase the potential for action in the outer world while keeping the inner state as constant, and rational, as possible.
Each culture has consistently underestimated the strength and attraction of the other.
Having experienced both, I know that we would benefit from an awareness of the relativity of all healing approaches, and a recognition of the universality of their concerns.
And that the Western psychotherapeutic tradition could learn a great deal from the work of people like the Good Doctor of Jharsetli.
Moralists and Malthusians
In 1972 the US spent three times more on family planning in the Third World than it did on health: ‘It's a right-wing plot’, some declared.
In 1986 the US cut off all funding to the UN's Fund for Population Activities and to the International Planned Parenthood Federation.
‘It's a right-wing plot’, others asserted.
Peter Stalker sifts through some population contradictions and explains how both interpretations can be true.
The 1987 State of World Population Report is written in code.
Nothing new about that: the UN's Fund for Population Activities, who produced the Report, is not noted for plain speaking.
And most readers of such documents understand the code so this does not much matter.
But the average NI reader might be quite surprised if she ponders its final section: ‘Population Growth — Threat or Triumph?’
This goes to some trouble to refute the idea that population growth is desirable and will not cause ecological damage.
You might wonder why UNFPA should expend quite so much effort in arguing against such a crackpot idea.
Who does believe such things anyway?
Well, some rather important people: right-wing ideologues with the ear of the US administration.
And they have got the UN seriously rattled.
In August 1986 the US Agency for International Development (USAID) withheld all funding from UNFPA.
All this is very strange.
It isn't so long ago that the advocates of population control were being attacked not from the right but from the left.
Family planners used to be condemned as lackeys of US imperialism who wanted to suppress the dark threatening hordes of the Third World poor.
A bit of history might shed some light.
The man usually credited with starting the whole population ball rolling was an Englishman, Thomas Malthus.
In his Essay on Population in 1803 he was the first person to consider what would happen if the world's population were to continue to grow unabated.
Like plants that jostle for a bare minimum of soil and light, human beings would eventually fill all the available territory, he warned.
True to his predictions, the population of Europe and North America did indeed grow dramatically in the 150 years that followed.
But, contrary to his expectations, his gloomy prognosis was disproved.
Human beings turned out to be more intelligent than dandelions and modified their behaviour to match the new circumstances.
Parents in the new cities, with their clean water and sewage systems, found their healthy offspring more expensive to feed, clothe and educate so they decided, without the help of any population policy, to limit the size of their families.
Life in the poorer countries remained dangerous and short, however, with disease continuing to take its regular toll of young children.
But after World War II, health and sanitation started to improve there too.
Soon the Malthusian spectre rose up again as populations soared.
But the Sixties were an optimistic decade.
For every problem there was a technical solution.
And the technical solution to the population problem was contraception.
So Western experts were soon jetting off to poor countries to run surveys and design massive family planning programmes.
And when these didn't meet with immediate success, yet more surveys were done and more programmes developed — until, ultimately, it was decided that, if parents could not be trusted to do the right thing, the decision had to be taken out of their hands.
Helicopters dropped experts onto unsuspecting villages in Nepal; Tunisian women were coerced into buses to have loops inserted without explanation; African women were given contraceptive injections against their or their husbands' wills.
Not surprisingly this produced a strong counter-reaction.
Radical voices in developing countries began to accuse the West of plotting to keep down the numbers in the Third World so as to maintain their own privileged position.
A notable Bolivian film, Blood of the Condor, told the story of Peace Corps volunteers sterilising Bolivian women while delivering their children.
Come the Seventies it was time for a rethink.
So some of the experts investigated further.
They discovered that people in poor countries persisted in having so many children because they wanted them.
The reason seemed to be that the improvements in sanitation and health in Europe and North America had occurred alongside general economic progress.
Parents with higher incomes had less need of child labour — anyway many children were now at school — and they began to spend more on bringing them up.
So children turned from an asset into a liability and, in academic parlance, a ‘demographic transition’ took place as high rates of death and birth were replaced by low ones.
In poor countries, however, incomes did not rise as death rates began to fall.
So parents actually welcomed the possibility of a large family: an extra pair of hands could soon pay for itself by working in the fields as well as ensuring security for the parents' old age.
So a new population wisdom emerged: only when people were financially secure could they risk smaller families.
Once they were better-off they would start using contraceptives of their own accord.
‘Take care of the people and the population will take care of itself’ was their slogan.
If you like labels, you could call this new group the ‘developmentalists’.
By 1974 — year of the first ever World Population Conference in Bucharest — there were roughly three population camps.
In the first were the Malthusians.
Led by USAID, they argued that people in the Third World were poor because they were having too many children.
This position received support from an emerging environmental movement and an influential new report — Limits to Growth from the Club of Rome — which warned that the world was running out of oil and almost everything else.
The second camp was inhabited largely by a group of sceptical, defensive Third World governments, who often refused to consider that they had a population problem at all.
In the third camp — implicitly supporting the Third World position — were the developmentalists, which included the UNFPA.
They argued that development would eventually take the Third World through its own demographic transition to low rates of death and birth.
In the years that followed the developmentalists turned out to have most of the evidence on their side.
This forced even the most raucous Malthusian pill-pushers to tone down their rhetoric and ‘integrate’ family planning into health and development programmes — though their hidden agenda was still to get people to use contraceptives.
However, some Third World governments also started to shift their approach — often, ironically, towards a more Malthusian position.
These nouveau-riches elites were getting worried about the increasing numbers of poor families camped outside their large houses.
And some of the worst excesses during this period came from Third World governments, such as Sanjay Ghandi's notorious sterilisation campaign in India in 1976.
Later still, both Malthusians and developmentalists softened their lines.
The Malthusians now had their ‘integrated’ health programmes, albeit only thinly-disguised family planning campaigns.
But the developmentalists, too, were having second thoughts.
A massive 42-country World Fertility Survey, commissioned by UNFPA and USAID, demonstrated that half the women who wanted no more children had no access to contraception.
So distribution of information and contraceptives was now accepted as a way of meeting this ‘unmet need’, alongside other development efforts.
But just as these two groups began moving closer together, other forces were gathering which threatened to blow the consensus wide apart once more.
The first new force was the women's movement (always prominent in the field of family planning, but now with more international influence).
Now, much of what they were saying — particularly their insistence that women had a right to control their bodies and therefore a right to family planning — was welcomed by all sides of the population industry.
But the feminists went further.
They argued that the right to control their own bodies should include the right to abortion.
This outraged the Catholic Church of course.
But this was nothing new — the Church had long objected to all artificial methods of contraception.
What was new was the uproar this caused among the second new force on the population scene — the New Right.
The New Right — in the guise of the Reagan Administration in the US and, to a lesser extent, Thatcherism in the UK — had already attacked most of the conventional development wisdom of the Seventies.
Aid was discredited, as was the whole idea of development planning.
Third World governments should be stepping aside and letting market forces work their magic, they argued.
Now they went to work on population too.
New Right population ideology has two distinct components: the economic and the moral.
The high-priest on the economic front is Professor Julian Simon of the University of Maryland.
For him more people are not a problem: on the contrary, they are the ‘ultimate resource’.
Providing they are not restrained by government interference, newly-born humans offer a fresh source of ingenuity and can provide solutions to many more problems than they cause — by discovering new energy sources, for instance.
The moral component of the New Right's population ideology, on the other hand, is based upon the sanctity of family life and the rights of the foetus.
It is resolutely opposed to abortion and would like to see women firmly back in the home, where they belong.
In fact there is no logical connection between the moral and economic components — Simon himself is not against abortion.
What ties them together is their adoption by the Reagan Administration, which uses Simon's economic thesis to give intellectual backbone to their moralistic assertions.
But put together, they produced a potent brew which has caused an extraordinary about-face in US Government policy: at the 1984 World Population Conference in Mexico City, the US described population growth as merely a ‘neutral phenomenon’.
The real problem, they argued, was government interference in the efficient play of market forces.
But it was the moral part of the New-Right's package that really put the cat among the pigeons.
On grounds that they were funding programmes which included abortion, the US cut off its support to UNFPA.
The International Planned Parenthood Federation — an association of local family planning organisations around the world — also lost its US funding because it would not promise to deny women the option of an abortion.
So now the ideological battlefield is littered with a number of often overlapping forces — Malthusians, feminists and developmentalists, as well as the moralists and economists of the New Right.
And you are likely to find representatives of all camps within any given organisation.
All of which brings us back to the 1987 State of World Population Report and its coded messages.
Now that you have a vague idea what is going on, you could be forgiven for throwing up your hands in disgust and letting them all get on with it.
But the Third World poor, on the receiving end of programmes designed by one faction or the other, do not have this option.
Domitila — the forgotten activist
The 1980s have not been kind to Bolivia — and especially not to its devastated tin-mining communities.
Sophia Tickell tried to track down two great characters who brought home to NI readers what conditions were like in the mining town of Siglo XX.
She found only one — a woman who feels betrayed by sympathizers in the West.
From the start I knew that finding Domitila Barrios de Chungara and Higon Cussi was not going to be easy.
Both come from the tight-knit and militant mining community of Siglo XX which was torn apart in 1986.
The crash in the price of tin on the world market — and the election of a right-wing government committed to a ruthless neo-liberal economic model — led in early 1986 to the closure of all state mines.
I found Siglo XX to be a ghost town.
In three years, the district, which includes the Catavi mine, has lost over 2,500 of the original 3,000 workers.
Those who remain are employed in maintenance and repair work.
The miners' houses, built in the 1920s by tin baron Simon Patiño, were abandoned and rapidly becoming derelict.
The school and the hospital, hard-won gains of the miners, lacked patients and pupils, and a few people stood idly around the union building, former hub of the district.
The only activity of any note was on the strip of land leading from the mouth of the mine.
Like convicts, co-operatives of ex-miners and local campesinos spend day and night there breaking rock in the hope of finding a little mineral that they can sell.
Renowned for their political militancy, the miners have proved tragically unable to maintain this political leverage once the economic power was taken from them.
There has been little pattern in the movements of the 23,000 miners who were ‘relocated’ from mines throughout the country.
Like other state-sector workers, the Government promised to find new jobs for those they laid off, but in reality most have been left to their fate without support.
Some families have moved to the shanty towns in La Paz and Cochabamba, where even now some live in tents.
Others made their way to the coca-growing Chapare region, only to return plagued by the heat and tropical illness.
Some have emigrated, and yet others eke out a living selling contraband toothpaste or soap from neighbouring Chile or Peru.
So the very act of searching became symbolic of the drastic changes that have recently shaken Bolivia.
Previously self-reliant communities are now so dispersed that the whereabouts of family members remains unknown.
I never did find Higon Cussi.
Domitila now lives in Cochabamba in the foothills of the Andes.
With the $10,000 she received from the sale of Let Me Speak, her harrowing account of life and political struggle at Siglo XX, she has been able to buy a two-roomed house in the poor neighbourhood of Hayrakasa.
She lives there with four of her seven children who remain alive, and her tiny grandson.
I asked her about the changes in her life since the NI featured her in 1979.
‘I lived my life in Siglo XX as described in the book until 1980, when I was invited to a conference on women in Denmark.
Two days after I arrived, the García Meza coup took place and two-and-a-half years of exile began.
I was not allowed to return to Bolivia, so I spent my time and energy denouncing what was happening and setting up solidarity networks.
I ended up in Sweden for most of that time.
It was very difficult.
For over seven months I had no idea what had happened to my family — and in that time both my father and my sister died.
‘Anyway in 1982 Bolivia returned to democracy, after 16 years of military rule, and I went home to Siglo XX.
In 1985 the winner of the election was Dr Paz Estenssoro, three times President but no friend of the people.
The challenge facing his government was to bring down hyper-inflation, which at one time even reached 24,000 per cent.
They succeeded, but at what cost?
Outside Bolivia Dr Paz is this great hero who brought down inflation.
But he only did it by sacking thousands and thousands of workers.
Not just miners — factory workers, builders, public-sector workers, teachers and nurses as well.’
I asked Domitila about her own experience, and what had happened at Siglo XX during that turbulent time.
‘In 1986 they shut down the mine and offered all the workers a pay-off.
Well of course we protested and went on the March for Life and Peace, which was turned back by the military.
The new government's economic policy was fatal for us.
They wanted to break the strength of our union.
They stopped providing the subsidized food which had made it possible to survive.
At the beginning we all resisted, and put up with the hardship, but it was impossible.
In the end it's the hunger that wears you down.
It's the children crying to be fed, and having to get up in the morning and pawn whatever you've got left to buy four rolls for breakfast or a kilo of sugar.
In the end, despite our efforts and those of friends, we just had to go.
‘It was terrible.
Most of us had been born in the mining community.
It was the only life we'd ever known.
When you want to move somewhere you plan it in advance, you prepare yourself for the change.
But it wasn't like that for us.
We were just thrown out from one day to the next.
It was so sad.
We were bewildered.
We felt as if our mother was dying.
When your mother dies you don't know where to go or what's going to happen to you.
We didn't know when, or even if, we were going to meet again.
We couldn't understand why we had to go.
We stayed and stayed until we were forced to leave.
‘I came straight to Cochabamba with my family because we were lucky enough to have the money from my book and I'd bought this land before leaving Bolivia in 1980.
We always thought we'd leave, I suppose.
Even before they closed the mine we knew that once they retired my husband we'd have to move.
The company only provides housing while you're working.
Once you're retired you have three months to get out.
That's why so many of our sons went down the mine — to stop the family becoming homeless.
‘So we came to Cochabamba.
My husband stayed at the mine.
I suppose we're typical of so many families that split up over the changes.
It's been difficult.
Finding the younger children schools took up all our time to begin with, and then we had to find a way of surviving.
It's been tough on the kids.
We've all tried to get work, but none of us has anything permanent.
You try selling pasties in the market — something we always did to supplement our income at the mine — but it's impossible.
Oh, there are plenty of people who want to eat, but no-one has the money to pay.
My son did get a job in a button factory and an optician's but he was laid off from both because of lack of demand.
It's more expensive to manufacture things here in Bolivia than it is to buy contraband.
So we make out as best we can.
Sometimes we have enough to eat, sometimes we don't.’
I asked Domitila whether she was involved in any political activity or neighbourhood pressure group.
The contrast between her hand-to-mouth existence in Cochabamba and the former vibrant activist who inspired people all over the world was very striking.
‘The only neighbourhood committees here are those controlled by the political party in government.
There are no people's committees.
Look, this area empties at five or six in the morning and people come back at nine or ten at night.’
She pointed to an 11-year-old girl who had been hovering in the doorway since I arrived.
‘She's the sort of person who's here in the daytime.
Her mother leaves her one boliviano (40 cents) a day to feed her five brothers and sisters.
Sometimes she buys bread and sometimes pasta.
If it's pasta she comes here and asks us to cook it for her.
The little ones complain, thinking the money should be able to buy much more.
How can you expect organization when the struggle for survival is so acute?’
In the past Domitila was a champion of international solidarity.
She wrote her book, and spent two-and-a-half years in exile raising support for the struggles of the people in her country.
I asked her what she thought the role of solidarity is now.
‘I'm not sure.
When my book came out everyone was interested.
Everyone loved the drama and the repression and our struggle.
Now the fight is just as hard but it's not so romantic, so it seems people have lost interest.
I believe that the Bolivian people are going to continue struggling.
Things aren't going to stay as they are now.
On the contrary, it's going to get much harder.
I think that's why the US troops have arrived to build their runways.
They're not building that runway at Potosi so that we Bolivians can travel, as if we had the money!
They're building it so that they can control events in the whole of South America when things get really tough.
I think that people in other countries who value democracy, freedom and who recognize that we need work, I think that they should do solidarity work with us.
Now — not just when it's romantic.’
Editor's Letter
The early winter evenings in Oxford are magic.
Courtyards and cloisters are pools of shadow and lamp-light.
The chapels glow through stained glass.
The city seems like it is preparing for a masked ball.
The students hurry about in a state of permanent excitement, as if they were amazed to have been chosen to live in such a sumptuous place, to eat breakfast under chandeliers.
(I speak of course of those who are not members of the British aristocracy.
The latter would regard it as their natural right.)
I look at these hand-picked people with great interest.
And I know that they — and the place — are a result of a celebration of one particular part of the human mind: that part involved in academic knowledge.
The reason they were picked (aside from those who are here by right of birth) is that a small portion of their total brain power was visibly alight at the right time and in the right place.
And they have been rewarded for it.
This probably sounds like a run-up to a full-scale attack on Oxford and academic knowledge.
But it isn't.
The place is beautiful and its studies a precious part of human heritage.
But…
But inside the great doors of the colleges there is often a small notice.
It reads: ‘This college is closed to visitors’.
And indeed it is.
These beautiful buildings, along with a whole realm of cultivated human intellect, are closed to the vast majority of humankind.
And this is not because humanity isn't up to it.
The only belief I'll never recant is that every single undamaged baby is born with fabulous, infinite intellectual potential.
And that, of all the terrible wastage of resources in the world, it is the wasting of that intellectual potential that is the worst.
Anyway, to come back to Oxford: While editing this issue of the magazine, I was confronted every day with the contrast between the university and education all over the world.
I was struck more and more by the fact that there are comparable celebrations of human brilliance in the most deprived places.
The photographs of school-children under fire in Beirut, of pupils piling into tin shacks for lessons in Namibia, of students reading (in between sinking a new well and sowing next year's crop) in Laos, give off that same feeling of excitement as the Oxford students.
Better still, they are a reminder of the myriad forms that intelligence takes, a reminder that the Oxford sort is just one amongst many.
The anger in this issue is concentrated on two things.
One is the attack on people's confidence in their own abilities by politically-motivated assessment systems.
The other is the onslaught on the mind by mass junk entertainment.
I realize that this issue may seem British-centered.
This is partly because my personal experience of the rest of the world is limited.
But there is another reason.
The British education system contains both the best and the worst — from atrocious elitism to brilliant inventiveness in curriculum development.
And aspects of both have been exported across the world — though, sadly, vastly more of the former.
Right now Britain is going through dark days — because the gang now in power are determined to destroy all the achievements of post-war British society, including the best in its education system.
But I hope the articles in this issue of the magazine will say to you, as they do to me: you can fool some people some of the time, but you can't fool most people for ever.
They are just too intelligent.
EDITOR'S LETTER
Many newspapers compile lists of what they consider to have been the best novels of the previous year — a useful guide to what readers might try to get hold of.
Since this issue of the NI is devoted to language we thought we might join them for once, but give our own particular slant and maybe set you off in a different direction.
We have offered what we consider to be the best works of fiction by Third World writers — not just of this year, but of any year.
This is partly because we think they should be more widely recognized but also because they can also be wonderfully informative and entertaining.
I first read Petals of Blood by Ngugi Wa Thiong'o while on a visit to Kenya.
I realized as I turned its pages that this was probably telling me more about the country and its people than my actual visit.
I don't speak Swahili, the local papers were subject to heavy Government censorship and I had learned very little from history books of the opinions or lives of ordinary Kenyans.
But Ngugi managed to lift me out of my armchair and place me inside his imaginary village of Ilmorog.
Had the only purpose of my visit been to discover what Kenya is really like I might have saved on the air fare and just bought the book.
You can get similar value from Isabelle Allende's Of Love and Shadows which gives a vivid picture of what it is like to be on the wrong end of the dictatorial boot in Chile.
In this case the book is not only cheaper but considerably safer.
Compiling such a list was a labour of love — too pleasurable an activity to pursue in office hours.
Indeed I piled up on my home bookshelf many more volumes than appear here and which I have regretfully had to omit.
How on earth does one decide which are the best — and choose only ten?
In the end it comes down to personal prejudice.
I did consult with many other people; my thanks to all of them even if their suggestions could not be taken up.
They pointed me towards writers I had never even heard of, let alone read.
I was fairly ignorant of Third World literature at the outset and in many respects still am.
I would like to have heard of Sembene Ousmane years ago; I could have enjoyed God's Bits of Wood much earlier.
The final selection was slanted towards books with a strong social content and which explored political issues.
So Mario Vargas Llosa is represented by The Real Life of Alejandro Mayta rather than the technical brilliance of Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter.
And, again somewhat arbitrarily, we have allowed only one book per author.
We also looked for a geographical spread of writers.
It was disappointing that there were relatively few possibilities from Asia.
Africa and Latin America seem to have been rather more prolific — in English translation at least— though this may be due to the vigour with which the publishers have sought out writers to publish.
It is unusual for us to devote much space to fiction.
But this month it is particularly helpful.
Language is a tricky subject to write about.
Words about words tend to float off into a mysterious space of their own — though I hope most of those we have used have been firmly pinned down.
Fragments of fiction can, in their own way, add an additional touch of reality.
The only certain result of such a selection, however, is that it will provoke dissent from NI readers.
I look forward to your suggestions for the most glaring omissions.
EDITOR'S LETTER
Breaking rules is fun.
So are stories about people doing it.
It was therefore not hard to think up entertaining themes and commission a bunch of lively articles for this issue of theNI on the subject of the underground economy.
It might have been quite fun as guest editor to just leave it there.
But that might have left you, the reader, with an empty feeling — like you had just eaten a dozen vol-au-vents when it was actually a three-course meal that you ordered.
So I got thinking about whether it should bother us that more and more people in the world today are working underground, illegally, outside the legitimate economy.
I must admit the ‘truth’ did not smack me right between the eyes or make me leap like Archimedes from his bath.
To begin with the variety of the subject was so dazzling, at times blindingly so.
There were all these different characters pursuing activities of vastly varying degrees of dodginess.
How could you, for instance, put the smarmy, tax-dodging, moonlighting, computer whizz-kid in the same bag as the shoeshine boy trying to make out on the streets of a Third World city?
And then there was that million dollar question that NI co-editors are prone to ask: ‘What is your line?
Are you saying it's a good thing or a bad thing?’
‘Um,’ I think I replied and went away to think about it, read about it, talk to people about it, and with people who were doing it.
Memory came in handy too.
Who can honestly say they have never done a bit of work off-the-books or used the services of somebody who was doing so?
What had started me thinking about the underground — or the informal sector — was spending a couple of years in Latin America.
You could not avoid it there.
Most of the population were making a living, and sometimes a killing, in ways that were strictly speaking illegal.
It was great, observers said.
People were creating jobs for themselves in a free market.
It seemed a funny sort of freedom to me when all you saw was poor people working like crazy and getting poorer and rich people not appearing to be doing much of anything except remaining quietly rich
Returning to Britain I was struck by how many people I knew — otherwise law-abiding citizens — were also working in large or small ways off-the-books.
‘So, what are you saying?’
I hear you echo.
‘Is it a good thing or a bad thing?’
Well, you will just have to read on and see.
EDITOR'S LETTER
Now I've finished researching this issue of NI, I have come to hate the very word ‘population’.
Not because I've tapped it into the word processor so many times — though that would be reason enough — but because once it is uttered even the most sensible, humane people tend to react in a disturbing, almost totalitarian, way.
‘Having too many children is like smoking,’ said one to me.
‘Why should I get lung cancer because of your self-indulgent habit?’
And that was one of the milder arguments.
One man I met on holiday even suggested that sending aid to Africa was ‘compounding the problem’ because it allowed so many potential breeders to survive.
The problem, I believe, is that the word ‘population’ is an abstract, statistical term.
It's a word we use to talk about masses of undifferentiated humanity — like buying a pound of whitebait for your supper, rather than, say, 341 little silver fishes that once frisked and swam in the dappled shallows of the ocean.
I'm being deliberately fanciful, but I think that when we talk about ‘population’ exactly the same thing happens: individual people — laughing, working, scratching their heads trying to solve this problem or that — simply disappear.
And once the people have disappeared, it then becomes possible to manipulate the ‘population’ in your mind as if it were any other variable in a mathematical equation.
Need more workers for the factories and plantations?
Simple: ban contraception.
Need fewer people in the shanties and the ghettos?
Simple: launch a sterilisation campaign.
Need fewer poor people, black people, disabled people?
Simple: target the sterilisation campaign.
These things can happen on the smallest scale — within one family, when a husband treats his wife as a breeding machine — or on a national or international scale, when entire ‘populations’ come under pressure from the planners, and individual human rights become as invisible as the individual people the word ‘population’conveniently obscures.
Given that the majority of people are as rational about their fertility as I am — and God knows we are the ones who have to live with our decisions — it seems that any government which tries to overrule those decisions for the sake of some nebulous ‘common good’, or ‘future benefit’ is not to be trusted.
If they are disinterested in my individual welfare today, what assurance do I have that they will miraculously become interested in my welfare tomorrow, after I have had the number of babies they tell me are ‘necessary’?
Of course there is a danger that anyone who criticises population policies is assumed to be against family planning per se.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
It is precisely because I am so in favour of family planning — of women (and men) planning their own families — that I am so supicious of any population policy that attempts to do anything but help them have the number of children they think is best for them.
This is the reason there are so many personal stories in the magazine this month and why the entire keynote article is devoted to an attempt to understand how poor people make decisions about their childbearing.
I wanted to bring the people into the spotlight for a change and shove ‘population’ into the background, where it belongs.
EDITOR'S LETTER
Now I've finished editing this issue of NI, I have come to hate the very word ‘population’.
Not because I've tapped it into the word processor so many times — though that would be reason enough — but because once it is uttered even the most sensible, humane people tend to react in a disturbing, almost totalitarian, way.
‘Having too many children is like smoking,’ said one to me.
‘Why should I get lung cancer because of your self-indulgent habit?’
And that was one of the milder arguments.
One man I met on holiday in Greece even suggested that sending aid to Africa was ‘compounding the problem’ because it allowed so many potential breeders to survive.
The problem, I believe, is that the word ‘population’ is an abstract, statistical term.
It's a word we use to talk about masses of undifferentiated humanity — like buying a pound of whitebait for your supper, rather than, say, 341 little silver fishes that once frisked and swam in the dappled depths of the ocean.
I'm being deliberately fanciful, but I think that when we talk about ‘population’ exactly the same thing happens: individual people — laughing, working, scratching their heads trying to solve this problem or that — simply disappear.
And once the people have disappeared, it then becomes possible to manipulate the ‘population’ in your mind as if it were any other variable in a mathematical equation.
Need more workers for the factories and plantations?
Simple: ban contraception.
Need fewer people in the shanties and the ghettos?
Simple: launch a sterilisation campaign.
Need fewer poor people, black people, disabled people?
Simple: target the sterilisation campaign.
These things can happen on the smallest scale — within one family, when a husband treats his wife as a breeding machine — or on a national or international scale, when entire ‘populations’ come under pressure from the planners, and individual human rights become as invisible as the individual human people the word ‘population’conveniently obscures.
Of course there is a danger that anyone who criticises population policies is assumed to be against family planning per se.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
It is precisely because I am so in favour of family planning — of women (and men) planning their own families — that I am so supicious of any population policy that attempts to do anything but help them have the number of children they think is best for them.
This is the reason there are so many personal stories in the magazine this month and why the entire keynote article is devoted to an attempt to understand how poor people make decisions about their childbearing.
I wanted to bring the people into the spotlight for a change and shove the ‘population’ into the background, where it belongs.
THE NEW EUROPE
The tyranny of teaching.
On a good day Fred loves it.
But he needs to believe in what he teaches, and tries not to lie.
So what is he to teach now about the post-war history of Europe?
All change — and who knows where it will lead?
Whatever happened to all those joyous people dancing on the Berlin Wall?
Has the revolution of 1989 been lost already, or did it never really happen at all?
The Little Red Province
Curt Stauss records a tumultuous year in a small East German industrial town engulfed by pollution.
In the strangely dejected quiet of the morning of October 7 1989 a young man came to see me.
It was the official state holiday to celebrate 40 years of the German Democratic Republic.
But the big processions of previous years were nowhere to be seen — or heard — in our town.
The young man wanted to know whether I was responsible for the posters that appeared all over town the previous night.
They were small handmade notes protesting against environmental pollution and complaining about how it endangered health — and they had thrown the security forces into a tizzy.
Imagine: posters with no official permission!
At last something was happening even here, deep in the provinces!
Sadly it wasn't I who had pasted them up.
The posters were signed: ‘The Little Green Province’— a name which captivated my imagination.
Was a new movement being formed at last?
Was there a change of mood, an ideological change of heart amongst the local population?
The district around Lauchhammer, an industrial area 30 miles north of Dresden, is more commonly known as ‘The Little Red Province’.
People passing through recognize it from afar, by the clouds of coal dust darkening the air.
The smell is distinctive, too: chemicals and rotten eggs, the hydrogen sulphides produced by processing coal.
More than 30,000 people live off coal around here.
But this industrial monoculture, producing secure and well-paid jobs as well as clouds of coal dust, is now on the verge of collapse.
Around 250 years ago the meadows in the northern part of this area near the Black Elster river used to have a tinge of red due to ironstone in the soil.
This gave the ‘The Little Red Province’ its name.
Metal castings were exported all over the world and an industrial proletariat developed very early.
More recently ‘The Little Red Province’ might have seemed like a positive reference to the ideological orientation of the area.
There's hardly anyone nowadays who still remembers the true origin of the name.
And since last October ‘The Little Red Province’ has become a pejorative term, like ‘Reds’.
The first new group to appear in Lauchhammer called itself Environmental Forum.
It grew out of the first demonstrations, towards the end of October 1989, and was composed of women and men who were outraged at the filth and the toxins in the air, water and soil.
They'd had a gutful of official lies.
The Environmental Forum found some support amongst professionals in the water industry and in medicine, people who had known about the problems for years but kept quiet about them.
Smoke signals
Take the ferrous alloy plant.
This is a factory, more than 100 years old, which produces silicone for steel production and computer chips.
A thick, milky white cloud of smoke belches from this factory's chimneys day and night.
The smoke is totally harmless, claims the company director.
So why have the people of Lauchhammer been complaining of headaches for years, whenever the wind carries a column of smoke over the town?
It's psychological, says the director.
Then why do the children in the school just 500 metres away from the plant get so aggressive every time the cloud envelops the school?
Teachers find that the children become unteachable — those in the lower classes have to be fed sedatives to calm them down.
But the director insists: the emissions are non-toxic!
The Environmental Forum tries to find out the results of tests on emissions from the plant.
There aren't any, says the director.
So how does he know the smoke is non-toxic?
Some data is suddenly produced, but it is irrelevant.
Then, early in 1990, the Environmental Forum stumbles upon a secret analysis of the plant's emissions.
At this point the director gives up his denials.
The smoke contains levels of carcinogenic substances and heavy metals like cadmium, lead and berillium that are way in excess of permitted limits, some of which are much higher anyway than those in West Germany — lead 34 times, berillium 80 times and cadmium 166 times.
The director then comes up with an interpretation which claims that the dust is so fine that when it enters the lungs it is exhaled again.
The environmentalists don't know whether to laugh or cry.
Meanwhile a Round Table had been established in Lauchhammer.
It is composed of women and men representing old and new political parties, movements and mass organizations.
The intention is to take the town's fate in hand, until such time as democratic elections are held.
The Round Table sends for the director of the industrial combine responsible for the ferrous alloy factory.
He comes, and after a heated discussion he commits himself to closing down the factory by 1992.
Agreement is reached on monitoring emission levels precisely, calculating the factory's economic viability and evaluating how much people's health had been affected by the ferrous clouds.
Now the director — like most people in East Germany — is so busy adapting to the transition to a market economy and to the West German Deutsch Mark than none of his undertakings has been honoured.
The factory still smokes and stinks into the town, day and night.
Political shifts
Meanwhile, the national New Forum political movement — founded in September 1989 — began to sprout off-shoots in the provinces, including Lauchhammer.
Word got around fast that you could join by going to see the local protestant minister, despite intimidation from the ‘Stasi’ state police.
But within a very short period of time the ideological balance of power in the town shifts dramatically.
A 46-year-old woman shop assistant, who was initially very active in the Forum and wanted to get involved in the politics of education, very quickly leaves the group again.
The reason: New Forum is sceptical about too hasty a unification of the two German states, and about market economies.
It attempts to define not only what needs changing in East Germany but also what is worth retaining.
All of this is totally incomprehensible to the woman, who wants unification as soon as possible.
She supports the Christian Democrats (CDU), who until recently have been of no consequence at all in Lauchhammer.
In the March 1990 elections the Christian Democrats get 50 per cent of the vote, and the local elections produce very similar results.
Where is the Left?
What has become of the proletarian consciousness of this working-class town in ‘The Little Red Province’?
New ‘businesses’ are being set up almost daily.
But they produce virtually nothing and create precious few jobs.
Taxi companies, video shops (which didn't exist before) and used car dealers — all of a sudden the town is full of Western scrap metal.
The price of second-hand Western cars has almost doubled.
It is being paid by people whose money, as of 1 July, has been halved in value.
Money is a subject in itself!
The queue in front of the bank hasn't budged since the beginning of June, and it's a very long queue.
Western currency, which had a mystical aura for many years, has suddenly become the ordinary, everyday legal tender.
The entire price structure has changed completely — some prices are now higher even than in West Germany.
The West Germans, known as ‘Westies’, treat the ‘Easties’ as if we are were illiterate idiots.
They forget that we paid the higher price for the partition of Germany as a precondition for peace in Europe.
They have dumped their rubbish on the cheap in the East for years.
Their own chemical industry is cost-effective because it buys products at knock-down prices from places like Lauchhammer, where the incidence of cancer keeps increasing.
And a new kind of anger is growing.
The Wall symbolized the physical division of Germany, but the post-Wall scene is the setting for new and equivalent social divisions.
True enough, there used to be some hidden unemployment in East Germany.
But the level of social welfare was so high that poverty was unthinkable.
Now, just a short time after the ‘Currency, Economic and Social Union’, almost 20 per cent of the workforce is unemployed or in a desperate situation as a result of the imposition of short-time working.
The trend is on the increase.
What are unemployed people to do?
For the moment they are still enjoying their newly-won freedom to travel — if they feel like it, that is.
And they can travel down to the job centre — in vain.
Some work in the West during weekdays to earn money there, providing a new pool of cheap labour for West Germany.
Many are developing a hatred of those foreigners who still have jobs in Lauchhammer.
There aren't many of them, a few hundred from Vietnam and Mozambique.
But that's enough, it seems, in this small town in the eastern part of Germany, unaccustomed as it is to dealing with foreigners.
And wherever you turn in ‘The Little Red Province’, you find a growing number of people who sympathize with the radical right-wing Republican Party — especially among the young.
Change of heart?
Is this an ideological change of heart?
Hardly.
Amongst those who seem to be ‘changing’ the most rapidly are people who deserve to be called nothing short of unprincipled opportunists.
They are the ex-Communist bosses and party officials who are managing to fix up jobs for each other while pushing others out of jobs they have held for years and onto the streets.
No.
It's not an ideological change of heart.
Left-wing attitudes were never more than skin-deep, at least in the majority of the population.
This is because the revolution in East Germany after 1945 changed the structures of power and ownership — but did not go on to change the structure of social relationships.
When Erich Honecker gave his last big speech many people regretted the fact that there wasn't a hint of sadness about all the things that had gone wrong in the past 40 years, all the changes that should have happened and never did — nor, finally, any regrets about the many people who fled the country.
Now, the much-repeated phrase is: ‘The past 40 years have all been for nought’.
But this response is counter-productive.
Of course it is not true for anyone that they lived the past 40 years in vain.
And if the past is given an exclusively negative interpretation, if positive memories are forbidden, then it won't be possible to mourn either, to take leave from what has been lost.
Pregnant in Kingston
Giving birth in Jamaica set Anne Lyons thinking about different attitudes towards sex, life and having children.
‘Hey baby-madda!
Hope it's a yout’!’
‘Baby-madda!
I give you the next one!’
I was white, pregnant and in Jamaica and didn't know how to respond.
Should I launch into a discourse on why I didn't value male above female children?
Give no response and risk appearing racist?
Or simply smile and collude?
It had been easier to discuss issues in pubs and read about them in the New Internationalist.
I had left for Kingston largely dismissive of the anxieties expressed by family and friends, telling them that, after all, women have babies all over the world.
Leaving behind hi-tech hospitals and computerized records did not bother me so much as leaving behind certain hard-won changes in birth procedures.
I did not really know what to expect away from the National Health Service and my mum, and so, armed with a small library of books and the good wishes of a Jamaican midwife at Homerton hospital, I just hoped for the best.
I gave birth at the University Hospital.
From the start everything was firmly in the hands of the professionals.
I was shaved, given an enema, sent to shower and then directed to a bed in the delivery room.
There was no gas and air, but pethidine (a painkiller) was offered as a matter of course(and accepted) and I was cut.
I wouldn't say it was a particularly woman-centred experience but I did feel confident in the skills of the midwives and the doctors and knew that there were all the necessary facilities should anything go wrong.
This is not always the case in Jamaica.
Many women receive no medical attention at all— even in hospitals — due to pressure of numbers and lack of staff.
A recent survey showed that 18 per cent of the births were unattended and 35 per cent of institutions had maternity beds with more than one patient to a bed.
Pregnancy and having a baby does make you public property.
While I was pregnant a young security guard used to enquire solicitously about the state of my ankles.
The ‘helpful advice’ after the child was born, however, did get a little wearing: ‘Hold her head up!’
‘Support her back!’
‘Don't cut her hair or it will stop her talking!’
But I was struck by just how proficient at handling babies and young children were people from all walks of life.
Mr Lewis, the mechanic, for example, soon managed to quieten my baby daughter Rachel while I was out of the room.
Attitudes to family and children vary considerably according to class, however.
The middle- and upper-class adopt a fairly Western lifestyle, though the children are often brought up by a live-in ‘helper’.
The children lead sheltered lives, getting chauffeured to and from their prep schools.
Working-class children, by contrast, are often ‘grown’ by a female relative in the country — usually a grandmother or an aunt.
Their mothers work in town or ‘in foreign’, sending back money and visiting when they can.
Working-class children are expected to be independent, travel on the packed buses, take responsibility for siblings, do washing, help sell or ‘higgle’ in the market and work on the land.
The extended-family network is vital for survival: one woman will look after all the children while the others work.
As child-care is easily available and children are integrated into daily life having a child does not automatically exclude a woman from her previous lifestyle as is so often the case in Britain.
I had a discussion with a middle-class Jamaican woman who argued that Jamaican women are more liberated than Western women because they are more economically active.
Few Jamaican women fall into the wife-mother trap of isolation and financial dependence.
On reflection I feel that the advantages are only available to women of a certain class.
Their freedom to pursue careers and to be liberated from child-care and housework depends on the labour of another woman who, although financially independent, is actually struggling and has yet more work to do when she gets home.
A negative side of the pro-baby culture is that women who do not breed are ‘mules’.
And those who do breed often bear the brunt of the responsibility for their children as men often fail to support their children or act as a role model.
When Fathers' Day was celebrated in the local church recently I saw several giggling and embarrassed adolescents rise to their feet.
They were clearly biological fathers only — not practising parents.
So many girls get pregnant young, often through ignorance, and are subsequently traumatized by the whole experience of pregnancy and childbirth.
Unable to cope with the financial or everyday demands of a baby, they often end up relying upon their own mothers to care for the child.
As Jennifer said after her 15 year old gave birth, ‘Instead of de five pickney, it now six’.
ENDPIECE
Sunday, bloody Sunday
The last few days have been the worst of my life so far.
Our village has been attacked by over 500 well-equipped contras.
The battle began at three in the morning and continued uninterrupted until past daybreak.
The din of mortars, machine-guns and ricocheting shrapnel was horrendous as our attackers penetrated simultaneously at three different points — the high road, at the bridge over Monkey River and at Death Canyon.
They were probably trying to blow up the bridge.
The contras surged into several of the village streets, where we heard them shouting defiant angry slogans (‘We don't want your amnesty!’).
The Sandinistas were forced into a temporary retreat but returned later with reinforcements to do battle in the streets.
The bridge was saved and the contras eventually dispersed when their supply of ammunition came to an end.
We opened up the parish hall to the wounded and dead which were brought in from all parts of the village.
Our canvas stretcher-beds were quickly drenched with blood, because we used them for the worst wounded — the others had to be laid on the tiled floor.
I have so many indelible impressions of that day: of cutting a soldier's clothes off his body with scissors as he screamed with pain; of a young man seizing my hand with an iron grip as he groaned ‘I'm dying — I can't bear the pain’; of a baby girl less than two years old just staring ahead as the blood soaked into her clothes; of the terrible vacant look caused by shell-shock on the faces of teenage soldiers; of the stench of human excrement, urine and blood as the nurses and nuns struggled to clean up the patients.
There were more than 30 gravely injured, and 20 dead.
That morning seemed endless as we waited for an ambulance to transport the most urgent cases to the hospital.
At around two that afternoon one Sandinista driver discovered the dead bodies of three contras near the bridge.
He was so angry he strung them up in the back of his open lorry, head downwards, like side of beef bound for some unhygienic market.
Though they understood his fury, many villagers protested as he drove through the streets with the almost-naked bodies waving grotesquely.
I spoke to the mayor and we decided to give them a proper Christian burial in the village cemetery.
There were no more coffins available, but by four o'clock we had buried the soldiers, wrapped in plastic sheeting.
A rustic cross marks the grave.
It was just four months ago that met my first contras face to face.
I had been visiting villages to the north of the parish.
They must have been watching from a hill-top as I rode towards them because suddenly I was surrounded by a company of about 40 soldiers, all aged between 17 and 18 years.
One held up a Bible and a rosary, but none spoke until an older man, their commanding officer, strode up with an outstretched hand which I shook without enthusiasm.
He spoke with a deference that was almost fawning: they were fighting to save their country from an atheistic dictatorship.
Nobody desired peace more than these loyal sons of the Catholic Church.
Their victory against the Soviet Sandinistas was inevitable.
I remained seated on my mule, uncomfortably aware that my every gesture and expression was being carefully observed.
The slightest word of encouragement would have elicited wild cheering, I felt.
Looking back I wish I'd been more courageous.
I told them that the Sandinista soldiers were also Catholics; were also fighting for their country; were also longing for peace.
I urged them to listen to the voice of their individual conscience.
And I suppose the general coldness of my tone conveyed my disapproval of their activities.
Then I looked at my watch, pretended to be surprised at the lateness of the hour, and dug both spurs into the flanks of the mule, hoping to God that a bullet would not follow my hasty departure.
Two or three hundred villagers kept me busy that evening.
All the prayers were for peace and for those who were fighting — in both armies.
Afterwards, while the congregation said the rosary, praying for an end to the war, I heard individual confessions — confessions in wartime are particularly painful and I find the experience more harrowing than any other of my duties as a priest.
When the last penitent left I strolled to the back of the chapel and was surprised to see three young contra soldiers gazing rather wistfully in through the door — as if they felt unworthy to set foot inside.
The war in the hills
Floods have pitched Bangladeshis into the headlines.
But to the tribal people of Chittagong they are oppressors.
Monica Connell meets a Buddhist monk who speaks for them.
I met the Venerable Bimal Bhikku in the Friends' Meeting House in Swindon, England, on a grey afternoon.
He sat opposite me looking calm and composed in his ochre robes: an educated, articulate monk, who cares passionately about peace, justice and the plight of his people, the Chittagong Hill Tribes of Bangladesh.
He told me that if he were to return to Bangladesh he would face certain assassination by the Government, which wishes to keep the situation in Chittagong secret.
Until 40 years ago, the Chittagong Hill Tracts were inhabited almost exclusively by people belonging to 13 tribes.
The tribal people differ fundamentally from the predominantly Muslim people of the plains.
They are of a different ethnic origin (Sino-Tibetan), they speak their own languages and have their own culture and religions (mainly Buddhist).
But since then there has been a steady influx of Bengali plainspeople.
In 1971, after a bitter civil war, Bangladesh emerged as a separate state and the new government, wrongly believing tribal leaders to have supported Pakistan in the war, stationed a counter-insurgency force in the area.
In response the tribal people formed a solidarity association with an armed wing, Shanti Bahini.
By the mid-1970s the conflict between the army, the Bengali settlers and the tribespeople was under way.
I had always thought that the Chittagong war was about land.
Talking with Bimal I realized how wrong — or naive — I had been.
Successive governments have resettled Bengali plainspeople in the Hill Tracts, reasoning that while the country as a whole is desperately overpopulated (averaging 2,000 people per square mile) the hills are still relatively empty (only 20 people per square mile).
But these statistics grossly misrepresent the reality: the poor terrain of the hills is already fully utilized and cannot support a larger population.
‘They, too, are victims,’ said Bimal of the Bengali settlers.
They are given incentives to move to the hills and transported there in truckloads.
But if they don't like hill life — and many don't — they're beaten and tortured for attempting to return.
They are simply part of the Government's plan to dilute the tribal population — to promote nationalism by standardizing the Bengali language, culture and the Muslim religion.
It's not a conflict about land.
It's the planned annihilation of a whole people.
In 1950 the 660,000 tribespeople constituted 91 per cent of the total population of the Hill Tracts.
Now they are virtually outnumbered by settlers, many of whom have been issued with rifles, trained by the army and enlisted into village paramilitary forces.
So when the military instigates an attack on a tribal village, it is generally with the backing of the new settlers.
‘They come in the night or in the early hours of the morning,’ Bimal told me.
‘They announce their arrival with a round of blank fire.’
They set fire to houses and some of the younger people are taken to prison and tortured for information about the Shanti Bahini (there are now about 2,000 tribal people in prison without trial).
Others are tortured and killed there and then, in front of their families.
In May 1986, Bimal's own Buddhist monastery in Dighinala was burned to the ground.
At least 500 people were killed and 35 local villages destroyed.
I hesitated to ask Bimal more about army brutality — afraid that the memory would rekindle some private pain.
He spared us both by referring me to eye-witness accounts published by Amnesty International.
There I read about soldiers raping women, then thrusting bayonets into their vaginas shouting ‘No tribals will be born in Bangladesh’; of children being ‘thrown into burning huts’; of men being hung upside-down from trees and branded with hot knives.
In September last year, President Ershad set up a national committee which, according to its own press release, intends to ‘restore honour and dignity to the tribal peoples’ by withdrawing the army, banning further immigration and returning the land which had been ‘illegally and fraudulently’seized.
Bimal dismisses this as a ‘bluff’, adding that the Government has ‘no wish and no intention to solve the problem of the Hill Tracts’.
So why the bluff?
The answer lies in Bangladesh's dependence on foreign aid.
Donor countries must be convinced that the tribal people are being adequately catered for.
Thus the 1985 Five-Year Plan contains a one-million-dollar proposal for the development of the Hill Tracts.
But, as Bimal pointed out, none of this will benefit the tribal people.
What use are roads and telecommunication systems to them?
‘They will merely make it easy for the Government to mobilize the military and send the settlers deeper into the area’.
The African Quota
Faisal from Mali dreams of joining the colonies in space.
A short story by Elizabeth Sourbut.
On the first night out from Dakar, 12-year-old Faisal wandered the deck restlessly.
He thought about his family, far away in Mali's dusty savannah, eating the evening meal with the television switched on in one corner.
They would be watching the American channels, picked up by the satellite receiver dish on the outskirts of the village.
His mother would be tired, probably complaining about the distance she had had to walk to fetch water that day.
He wondered how long it would be before he saw them again, returning from space a rich man.
Picking his way between the groups of emigrants, he went in search of the family of Bambara cattle farmers who had befriended him.
They had sold their farm to the Mali Government and were travelling to a new life in France.
Faisal had seen advertisements on television and knew that Europe and North America were almost empty now most of the people had moved into space.
The Bambara's talk about the house and cattle they were going to buy made him wish that his father had agreed to move.
But now he was going into space, and when he had made his fortune he would pay for the whole of Mali to be irrigated so it was as green as France.
When he found his friends, he saw that a lean white man had joined them.
‘You should all have stayed at home,’ he was saying, stuffing tobacco into his pipe with nervous fingers.
‘You've no idea what you're letting yourselves in for.’
‘Don't be silly,’ said Shanti, the mother.
‘All the farms in France are lying idle now the white people have gone into space.’
Mahoud, her husband, greeted Faisal.
‘This is Ralph.
He's travelling alone, too.’
‘Are you American?’ asked Faisal timidly.
‘Yes.
A poor one.’
‘Americans are rich,’ objected one of the children.
‘We watch American TV.’
‘So do I,’ said Ralph.
‘So what?
TV isn't about real life.
There are plenty of Americans like me, bumming around the world because our country has no jobs for us.’
‘Why don't you go into space?’ asked Faisal.
‘That's an expanding frontier, unlimited growth, enough wealth for everyone.’
He repeated the phrases he had heard so often on TV but Ralph sneered.
‘Sure, but how can I get there?
They're independent states these days, no more free transport.
Do you know how much the fare is?’
‘There's no fare,’ said Faisal.
‘My permit was free.
Look.’
He took the precious papers from his pocket and the American snatched them out of his hand.
‘You're on the African Quota!’ he exclaimed.
‘Is that a spaceship?’ asked Faisal.
Ralph laughed mirthlessly.
‘It's the number of Africans the UN allows to go into space,’ he said.
‘They get a free ride.
It's all to do with a guilt complex.’
He handed the permit back.
‘What will you do when you get there?’
‘I'm going to buy my own spaceship and be an asteroid prospector.
Then I'll get-rich-quick.’
‘And how will you afford a spaceship?’
‘I'll work for it.
There are millions of jobs in space.
All the factories have moved there.’
‘Yeah,’ said Ralph.
‘Why do you think I don't have a job?’
‘But the North is rich,’ insisted Shanti.
‘And you think you'll be rich when you get there?’
‘We're going to buy a farm,’ said Mahoud.
‘We have money.’
‘But there aren't any for sale.
The French city people may have gone but the farmers are still there — they weren't wanted in space.
Space farms are tended by biochemists, not farmers.
You were told lies.
Your country has too many people, so your government is shipping you north.
There's no land for you.’
‘Then what can we do?’ asked Mahoud, dismayed.
‘Same as me.
Get out your begging bowls and wait for somebody to sort out this mess.’
A long silence fell.
Faisal wondered if getting rich would help at all.
He didn't understand.
Why couldn't the land be shared amongst those who wanted it?
It seemed the world was more complicated than he had imagined.
Mahoud sighed heavily.
‘We are in the hands of Allah,’ he said.
‘I'm sorry,’ said Ralph.
‘I just wanted somebody to talk to.
You would have found out soon enough.’
Nobody replied and he stood up.
‘Well, so long.’
Faisal followed him to the railings.
‘Who's in charge of it all?’ he asked.
Ralph shrugged.
‘Who knows?
Maybe you will be one day, after you get rich prospecting the asteroids.’
He smiled and pointed towards a point low in the eastern sky.
‘Look.’
Straining his eyes, Faisal could just see a tiny cluster of lights where the colonies were rising above the hidden bulk of Africa.
The sacrifice
Long, long ago in Hua Xian village, Dai Huang began to dig.
When finally a small boy was sent to ask him what he was up to, he replied: ‘Here I am building the biggest, the best kiln Hua Xian has ever seen’.
And so he was.
He called the villagers together for the first firing.
He slaughtered a pig so the kiln would burn hot and fierce and would not turn out any soft, yellow, useless bricks.
Stepping through the warm blood, Dai Huang lit the fire.
And of course the people bought the bricks.
They were dark and heavy and very, very hard, and the people needed to repair disused outhouses to store that year's bumper crop.
They needed to repair the crumbling walls of their draughty homes, too.
And they needed to buy Dai Huang's new hard bricks, because some malicious spirit had come one dark night to kick holes in the backs of the other, smaller kilns.
At night, as they huddled round their fires, the people would murmur about the evil spirit who kicked holes in their kilns so that they had to buy their bricks from Dai Huang.
You never know what's out there, they said, looking fearfully over their shoulders.
But Dai Huang was not around to hear their whispers.
He had built a big new house in the valley, beside the best clay for making good hard bricks.
He hardly ever came to the village any more.
But when the long hard Chinese winter was nearly over, the villagers began to come to the house of Dai Huang.
They needed bricks, they told him; and some needed more time to pay.
Ants and mice and rats, some said, had crept between the bricks of their new storehouses and eaten half their crop.
One poor man, Li Lu, had lost the lot.
Grumpily Dai Huang chose Li Lu, to help him construct a newer, bigger kiln.
‘You can pay your debt to me this way,’ Dai Huang told Li Lu curtly.
Dai Huang examined his new kiln the next day.
But the bricks were soft and crumbled uselessly away when he removed the moulds.
The people made gifts to the ancestors, to keep away evil spirits.
And Dai Huang went with gifts to consult the wise one.
‘Dai Huang,’ said the wise one.
‘I know you.
There is evil in your heart, and so your sacrifices are too small.
A pig!
Ha!
No.
The spirits want…your daughter.’
Dai Huang walked through the village which was shuttered against evil.
Then he cried ‘Daughter!’ to a girl just disappearing round a corner.
She turned her head.
This 12-year-old had dark eyes more slanted than his daughter's, and a nose turned pertly upwards, but otherwise the resemblance was amazing.
‘You are mistaken, I am the daughter of Li Lu sir,’ the girl replied and, walking carefully on bound feet, went on her way.
Dai Huang followed her.
‘Sell me your daughter, Li Lu,’ he cried when he reached the house, ‘and I will release you from half your debt to me.’
Early that evening, Li Lu arrived with his daughter at Dai Huang's grand house.’
Dai Huang had another proposition for him.
‘If you would like me to forgive you the other half of your great debt, then fire the kiln tomorrow morning, well before dawn.
Then this is what you have to do…’
He turned his back on the little girls, the poor one looking so much like the rich man's child, as they disappeared into the house to eat their rice together.
The dogs howled in the village all that night, and Dai Huang's daughter could not sleep.
She lay awake, excited at the prospect of the pig sacrifice Dai Huang had promised she could watch at dawn.
She watched the kiln's flames flicker on the walls.
Li Lu stoked the glow and went through Dai Huang's instructions once again.
‘I'll send a slave boy from a far off province,’ Dai Huang had said.
‘Just before dawn.
Do not speak to him.
Just pick him up, and throw him into the flames, and I'll free you from your debt.’
And satisfied that this sacrifice would satisfy the spirits and make his kiln the best one ever, Dai Huang slept peacefully in the fine house beside the kiln.
Dai Huang's daughter nudged the new slave girl as the sky began to lighten in the east.
‘Wake up!’ she whispered.
‘It's time for you to take breakfast to the labourer at the kiln!’
But Li Lu's daughter slept so soundly that in the end Dai Huang's daughter dressed quickly.
She took the breakfast and, slipping out of the door, approached the kiln's glow and the labourer's dark back.
‘Here…’ she said.
Without a sound, Li Lu turned and caught her up.
Without a sound, the fire's wicked eye changed colour as the villagers opened their doors to walk down the valley for the second sacrifice.
Li Lu turned.
Stretching and yawning, his daughter stood at the door of Dai Huang's big house.
Quickly, fearfully, looking over each shoulder in turn, Li Lu called her to come home.
And through the blueness of the dawn they walked back to the village together.
Ugly magic
City-dweller Moiphebi Nkuebe goes to visit a witchdoctor — and brings home rather more than he had bargained for.
I am not a superstitious man.
However, I have tried to display some broad-mindedness when it comes to the subject of witchcraft.
And it was in this frame of mind that I undertook the journey to visit a witchdoctor who reputedly had the ability to establish contact between a person and their ancestors.
One Saturday morning, without telling anyone of my plan, I boarded a bus and headed off out of the Lesotho capital of Maseru and towards Roma where I knew a witchdoctor lived.
I got to my destination without much difficulty.
The witchdoctor's home was in a hillside village overlooking the National University of Lesotho.
I imagined the witchdoctor would be living in a village of several rondavels surrounded by reed hedges.
Instead I was directed to a three-roomed brick house with corrugated iron roofing.
There I found a respectable-looking woman of middle age sitting on a sofa, sniffing tobacco.
Greetings said, I sat down on the chair she proffered and explained the purpose of my visit.
When I had finished she asked me to place a banknote in front of her and say ‘lesedi’ which means ‘illumination’.
I did as I was bid and sat down again.
She took a pinch of snuff in her hand and sprinkled it over the note murmuring something under her breath.
This little ritual lasted about two minutes after which she raised her eyes and calmly told me that my money signified ‘death’.
‘Death?’
I asked in surprise — and with some degree of shock.
Being a healthy person, I immediately told myself this could not refer to me.
But then I thought that perhaps an accident was awaiting me or one of my relatives.
She stood up and went out of the room, while I pondered her ominous information.
She returned a few minutes later with an explanation that medicine was being prepared for me.
In the meantime she briefed me on what to expect on confronting the ‘mirror’.
I grew a little apprehensive when she informed me that I would see witches and some ugly things, after which I would see my grandfather and other long-dead relatives.
The process then began.
First I had to be cleansed — this meant drinking a lot of medicated water and throwing it up again.
It proved to be a long and painful process, starting at nine o'clock in the morning and ending at around three in the afternoon.
Much weakened constitutionally, I passed on to the next stage.
I was led into a dark room and told to lie face down on a mattress on the floor.
There was a small basin filled with water at one end of the mattress and I was told to gaze into it.
I lay silently, expecting my grandfather to materialize in front of my eyes at any moment.
The witchdoctor poured some milky medicine from a large bottle into a spoon and gave it to me to drink.
It was thick and vile.
Even after swallowing it, its bitter taste lingered long in my mouth.
While I was still gazing into the water basin, the doctor then covered me with blankets, enclosing me in total darkness.
As she did this, she told me a chant I had to say over and over again.
‘God of light and pervading wisdom, let there be light so that I can see.
I wish to see my grandfather.
I wish to see the path of my life.
I wish to see the dark acts of my enemies.
I wish to see every witch who is trying to make my life a misery.’
I picked up the chant and repeated it many times.
I chanted until I was tired but nothing happened.
Throughout the doctor sat beside me and prodded me whenever I slowed.
Eventually when I felt I could not take any more I threw the blanket off and sat up.
At this point I was a little drowsy and the weakness in my joints had increased.
I put on my shoes and jacket which I had been asked to take off and told the doctor I would visit her another time.
She explained that with some people one had to wait a long time before one saw what one wanted to see.
I left her, disappointed, weak and hungry.
As I sat in the bus on my way, strange things began to happen to me.
Every object I looked at took on a new form and turned into ugly monsters.
I also saw faces of people I knew and had met in my life; they floated in front of my eyes one after another in an endless stream.
When I eventually got off the bus back in Maseru I nearly collapsed, such was my weakness.
At this point I was plunged into a world of terror in which voices were changed and objects were distorted.
I was very scared.
With great difficulty I reached home.
After gobbling up whatever I could find in the house, I crept into bed and pulled the blankets over my head in a vain attempt to stifle the mocking voices and shut out the ugly visions.
I wished I had been more patient and stayed at the witchdoctor's.
The next morning I woke up, and was relieved to find myself a normal man again…
A brilliant band
Does sending well-intentioned Westerners to do aid work in the Third World do more harm than good?
Naomi Roberts writes from experience.
Once I saw myself as one of a brilliant band of aid workers.
I applied to do Voluntary Services Overseas (VSO).
Getting them to take me on had taken some persuasion: developing countries do not generally put in requests for people in my profession — clinical psychology.
But I was eventually sent to Ghana.
And only now, two years after my return, am I finally beginning to make sense of my experience there.
As a volunteer aid worker I was a failure.
Instead of staying the requisite two years I came home after just nine months.
In some senses the VSO system had failed me — but I did not see it that way at the time.
I had given up a good job to go there and when I came back after the adventure I had looked forward to for so long, I was very disappointed with myself.
I hadn't coped.
What made it worse was that in order to explain the frustrations that I had experienced I found myself making stereotyping judgments about Africans as lazy — not even caring to look after themselves — and as unreliable.
I did not think of myself as a racist but my experience of working in Ghana was making me irritable and critical, the first step on the way to making racist judgments.
I felt very guilty about it but this guilt was not very productive.
My job in Ghana was to teach young men and women doing their National Service about community health work in the villages.
I lived in the village myself and waited for my students to arrive.
But the students did not arrive.
Due to a shortage of teachers the recruits were more urgently needed in schools.
Another strand of my job was to teach management skills to local health workers.
So I put on courses and workshops for various groups involved with health in the district.
I became annoyed and offended when nobody turned up.
After a while I realized that nobody had asked them if they wanted or needed to learn management skills.
I had staked a lot on coming to Ghana and wanted to make a contribution.
But what I thought of as a contribution often seemed to be less appreciated than the things I thought of as irrelevant and boring.
A few words of mine addressed to local people who were raising money to sink a well in their remote village had apparently made all the difference, I was later told.
I heard this with embarrassment, remembering how terribly bored and miserable I had been sitting there on a long hot afternoon, hardly understanding a word as chiefs and elders talked to our delegation in local dialect.
During those months I became anxious, short-tempered and critical.
I caught myself shouting at people or giving them lectures about elementary things like the importance of oiling their bikes (I later discovered that oiling bikes in dusty regions wears out the moving parts rather than preserving them).
I felt I was becoming a caricature of the colonial lady in the 1950s film, ticking off ‘the natives’ in a ringing upper-class voice.
Thankfully, I decided to go home before I really cracked up.
But on my recent visit to Ghana I found that my attitude to everyday life in Africa had changed radically — mainly because I was not working on a project whose usefulness I doubted, trying to achieve things and getting frustrated.
I did not have to justify my being there.
I could sit for hours on buses without worrying about how much time I was wasting.
I found myself tolerant of Ghanaian customs that I had previously criticized, like the enormous amount of time and attention given to funerals.
I felt calm and happy.
Because I had not come to make a personal contribution I was able to see Africa with open eyes.
If you go somewhere determined, with the best of intentions, to make changes for the better, you are likely to be on the look-out for faults to correct.
The more workers are sent from the developed world, the louder is the message to the recipients of aid that other people know best.
People in poor countries lose touch with their own ways of meeting their needs — and may be too polite to tell foreign volunteers that they are compounding the problem.
When I was asked to speak at my farewell party I said that I felt a Ghanaian could have done my job and that was one of the reasons I was leaving.
I have never been cheered so loudly!
Looking back on it now, I am not sorry that I went.
I learned a lot about development and about myself and about some of the origins of racist thinking.
But I was the most expensive single piece of aid donated to that district of Ghana — more than the money for sinking wells — so it is relevant to ask whether it was worth it.
Learning under fire
Every day there is danger.
Every day the Ethiopian planes may swoop down from the sky.
But in embattled Eritrea the people are eager to learn and the teachers keen to offer them a new kind of education.
Richard Swift reports.
‘Teaching at home is a bloody waste of time — the students are so alienated that they are just not interested.’
The words belong to Paul Highsmith, who taught in England and Wales for six years but now teaches in the liberated zone of the emerging East African nation of Eritrea.
‘Here it's like another planet.
You can't keep the students away.
Even if they're sick you have to fight to get them to leave class.’
At first sight the Sahel region of Northern Eritrea looks forbidding.
This terrain of rocky canyons and dusty valleys is well suited to defence against the Ethiopian army in a war of independence that has lasted 25 years.
But it is ground which does not appear to be fertile for anything — let alone an attempt to build an alternative to Africa's elitist and beleaguered educational system.
Yet that is exactly what the educational department of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) is trying to do.
The centrepiece of liberated Eritrea's new educational system is Zero School.
The school is scattered in a series of classrooms that dot several interlocking valleys.
Each classroom is built of sticks and foliage and is either carefully camouflaged under trees or else dug into the sides of rocky hills.
Every village school in Eritrea is designed in this way so as to prevent detection from the air by the MIGs and Antanov bombers of the Ethiopian air force.
Zero School is unlike any school you could ever imagine.
Yet it's all here.
The chemistry lab carefully hidden under two olive trees.
The history class working in a structure of earth-coloured sticks tucked half way up a steep slope.
Grade Two studying next to a ditch in which they can take cover if the planes should strike today.
And way above it all, on top of a nearby mountain, are the anti-aircraft guns which seem to provide scant protection for these 4,000 students.
The threat of attack is very real throughout Eritrea.
In 1985 several of Zero School's students were killed in an air raid.
But so far the MIGs have not returned.
Schools elsewhere have not been so lucky.
One teacher described the effect of an air raid on the students.
‘It's a terrible thing.
The children are terrified.
They come to you because they think that you can stop it and save them.
Their terror doesn't stop even when it's over.
It's better to be alone when the planes come.’
But Andebraham Giorgis, who heads up the educational division of the EPLF, is as interested in talking about the achievements and challenges of education as about the difficulties resulting from the war.
‘We are engaged,’ he says, ‘in a profound struggle to change people's way of thinking…their entire approach to problems.’
The educational system reflects the EPLF's commitment to socialist equality and the rights of women.
Classes are strictly co-educational, with girls encouraged to enter all fields — particularly technical ones.
This is no mean achievement in a region which is dominated by the Islamic Sharia law and where nomadic men feel very threatened when their wives and daughters go to school.
The classroom content reflects a clear socialist bias.
For Cubo, who teaches history, the causes of World War One have more to do with the battle over markets and raw materials than with the assassination of the Arch-Duke Ferdinand (the classical explanation that children are offered from Melbourne to Montreal).
The Eritreans want their educational system to contribute to the total transformation of this Red Sea country which has been under colonial occupation by Ethiopia since the end of World War Two.
And considering two thirds of the Education Department's activities take place behind Ethiopian lines — in what the EPLF calls semi-liberated areas — their achievements have been impressive.
Last year 25,000 students were enrolled in 135 schools throughout Eritrea.
This is a drop in the ocean for a country of around four million people with an illiteracy rate of some 80 per cent.
But it's an impressive start considering the lack of resources and the continual Ethiopian air raids.
The EPLF's approach to education is different from that of other African countries.
This is readily pointed out by Acia, one of Zero School's science teachers.
Acia is a little man with merry eyes who taught in different parts of Ethiopia until 1980.
‘There I only cared about the money and all the other teachers were the same.
Teaching was a very low-status job and you just waited until the day was over.
The students picked up the lack of concern on the part of their teachers and became indifferent.
Their attention wandered and they lacked any discipline to learn.’
According to Acia the whole Ethiopian system was based on individual advancement and your marks in the final national exams.
‘If you did well you became a manager, got a job in the airlines or a good position in the army.
Those who did poorly often became teachers.’
Acia points out that the Eritrean approach emphasizes how the student can best relate to the overall needs of a society in which every individual is respected.
There are still examinations but students are allowed to take them several times to build up their confidence.
A highly competitive approach to learning is discouraged.
The teachers of liberated Eritrea have to be committed because none are paid.
In EPLF territory there is no money — people just receive what they need to live.
The enthusiasm and passion for learning among the students is obvious.
Many have made sacrifices to become educated.
Feshaie is a bullet-headed 12 year old who wears a striped T-shirt and shorts that are too big for his skinny frame.
He claims he had no chance to go to school in his home town, Ethiopian-occupied Asmara.
But he heard stories that living conditions were better in the North and that there was a chance of an education there.
In late 1984 Feshaie and a friend left home and simply walked until they found some EPLF fighters.
He wants to be a teacher when he graduates.
Such stories are not unusual.
Many students are orphans or have been separated from their families.
One boy called Haile Nehari actually escaped from prison — he had been put there after his sling-shot aimed at a pigeon hit an Ethiopian soldier instead.
He counts himself lucky to have avoided being shot.
In Zero School a teacher's questions are greeted by a sea of waving hands and shouts of the teacher's nickname — no turgid academic respect here.
Students are encouraged to take an active part and regular sessions are held in which they can criticize their teachers.
Student participation in their own education often starts with the construction of their own classrooms.
In such circumstances education becomes much more than the dead-end routine it so often seems in the industrialized world.
But the difficulties the Eritreans face in educating both old and young are still formidable.
Students must make do with two exercise books for the entire year.
There are shortages of maps, blackboards, texts and, most of all, teachers.
The Ethiopian occupation of Eritrea is treated by nearly all foreign governments as an ‘internal’ political question — this means there is very little direct government aid to the EPLF's educational and social programs.
Eritrean educators are frustrated that they cannot meet the demand for basic education.
So far all the Eritreans have been able to do is provide a basic education.
After that students go off to vocational and on-the-job training.
The curriculum is skewed towards the practical subjects that can most easily be integrated into economic production — the sciences, engineering, mechanics and health studies.
Given the situation this is quite understandable.
But there is a danger that education might become confined within a strictly utilitarian approach that neglects literature, the arts and social sciences.
The basic courses stimulate a passion for learning, but a student interested in history or music has very limited opportunities to pursue that interest.
The Eritreans are aware of the problem.
Andebraham holds that: ‘You can't build a country only with technical experts.
You need people with all kinds of skills: in sociology, psychology, politics and economics’.
Still this is something to be watched, since revolutionary movements have the unfortunate habit of elevating temporary necessities into patriotic virtues — plumbers are more valuable than poets.
But as you hear the laughter, songs and shouts echo off the barren Sahelian hills you can't help but feel that Eritrea provides an optimistic boost for those who retain a faith in education.
Highs and lows
The key events from two decades in the life of the world, from the point of view of the poor.
1970
EGYPT
President Gamel Abdel Nasser dies.
A leading figure in the Arab world, sure that the Third World should not align itself with either superpower.
CHILE
Election of Salvador Allende, the first Marxist to win a presidential election in a Western-style democracy.
JORDAN
Palestinian camps are wiped out by the Jordanian army.
CAMBODIA
Prince Sihanouk is deposed by pro-US army leaders.
US President Nixon orders the saturation bombing of Cambodia and Laos.
1971
UGANDA
Idi Amin seizes power.
Tribal killings begin.
BANGLADESH
West Pakistan's army invades rebellious East Pakistan.
India declares war, defeats Pakistan and establishes the independent state of Bangladesh.
Famine, disease and war cause 1.5 million deaths and 10 million refugees.
IRAN
The Shah celebrates the 25th centenary of the founding of the Persian Empire with an orgy of conspicuous consumption.
CHINA
The United Nations finally recognizes Communist China, having supported the Nationalist exiles in Taiwan until now.
Mao Zedong assets the idea of ‘continual revolution’ and launches a second phase of the Cultural Revolution.
Many ministers are deposed, including second-in-command Lin Biao.
UNITED STATES
The dollar is dramatically devalued to help pay for the Vietnam War.
This reduces the national reserves of most countries.
1972
BURUNDI
A rebellion by the Hutu people results in 80,000 being slaughtered by the ruling Tutsis.
UNITED STATES
The US holds farms land out of production.
The USSR buys a quarter of the wheat crop and the resulting high world prices help start a worldwide inflation spiral.
SAHEL
Famine causes up to 100,000 deaths.
It is caused not only by drought but also by high world food prices and use of land for cash-crop exports.
UNITED NATIONS
Environment Conference in Stockholm recognizes that overconsumption by the rich world brings waste and pollution while depriving the poor of basic needs.
VIETNAM
US troops are forced to withdraw after seven years of war.
1973
CHILE
The military seize power, encouraged by the US Central Intelligence Agency.
President Allende is murdered and General Pinochet begins his dictatorship with a bloody crackdown.
ISRAEL
Egypt and Syria attack Israeli positions but Israel's victory strengthens its hold on the Sinai and the Golan Heights.
OPEC
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries raises oil prices by 450 per cent in a year.
This leads to a massive transfer of wealth and power to these mainly Muslim states over the next decade.
It helps to fuel inflation and cause deepening recession, especially in the non-oil developing world.
ARGENTINA
Military government is forced out by popular pressure — the demagogic Juan Peron returns in triumph.
ETHIOPIA
Around 100,000 people die in a famine affecting four million people.
1974
ETHIOPIA
Emperor Haile Selassie is ousted by a military coup.
Power is assumed by a committee called the Dergue, led by Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam.
PORTUGAL
The strain and cost of fighting rebels in its colonies finally causes an army revolt and the fall of Portugal's fascist government.
The new government announces independence for Mozambique, Angola, Guinea-Bissau and later Cape Verde.
UNITED STATES
The Watergate cover-up finally leads to the resignation of US President Nixon.
UNITED NATIONS
calls for a New International Economic Order, establishing fairer terms for trade between the West and the Third World.
Very little happens as a result.
1975
INDO-CHINA
The capitals of South Vietnam and Cambodia — Saigon and Phnom Penh — fall to Communist forces.
Vietnam is reunited.
LEBANON
The internecine war that is to continue until the present day begins with a battle between right-wing Christian Falangists and left-wing Muslim Palestinians.
INDONESIA
invades the former Portuguese colony of East Timor.
Tens of thousands of deaths are followed by a guerilla war that still continues.
INDIA
Indira Gandhi declares a State of Emergency, detaining opposition leaders without trial and launching a ‘family planning’ campaign which involves the compulsory sterilization of many villagers.
UNITED NATIONS
declares this International Women's Year.
1976
ANGOLA
South Africa invades — but is rebuffed by Angolan and Cuban troops.
CHINA
Death of Mao Zedong, leader since the Revolution in 1949.
China also suffers the worst earthquake of the decade at Tangshan, which kills half a million people.
ARGENTINA
falls to another military coup.
PERU
General Velasco dies and his unique attempt at left-wing military government is over.
SOUTH AFRICA
Black students riot in Soweto in protest against the imposition of Afrikaans as the official language of instruction in schools.
Up to 500 black people are killed by the security forces.
UNITED STATES
Jimmy Carter's election as President means more concern about human rights and reduced US support for repressive regimes in Latin America.
1977
INDIA
Indira Gandhi is defeated in the Indian election due to popular protest at her Emergency.
ETHIOPIA
Soviet and Cuban support is enlisted by the Dergue for its war against Somalia and Eritrea.
SOUTH AFRICA
Black Consciousness leader Steve Biko is murdered in prison by police.
1978
AFGHANISTAN
A military coup installs a Soviet-orientated regime.
UNITED NATIONS
World Health Organization announces the eradication of smallpox after a worldwide immunization campaign.
A Conference on Health at Alma Ata establishes primary health care — training local workers to combat basic diseases — as the way forward, not prestige Western-style hospitals.
EGYPT
The poor riot in Egypt as food subsidies are withdrawn on US insistence.
The subsidies are reinstated.
The Camp David accords are concluded with Israel — Egypt regains the Sinai Desert in return for peace.
1979
IRAN
The Shah is deposed by a popular uprising and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returns from exile in Paris to launch an Islamic revolution.
NICARAGUA
The Sandinista Revolution ousts the Somoza dictatorship.
UGANDA
Idi Amin is deposed by invading Tanzanian forces.
The President he himself deposed, Milton Obote, eventually wins power.
UNITED STATES
A major nuclear accident at Three Mile Island.
CAMBODIA
Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge regime is deposed by invading Vietnamese forces.
The world eventually realizes that as many as two million Cambodians died under Khmer Rouge rule.
AFGHANISTAN
Soviet forces invade to prop up a beleaguered government.
1980
INDIA
Indira Gandhi wins back power.
ZIMBABWE
gains its independence with Robert Mugabe as its first prime minister.
EL SALVADOR
Progressive Archbishop Romero is assassinated by right-wing forces.
Three US nuns and a missionary are murdered by the army.
EAST AFRICA
Famine threatens 10 million people — in Somalia and Uganda 500 people are dying each day.
IRAN/IRAQ
War erupts — it is to form a bloody backdrop for most of the decade.
UNITED STATES
Ronald Reagan is elected President — following Margaret Thatcher's victory in Britain the previous year, right-wing dominance in the West for the 1980s is assured.
1981
IRELAND
IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands dies, drawing worldwide attention to British policies in Northern Ireland.
EGYPT
President Sadat is assassinated.
UNITED STATES
The first reports of people dying from the mystery disease later identified as AIDS.
GHANA
Jerry Rawlings assumes power in Ghana for the second time.
POLAND
Martial law is declared in Poland after the growing success of the independent trade union Solidarity.
1982
ARGENTINA
invades the Falklands/Malvinas Islands.
Britain recaptures them by sending a large naval task force.
British Conservatism is reinvigorated by this echo of former military power.
LEBANON
Israel invades.
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) is forced to leave Beirut and Palestinians in the refugee camps are eventually massacred by Lebanese Christian forces.
BRITAIN
Women protesting at the installation of ‘Cruise’ nuclear missiles establish a permanent peace camp at Greenham Common airbase.
USSR
Death of Leonid Brezhnev.
1983
NIGERIA
A million Ghanaian migrant workers are expelled.
INDIA
The worst sectarian violence since Partition sees 600 Muslim refugees massacred in Assam.
NICARAGUA
President Reagan openly backs the Contra guerillas against the Nicaraguan Sandinista Government for the first time.
Managua's civilian population is attacked from the air.
CHAD
Libyan forces capture one half of the country on behalf of one side in the civil war.
France sends troops to help the other side.
PHILIPPINES
Benigno Aquino, leader of the opposition to Ferdinand Marcos's regime, is murdered at Manila airport as he returns from exile.
GRENADA
Revolutionary leader Maurice Bishop is murdered by a disputing faction; the US seizes the chance to invade.
SOUTH AFRICA
Whites agree in a referendum to give ‘coloureds’ and ‘Indians’the vote — but not the majority African population.
ARGENTINA
Democracy is restored in Argentina as Raul Alfonsin wins the presidential election.
1984
NIGERIA
The military seizes power.
MOZAMBIQUE
signs an non-aggression pact with South Africa, the Nkomati Accord, but South Africa continues to supply the Renamo guerillas.
USSR
Death of reformist leader Yuri Andropov before he could have an impact on Brezhnev's system.
AFRICA
A major famine affects 150 million people in 24 countries.
The world does not wake up to it until a TV report captures the popular imagination at the end of the year.
NICARAGUA
The International Court of Justice condemns US support for the Contras and the mining of Nicaraguan ports.
The US ignores the ruling.
INDIA
Troops storm the Sikh stronghold of the Golden Temple, causing widespread resentment which eventually issues in the assassination of Indira Gandhi.
Her son Rajiv wins a sympathetic landslide in an election.
Thousands die and many more are mutilated by an eruption of poisonous gas from the multinational Union Carbide's chemical plant at Bhopal in India.
This is the world's worst industrial disaster.
PHILIPPINES
A typhoon leaves 1,000 dead.
1985
UNITED NATIONS
A conference in Nairobi marks the end of the UN Decade for Women.The US withdraws from UNESCO, signalling a general disengagement from the UN.
BRAZIL
has its first civilian president for 21 years.
SOUTH AFRICA
Many clashes as popular resistance to apartheid in the townships grows.
Each death brings out greater opposition to the army in the streets, the world's attention is gained and held, and revolution, for a brief brilliant moment, seems possible.
USSR
Death of old-guard Soviet leader Chernenko.
His replacement Mikhail Gorbachev ushers in a new era of reform, beginning with a unilateral 10-month freeze on the deployment of new weapons.
BANGLADESH
A cyclone and tidal wave in Bangladesh leave 10,000 dead.
The Live Aid concert raises funds for Africa.
PERU
New President Alán García says Peru will pay back to the banks no more than 10 per cent of its annual export earnings.
His similarly debt-crippled Latin American neighbours fail to back him.
MEXICO
An earthquake in Mexico City kills at least 2,000.
COLOMBIA
A mudslide in Colombia kills 20,000.
1986
USSR
Mikhail Gorbachev proposes the elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2000.
A major catastrophe at the nuclear power plant of Chernobyl spreads radiation over much of Europe.
UGANDA
Civil war culminates in the victory of the National Resistance Army.
Yoweri Museveni becomes President and at last begins reconstruction.
PHILIPPINES
The tyrant Ferdinand Marcos is deposed by popular demonstrations which thrust his election opponent, Corazon Aquino, to power.
HAITI
Another notorious dictator is ousted — Jean-Claude ‘Baby Doc’ Duvalier.
LIBYA
US planes attack Tripoli in an attempt to kill Colonel Muammar Gadafy.
SOUTH AFRICA
A full and indefinite state of emergency is declared in the wake of continued township and labour unrest.
Black opposition leaders are arrested, a press clampdown begins and resistance is strangled.
The US imposes sanctions, against President Reagan's will.
IBM, General Motors, Barclays and Esso are among the companies who disinvest.
CAMEROON
A massive effusion of poisonous gas from a volcanic lake kills 1,500 people, most of them in their sleep.
MOZAMBIQUE
President Samora Machel dies in a plane crash.
South African involvement is suspected but never proved.
UNITED STATES
The Irangate scandal begins.
CHINA
Students demonstrate in favour of greater democracy.
1987
SOUTH KOREA
Widespread student unrest is followed by an allegedly fraudulent election victory for the Government candidate.
FIJI
A coup on behalf of the indigenous minority stops an Indian-orientated government from assuming power.
WORLD
The world's population tops five billion.The prices of the commodities exported by Third World countries, which have declined throughout the 1980s, reach their lowest level of the decade, at around 65 per cent of their average value in the 1970s.
The world's stock markets crash in the biggest nosedive since 1929.
The predicted recession does not happen — for the moment.
SOUTH AFRICA
Nelson Mandela completes 25 years in jail.
CENTRAL AMERICA
The five countries in the region sign a peace agreement.
PALESTINE
PLO leader Yasser Arafat publicly recognizes Israel's right to existence.
The world does not notice for another year.
UNITED NATIONS
Publication of Our Common Future, the report of the Brundtland Commission on the state of the world's environment.
It calls for immediate action but none is forthcoming.
BURKINA FASO
Murder of Thomas Sankara, one of Africa's most promising revolutionary leaders.
LATIN AMERICA
spends 36 per cent of its export earnings on servicing its foreign debt.
1988
AFGHANISTAN
The USSR starts to withdraw its troops — and completes the process by the target date early in 1989.
US/USSR
The first-ever treaty delivering cuts in nuclear weapons is signed by Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev.
PALESTINE
The PLO's recognition of Israel is finally understood by the West; the US agrees to talk to them.
CHILE
An ‘election’ in Chile asks simply whether General Pinochet should remain as President.
The answer is ‘No!’.
IRAN/IRAQ
Finally, a ceasefire after a punishing eight-year war.
PARAGUAY
General Alfredo Stroessner is tumbled into exile after 34 years of dictatorship.
UNITED STATES
George Bush is elected President.
BURMA
People take to the streets to demand a change in the rigid political system.
The old guard survives for the present.
1989
NAMIBIA
wins its independence from South Africa; SWAPO and other exiles return to take part in the first general election.
USSR
The first genuine elections since the early days of the Revolution establish a new Parliament, though the Communist Party remains unchallenged.
TIBET
The latest Chinese atrocity sees demonstrating Buddhist monks shot dead by occupying troops.
WORLD
Escalating concern over the global environment is finally registered by world leaders.
In elections to the European Community, the vote for Green parties increases dramatically.
SOUTH AFRICA
Nelson Mandela, though still imprisoned, meets President Botha.
Botha, however, is replaced by a new Nationalist leader, FW De Klerk, who promises only cosmetic changes to apartheid.
CHINA
Hundreds of thousands of Chinese students and workers rally in favour of greater democracy.
The world's imagination is caught.
But the old guard in the leadership sends in the tanks and introduces a new phase of vicious repression.
Apples crop up everywhere from the dinner table to our most ancient myths and legends.
The NI examines the facts about this multifarious fruit.
THE APPLE HIT PARADE
Top ten apples in the world
(by production)
1.
Red Delicious
2.
Granny Smith
3.
Golden Delicious
4.
Democrat
5.
Jonathan
6.
Spartan
7.
Renette du Canada
8.
McIntosh
9.
Galas and Cox
10.
Anna
Top ten apples in the US
Total production 1989 (, 000 tonnes)
1.
Red Delicious 1,851
2.
Golden Delicious 693
3.
McIntosh 304
4.
Rome 257
5.
Jonathan 167
6.
York 109
7.
Stayman 84
8.
Newtown 79
9.
RI Greening 65
10.
Cortland 53
APPLE NATIONS
Main apple producers 1985
(‘000 tonnes)
World 38,072
Soviet Union 7,000
US 3,606
China 3,500
France 2,315
Italy 2,129
Turkey 1,772
West Germany 1,410
Poland 1,343
Spain 1,056
India 1,000
Iran 1,000
Argentina 982
Hungary 980
Japan 907
Romania 800
East Germany 700
Fruit and vegetables are the second most valuable item to South Africa's economy and earned $119 million in 1987 — a fall of 5% on 1986 — reflecting the impact of consumer boycotts in the West.
Australia produced 360,000 tonnes of apples in 1989 of which 150,000 tonnes were processed and 20,000 tonnes exported.
Of the total produced, 54% were Delicious; 27% Granny Smith; 9% other varieties; 8% Jonathans and 2% early apples.
Over 80% of Aotearoa/New Zealand's apples are grown in Hawke's Bay on North Island and in Nelson on South Island.
They include Granny Smith, Red Delicious, Braeburn, Cox's Orange Pipin and Gala.
Around
9.8 million are exported — mainly to the Pacific, South East Asia, Europe and North America.
Apples are Canada's most important fruit crop.
Red and Golden Delicious are most popular, followed by McIntosh, Spy, Cortland, Spartan and Idared.
Apples are Chile's second largest export crop after grapes (in terms of area planted).
Overall shipments of fruit abroad earned $524 million for Chile in foreign currency during 1988/89.
APPLE HEALTH
The saying ‘An apple a day keeps the doctor away’ contains some truth.
Recent research suggests that apples — along with some other fruit — contain ellagic acid, which may help us fight off skin and lung cancer.
For every pound of apples eaten, the cholesterol level can be reduced by one per cent.
Eating an apple 15 minutes before a meal helps slimming because the cellulose bulk gives a ‘full-up’ feeling and reduces calorie intake at mealtimes.
In mediaeval times cider was given to sailors bound on long voyages partly as a palliative for scurvy.
APPLE WORSHIP
Wassailing was originally probably a Roman fertility rite to praise and encourage Pomona, the goddess of fruit trees, and it is still carried out in parts of the UK on Twelfth Night to ensure a good crop of apples the following year.
The most productive tree in a village or orchard is chosen for a party and pieces of toast are hung in the branches to attract robins which are supposed to be good spirits.
The villagers then shoot guns into the branches to ward off evil spirits.
Cider is poured on the tree roots, the rest is drunk and the ceremony is concluded by a dance around the trees, and a song which begins, ‘Health to thee, good apple-tree’.
The Halloween game of bobbing apples — catching apples in a tub of water with your mouth — probably originated as an ancient harvest rite, possibly again in honour of the Roman goddess Pomona.
In Teutonic mythology, heaven was likened to a vale of apple trees tended by the goddess Idun.
The apples were the fruits of perpetual youth and gave the gods immortality.
APPLE LANGUAGE
The word for apple is similar in many European languages.
Celtic: ‘abhall’; Cornish: ‘avall’; German: ‘apfel’; Irish: ‘abhal’; Welsh:
‘afal’; Dutch: ‘appel’.
The Latin word for apple is ‘pomum’ and many European words stem from this linguistic root.
Appel'sin — Russian for orange.
Pomade — a perfumed oil or ointment put on hair to make it smooth and shiny.
Pomander — a mixture of aromatic substances carried as a scent or as protection against disease.
Derives from the Latin pomum ambrae meaning ‘apple of amber’.
Pome — means the fleshy fruit of the apple and related plants, consisting of an enlarged receptacle enclosing the ovary and seeds.
Pomme — French for apple.
Pomme de terre — French for potato meaning apple of the ground
Pomegranate — an Asian shrub or small tree cultivated in semi-tropical regions for its edible fruit — derives from Latin pomum meaning ‘apple’ and grenate meaning ‘full of seeds’.
Pomelo — another name for grapefruit.
Pomiculture — the cultivation of fruit.
Pomology — the branch of horticulture concerned with the study of fruit.
Pomona — Roman goddess of fruit trees.
Sinaas appel — Dutch for orange.
Apple expressions
In Cockney rhyming slang apples and pears means stairs.
The Australian term she's apples means all is well.
Apple sauce is US slang for ‘nonsense’.
Apples of gold referred to in the Bible —‘A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver’— are thought to have been apricots which abounded in the Holy Land and were introduced into Palestine from Armenia.
Apple of my eye derives from the Bible and means ‘child of the eye’, child being the eyeball and especially the pupil which is the organ of vision.
Its preciousness makes it a symbol of God's love for human beings.
Apple of discord comes from a Greek myth about a golden apple that was inscribed with ‘for the fairest’.
It was claimed by three goddesses — Hera, Athena and Aphrodite.
Paris awarded it to Aphrodite, beginning a chain of events that led to the Trojan War9.
Apples of Sodom was how ancient writers described fruits that looked delicious but when eaten proved to be full of ashes.
It now refers to anything disappointing.
Apple polisher is US slang for a sycophant.
The environment — the facts
The rate at which Westerners are consuming the earth's resources is destroying the planet.
The average US consumer has an hourly energy consumption equal to the detonation of more than 17 lbs of TNT explosive.
Every day she or he produces nine lbs of hazardous waste and drives an average of 30 miles.
1.
GALLOPING CONSUMPTION
The world now manufactures seven times more goods than it did in 1950.
If Third World consumption levels were equal to those of the industrialized world, manufacturing would have to increase between five and ten times.
The bar chart shows what the average Westerner consumes in a year compared to a Third World person: the shaded area represents the Third World.
The average person in the West is likely to
consume more than 264 lbs of paper a year, compared to an average consumption of just 17.6 lbs per person in the Third World
consume over 990 lbs of steel compared with 94.6 lbs in the Third World
consume 57.2 lbs of other metals compared with 4.4 lbs in the Third World
purchase energy equivalent to almost 6 tonnes of coal compared with 0.5 tonnes in the Third World.
2.
SQUANDERING ENERGY
The US has just 6% of the world's population but consumes 30% of the world's energy — compared with India where 20% of the global population use only 2% of the energy.
Private cars guzzle about 7% of the world's commercial (non-industrial) energy or 17% of the oil used each year.
Of the world's 250 major industrial products, just 12 consume more than 70% of the energy used by the entire industrial sector.
They are: petroleum fuels, petrochemicals, steel, aluminium, fertilizers, cement, glass, bricks and ceramics, paper and pulp, sugar and finished textiles.
Domestic energy accounts for one-third of each person's total energy consumption; the other two-thirds are consumed in transport, agriculture and industry.
Domestic energy consumption measured as barrels of oil
Barrels of oil per person
North America 22.0
Australasia 16.5
Scandinavia 13.5
Europe 9.8
Japan 8.5
3.
WASTING WATER
Every day Westerners flush away between 150 and 500 litres of water at home and more at work.
A quarter of the UK's piped water is lost through corroding mains.
The more water we use, the more land has to be flooded for reservoirs.
The world's thirstiest countries
4.
THROWAWAY WORLD
The Western world annually produces about one billion tonnes of industrial waste.
The average American throws away at least 12 times their body weight in domestic waste each year.
Annual domestic Equivalent per waste (‘000 tonnes) person (kilograms)
5.
AIR POLLUTION
The propellants in aerosol cans known as chloroflurocarbons (CFCs) damage the ozone layer — that part of the atmosphere which protects the earth from the sun's harmful rays.
A huge hole has recently appeared in the layer above the Antarctic ice cap.
If the layer thins by even one per cent, the result could be 15,000 new cases of cancer annually in the US alone.
Car exhausts and the burning of fossil fuels like coal or oil pollute the atmosphere with a mixture of chemicals — chiefly sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide — which combine to form acid rain.
This kills forests and lakes.
Half of all high-level lakes in the US have been damaged by acid rain and at least 4,000 of Canada's lakes have died.
Fish are practically extinct in the 5,000 square miles of Norway's southern lakes.
Since 1955 the amount of CFCs in the atmosphere have increased 25 times.
In 1985 the chemical industry produced nearly 800,000 tonnes of CFCs.
CFCs also contribute to a heating of the earth's atmosphere known as the greenhouse effect.
The temperature has risen by around one degree centigrade over the last 150 years.
A rise in average temperatures of three degrees centigrade could occur by the year 2030, resulting in the melting of glaciers and icecaps, and widespread flooding of lowland.
6.
DUMPING POISONS
In 1985 the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development estimated that there was a shipment of waste every five minutes, 365 days a year.
Shipments are now even more frequent.
Since 1986 over three million tons of toxic waste have been shipped from Western Europe and North America to other countries.
About 125,000 metric tons of toxic waste are sent to the Third World from Europe each year.
7.
BRUTAL FARMING
Every year 25 billion tonnes of topsoil are lost through large-scale farming techniques — seven per cent of the world's soil every decade.
In the US, farmers work the soil so hard that around five billion tonnes are blown or washed away annually and an area twice the size of California has been rendered unproductive.
The use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides is responsible for over half of all water pollution in the US.
In 1970 European farmers as a whole consumed about 17 billion tonnes of artificial fertilizer.
The same was true for US farmers.
By 1983 the figure hit 22 billion tonnes for each country.
The numbers of damaging insect species resistant to pesticide have multiplied from 160 to 450 since 1960.
Increasing amounts of pesticide have to be used to kill them; between 1950 and 1967 pesticide use in the US shot up by 168%.
An estimated one million people worldwide are unintentionally poisoned by pesticides every year.
8.
CONSUMER POWER
Green consumers have already forced the shift from leaded to unleaded petrol, the replacement of ‘hard’ detergents with ‘soft’, more biodegradable products and the growing demand for health foods and organically grown produce.
More than two out of every five Britons say they buy products on environmental grounds — over double the number who did so in 1988.
Campaigns to save the whales have led to the International Whaling Commission gradually lowering its quotas and many nations giving up whaling in favour of protectionist policies.
In response to public concerns about the ozone layer, 65% of the UK toiletry market have agreed to phase out aerosols with CFC propellants by 1989.
1 Green Consumer Guide, John Elkington and Julia Hailes (Gollancz, 1988) .2 The Gaia Atlas of Planet Management, edited by Norman Myers (Pan, 1985).
3 State of the Environment, Essam El-Hinnawi and Manzur H. Hashmi (UN Environment Programme, 1987) .4 Blueprint for a Green Planet, John Seymour and Herbert Giradet (Dorling Kindersley, 1987).
5 Pollution solution, NSW State Pollution Control Commission, 1983. 6 Acid rain, Steve Elsworth (Pluto, 1984).
7 The International trade in Wastes, Greenpeace policy statement, January 1989. 8 ‘Toxic waste for a small planet’, by David Weir, Consumer Lifelines,(IOCU, April 1989).
9 London Observer 24. 9. 1989 10 Friends of the Earth Handbook, edited by Jonathon Porrit (MacDonald Optima, 1987).
POPULATION — THE FACTS
Global families: On average 3.9 children are born to each woman in the world, but there are wide variations both within and between different regions.
FAMILIES AND FINANCE
Paying for the pills
Of the one billion dollars currently spent each year on family planning programmes in the Third World, one-tenth is contributed by the couples themselves, two-fifths by Third World governments and half by governments and aid agencies in the rich world.
Some rich world governments see population planning in poor countries as a key aid priority.
In 1972 the US spent three times as much on family planning programmes in the Third World as it did on health programmes.
Fertility and equality
It is not just the wealth of a nation that influences whether people will choose to have fewer children.
Far more important is the distribution of that wealth to individual families.
Spoilt for choice
A government's plans are sometimes implemented with little or no regard for an individual's family plans.
The lists of countries below are not necessarily exhaustive, but give an indication of the extent to which human rights are being compromised.
Prohibition
Countries which forbid or restrict access to contraception: CHAD, EQUATORIAL GUINEA, GABON, GREECE, IRELAND, MALAWI, MALTA, LIBYA, KAMPUCHEA, SAUDI ARABIA
Coercion
Countries where forced sterilizations have been recorded on a significant scale since 1970: BANGLADESH, BOLIVIA, BRAZIL, COLOMBIA, EL SALVADOR, GUATEMALA, INDIA, INDONESIA, MEXICO, PUERTO RICO, US
Bribery
Countries paying money to users of contraception: BANGLADESH, EGYPT, INDIA, INDONESIA, MALAYSIA, MAURITIUS, NEPAL, SOUTH KOREA, SRI LANKA, THAILAND, TUNISIA, VIETNAM
FAMILIES PLANNING FAMILIES PLANNING FAMILIES PLANNING FAMILIES
Every child a wanted child?
It is a truism that every woman wants to be able to choose how many children she has.
But she may not always choose to have fewer children.
Too close, too many, too young
Family planning is not just used for limiting unwanted pregnancies; it can also be used to time the arrival of a wanted child and thereby increase its chances of survival.
SOUTH INDIA
A child born less than a year after its elder sibling is twice as likely to die in infancy than a child born two to three years after.
EL SALVADOR
A child in a family with five children is twice as likely to die in infancy as a child in a family of three children.
ARGENTINA
A child born to a teenage mother is twice a slikely to die in infancy as a child born to a mother aged between 25 and 29.
Choosing fewer children
Women of different ages were asked about the number of children in the ‘ideal family’.
In all regions younger women gave a smaller number, indicating a worldwide trend towards a desire for smaller families.
The family planning boom
Today there are more women using modern contraception than ever before.
An estimated 50% of women in the world who want to stop having children are able to fulfil that wish by these means.
Type of contraception
An estimated 270 million women are currently using some form of contraception, but this figure and the table below are likely to underestimate — by a wide margin — the numbers of women using traditional methods.
Notice the lack of alternatives in China.
Abortion
Worldwide there is one abortion for every three live births.
That adds up to over 50 million a year, half of which are performed illegally.
39% of women live in countries where abortion is freely available.
28% live in countries where it is illegal or legal only when the woman's life is threatened.
The cost of illegality
BOLIVIA 60% of the obstetric health budget is spent on patching up botched, illegal abortions
US Abortion deaths dropped from 292 to 36 a year when abortion was legalised in 1973
FAMILIES OF THE FUTURE
60 years on…
The exact date when world population is expected to stabilize (i.e. when the number of babies born equals the number of people dying) is revised every year as population growth rates change.
At present the predicted date of stabilization is 2045.
Where will all the people be?
The top ten in 2045
The world of five billion
This year world population tipped the scales at five billion.
It is growing at a rate of around a billion every 12 years.
Every minute it grows by 150; every day by ‘0,000; every year by 80 million.
But this stupendous growth rate is starting to slow down and world population is expected to stabilize at around ten billion less than 60 years from now.
LANGUAGE — THE FACTS
Global talk
More people speak Chinese than any other language — though it is really a collection of eight different languages.
The most widely spoken of these is Mandarin with about 800m speakers.
English, however, is a more international tongue.
It has official status in many countries where other languages are also spoken.
Mother-tongue speakers
Below are the world's major languages ranked according to the number of people who have each as their first language — their mother tongue.
Official languages
Listed here are the total populations of those countries where each language has official status — this will overestimate the number of speakers because only a relatively small number of Indians, for example, will actually speak English.
Family ties
There are around 4,000 languages in the world today — 6,000 less than were spoken a couple of centuries ago.
There were over 1,000 in the ‘New World’ before the colonists arrived — a number that has now dropped to around 400.
Many languages clearly have a common source so it is possible to group languages into families of which the following are the largest:
1.
Indo-European
2,000m speakers
Unlikely as it may seem, there are striking similarities between the major European languages and Sanskrit.
These point to a common ancestor that probably originated in Eastern Europe 25 thousand years ago.
The original ‘proto’ Indo-European language spread west and mutated into the present-day Romance languages like French and Spanish, and the Germanic, like English and German.
As it moved south it took a wide variety of other forms from Kurdish to Hindi.
2.
Sino-Tibetan
1,040m speakers
The vast majority of the speakers of this group are in China but there are significant numbers of Chinese speakers throughout South-East Asia and even in the US.
3.
Niger-Congo
260m speakers
There are 1,000 or so languages in this group which are spoken in most of the southern half of Africa — below a line running roughly from Senegal to Kenya but excluding Namibia and South Africa.
This includes Swahili which although the mother-tongue of only 4m people is probably used as a lingua franca by about 30m.
Some of the other major languages include Rwanda (15m) and in West Africa Yoruba (17m) and Igbo (13m).
4.
Afro-Asiatic
230m speakers
Also known as the Hamito-Semitic group this is found across the northern half of Africa and in South-West Asia.
The Semitic languages are the oldest, of which Arabic (150m) is the most significant and is the sacred language of Islam.
Hebrew (4m) is the language of Israel — though the language spoken by Jesus Christ would have been Old Aramaic.
5.
Austronesian
200m speakers
Also known as Malayo-Polynesian, this is spoken over a vast area from Madagascar to Aotearoa(NZ) and includes at least 500 languages.
They fall into two groups dividing on a line east and west of New Guinea.
Putting a name to a place
The origins of the names of most countries looked very different to a speaker of the local language or the original language.
Here are just a few:
Guatemala
— Place of wooden pillars (Carib)
Cuba
— Place where gold is found (Carib)
Chile
— End of the land (Araucanian)
Uruguay
— River of the painted bird (Araucanian)
Argentina
— The silver republic (Spanish)
Ethiopia
— Burning face (Greek)
Hong Kong
— Fragrant streams (Chinese)
Israel
— Wrestler with God (Hebrew)
Honduras
— The depths (Spanish
Haiti
— Mountain (Carib)
Jamaica
— Well-watered (Carib)
Sierra Leone
— in Portuguese means ‘Mountain range of the lions’.
Seafarers who landed there thought they saw a great chain of mountains and heard the roaring of lions from them.
In fact the mountains were cumulus clouds and the roaring sound came from the surf.
Guinea
— One explanation is that when visitors to West Africa pointed at the land around them and asked its name the local people though they were indicating a group of nearby women.
The word for woman is guiné in the Susu language.
China
— Chinese traders when asked by the Romans what country they came from should really have replied ‘Chung-kuo’(Middle Kingdom).
Instead they gave the name of the current dynasty — which at the time was the Ch'in.
Africa
— Comes from the latin Aprika —‘Sunny’.
Terms of abuse
Many racist words are derived from the strange sounds made by foreigners.
This is an ancient tradition.
The Greek word for ‘barbarians’ means people who seem to be saying ‘baa-baa’— like sheep.
Other labels derive from words taken from the foreigners' own language.
Spik
— Applied by English-speaking to Spanish-speaking persons.
It is difficult for Spanish-speakers to pronounce the English sound ‘ea’.
So ‘I don't speak English’ can come out as ‘No ess-pik English’.
Chink
— Comes from a mis-pronunciation of Chung-kuo, the Chinese word for China.
Gook
— Used (frequently by the military) of East Asians in general.
It is a Korean word which simply means ‘country’.
Thus Korea is han-gook and America is mei-gook.
Wop
— Refers to Italians.
It is a corruption of guappo meaning ‘strong’ or ‘robust’in the Neapolitan dialect and was applied to youths who migrated to America.
Honky
— used by blacks of whites.
Probably derives from rivalry between blacks and central European immigrants in US cities.
Hunyak is Hungarian for Hungarian.
Coon
— Comes from the last syllable of barracões the Portuguese word for buildings constructed for holding slaves before they were sold.
Eskimo
— This is an Algonkian word meaning ‘eater of flesh’ which this Indian group used to refer to the hunting peoples who live to the north of them.
The ‘flesh-eaters’ merely call themselves Inuit —‘the people’.
Dago
— For the Spanish.
Comes from the common Spanish Christian name, Diego.
Gringo
— Used by Latin Americans of North Americans and Europeans.
The most picturesque explanation is that US soldiers were frequently heard in Mexico during the US-Mexican war of 1848 to sing the song ‘Green Grow the Lilacs’.
Local people ran the opening two words together.
Nip
— For the Japanese.
A transliteration of the Japanese word for Japan, Nippon.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is committed to a policy of ‘Mental Health for All by the Year 2000’.
Here the NI draws evidence from around the globe to show how far short of that lofty goal we are likely to fall.
Health Warning
The ‘facts’ about madness can be misleading.
Only the Western medical science of ‘epidemiology’ pursues them with vigour, often to prove its own theories and with doubtful results.
USA: Lifestyles
A survey in Eastern Baltimore has shown how changing lifestyles are increasing the risk of mental disorder.
This is because, in Western industrialized culture, those who live outside the nuclear family are vulnerable, and their numbers are increasing.
For example, the number of female non-family households has increased from 7% to 16% of the total number of households between 1950 and 1984; and the prevalence of disorder is 27% for this group, compared with an average of 23.4%.
UK: Disappearing Madness
Two of the most serious disorders recognised by Western psychiatry are schizophrenia and hysteria.
First admissions to hospital for the former have fallen from 14 per 100,000 population in 1970 to 9 per 100,000 in 1978.
The latter has disappeared almost completely, falling from 2.12% of all admissions in 1960 to just 0.80% in 1978.
This is not the result of patients being ‘switched’ into a different mental health category since the incidence of other types of illness has not increased over the same period.
But no-one yet knows why this is happening.
LATIN AMERICA: Chilling Prospects
A recent survey for the WHO predicts that there will be an increase of 11.2% in deaths related to psychological factors.
Violence accounts for a large proportion of this increase.
By the year 2000 it is predicted that there will be 88.3 million people suffering from selected disorders in Latin America, an increase of 48.1%.
Deteriorating social and economic conditions will play a major part in this trend.
UGANDA: Irritating Tendencies
A survey of adults in two small Ugandan villages found 20% had some sort of disorder, mostly depressive.
But the researchers also reported ‘an irritating tendency for some Ugandan subjects not to answer questions directly.
Thus…in reply to being asked if they worried more than others, they would answer, ‘How can I know how much others worry?’’
SOUTH AFRICA: Cheap Black Patients
Apartheid is just as evident in mental health as elsewhere.
Black psychiatric nurses and doctors are not permitted to care for white patients (according to a 1984 study) while there were no psychiatrists of ‘African’ descent in 1982.
Institutional care is provided by a private company as well as by the state.
In 1978 the Government paid this company 1.69 to 2.11 rand per day to care for black patients and 5.33 to 7.00 rand per day for white patients.
USSR: History of Abuse
Until 1988 the Ministry of the Interior, which runs the police and has close links with the KGB, supervised all top-security psychiatric hospitals.
There are 25,000 psychiatrists, more than anywhere else in the world except the US.
In 1982 a book called ‘The Pictorial Language of Schizophrenics’ accused ‘sick artists’of being interested only in the baser aspects of life.
JAPAN: the Madness Business
Between 1955 and 1975 the number of private mental hospitals rose from 206 to 1,450 and the number of patients increased from 44,000 to 300,000.
That number has now increased to some 340,000. 95% of patients are detained without their consent, at a rate of 250 per 100,000 population, compared with just 2.5 per 100,000 in Europe.
Well over 80% of Japanese hospital beds are in private hospitals.
THAILAND: Poisoning the Brain
Ponds and streams near lead factories in western Thailand contain up to 10,000 times the WHO maximum limit for lead.
Motor vehicles spew over a ton of lead into the atmosphere of Bangkok every day.
Only 19% of Thais tested in 1983 had levels of lead in their blood below 20 micrograms, compared with over 85% of the US population tested at the same time.
Lead poisoning in mothers and young children is very dangerous indeed, permanently damaging mental development.
AUSTRALIA: Tranquillized Community
According to its manufacturers (ER Squibb & Sons Pty), sales of the drug Modecate increased from 560 kg in 1975 to 1,552 kg in 1986.
Of the sales in 1975, 10% were to dispensing chemists (primarily outpatients) and 90% to hospitals.
By 1986, 40% of sales were to dispensing chemists.
Modecate can be administered by means of‘depot’, or long-acting injections, and is often prescribed for schizophrenia.
The incidence of schizophrenia is also thought to be on the decline in Australia.
AOTEAROA/NEW ZEALAND: Madness and Racism
A recent survey showed that involuntary admission to mental hospital, especially under the Criminal Justice Act, is much more common among the Maori (36% of all Maori admissions) than the pakeha or non-Maori (24%).
It is highest of all among Pacific Island Polynesians (45%).
The failure of success
The prevalence rate of mental disorders — the proportion of the total population affected — is set to increase around the globe by the year 2000.
There is a threat of a ‘pandemic’.
This is because, as population increases, so do the numbers of people in age groups at high risk of developing disorders.
And successful treatment is prolonging the lives of affected people — but not dealing with the causes or preventing them being affected in the first place.
Here are the latest WHO figures.
1 Mental retardation
Approximately 3 to 4 per thousand children under 18 years of age have major disabilities in intellectual and social function.
There are between 90 and 130 million people in the world suffering such disabilities.
2 Brain damage
Caused by bacterial and parasitic infections, alcohol abuse, malnutrition, chemical pollutants etc.
There are an estimated 400 million people suffering from iodine deficiency, which can damage the foetus.
3 Psychoses
The prevalence of severe mental disorders such as schizophrenia is estimated conservatively at not less than 1% of the population.
More than 45 million people suffer social and occupational difficulties as a result.
The prevalence of schizophrenia is approximately 2 to 4 per thousand.
4 Dementia
Diseases of the brain, particularly those associated with ageing, are increasing as people live longer.
Senile dementia is estimated at 100 to 200 per thousand individuals aged 70 years or older.
5 Epilepsy
Prevalence ranges from 3 to 5 per thousand in industrialized countries to 15 to 20 or even 30 per thousand in some areas of the developing world.
6 Neuroses
Estimated to occur at a frequency of 5% to 18% of the general population, and rising sharply in industrialized countries.
7 Alcohol abuse
The number of countries in Europe with a per capita intake of more than 10 litres of pure alcohol per year increased from 3 in 1950 to 18 by 1979.
There is a sharp global increase in alcohol consumption, particularly in some countries in Africa, Latin America and the Western Pacific.
8 Illicit Drugs
There are an estimated 30 million cannabis users, 1.7 million opium-dependent and 0.7 million heroin-dependent people in the world.
There are as yet no figures for cocaine.
9 Psychotropic (‘mood altering’) drugs
Drugs used in the treatment of mental disorders are often supplied over the counter without prescription, with insufficient or misleading information, or are prescribed inappropriately.
10 Somatic symptoms
Between 30% and 50% of all consultations with medical professionals in industrialized countries result from no detectable physical illness or when the complaint of discomfort is out of proportion to the physical problem.
In developing countries such complaints, though a lower proportion of the total, are still the largest single complaint category in primary health care.
Family ties
There are around 4,000 languages in the world today — 6,000 less than were spoken a couple of centuries ago.
There were over 1,000 in the ‘New World’ before the colonists arrived — a number that has now dropped to around 400.
Many languages clearly have a common source so it is possible to group languages into families of which the following are the largest:
1.
Indo-European 2,000m speakers
Unlikely as it may seem, there are striking similarities between the major European languages and Sanskrit.
These point to a common ancestor that probably originated in Eastern Europe 25 thousand years ago.
The original ‘proto’ Indo-European language spread west and mutated into the present-day Romance languages like French and Spanish, and the Germanic, like English and German.
As it moved south it took a wide variety of other forms from Kurdish to Hindi.
2.
Sino-Tibetan 1,040m speakers
The vast majority of the speakers of this group are in China but there are significant numbers of Chinese speakers throughout South-East Asia and even in the US.
3.
Niger-Congo 260m speakers
There are 1,000 or so languages in this group which are spoken in most of the southern half of Africa — below a line running roughly from Senegal to Kenya but excluding Namibia and South Africa.
This includes Swahili which although the mother-tongue of only 4m people is probably used as a lingua franca by about 30m.
Some of the other major languages include Rwanda (15m) and in West Africa Yoruba (17m) and Igbo (13m).
4.
Afro-Asiatic 230m speakers
Also known as the Hamito-Semitic group this is found across the northern half of Africa and in South-West Asia.
The Semitic languages are the oldest, of which Arabic (150m) is the most significant and is the sacred language of Islam.
Hebrew (4m) is the language of Israel — though the language spoken by Jesus Christ would have been Old Aramaic.
5.
Austronesian 200m speakers
Also known as Malayo-Polynesian, this is spoken over a vast area from Madagascar to Aotearoa(NZ) and includes at least 500 languages.
They fall into two groups dividing on a line east and west of New Guinea.
Loads of money
About two thirds of the Third World's $1,000 billion debt was lent by around 550 of the world's private banks from North America, Japan and Europe between the late 1960s and early 1980s.
Most of the lending came from the largest US Banks — Bankers Trust, Bank of America, Chase Manhattan, Chemical, Citicorp, Continental, Illinois, First Chicago, Manufacturers Hanover, Morgan Guaranty1 — and their counterparts in Japan, Germany, France and the UK.
The rest came from government sources.
Scraping the barrel
Many Third World countries owe more in debts than they earn a year from exports:
Desperate dependence
Three quarters of developing countries' earnings come from just 33 commodities, and an individual country is likely to be dependent on just two or three of these.4
Economies dependent on few commodities
Running to stand still
To repay the banks, Latin American countries exported more and more goods over the first half of the 1980s.
Exports grew in volume to yearly levels that were double those of the previous decade.
But the earnings for the same exports have actually been falling — by an average of 5% per year since 19816.
Plunging prices
The more that is exported, the faster prices fall: Between 1980 and 1987 the price of food fell by 10%, minerals by 6%, agricultural raw materials by 4% and tropical beverages by 2%.
Disappearing dollars
Booming banks
Between 1982 — when Mexico threatened default — and the end of 1985, the dividends declared by the big nine banks increased by more than a third.
Profits shot up and stockholders benefitted from rising shares.
As Walter Wriston, former chairman of Citicorp Bank said: ‘Our strategy is not one of making loans; our strategy is one of making money.’
9
Graph 1.
Between 1982 and 1985 profits at Banker's Trust went up by 66%: at Chase Manhattan by 84%: at Chemical by 61%: at Citicorp and Manufacturers Hanover by 38% and at Morgan Guaranty by 79%.
Graph 2.
Between 1982 and 1986 the value of Chase's stock rose by 86%: of Chemical's by 97%: of Citicorps by 83% while Morgan and Banker's Trust's shot up by 142 and 154% respectively.10
Mention Fiji and people think of an idyllic island in the South Pacific.
In fact there are 300 islands.
Vitu Levu is the biggest and is host to the nation's relatively buzzing capital, Suva.
A British colony until 1970, when it was granted independence, Fiji is a mixture of imposed Western values and indigenous traditions; of native Fijians and a majority Indian population which migrated to the country in the last hundred years.
British missionaries started arriving in the early 1800s and convinced Fijians that they should wear clothes.
Merchants followed hot on their heels selling fabrics and other manufactured goods in exchange for copra oil.
The Fijian king, impressed with this kind of ‘progress’, offered his country to Washington for annexation.
In the throes of civil war, the White House declined his offer.
The British stepped in.
Short of sugar, they discovered the archipelago's potential for growing cane — still the country's major export — and annexed the islands in 1874.
While there was little resistance to the purchase or expropriation of their land for cash crops, Fijian peasants refused to work the plantations.
Indian semi-slaves were shipped in by the British and most of these stayed on after their contract ended, bringing their families over and settling down, becoming small shopkeepers, craftsmen and bureaucrats in the colonial administration.
British colonization did little to help the majority of Fijians, bringing commerce and economic development which benefitted few.
Most people still live in the hinterlands of the inhabited islands eking out a living, but poverty abounds.
Yet travellers are certain to be met with overwhelming hospitality.
In the cities lack of employment has led to despair and alcoholism.
Young Fijians find solace in ‘one case of beer’— it is never drunk by the bottle — and are generous to a fault.
Unfortunately no longer protected by the caring concern of the traditional communal system of the Fijian village, dying it own death, urban Fijians cherish a fantasy of the security of the village which no longer exists.
The streets of Fiji's three major cities — Suva, Nandi and Latouka — are reminiscent of Australian country towns as the advertisement hoardings proclaim the extent of Australian business penetration.
‘Fiji is now an Australian colony,’ observed an academic in Suva.
Japanese and Taiwanese ships are anchored in the bays, testimony to the importance of the country's export industry.
But the traditional Fijian elites, the power and influence of Australian and multinational companies, and US military and strategic interests were seriously threatened by the last duly elected civilian administration, Bavandra's Labour government.
Now many Indians see no future for them in Fiji and there is a mass exodus.
For the majority of Fijian citizens who cannot emigrate, there seems little alternative in the short term to growing unemployment and hunger.
Fiji's decline is abetted by its newly-acquired reputation as a ‘banana republic’ following the two coups last year when the military leader Colonel Rambuka refused to allow the democratically-elected government to take office.
The worsening unemployment, poverty and despair have fostered the fascist ‘Taukei’ movement which was behind last year's coups and is currently shaping the country's political future.
SECRET FILTERS
At the centre of education systems there is a confidence trick to prevent most people from reaching high standards.
It is called The Examination.
Terry Furlong explains how it works.
Question: What's the most complex and challenging intellectual feat ever achieved by human beings and who did it?
Answer: Learning to speak and we all did it.
And how did we do it?
By a kind of sympathetic apprenticeship.
Before babies start to talk, adults and others around, talk to them.
And they pick up the tunes of the language.
And as they learn more and more words and communicate ever more complex ideas, they are encouraged by their own success and other people's approval.
Their ‘teachers’ don't set up special learning programs, or correct mistakes much, or punish failure.
Above all they don't test, assess or measure progress in any way.
The only criterion is that of mutual comprehension.
And if they don't understand one another, then they keep trying new expressions until they do.
There is very little which can't be learned by the apprenticeship method, and anyone can teach anyone anything up to their own level of competence.
At the highest levels of attainment in developed societies, like postgraduate research fellowships, or master classes in the arts, this is exactly what does happen — just as it always has with farmers, hunters, mothers, shamans, poets, and makers of things tangible or mental.
But learning in school seems to be quite another process, and very much less successful with the majority.
The real problem with formal education is that it isn't meant to make everyone almost equally successful.
It is specially designed to filter out and exclude from power, confidence and self-respect, all except a small minority.
There wasn't too much problem when everyone knew that this is what schools were meant to do — as with the priest colleges of ancient Egypt, the monasteries of Europe or Asia, or the academies of Greece or China.
The problem lies with systems of universal education which pretend that they are in the business of educating everybody to the limits of their potential, while hypocritically and determinedly doing the opposite.
The main instruments of this confidence trick are: controlling what counts as intelligence; controlling systems of measuring it; and creating the expectation that most people will fail this system.
These instruments then provide a pseudo-scientific basis for giving most of the educational goodies to the few who can ‘benefit’ from them.
Politicians and educators take refuge in this pseudo-science to mystify, confuse and warn off ordinary people, when any serious questions are asked about educational provision.
The first instrument of this trick is the definition of certain mental operations as representing intelligence.
Which of the following achievements do you think best represents intelligence?
Teaching handicapped children to play a tune on the recorder
Making a garden produce food all year round
Navigating a boat across the ocean without instruments
Sensing when someone is very frightened
Helping a group to resolve severe conflicts
Creating a complex design for weaving cloth
Finding the next number in the series 3,4,6,9,12,14…
Only the last item would be included in an intelligence test.
For it so happens that the developed societies over-value certain kinds of mental operations, like logic.
They call these intelligence, even though they only represent a small part of the mind's capacity.
And it turns out that these are the ones that are easily measured.
The ‘measurement’ itself is done in such a way that the numbers of people doing well can be controlled.
Neat.
So how is it done?
First you get together a batch of questions to be answered which supposedly measure intelligence or knowledge of some particular subject.
This batch of questions is called the test, and its main job is to produce a pattern of answeres called a ‘normal distribution’.
This means that a few get top marks, a big bunch get middling marks, and a few come near the bottom.
Any set of questions which allowed most people to be at the top, and only a few further down, would be rejected as useless, because it didn't ‘discriminate’(to use the pseudo-scientific jargon).
This means that the test itself, regardless of its content is capable of acting as a filter, which is exactly what society wants, to allocate educational resources on an apparently fair and scientific basis.
Public examination systems are constructed on this principle and have another feature too, that of setting up a norm each year, on which each pupil is judged.
This year, let's say, 100 children are being tested in mathematics.
The child who comes half-way, that is, 50th, gets 60% So we decide that all those who got 60% or more will pass, and the ones who get less will fail.
But last year the one who came 50th only got 45%.
So last year all those with more than 45% passed and those with less failed.
Their actual answeres could have been identical.
The trouble is that if we use 45% as the pass mark this year the child who came 80th will pass and so will all those above her.
And then the examiners will be accused of ‘falling standards’, and even worse, more people will be qualified than the system is supposed to deliver.
So what can we do?
We can't use the actual mark, or quality of answere as the standard, we must stick with whatever the 50th child gets.
If that child gets higher marks this year than last, then we assume that the examination was ‘easier’, and we remove some of the questions that nearly all children found easy, before next year's examination.
The important thing is that only 50% should pass, and the others should fail.
This is the principle, though it is rarely done as nakedly as this.
It is a principle which can produce all kinds of filters.
You can make one like the British O' level that passes only 20% of 16 year-olds.
Or you can have grades so that 7% get A, 12% get B, 28% get C, ‘% get D and 17% get E, depending, not on what they are like, but on the numbers you want through your filter.
Since the construction of these tests is on scientific principles, then everyone will accept, as some law of nature, that large numbers of children and adults are failed and excluded, and thus convinced that they cannot learn anything valued by the education system.
Once convinced it is easy to filter them out.
So what, if anything, do examinations and tests have to do with teaching, learning, or reaching the standards of excellence that supporters of selective systems are so fond of?
The answere is that they have nothing to do with them, and their effects on them are negative.
Teachers need information about how pupils are getting on.
They must be able to spot strengths and weaknesses and gaps in knowledge, not so as to compare pupils with each other, but in order to move on to the next stage, in the most effective way.
Both teachers and learners need these ‘snapshots’ to stimulate, interest, excite and challenge.
This kind of assessment is called formative.
Teachers will have had experiences of both kinds of testing and, like myself, have concluded that the formative sort enables the vast majority in their care to make excellent progress and know that they are doing so.
And they will also know, that the more often they have to subject their students to the selective, norm-based assessment, the more some of their students will lose confidence and motivation and be reinforced in failure.
This in itself causes bitterness and resentment in teachers and taught.
So how do you do formative assessment?
I teach children and adults to get better at writing, which is notoriously difficult to assess, particularly the imaginative and poetic kinds.
On a day-to-day basis, I encourage them to sketch, to draft, to alter and revise, depending on the purpose and audience for their writing.
The students show their writing to me, other teachers, other students, and any person or organization for whom the writing is intended.
Every six weeks or so, we discuss which piece or pieces of writing should be selected to represent their best work so far.
At the end of the year, or at any time, there is a small selection of pieces that represent stages in their progress towards being successful writers, including types of writing they're best at and types they have more trouble with.
Anyone can use this to make a judgement about any and every aspect of their writing depending on what they're interested in — style, content, layout, accuracy etc.
The students take a lot of trouble with these selections.
And they are certainly not blind to their difficulties or weaknesses.
It doesn't prevent them being ambitious and idealistic for themselves, or stop them comparing themselves with other students in their class, their school, in other parts of the country or the world.
On the contrary, I'd say they are more aware of standards in a productive and hopeful way.
What we can all say, is that the failures and worst mistakes can be relegated to history, as part of the process of learning, and the solid achievements saved.
For surely it is on those achievements we are entitled to be judged.
For teachers of all topics, the world over, the problems of assessment are similar.
There are what I have called political uses of assessment and there are educational uses.
I can if necessary put the achievements and remaining problems of my writers into words to save people the trouble of making up their own minds.
I can even compare them with nationally agreed criteria and say how well they have done, and grade them against each other when they leave me, if I must.
What I cannot comply with, is the regular imposition of a psychometric system of evaluation, which has already decided who will fail and in what proportions, because it is based on a deficit model of learners, and a culturally and politically determined view of intelligence and ability.
If I were to be denied my belief in the almost limitless potential of my students, I'd give up.
There is enough to do without trying to take on the role of quality controller standing by the conveyor belt of education, rejecting two out of three products as sub-standard.
If I were growing potatoes, like most sensible gardeners I'd let them grow.
I wouldn't keep lifting them up to see how they were doing, and I'd be pretty hesitant about pruning them too.
The art of arrangement
Italy wins, hands down, all the prizes for moonlighting and tax evasion in Western Europe.
Judy Gahagan delves underground — and discovers the secret of the Italian ‘economic miracle’.
‘Si arrangia,’ says the Neapolitan, living precariously and unofficially as car-park attendant, porter, vendor, labourer, pimp, pick-pocket on his city's chaotic streets.
‘Si arrangia’ says the lawyer whose double-doored apartment, three marble bathrooms, designer-dressed wife and powerful car bear no relation to his apparent income as an employee of the Comune.
‘Si arrangia’—‘one makes out’— has a peculiarly Italian meaning: you think on your feet; don't miss a trick; make ‘contacts’.
It is an art, developed from historical necessity, perfectly adapted to the growing shift to de-regulation, self-employment and the unofficial economy.
It is a mentality much admired by the Right everywhere.
With the Italian economy apparently hitting the stars, and a submerged economy estimated at around 20 — 30 per cent of the gross national product, it is easy to use Italy as the shining example of leaving things to individual initiative.
The mentality which is good at ‘arrangiarsi’ is also brilliant at taking risks, investing in 21st century technology and working at a tremendous metabolic rate.
This accounts partly for the vast success of ‘Made in Italy’.
But behind the bravura lies another reality.
That of fast-moving chaos, sweatshops, child labour, gross corruption and the galloping destruction of Italy itself.
Submerged economy and unofficial government have always been features of Italian life.
The State did not exist until 120 years ago.
Its struggle for existence has taken in 20 years of Fascism and six years of wartime occupation.
From the beginning government was based on a system of representing ‘client’ interests and the bureaucracy which administered these was inefficient and corrupt.
So the tradition of ‘arrangiarsi’, of having a network of ‘contacts’(‘He who has more saints gets to Paradise,’ they say in Naples) and of having rock-like families to protect you if you didn't make out, grew as naturally as did the Mafia and the Camorra as systems of rough justice and violent ‘government’.
It made the achievement of the Left in pushing for reform and establishing responsibility and commitment, particularly in local government, all the more remarkable.
That was until the new impulses of deregulation swept everywhere.
In Italy, as elsewhere, the modern industrial strategy has been that of fragmenting and dispersing labour.
In the 1970s militant demands for improved conditions led to new laws which gave Italian labour higher job security than virtually anywhere else.
However it applied only to firms with 15 or more on the payroll.
Immediately thousands of firms employing 14 workers or fewer began to sprout.
Such firms were able to avoid tax and welfare responsibility.
Big firms like Fiat and Pirelli began dismantling and de-centralizing labour forces.
Some car parts are now assembled for Fiat by women working at home.
All this is relatively new but represents the tip of the iceberg of unofficial work, which has a very broad base.
There is, for example, the vast moonlit world of ‘double work’.
State employees and many others too, finish at 2pm.
The rest of the day is free to do a second job, un-taxed.
Morning draughtsperson becomes afternoon psychotherapist.
Lawyer becomes import-export trader after lunch.
Italy is a land of thousands of tiny shops, bars and restaurants.
Until recently only part of the takings would go recorded.
Then the tax authorities got tough.
All transactions had to be recorded on government-provided fiscal receipts with special stamps.
Result: a black market in official government receipts with special stamps.
The authorities reacted by ruling that tamper-proof electronic cash registers must be used.
Anyone, proprietor or customer alike, found without a receipt, even for a packet of chewing gum, could be instantly summonsed.
But then all shopkeepers had to do was ring up less than the actual transaction…
Doctors, lawyers, accountants, consultants of all kinds whose vast fees can be lowered for cash with no receipt, are the ‘elegant’ tax evaders.
But rapidly joining their ranks are those working with new mushrooming TV stations, local radios, courier services, fast-food, software firms and the like.
This is the spaghetti-fun end of the Italian submerged economy.
What about the skid-row end?
It consists of four extremely unpleasant domains: the women and children working at home and in sweatshops; illegal building; the exploitation of illegal immigrants; and organized crime.
Italy is an economist's puzzle — with a big growth rate and continuing high unemployment.
However, this is because a large labour force — women and children — has been kept invisible.
In fact a good part of the success of ‘Made in Italy’— shoes, clothes, and knitwear — depends on women working at home without benefits and welded into their place by marital, familial and community ties.
And in Naples, 25 per cent of school-age children are not enrolled and truancy rates of the rest are high.
Children as young as six and seven work in textiles and leather, unprotected from fire-risk and exposed to poisonous substances which induce respiratory and central nervous system disorders.
It has been suggested that were these children withdrawn from the 10,000 tiny workshops in the city, production would grind to a halt.
The illegal building industry is destroying vast tracks of Italy.
A 1981 census showed that only half the new building constructed had planning permission.
Along the Neapolitan coast, in Sicily and Calabria where the percentage of illegal building reaches 85 per cent, the beautiful sea is ringed by the blight of straggling concrete towns, without roads, water, sewage, lighting or social amenities of any sort.
Italy, once the land that produced work-hungry emigrants bearing cardboard boxes, is now a land of illegal immigrant labour, mostly from Africa, unprotected and grossly exploited.
Even in Sicily, where unemployment is high, Tunisians come to work on the boats for low pay, no questions asked.
The local jobless look on knowing it's unwise to protest as the Tunisians despatch fish.
Finally, there are the vast profits from heroin and cocaine industries and from illegal arms sales which are laundered, in part, through the Italian economy.
Economists have estimated these may add 20 per cent to the non-criminal submerged sector.
Today, the battle to counter tax evasion, fight crime, and recognize the role of sweated labour in Italian success is vigorous.
The tax system is getting more efficient.
Scandals and crime are uncovered daily.
The trouble is that the visibility of corruption — and in Italy people are not modest about displaying their wealth — makes tax evasion seem socially acceptable.
Whatever happens to the new wealth there are clear victims and irrevocable damage.
There is the damage to human potential by fragmenting and de-skilling work and to the children and women whose contribution remains invisible and soul-destroying.
There is the damage to government systems of social responsibility which may slide back into selfish chaos.
But the most visible victim of the unofficial economy is Italy itself.
The desecration of some of the most beautiful landscape and cities in the world is a dreadful example of the new poverty which uncontrolled modern industrial wealth brings in its wake.
Electronic sweatshop
Information is power and computers give both to ordinary people — or do they?
Barbara Garson peels back the truth about Apple computers and their ilk.
In 1976 Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak began selling Apple computers to ordinary humans — as opposed to businesses — for $666 a throw.
It was like stealing fire to give to humans.
‘We build a device that gives people the same power over information that large corporations and the Government have had over people,’ proclaimed one promotional video made by Apple Computer Company.
But the computer did not extend my power when I first worked on one in 1980.
In fact it seemed to siphon autonomy and information away from me and back to the people at the top.
I was working as a data clerk in the basement of a Wall Street bank.
It was one of those windowless back offices where dozens of women sat spaced apart keying numbers with one hand while turning little slips of paper with the other.
Oddly enough there were apparently no supervisors: just a young man in a glass booth who occasionally changed the printer ribbons on the computers.
Yet the women worked non-stop, their fingers flying in a blur.
I wondered why they didn't pause to stretch or joke.
But since I was new, I didn't either.
Then one night on a late shift, the young man in the booth came over and said, ‘If you are going to stay, you'll have to get your productivity up’.
I asked what he meant.
He led me to his booth and typed a few keys on the control panel.
A welter of figures shot up telling him when I had started work, how often I took a break to scratch my nose or eat a mint and exactly how many key strokes I'd done all evening.
I was well below my statutory 15,000 key strokes an hour.
Later an older woman called Dorothy tried to comfort me.
She had seen through the glass booth how flustered I was.
And she told me that, while working at another bank, she had once been summoned to an office four flights away.
There ‘a kid in a white leather blazer’ had asked her ‘Dorothy, do you have some problem at home?’
‘No, I don't think so,’ she had replied, surprised.
‘Well your key stroke count fell to under 9,000 an hour after lunch two days in a row,’ he had said.
‘Are you sure you haven't got any problems?’
Dorothy changed jobs.
‘But,’ she consoled me, ‘that's how it is everywhere now.
With computers they can always see what you are doing.
You'll get used to it.’
That was my first experience of electronic monitoring.
Work places have always had supervisors to measure output, so it is hard to explain why it was so much more painful to work plugged into the big brain.
But it was.
In 1981 the US National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health found higher stress levels among electronically monitored clerks than among any other occupational group that they studied.
We clerks might have found comfort if we had known that many floors above us a few of the bank's more senior personnel were smuggling personal computers into the building in a bid to free themselves.
This phenomenon happened regularly in the early stages of personal computers.
And many companies banned the practice entirely in a way which seemed to justify Apple's claim that their machine was inherently revolutionary.
Computer invasion
Nevertheless by 1980 Apple was a $300 million company and personal computers had so successfully invaded the office that in 1981 IBM — which had originally scorned the little machine — introduced its first model called simply the IBM PC.
For clerical workers, secretaries and others the impact was devastating.
In 1985 I received letters from several women who described themselves as ‘former secretaries’ for Proctor and Gamble.
They invited me down to Cincinnati, Ohio, to observe networked computing — or personal computers which are linked together so that information can be transferred from one to another.
Proctor and Gamble had 60,000 employees and was known as a firm that almost never laid people off.
Indeed when I arrived many of the ‘former’ secretaries were still working for the company.
The women explained that they were ‘former’ in the sense that since computers had been installed, they used few of their old secretarial skills.
Instead they had been separated from their ‘bosses’ and relegated to word-processing pools to type for ‘dictators’.
This is a standard way to implement word processing: the ‘pool’ breaks secretarial work down into a few routine activities like typing, making travel reservations and answering the phone.
I wasn't surprised when the supervisor of one new work centre said to me, ‘Oh Barbara, it's such a waste — such a waste of people.
The way they put in word processing there, a lot of smart women are getting dumb very fast.’
During my visit to Proctor and Gamble I expected to spend most of my time listening to smart women complain about having their key strokes counted.
But surprisingly, most of the complaints about monitoring came not from secretaries but from their former bosses.
Many felt shocked and betrayed when confronted by computer-collected statistics on their productivity.
‘But what is countable may not be what counts,’ lamented one executive who had himself supervised a hundred engineers.
Despite the liberating potential of the personal computer, information was flowing away from the person with the machine on their desk and up to the man — as it usually was — who owned it.
I decided to move up too.
Big brother
Back on Wall Street I talked about monitoring systems to a Senior Vice President of a prestigious brokerage.
‘You see,’ he said, tapping furiously at the terminal before him, ‘they have a lot of information on me.
With computers they can do all kinds of breakdowns: what I did last week, last month, last year.
They can calculate not only how much business I'm doing but exactly how much money they will make on each piece of business.
So now the pressure on the broker is not only to do more business but to do it in exactly their way.’
Moving even higher up the occupational ladder, I interviewed Admiral Thomas H Moorer — NATO's former Supreme Allied Commander in the Atlantic and Chair of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff.
He complained that with computers he didn't get to pick his own bombing targets any more.
Now frankly, an admiral who doesn't pick his own bombing targets and a broker who can't choose his own investments don't seem as oppressed to me as a clerk who isn't allowed to press her own return key.
But, as men used to fighting for power, both were well placed to explain how the computer does or does not redistribute that power.
One thing was certain.
Both men wanted computers when they controlled the direction in which the information flowed.
The big broker even asked me, as I left his office, if I could recommend someone to design a programme that would let him keep track of his client's accounts as he traded.
‘But I don't think they would let me run it on the company's machine,’ he added regretfully.
‘It's a political matter.’
Admiral Moorer also liked computers.
In the mid-1950s he had introduced them to the Naval College in Rhode Island.
But he had experienced complications when using them for logistics in Vietnam.
‘The problem is not the computers,’ the Admiral emphasized.
‘But our record-keeping system generates…information that lets a lot of people ask me how I conduct my business.’
He was referring to print-outs that had enabled the US Congress to discover that he had been secretly bombing Cambodia.
I may not sympathize with the bombing.
But I certainly know how it feels to be called to a distant office where your bosses have been tracking your movements through your ‘own’ computer.
‘But,’ the Admiral repeated, ‘let us not blame computers.
It is not a technical question, it is a political question.’
And he was right.
If it was merely a technical matter, personal computers would have meant increased autonomy for office workers just as Apple's founders predicted.
Instead by 1984, when personal computers were abundant, the US Department of Labor estimated that nearly two-thirds of people who worked on Video Display Terminals in the US were monitored by their employers.
It took a little time for employers to depersonalize personal computers.
But in the end new technology was used to reinforce the old office relationships.
He who pays the piper calls the tune.
Several pounds of flesh
Never before in history have the poor financed the rich on such a lavish scale.
Susan George reveals the dynamic behind the debt trap.
A joke: President Reagan asks God whether there will ever be Communism in the United States and is told ‘Yes, but not in your lifetime’.
General Secretary Gorbachev asks God whether Capitalism will ever come to the Soviet Union, and gets the same answer.
Finally President Sarney asks whether Brazil will ever be able to pay back its debts.
‘Yes’, says God, ‘but not in my lifetime.’
God, as usual, is right.
Between 1982 and 1987, Brazil paid back some $70 billion to its public and private creditors — averaging well over a billion dollars a month — and its only reward was to be $20 billion deeper in debt than in 19821.
Brazil holds dubious first-place honours among Third World debtors, with $115 billion in loans outstanding.
It is a mathematical impossibility for this debt to be reimbursed in God's lifetime, much less Sarney's.
Yet Brazil is still expected to send northwards another $60 billion in debt repayment between 1987-89 if we can trust the forecasts of the World Bank2.
The rest of Latin America has fared no better than Brazil.
Since 1982 the continent has remitted $145 billion net (repayments minus aid and new loans) to the creditor nations.
In the five years between 1982-87 Third World countries as a group, including the most impoverished and crisis-ridden in Africa, sent us $220 billion more than we sent them 3 (see box).
Never before in history have the poor financed the rich on such a lavish scale.
The so-called debt crisis is clearly not a crisis for everyone.
Who exactly is reaping the benefits of this bonanza?
Obviously not ordinary Latin Americans: they call the 1980s ‘the lost decade’.
Their countries' economies are in shreds, they themselves are suffering as never before.
Nor are Northern industries profiting: they have forfeited at least $30 billion in exports every year since the debt crisis erupted in 1982.
Consequently Northern workers also get the short end of the stick.
Experts claim that at least two million US jobs have been lost because Latin America can no longer buy North American products — nor European ones for that matter.
Northern taxpayers are also losing, but few of them know that they are already ‘bailing out the banks’.
Public loans — your money and mine — are now routinely used by indebted governments to pay interest on their private bank debt4.
It is the banks that are benefitting handsomely whilst economies as a whole stagnate in both North and South.
All too often, banks are even repaid twice: once in interest, and again with loans smuggled out of poor countries then re-cycled back to the North by corrupt Third World elites anxious to secure personal fortunes.
Crisis fears
The notion of a ‘debt crisis’ is fired by fears of Third World countries refusing to repay their loans.
Many people (especially bankers!) claim that default by a major debtor government like Mexico or Brazil could set off financial shock-waves that would make the Black Monday stock market crash of October 1987 look like a hiccup.
If they are right, Third World default could one day lead to a banking collapse and the loss of all our savings.
But this argument no longer holds water.
True the banks made hundreds of imprudent loans in the 1970s and early 1980s; they could hardly get rid of their money fast enough and virtually begged Third World governments to take it off their hands.
The governments were only too pleased to oblige.
They bought tanks and fighter planes, nuclear plants, huge dams, and a host of other unproductive projects — whilst billions were stolen and often smuggled out of the country.
As a result the banks found themselves in a quandary — they had lent vast sums of money which could neither be repaid nor return interest.
In August 1982, panic broke out in banking circles when Mexico came within a hair of default.
By 1987 the banks had muddled through — with considerable help from governments, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.
Since the Mexican panic they have made themselves less vulnerable through a variety of stratagems.
The banks have set aside billions in ‘loan loss provisions’ against possible future bad debts, essentially transferring their money from one pocket to another.
Their 1987 balance sheets took a hit because of defaults, but have bounced back nicely in 1988.
Major banks have also swapped about eight billion dollars in debt for shares in profitable Third World companies.
These ‘debt-equity swaps’ merely push the debtor-country's financial problems into the future because profits from the purchased companies will eventually be remitted to the North.
Meanwhile the country loses control over vital assets, as Mexico did when it exchanged shares in one of its biggest manufacturing companies — Grupo Alfa, against a reduction of several hundred million dollars in its debts.
Moreover commercial banks today mainly lend to well-heeled borrowers in their own countries.
Third World loans represent a mere six per cent of their total portfolios.
The ‘crisis’ is now a crisis for at most two or three large US banks, which have good reason to believe they can count on government help if worse comes to worst.
Who suffers?
The real trouble is in the Third World.
Countries like Brazil, Mexico or Tanzania can't simply write checks in cruzados, pesos or shillings and expect their creditors to be happy.
Banks and governments want hard currency — dollars, pounds or marks — and the only way to earn them is to export.
But world markets can absorb only so much coffee, copper and cotton, or for that matter T-shirts, motor-bikes and transistors.
Commodity prices — at their lowest since the Great Depression of the 1930s — show no signs of looking up because countries must export more every year just to keep their revenues stable.
The North receives a kind of colonial tribute in debt service, whilst getting its raw materials at rock-bottom prices.
Tanzania is caught in this trap: it had good rains in 1986 and its cotton crop doubled from the previous year.
The government was overjoyed.
But the same year cotton prices plummeted on the world market from 68 cents to 34 cents a pound.
As former Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere explained, ‘The result for our economy — and the income of the peasants — is similar to that of a natural disaster: half our crop, and therefore of our income, is lost.
Our peasants and our nation have made the effort, but the country is not earning a single extra cent in foreign exchange.
That is theft!’
Mass misery
Nyerere's lament could be repeated by nearly every Third World country for nearly every commodity.
Something has got to give and that something has been the vast majority of Third World people.
Their living standards are dropping out of sight as governments ‘adjust’ their economies in order to cope with the debts.
‘Adjustment’ is the polite, IMF word for grinding down whole nations and entire populations.
It goes like this: when the IMF devises an adjustment package — as it has done in over 50 countries — social service budgets are cut to the bone.
Health, education, transport and other welfare spending goes by the board.
Food subsidies are reduced or thrown out altogether and food prices may double or triple overnight.
Governments are forced to prune state employment, while businesses can no longer obtain credit and therefore retrench.
Consequently thousands of workers may be sacked from one day to the next.
The IMF prescription for debt-ridden economies — spend less, earn more — may sound healthy but a combination of all-out export drives and reduced government expenditure spells misery for the masses.
Export crops replace food crops so food becomes more expensive.
In Peru a worker with a minimum salary — already a privileged person — must work today seven times longer to earn the price of a kilo of rice and five times longer for a tin of powdered milk than she did in 1981.
In Jamaica the cost of a market-basket of staple foods shot up by nearly 100 per cent between 1983 and 1986.
A Brazilian lucky enough to earn the minimum wage must work four times longer now for a basic food ration than she would have done in 1959.
Food shortages translate into increased illness, even death.
In the poor north-eastern part of Brazil infant mortality went up by 20 per cent between 1982 and 1984, even though the Brazilian government had made a special effort to establish more health-care facilities during the same period.
These infants died because their mothers could not purchase adequate food and gave birth to babies under the viable weight threshold.
According to the Brazilian government's own figures, two-thirds of the population now suffers from some degree of malnutrition and in the north-east nutritionists are talking about an epidemic of dwarfism.
Polio had been almost eradicated in Brazil, but by 1986 the country had the highest incidence of polio in Latin America because it had to cut back spending on immunization.
Now it is measles vaccine that is lacking.
Two US sociologists looked for connections between debt and life-expectancy in 73 countries.
They discovered a definite debt-death link: a relationship between interest paid per capita and decrease in life expectancy.
Their study shows that every $10 of interest payments per year and per person means 142 days less of life on average, had life expectancy continued to increase at pre-debt crisis rates.
At the time of this study, which ceased in the early 1980s, average interest payments for the 73 countries were $27.50 per capita.
This implies an average 387 days less of life for inhabitants of the indebted countries.
How many of us would be prepared to give up a year or more of life to pay back a debt from which we never benefitted, to satisfy the banks?
Adrift in Hades
On the Greek island of Leros is a state mental institution which beggars belief.
Despite recent media attention, Edith Morgan finds continued resistance to change and an urgent need for positive measures.
Leros is a six-mile-long island in the Dodecanese, an hour's flight from Athens.
A Turkish possession until the end of World War One, it was then granted to Italy as part of war reparations.
The Italians made it a central part of their defence arrangements because of its fine natural harbour, and erected barracks to house 20,000 soldiers.
At the end of World War Two the island was restored to Greece and was used to accommodate child refugees of both World War Two and the Greek Civil War that followed it.
The dilapidated buildings were used as a concentration camp during the dictatorship of the Colonels between 1967 and 1974.
As many as 10,000 political prisoners were said to have been confined in one corner of the island.
From 1957 onwards some buildings began to be used to incarcerate difficult mental patients, or those deemed ‘untreatable’, from other Greek hospitals.
They were brought in shiploads and bundled away in an institution which a Swiss newspaper recently called ‘an antechamber of death’ and a British journal ‘a modern entrance to Hades’.
The numbers of patients on the island have declined since new arrivals were cut five years ago.
There are now some 1,100 of them.
About 40 to 60 die each year.
And the conditions under which they are kept could justly be described as intolerable in any society.
Patients wander naked behind barbed-wire fences.
They are chained to walls or to their beds.
Their guards have no training — the tendency to treat patients like animals comes more often from lack of knowledge and understanding than from deliberate cruelty.
There is only one qualified psychiatrist in the whole institution.
Any kind of treatment or rehabilitation is impossible.
Mentally ill and mentally handicapped patients — many with severe physical disabilities as well— are herded together with little attention given to their different problems and needs.
The isolation and reputation of the island deter recruitment of staff from outside.
The difficulty and expense of travel makes visiting almost impossible, even by those families who do try to maintain contact with individual patients.
Yet a recent survey showed that a quarter of the ‘patients’ do not need to be in a mental institution at all and a half of them could live in the outside world given proper support.
The mistreatment of mental patients on Leros differs only in degree from others of the nine state mental hospitals in Greece, which together house some 10,000 patients.
In some respects the situation at Daphni, a large institution with 1,900 patients and only eight kilometres from Athens, is worse.
Because it is close to the capital it has a large medical staff.
But visitors have reported intolerable conditions on many wards, patients locked up all day or even chained to walls as approved forms of correction.
Conditions in some ‘private’ clinics, to which patients without funds are sometimes sent by the State, but which are rarely inspected or monitored for standards, can be even more stark than in the state institutions.
Greek mental-health legislation is out of date and gives little or no protection to patients.
Once they have entered hospital, even voluntarily, it can be difficult to leave — especially if any member of their family objects.
In 1982 the European Community (EC), when offering financial help, stressed the need for reform and said that ‘the manner of dealing with psychiatric patients is often close to the limits of denial of the most basic notions of human dignity.’
Greece is not the only country which detains mentally ill people under inhumane conditions.
But the conditions in Greek state psychiatric hospitals have been exposed for many years.
As a member of the European Community Greece has accepted obligations on social and medical welfare, and it has access to EC funds and other assistance, unlike other countries with unsatisfactory mental-health services.
As a result in February 1990 the World Federation for Mental Health — for the first time in its 40-year history — made a submission to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, arraigning an individual country for abusing the human rights of mentally ill people.
The reasons for this seemingly intractable situation are various and complex, but they undoubtedly have something to do with Greece's troubled history.
No-one should forget the disastrous collapse of Greece's infrastructure during World War Two and the bitter Civil War that followed.
No less catastrophic was the seizure of power by the Colonels in 1967.
The end of their fearful regime left the country with the task of reconstructing the entire Greek economy and bridging the deep rifts that had opened up between the Greek people themselves.
Official inertia and resistance to change have at times seemed to spring from a sense of hopelessness.
There would also be economic implications to reform of the mental-health system.
Nearly 1,000 of the 6,000 population of Leros, for example, are employed in the psychiatric institution.
They fear for their own livelihoods if it is closed.
And while media attention is useful in arousing the public conscience from time to time, there is little follow-up.
The time has now come to end the recrimination.
The many Greeks who deplore their present psychiatric system and struggle to change it need support and encouragement.
They have to come up with a long-term training strategy — and offers of help have come from both the World Federation for Mental Health and the Richmond Fellowship.
A vigorous mental-health association in Greece could do a great deal.
Similar circumstances befall mentally ill people in many other parts of the world.
They can only be overcome by action on an international scale, rather than by castigating one or two countries.
A Greek lawyer, Mrs Irene Daes, has chaired a working group developing principles, guidelines and guarantees for the protection of mentally ill people, under the aegis of the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
Its task should be completed in 1991.
Another Greek woman, Mrs Vasso Papandreou, is the Commissioner of the EC's Social Fund, which has focussed attention on several vital health and social issues with considerable success.
The time is surely right to mount a well-planned, Europe-wide action programme, presenting mental health in a positive way.
This could have an effect far beyond Europe and contribute to the start of a new era in mental health for the world.
The NI is not only about words: we say just as much about the world through the photographs we select.
What we have said about China has been reflected throughout by the photos of Sally and Richard Greenhill.
We have been travelling to China every three or four years since 1971.
In the early (still Maoist) days the Western press was generally hostile to China's aspirations.
Although we were wary of being shown set-up situations, the people we met impressed us as having deep convictions, lively minds, tireless enthusiasm, incorruptible moral standards.
All this has gone.
In recent years there may have been more wealth and consumer goods around but people have seemed cynical, weary, amoral…
Then the most wonderful, exciting flower burst into bloom: the Democracy Movement!
Unbelievably, the students were running Beijing.
Suddenly old standards of honesty and altruism reappeared: you heard stories everywhere about people refusing payment, giving, helping, volunteering…
It was the second Cultural Revolution but this time it came from the students and the workers and this time it was nonviolent, peaceful, gentle.
And this time China's rulers knifed it in the back with shameless savagery — then set about hounding the survivors in a reign of terror.
Many of the elements of this repression are not new: executions, controlled press, informers.
On the other hand, the corruption and cynicism are new.
So how far back does responsibility for the massacre go?
To what extent do we have to re-evaluate everything we have seen and photographed over nearly two decades of involvement with China?
In 1971 the children were on the march, carrying the Cultural Revolution into the countryside.
Here were young people striving for the noblest ideals.
Perhaps the disco-dancers of 1986 saw themselves the same way.
Primary schoolchildren from Cultural Revolution days seemed regimented — yet were encouraged to criticize their teachers.
Are today's children as critical of their Walkmen?
General Chen Chung Kwei and his men helping peasants hoe the fields in 1971.
If he could have looked through time at his late 1980s counterpart, would he have been scornful of his sunglasses, his insignia of rank, his fat-cat complacent air?
Or should we ask instead if the General really made a habit of such manual labour?
These two photos might seem like Then and Now exercises as on the facing page.
But both come from the mid-1980s.
Much of China goes on just the same, shrugging off time, while for Business Studies and Public Relations students life looks pretty rosy.
The people love the army and the army loves the people.
Ever since the victory of the Red Army in the Revolution, soldiers have been part of the Chinese people's sense of themselves.
The massacre in Tiananmen Square changed all that.
If modernization carries the seeds of freedom, then modernization will have to wait.
Deng Xiaoping has warned that there may be 60 or 70 years of ‘plain living’ ahead for his people.
Ten days before the massacre, the atmosphere in Beijing was ecstatic.
As foreign photographers, we were treated like heroes.
Everybody was so HAPPY.
Everyone supported the students.
Everyone felt that history was being made.
Bei Da University, Beijing.
Students huddle round a politics teacher who analyses the current situation.
Nine days later the soldiers came to Bei Da, beating and killing.
The massacre of Apple Lincoln
A tyranny of sameness is sweeping the earth: the chemical companieshave discovered gold in the genes.
Pat Mooney reports.
Lincoln was assassinated.
So were Washington and Jefferson.
In fact all three Lincolns were wiped out.
In the end it wasn't so much an assassination as a massacre, with 6,121 of the 7,098 American apple varieties that blossomed last century now extinct.
The same has happened to American pears.
Almost 88 per cent of the 2,683 varieties which our grandparents enjoyed have vanished along with the Lincoln, the Washington and the Jefferson apples.
Fruit aficionados in Europe might think this no great loss.
After all Europe has always had greater genetic diversity of apples.
But the apple killers have crossed the Atlantic.
In 1874, Belgium was Europe's top pear-breeding country and boasted over one thousand varieties of pear.
Today just three pear varieties dominate the country's commercial crop.
Golden Delicious over-runs half of Belgium's orchards and just five apple varieties have taken over where once nearly 600 varieties thrived.
But the mass extinctions of fruit pale next to the murderous uniformity at the vegetable counter.
Today 97 per cent of the vast range of vegetable varieties that adorned American dinner tables at the turn of the century have disappeared forever.
Similar estimates are made for Western Europe.
Animal species are being made extinct worldwide: pandas in China, whales in the Pacific; elephants in Africa.
And rightly there is a storm of protest aimed at saving them.
But our own food supply is being decimated around us and hardly a hand is being raised.
Kiwi fruit and pizzas notwithstanding, a vast sameness has swept the supermarkets of Europe, North America and Australasia.
Diversity on the shelves is an illusion.
The local grocery in Brandon, Manitoba, sports 12,000 food products and flaunts 56 brands of breakfast cereal.
Yet the gaudy boxes hold nothing more than wheat, rice, maize and oats.
Three-quarters of human cereal consumption comes from only four crops.
Within these crops also, variety is being wiped away.
Most cereals that used to grow in industrialized countries had dozens or even hundreds of different varieties of seed.
But now fewer than five varieties predominate for each crop and even these are ‘kissing cousins’ of one another, genetically almost identical.
Our wheat and our maize have experienced the same fate that befell our apples and pears.
In less than a century, market pressures for uniformity have slaughtered crop diversity.
Machine harvesting demands uniform crops; food processing insists on standardized products.
Each has contributed to the massive genetic erosion of the food chain.
When the demand for uniformity forces farmers to plant new varieties of cereal, the seeds from the old variety just get eaten.
That is extinction.
Because the good old seeds aren't around any more, plant breeders have fewer and fewer breeding options.
Where they could have taken genes from an old disease-resistant variety and inserted them into a disease-vulnerable, high-yielding new variety, the old genes can no longer be found.
Kissing cousins
Every year genetic uniformity contributes to crop wipe-outs.
Famine hit Ireland in the 1840s because of the genetic sameness in the Irish potato.
When a new disease attacked the US maize crop in 1970, the kissing cousins in the fields had no genetic defence: farmers overall lost a billion dollars and some unlucky ones lost their farms as well.
Two years later the Russian wheat crop was halved for want of genetic resistance.
Most of the world's remaining food genes are in the Third World which is where most food species come from — though the apple is actually one of the few exceptions, having originated in northern Eurasia.
Wheat and barley sprang from the Near East and Ethiopia, as did coffee and many millets and sorghum.
Central America is home to maize, tomatoes and cocoa.
Potatoes come from the Andes and most of our salad vegetables hail from Asia or the Mediterranean.
When Northern crops crash up against a new pest or a new processing requirement, breeders hightail it back to the gene pool in search of the genetic variability that may help them.
Every year dozens of plant-collecting expeditions comb the fields and markets of the Third World searching for lost diversity.
There can be gold in those genes.
Third World genes contributed about $20 million to the value of the American maize crop in the mid-1980s and some corporate breeders estimate this will rise to about $6,000 million in the coming decades.
Individual genes valued at $50 million each have been inserted into California tomatoes and Oregonwheat.
And the value of a distant relative of maize has been estimated by one company at $1,000 million dollars.
Yet the Third World countries that these genes came from have not received a cent for them.
All have flowed from South to North free of charge.
Once collected, Third World genes are stored in company vaults or government gene banks waiting to be incorporated into seeds patented and controlled by the multinational companies which monopolize the patents.
In the midst of the global gene drain, more than 1,000 small family seed houses have either been bought out or come under the control of some of the world's largest chemical companies.
The new seedspeople of the 1990s are Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz of Switzerland; Shell, ICI and Unilever of the UK; Rhone-Poulenc and LaFarge Coppee of France; Monsanto, Dow and Upjohn of the US.
Big business
The interest of chemical companies in monopolizing seeds and genes is hardly accidental.
These same multinationals also dominate the world's crop-chemical business.
They foresee a huge market ahead.
Already it is more lucrative to breed pesticide-resistant crops than pest-resistant crops: it is cheaper and faster to adapt the plant to the chemicals than adapt the chemicals to the plant.
While companies talk about sustainable agriculture, they create plant varieties that can withstand being sprayed by their most virulent herbicides.
That means a bigger market for their chemicals.
The chemical companies are also betting that the Greenhouse Effect will make them a killing.
One thing we know for certain about global warming is that — whether fields get drier or damper, whether temperatures soar or only fluctuate — our crops will have to adjust quickly.
An altered climate will require altered crops as new pests, diseases and growing conditions force breeders to scramble for new genetic options.
Chemical companies are assuming that nations will turn desperately to the creation of new crops — like the recently produced soybean, which has been bred with genes from the flounder fish to increase its cold tolerance.
Patents on life-forms are the key to this corporate strategy.
If you control the first link in the food chain — the seed — you are well on the way to controlling the whole food chain.
With this in mind the genetics-supply industry has approached the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations at which all biological processes and products are assumed to be patentable.
Third World countries that attempt to slap their own patents on life-forms have been attacked by the industry on the grounds that they are unfairly blocking corporate interests.
If this argument sticks — and it looks like it might — the only innovations that will remain unprotected will be those made by the rural poor in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The seeds of Third World farmers will be ripe for rip-off by big multinationals, to be incorporated into their own patented varieties.
In this way a handful of companies in the North are edging towards having a monopoly over the world's genetic pool.
Losing the war
But as political battles rage around conference halls, the war for diversity may be collapsing in the fields.
Even the gene pools in the South are drying up.
The Green Revolution that swept away Europe's diversity at the turn of the century is now taking its toll on the
Third World.
Where 30,000 rice varieties once flourished in South-East Asia, one single kind now occupies two-thirds of the land.
The incredible eggplants of the Sudan have succumbed to the US-bred ‘Black Beauty’ and the vast array of beets in Turkey have been vanquished by the ‘Detroit Globe’beet.
For more than 10 years voluntary organizations around the world have been working to collect and conserve genetic diversity in community seed banks.
From Java to Iowa, dedicated farmers and gardeners have been making a mighty effort to secure our future food supply.
This is better than nothing.
But extinction is forever and it doesn't do the world much good to save a seed for a year or two.
A programme of concerted political action is needed which will preserve the world's genetic resources in a systematic way.
Apples it now seems — along with some other fruit — contain a substance which may help us fight off skin cancer caused by ozone depletion and lung cancer caused by tobacco smoke.
Scientists are beating the bushes for diversity again.
Let's hope they are not too late.
But even two apples a day may not keep Ciba-Geigy away and unless we act fast the prayer ‘Give us this day our daily bread’ could soon become a prayer to Shell Oil.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
If we are to save the world's genetic pool we must act fast.
You can help by asking overseas development organizations to support practical projects that will save genetic diversity, and also persuade them to alert their governments.
Many countries have organizations that belong to the Seeds Action Network (SAN) which exchanges information about seeds and related topics.
Write to the addresses below to find out who to contact in your country.
Also, on 21 October this year, people in the UK can support Apple Day, which is being organized by the campaigning group Common Ground to raise awareness of the great diversity of apples and other fruit grown in the UK.
The event will be held at ‘The Old Apple Market’ in Covent Garden, London, and is part of an ongoing campaign to draw attention to Britain's rapidly disappearing old orchards.
More than one-third of these have been lost over the past 30 years, taking with them thousands of varieties of apple and depriving wildlife of a traditional sanctuary.
Terror tactic
Your recent issue on how the end of the Cold War affects the Third World (East Meets West, North Forgets South, NI 211) was welcome — but puzzling.
In it you made no mention of the way in which some Third World leaders are attempting to redress the political imbalance between North and South by resorting to the terrorist tactic of hostage-taking.
However repugnant, recent events in the Middle East surely indicate that this is the future ahead of us.
Saddam Hussein's actions are a response to Third World powerlessness — and one we should expect to see more of.
I can only assume that the NI went to press before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait for this important factor to have been omitted.
What about an issue on the Middle East now?
Virginal vagaries
I don't expect you to get everything right, but to describe the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception as coming from a ‘literal translation’ of a controversial biblical passage’is enough to make me chuckle — especially in a piece headed ‘Fundamentalism —The
Facts’(Reaching for certainty NI 210).
The doctrine states that Mary, the mother of Christ, was preserved from sin from the moment of her conception.
And it isn't in the Bible.
It wasn't defined by the Roman Catholic church until 1854.
And it isn't accepted by
Protestants — certainly not by most of those you refer to as ‘fundamentalists’ in the rest of your issue.
I expect you were thinking about the virginal conception of Jesus which is described in the Gospels of Mathew and Luke.
Outraged reply
I object strongly to the photograph of Ahmadi Muslims that was published in the NI in the context of the articles on fundamentalism £P/
(Reaching for certainty NI 210).
The word fundamentalism is unfortunately used by the Western press as the ‘thought represented by mediaeval Islam’— rather than Islam at its source or in its pristine form.
The Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam was founded by Hazrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad of Qadian India in 1889 and stands for the revival of true Islam.
To this, fundamentalism as expressed in the articles is totally alien.
Our motto is ‘Love for all, hatred for none’ and it can be clearly seen in the background of the picture.
Using the photo in the context that you placed it damages the credibility of your publication, and I feel that NI owes an apology to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community.
Natural pain
At one time I could easily have become a fundamentalist advocate of natural childbirth (Reaching for certainty NI 210).
But I didn't because I quickly discovered that I was even more fundamentally opposed to unnecessary pain — and resorted to an epidural anaesthetic.
As a result I had a very pleasant, stress-free, pain-free labour and delivery.
Moreover I had no guilt about by-passing the pain: afterall, I have yet to hear anyone advocate, say, natural tooth extraction.
Sometimes I feel the romanticising of natural childbirth is yet another example of the seemingly worldwide conspiracy — aided and abetted by many women — to make us all feel guilty for not suffering enough.
Perhaps you were right and there is a demon fundamentalist within us all, which we need to be constantly battle against — or at least made aware of.
Fundamental panacea
On the broad definition given by Richard Swift (Reaching for certainty NI 210), fundamentalism can mean almost anything.
More simply, this striving for the clear assertion of ‘fundamentals’ is an age-old and pandemic aspect of humanity: the striving for certainty and predictability.
In the old, inherited sense fundamentalism is a good thing because it alleviates pain and suffering.
But it is subject to manipulation by politicians who use it to their own advantage.
Never let the politicians get hold of your own particular source of comfort and kid you that without them it will not survive.
Refuse to believe them.
Refuse to go along.
If everyone can manage this we will all be able to go on quietly shaving our heads, lighting our candles, starving ourselves on particular days of the year — and no-one will mind or probably even notice.
Difficult dilemma
Naomi Roberts concluded her period of volunteering early because she felt she was giving Ghanaians something that they did not want (Endpiece NI 209).
This is odd because VSO does not impose volunteers on countries.
It responds to requests from those countries and, usually, they only get what they ask for.
Of course, we sophisticated Westerners may think they are not asking for the right things.
But to impose our views is just as colonial as our forebears.
There is a difficult problem here and I should be interested in any answers your readers may suggest.
Patient partners
I am a Ghanaian working as a Field Officer for VSO in Ghana.
I read Naomi Robert's article (Endpiece 209) with interest because in a way I was one of the characters in the drama she narrates.
She has been honest with herself and the lesson is clear.
‘Aid workers’ who come to developing countries with a purely altruistic attitude — giving up a good job and staking a lot to help poor people — are doomed to be disillusioned and frustrated.
Those who come as partners, patient and ready to learn and therefore better able to adapt their contribution before giving it, stand a better chance of going back happier and with a feeling it was worth it.
Nicaraguan niggle
In their article on Fear and freedom in Central America (The fear of madness NI 209), Lucy Marks and Val Ford twice refer to the ‘new UNO government’ of Violet Chamorro.
What one earth does this mean?
This ‘UNO government’— as the authors acknowledge — was selected by the Nicaraguan people albeit by a fairly narrow margin.
Their new leader is a former Sandinista supporter.
Is it seriously suggested that she break with her old allies because of her lack of sympCOMMAND FILE ABORTED. athy for their mental health reforms?
If, as I suspect, Nicaragua faces serious economic problems, I would assume that part of the blame lies with the previous Nicaraguan government and that Chamorro may be faced with tough decisions needed to ensure that the ‘empty stomachs’ of the people are filled.
She deserves sympathy in these present difficult times.
Buzz-words
As a beekeepers wife I have for many years had to use soap powder rather than scented detergent as bees don't appreciate the chemical scents in many whiter-than-white products (Letters NI 208).
I use Preservene's White Snow which is the cheapest soap powder on the Australian market though there is a knack to using it as it is slow to dissolve, being fine lumps of pure soap.
On washing day I fill a bucket half full of very hot water and add my cup of soap powder before going back to the house for breakfast.
Dishes done, I return home to find my bucket full of ‘slime’ which I pour into the washing machine.
Soaps clean by having charged particles at either end of their molecules — one end ‘grabs’ dirt while the other ‘grabs’water.
This means you can re-use soapy water for fresh loads as the ‘cleaning’ happens in the rinse.
The sudsy water continues working while it is slippery and you can still make bubbles by agitating it, no matter how grotty it looks.
Private eye
Watch out!
Is your TV off?
Is your floor sticky?
Down the mean streets of the urban wasteland treads psychiatrist Trevor Turner, looking for the tell-tale signs.
When I first moved to Hackney in London's East End as a medical student in 1971 I saw the graffito: ‘HACKNEY — AN ASYLUM WITHOUT WALLS’.
Not surprisingly I have lived here ever since.
Hackney has always been a resort for madhouses and mad people.
For nearly 300 years it achieved notoriety for its private madhouses.
There were three major ones, standing within a few hundred yards of each other.
One was founded by William Batty, who gave his name to one epithet for madness.
Another, ‘barmy’, derives from a second of the Hackney madhouses, which was called ‘Barms House’.
So Hackney has left its mark on the history of madness.
It's a reputation we've kept to the present day.
One of the most obvious reasons for this is what might be called ‘social drift’.
If you take 100 people with a very severe psychotic illness like schizophrenia and look at their parents, you find that they are absolutely typical of the country as a whole.
But if you are schizophrenic, you cannot think straight, concentrate, hold down a job.
You slide down the social classes and you move to areas like Hackney.
When you get here today you find that the madhouses have gone or are going.
Instead there are psychiatrists like me.
Many times I'm called up by a local doctor and asked to do what is called a DV — a domiciliary visit to assess the mental state of an individual.
It's always rather a thrilling event.
Before I go on a DV I feel a bit like a private eye.
I get out my cassette recorder, the key instrument for a DV.
I unload it, check there's a fresh tape in the cartridge, load it, put the lock on, have a quick dummy run — for all the world as if it were a revolver.
Then off I go.
In fact, I have to spend a lot of my time asking silly questions of people while standing in all sorts of silly places.
‘Do you hear voices!?’
I shout through letterboxes and up at open windows.
I often feel very foolish.
I look for certain features, like the floor.
The stickiness of the floor is significant.
Early one Saturday morning, for example, we visit a woman whose behaviour has led to the evacuation of the other three people in her block of flats.
We knock on the door.
She lets me in.
The passageway is dark.
All over the wall there are little round holes, like the craters of the moon.
They are caused by the end of a broomhandle being banged against the walls and ceiling.
She says that one reason for her not going out is that upstairs there are about one thousand people assaulting children.
She bangs against the wall to stop them.
But they go on.
And so does she.
The floor is very sticky.
One of the reasons for this is that there are six cats living in this house.
They're never allowed out.
The floor is never cleaned.
There are other things I look out for.
In most houses in Hackney, like anywhere else, the TV is never turned off.
If I go into a house and it is turned off I get worried.
This is because a very common thing among people with mental illness, which is not properly understood, is the way they feel that other people can read their mind.
It's very frightening, this — the thought that people actually know what's going on in your mind.
It's like being mentally naked in the street.
The TV constantly inserts its images and thoughts into our minds and some people come to feel that the news reader is talking directly to them.
So they keep it turned off.
For my part, I sometimes think of the film Psycho as I walk up the bleaker staircases to people's homes in Hackney.
And there are other things about my job that remind me too much of Ghostbusters for comfort.
But then, we psychiatrists are a pretty strange bunch too.
Herman Bosman, a friend of mine, has written about one of his regular clients, who has long resided in a mental hospital.
‘They're barmy here,’ this gentleman informed him.
‘Male nurses, schizophrenics, psychiatrists, paranoiacs, pathologists, homicidal maniacs, keepers and attendants.’
Nor were the psychiatrists much better.
‘There was one fat mental specialist with a queer glint in his eyes who kept on asking me if I heard voices.
He meant when you hear voices and there aren't any.
Well, I never heard voices.
And if I did, I wouldn't have been mad enough to tell him.
And every time I told him I couldn't hear voices, you should have seen the look of disappointment that came into his face.
I have the uneasy feeling he heard voices all day long, talking all kinds of blah to him.
And why he wanted me to say I also heard voices was so he wouldn't feel so alone.’
PERUVIAN HAWKER
At 10.30 every morning, Marta Quispe, age 23, opens for business.
She rolls her ‘office’ out of a parking lot, pulls out her chair, props up an umbrella and goes to work.
On the sidewalk.
Marta, who owns a cart which bursts full of chocolate bars, candy and bags of chips, is a typical ambulante or roving seller.
She migrated to the big city, Lima, from the Andean town of Huancayo with her parents seven years ago.
‘My father thought that the new democratic government which took over in 1980 would create more jobs in the capital.
But things just got worse.
Prices kept going up and my father couldn't get a job.
Later el muy mierda took to heavy drinking and then he took off with another woman.
My seven younger brothers and I had to go to work to help our mother.’
So in 1982, at the age of 18, Marta got into the business of selling.
She started out walking along the main drag in the Miraflores commercial district, Avenue Larco, with a small case strapped to her neck, hawking cigarettes and chocolates.
Despite the competition, four years later she was able to purchase a wooden cart with small wheels.
Then, after studying the place for a week, she moved into her present workplace, next to a busy parking lot.
‘Of course I'm making more money here than walking around,’ she says with a broad, toothless grin.
‘Now people get to know me, and I have steady customers.’
Marta used to be harassed by the police.
But now she pays a monthly fee to the Miraflores municipality.
The fee, called Sisa, has little value in strict legal sense but not all ambulantes have one and it helps if the cops decide to pull a raid.
Another proof of her social status among the hawkers is her working spot: it is so well located that she if she decides to move she could ‘sell’ the right to use it to another vendor.
Marta gets her stocks from a large informal market in Villa El Salvador shanty-town.
Here well-dressed factory representatives show up once a week and sell their goods at 30 per cent discount to wholesalers who then sell them to people like Marta — but not before a hard haggle for the best deal.
‘If one brand of chocolate doesn't allow me to earn enough, I'll just switch over to another brand,’ she says.
But the final price she charges the customer depends on their face.
‘If you look like a gringo (a foreigner, usually blond) then it'll be a lot more expensive, because you have more money,’ she explains simply.
SELO AND MEDUSA
A Story by Bessie Head
Elizabeth had never seen a ghost in her life.
She was not given to ‘seeing’ things.
Motabeng means the place of sand.
It was a village remotely inland, perched on the edge of the Kalahari desert.
Seemingly, the only reason for people's settlement there was a good supply of underground water.
It took a stranger some time to fall in love with its harsh outlines and stark, black trees.
A fellow-passenger on the train to Botswana had laughingly remarked: ‘You're going to Motabeng?
It's just a great big village of mud huts!’
The preponderance of mud huts with their semi-grey roofs of grass thatching gave it an ashen look during the dry season.
During the rainy season, Motabeng was subjected to a type of desert rain.
It rained in the sky, in long streaky sheets, but the rain dried up before it reached the ground.
It seemed to Elizabeth that it took people half an hour to greet each other each day.
It took so long, they said, because Motabeng was a village of relatives who married relatives, and nearly everyone had about six hundred relatives.
People often looked at Elizabeth with a cheated air.
A person would actually put out her hand to stay her: ‘Wait a bit.
Where are you hurrying to?’
It was so totally new, so inconceivable, the extreme opposite of ‘Hey, Kaffir, get out of the way’, the sort of greeting one usually was given in South Africa.
Surely there was a flow of feeling here from people to people?
It was barely three months after her arrival in the village when her life began to pitch over from an even keel, and it remained from then onwards at a pitched-over angle.
At first she found the pitch-black darkness of the Motabeng night terrifying.
She had always lived in a town, with a street light shining outside the window, so the first thing she hastened to buy was a chair on which to place a candle, beside her bed.
She kept the candle burning right up to the point where she felt drowsy, then blew it out.
Often she fell asleep with the candle still alight.
The chair, a bed and a small table were the only pieces of furniture she had in her hut.
After a while she became more accustomed to the extreme dark and quite enjoyed blowing out the light and being swallowed up by the billowing darkness.
One night she had just blown out the light when she had the sudden feeling that someone had entered the room.
The full impact of it seemed to come from the roof, and was so strong that she jerked up in bed.
There was a swift flow of air through the room, and whatever it was moved and sat down on the chair.
The chair creaked slightly.
Alarmed, she swung around and lit the candle.
The chair was empty.
She had never seen a ghost in her life.
She was not given to ‘seeing’ things.
The world had always been two-dimensional, flat and straight with things she could see and feel.
This recurred for several nights, and she simply reasoned that whatever it was not a danger to her life.
Let it sit if it wanted to.
Oh, no; whatever it was wanted to introduce itself at some stage, because one night she was lying staring at the dark when it seemed as though her head simply filled out into a large horizon.
It gave her a strange feeling of things being right there inside her and yet projected at the same time at a distance away from her.
She was not sure if she were awake or asleep, and often after that the dividing line between dream perceptions and waking reality was to become confused.
The form of a man totally filled the large horizon in front of her.
He was sitting sideways.
He had an almighty air of calm and assurance about him.
He wore the soft, white, flowing robes of a monk, but in a peculiar fashion, with his shoulders hunched forward, as though it were a prison garment.
He stared straight at Elizabeth in a friendly way and said, in a voice of quiet affection: ‘My friend.’
A sort of terror gripped her chest.
The words were almost jerked out of her mouth: ‘No,’ she said.
‘I'm going to die quite soon.’
He kept quiet, excepting that his look changed from friendliness to seriousness.
A name for the monk had instinctively formed itself in her mind.
He was…
He was…
But it was too impossible.
A wave of panic made her fling her arms into the air and take a great leap out of the bed.
She paced the floor for a while, violently agitated.
The abrupt encounter, the strangeness of his question and the equal strangeness of her unpremeditated reply threw her mind into a turmoil.
He looked like a man she had seen about the village who drove a green truck, but the name she associated in her mind with the monk-robed man was that of an almost universally adored God.
Then nothing else seemed about to happen, and she eventually calmed down and went to sleep.
She was to find out that something would startle her like this and then quieten down to an apparent normality, only to find that she had really been shaken up into accepting an entirely unnatural situation and adapting it to the flow of her life.
There was only one way to explain it.
The principal of a school had a teacher on his staff who was fond of brandy.
He took a bottle of brandy into the toilet, intending to have a few sips.
Well, he kept taking a few sips and peeping around the door to spy out the whereabouts of the principal.
Soon he became quite drunk and reversed the activity.
He'd open the door, take a few sips, close the door and look for the principal in the toilet.
Much the same applied to her.
She began by waking up on the tail-end of absorbing conversations with the white-robed monk who sat on the chair beside her, and it wasn't long before the discussions became a full-time activity.
The faint silvery-white outline of his robe and his face were clearly discernible to her at all times, and so overpowering was the experience at first that in the early morning, as she poured out a cup of tea, she would pour a second cup and absent-mindedly walk towards the chair and say: ‘Here's a cup of tea for you,’ and then jolt back to reality, shaking her head: ‘Agh, I must be mad!
That's just an intangible form.’
What did mothers, black mothers, say to children whose fathers had been lynched by the Ku Klux Klan in America?
She had a picture of a Southern lynch mob, a whole group of white men and women.
Two black men hung dead from a tree.
The lynchers were smiling.
Medusa smiled like that in her mental images, but Medusa was as close as her own breathing, and each night she looked straight into Medusa's powerful black eyes.
It was tracing the evil to its roots.
The eyes of the lynch mob were uncomprehendingly evil.
Medusa's eyes were full of comprehension, bold, conscienceless, deliberate: ‘I will it.
Nothing withstands my power.
I create evil.
I revel in it.
I know of no other life.
From me flows the dark stream of terror and destruction.’
That night Medusa and Sello in the brown suit were engaged in an eager whispering conversation.
At one point Medusa turned her head towards Elizabeth and smiled triumphantly.
Sello was pointing to the figure of a man in the distance.
She overheard him say to Medusa: ‘Don't worry, he'll kill her.’
At this Medusa walked up to Elizabeth.
She had in her hands one of her bolts.
These bolts seemed to ooze out of her hands.
She had a way of shaping them into round balls, raising her arms in a wide, swinging movement and hurling them straight at Elizabeth.
They exploded against her like lightning bolts.
She often slipped into black unconsciousness and awoke later with a roaring headache.
Medusa raised her arms: ‘We are,’ she said, spelling out the words slowly: ‘We are bringing you the real magic, this time.’
Elizabeth raised one hand feebly in defence.
She said: ‘I can't stand any more of this.
My health is failing.’
Medusa turned her head from side to side, smiling, indicating enchantment: ‘Oh, but you will love it,’ she said.
Then she shaped her mouth into a yap: ‘Here's the last of them,’ and the black bolt came hurtling towards Elizabeth.
It was about to explode in her face.
She put both hands before her and jerked wide awake with a scream.
She was trembling so violently that the bed shook.
With no clear plan in her head, she pushed her legs out of the bed.
As she tried to stand, they wobbled like rubber.
She fell down on her knees and began crawling across the floor.
The chair on which Sello, the monk, eternally sat, was in her son's room.
She crawled to the chair and looked up.
She could clearly discern the outline of his form in the white cloth.
‘Sello,’ she groaned painfully.
‘Find another punch-bag for your girl.
I'm not her match.’
‘All right,’ he said, quietly.
She turned to crawl back to her bed.
A billowing wave of darkness rose up and sucked her to its depths, and she sank to the floor.
When she opened her eyes it was daylight.
Her son was lying on the floor beside her and peering into her face.
‘Why are you sleeping on the floor?’ he asked seriously.
She couldn't think of anything to say and kept quiet.
‘What was you burning last night?’ he asked, pointing to her room.
‘The floor is full of burnt things.’
She jumped up alarmed.
Why, anything could happen in her nightmare.
She might have left a cigarette lit.
She walked to the door of her bedroom, then froze.
There was the drama of a death-throe on the floor.
Charcoal-like foot-prints dragged into eachother across the floor and in the centre of the room was a heap of charcoal dust.
She half muttered aloud to herself:
‘Is this the last of Medusa?’
From the room behind her Sello said: ‘Yes.’
‘What are you saying?’ the small boy asked.
‘Poetry,’ she said.
She had found that the word ‘poetry’ excused any mental ramblings and he understood.
Citizen Cattolica
Hector Cattolica has produced some of the most dramatic illustrations to have appeared in the magazine.
Peter Stalker spoke to him about his work in Argentina and France.
‘I'm a public service artist.
Not in the sense that I work for any authority.
I mean that each image tries to express something that belongs to millions of people.’
Hector Cattolica is an Argentinian graphic artist living in Paris — and one of the NI's favourite contributors.
His images have appeared again and again in the magazine over the last ten years (the most recent was on the cover of the cancer issue).
We frequently telephone asking him to illustrate some obscure or abstract concept.
And he always comes up with an answer.
Hector first left Buenos Aires in 1962 — just to visit Europe and see where his (Italian) father had lived.
But he stayed on in Paris until the dramatic events of May 1968.
‘Before the student demonstrations I had been working with a group of Latin American intellectuals in Paris, helping bring out a magazine.
But all that was put to one side when the protests started and we took to the streets.
We were committed, perhaps too committed — and then very depressed by the response.
Mind you, I still see many of the images I created then reproduced in other countries.
I like to see them.
I feel like a father who watches what happens to his children.’
After May 1968 he returned to Argentina.
But he didn't like what he found — a student movement, influenced to some extent by the events in Europe, but calling for a return to the past in the shape of Juan Peron.
He returned to Paris three years later.
‘Events proved me right.
It was with Peron that the repression started.
Many of my friends followed me to Paris or they disappeared or they died.
I never went back during the military period.
My family warned me not to.
Thanks to the war with yourselves (the British) democracy returned with Alfonsín and I was able to return on a visit a year ago.
‘Here in Paris I'm what they call a touche-à-tout (Jack of all trades) in literature, architecture and graphic design.
The only journalism which I have done regularly is with the NI which is the group with which I have had the best understanding during my stay in Europe.
I don't have the same kind of link with any group in France.
‘The images which I like best are the ones which other people like — which have the best response.
So the helmet and the jaw for example— to illustrate the arms trade.
Or the ear which shouts, about noise pollution.
Or the poster I produced for you of the doves of peace made with human hands.
I try to use images that carry other images so that they keep on saying something each time you look at them.
‘I'm trying all the time to work against commercialization, against the idea that every author's work is a product directed towards consumers.
I like to treat people as I would like to be treated by them, as a citizen.’
Will he return to Argentina now?
He seems unsure — particularly after the election of the Peronist President Menem.
This reversion to Peronism represents to him the contradiction that runs through Argentina.
It is a place where there is no real distinction between the civil and the military.
‘We are either a civilian country in military uniform — or a military regime in civilian clothes.’
The debt crisis: action re-play
1973:
Oil prices quadruple.
Oil producing countries (OPEC) dramatically increase revenues or ‘petro-dollars’ which they deposit in big transnational banks.
The banks lend these to developing countries who want money for modernizing their countries as well as paying increased fuel costs.
1979:
Oil prices increase again…more petro-dollars…more loans to developing countries.
1981-1982
: Interest rates hit all-time high.
1982
: August, Friday 13 — the debt crisis officially begins.
Mexico's Finance Minister flies to Washington to inform the US Government that Mexico cannot meet the payments on its $80 billion foreign debt.
The profits of the big banks continue to rise.
Over the first four years of the debt crisis, after-tax profits at six big US commercial banks increase 57%.
1982-85
: The IMF signs 98 agreements with developing countries, including all the big debtor countries which have come to Washington for help.
1985
: July — Peru's new president Alan Garcia Perez sends shock waves through international credit markets by declaring the country will limit its payments of principal debt and interest to 10% of the value of its export earnings.
October — Treasury Secretary James Baker unveils new world-debt plan, encouraging banks to lend to developing countries in exchange for economic reforms.
December — Foreign debt of US surpasses $100 billion, making it the world's largest debtor.
1987:
February — Brazil suspends interest payments on its international debt.
August — at least 10 Third World countries have stopped repaying their commercial bank creditors.
October 19th — stock markets around the world crash, representing loss of confidence in banks.
Consumer wealth in developed countries is slashed by $1.5 trillion.
Prospects for Third World exports dim further.
The madness of hunger
The people of North-East Brazil are starving.
But they put their own physical anguish down to ‘nervous problems’.
Nancy Scheper-Hughes explains how drugs and politics have brought this about.
I was going through the death-registry books in the cartrio civil of Bom Jesus da Mata, a market town in the sugar-plantation region of Pernambuco in the Brazilian North-East.
I came across the following handwritten entry:
Died: September 18, 1985, Luiza Alvesda female, brown eyes, aged 33, spinster.
Cause of Death: dehydration; starvation
Observations: The deceased left behind no children and no possessions.
She was illiterate.
She did not vote.
That was the end of the entry, but I was able to discover that Luiza had died in the municipal hospital of Bom Jesus and was buried in a pauper's coffin in an unmarked grave wrapped only in a hospital sheet.
I think about Luiza Alves from time to time.
I imagine, from what I know of life in Bom Jesus, that she probably thought of herself as fraca (physically weak) or fraca de juízo (mentally weak) and prone to ataque de nervos (nervous attacks).
She may have cried a good deal without understanding why.
Perhaps sometimes she became angry.
She may have lashed out, uncontrollably, at a ministering hand during her final agonia at the hospital.
I have seen deaths like these and they are not very pretty.
The people of Bom Jesus sometimes refer to them as doena de cão — literally dog's disease.
They are referring to rabies, which in Portuguese is called raiva — literally rage, fury, madness.
The madness of hunger is indeed very much like rabies and it is truly a dog's death.
References to the delírio, the madness of hunger, can be found as early as the sixteenth century in the writings of Portuguese navigators, and it is a recurring theme in Brazilian literature right up to the present day.
It is the subjective voice, the primary experience of hunger.
The North-East of Brazil is a land of many kinds of hungers, and of a formidable thirst.
Infants who die of dehydration, their tongues blackened (their mothers say) and hanging from their mouths, compete for attention with equally brutal images of thirst-driven sertanejos who walk hundreds of kilometres to escape the drought of the sertão or hinterland.
So we must begin with the context, the 600,000 square miles of suffering that is the pock-marked face of the North-East, where cloying fields of sugar cane rot amidst hunger and disease, where authoritarian landlords compete for power with anarchistic bandits, and rural labourers are bound to a semi-feudal plantation economy in a state of perpetual anxiety.
The hunger of the coastal sugar-cane workers and their families is constant and chronic.
The hunger of the sertanejos of the backlands is periodic, acute and explosive.
Since 1964, when I first worked (and lived) in the region, what I have been seeing in babies and young children is starvation: a host of children of one and two years who cannot sit up unaided, who do not or cannot speak, whose skin is stretched so tightly over the chest and stomach that every curve of the breastbone and ribs stands out.
The arms, legs and buttocks of these children are often stripped of flesh so that the skin hangs in folds.
The buttocks are often discoloured.
The bones of the face are fragile, the eyes prominent, the hair thin and wispy.
The eyelashes can be extraordinarily long.
Some children take on an unnatural, waxen appearance that their mothers sometimes see as a kind of death mask.
No other calamity has quite the shattering effects on personality and behaviour as the experience of acute hunger.
The most obvious effect is a frenzied rage alternating with periods of euphoria, excitement and irritability, often subsiding into passive withdrawal and indifference.
In Nordestino folklore animals, too, go mad with hunger.
To this day rezadeiras (old, praying women) light small candles in their front yards to remind the mystic-priest-saint of the backlands, Frei Damiao, to keep hungry snakes from attacking the community.
At first in Bom Jesus one's ear is jarred by the way hunger and nervousness are interchangeable in the language of the poor residents of the hillside slum called Alto do Cruzeiro (Crucifix Hill).
A mother will stop you on her way up the hill to say that things aren't good, that her children are nervous because they are hungry.
Another woman returning from feira (market) tells you that she became dizzy, confused and ‘nervous’ at the price of meat.
Dona Teresa tells you that her husband Manoel came home from work sick, his knees shaking, his body weak and so tired he could barely swallow a few mouthfuls of dinner.
He is suffering from a crise de nervos, as is usual towards the end of the week, when everyone is anxious because there's nothing to eat.
I am sitting on the doorstep with several women of the Alto discussing nervos with them.
Anger, discontent, anxiety, hunger and even parasitic infections (all related to their work as laundrywomen, rural labourers and domestic workers) are filtered through the metaphor of nervos.
Sebastiana: As for me, I'm always sick, I'm fraca de nervos (I have weak nerves).
Me: What are your symptoms?
Sebastiana: Trembling, a great chill in my bones.
Sometimes I shake until I fall down.
Maria Teresa: There are many kinds of nervos.
Me: What's ‘anger nerves’ about?
Rosa: That's if your patroa says something to you that really ticks you off, but because she's your boss you just go away without saying anything.
But inside you're so angry you could kill her, you really wish she were dead.
The next day you're likely to have ‘anger nerves’.
Me: What about ‘fear nerves’?
Maria Teresa: When her mother died, Black Irene gave out such a blood-curdling scream in the middle of the night that we all woke up with a jump.
My son went running to Irene's house to see what was the matter.
When he returned he fell down on the floor clutching his heart in an agonia of pain and trembling.
Ever since that night he suffers from nervos.
Sebastiana: I only suffer from overwork nervos.
I've washed clothes all my life, for almost 60 years, and now my body is as worn out as Dona Carmen's sheets.
[This is a slur against a notorious wealthy miser who is too mean to buy new sheets].
When I come home from the river with that heavy basin of wet laundry on my head, my knees begin to shake, and sometimes I lose my balance and fall right on my face.
What humiliation!
Me: Is there a ‘cure’ for overwork nerves?
Sebastiana: I take tonics and Vitamin A.
Rosa: Yes, lots of people take tonics, others take nerve pills, a lot take tranquillizers.
Maria Teresa: Don't forget the sleeping pills.
Sebastiana: At night when everything is still, and the night is so dark, so strange, time passes slowly.
The night is long.
I almost go mad with nervos at times like that.
I think of so many things, so many sad and bitter thoughts cross my mind.
Memories of my childhood and how hard I was made to work, working like that in the fields on an empty stomach.
Then the tremors begin, and I have to get out of bed.
It's no use, I won't sleep any more that night.
My illness is really just my life.
What I wish to propose is that for this poor and hungry population many of the physiological symptoms of which they complain are also symptoms of chronic hunger.
And during the past two decades of my involvement with the people of the Alto I have seen a discourse on nervos and sickness replace a discourse on angry hunger.
I am not arguing that nervos can be reduced to hunger alone, or that nervos is an exclusively poor or working-class phenomenon.
The
‘beauty’ of nervos as a folk illness syndrome is its flexibility.
It is an all-purpose complaint, one that can be invoked by a frustrated middle class to express its dashed expectations in the wake of Brazil's decanonized ‘Economic Miracle’, by the urban working class to express their condition of relative powerlessness, and by an impoverished class of displaced sugar-cane cutters and their families to express their hunger.
The question is, how did these people come to see themselves primarily as nervous and only secondarily as hungry, malnourished?
How is it that mortally tired cane cutters come to define themselves as ‘weak’ rather than overworked and exploited?
Worse, when resentment over exploitation is recognized, how did it ever get reinterpreted as illness?
And, finally, how can it be that chronically hungry people will ‘eat’ medicines while going without their staple foods?
Nervos is a social illness.
It allows hungry, irritable and angry Nordestinos, just now emerging from more than 20 years of militarism and political repression, a safe way to express their discontent.
If it is dangerous to engage in political protest (and it is) and, as one of my informants Biu complained, if it is pointless to reclamar, to argue with God (and it would seem to be so), hungry and frustrated people can transform angry and nervous hunger into ‘breakdown’ and ‘mental’problems.
When people do so, the health-care system and the political machinery of the community are fully prepared to back them up in their unhappy and anything-but-free choice of symptoms.
Because the people of Alto do Cruzeiro truly suffer from headaches, tremors, weakness, tiredness, irritability, angry weeping and other symptoms of what people call nervos, they look to the doctors, pharmacists and political bosses and patrons from Bom Jesus for a ‘cure’ to the ‘sickness’.
They line up in clinics, in drug stores, in the municipal dispensary and they want powerful medicines to make them ‘strong’ and ‘lively’(full of animaão — a kind of vitality and readiness for pleasure and enjoyment in the body and its senses that is so Brazilian).
They do not leave without these magical, potent prescription drugs: vitaminas, fortificantes, pilulas para os nervos, sôro, but also antibiotics, painkillers and sleeping pills.
And they get them, if they're lucky, even without paying for them.
Why medicine?
If it is power that the leading families who supply them want, why not simply distribute food to hungry people?
Medicalization mystifies.
It isolates the experience of misery and it domesticates people's anger.
There is power and domination to be extracted from the defining of a population as ‘sick’ or ‘nervous’.
To acknowledge hunger (which is not a disease but a social illness) would be tantamount to political suicide among leaders whose power has come traditionally from the same plantation economy that produced that hunger in the first place.
This ‘bad faith’ operates among the doctors and pharmacists who allow their knowledge and skill to be abused; among the politicians who wish to see themselves as community benefactors, while knowing full well that they are nothing of the sort; and even among the poor who are so often critical of the medical ‘care’they receive yet continue to hold out for a medical solution to their social and economic problems.
The refusal to see the signs of malnutrition and dehydration, or the determination to see them as something other than what they are, as a nervous condition to be treated with painkillers, tranquillizers, tonics and elixirs, represents the worst instance of collective bad faith in Bom Jesus de Mata.
This, too, is the madness of hunger.
IMAGES OF MADNESS
Creative artists have always been interested in madness.
They use the incredible power of imagination to explore ideas and feelings, and it is their business to explore the outer limits of consciousness from which most of us prefer to sheer away.
The methods or ‘media’ they have used for these explorations have evolved over time — and have been aimed at an ever wider audience.
The single paintings made by Bosch have evolved into the multiple images and mass reproduction of modern cinema and television.
But if the means of communication have moved in a more public direction, the images have gone the other way.
The crowded, bustling scenes of Bosch have become an isolated, inward-looking face, an entire body suspended in space.
This paradox tells us something about how madness is seen today — isolated as an illness of the individual.
Breaking out of that isolation may be one of the greatest challenges now facing our imagination.
Painting — c 1500
HIERONYMUS BOSCH
The Cure of Madness
At first sight, it seems as if this painting portrays a primitive and horrific ‘treatment’ of madness.
The man on the left is probing inside the seated man's skull to find the cause of his madness — another title for the picture is ‘The Search for the Stone’.
But look again.
The surgeon is wearing a funnel on his head, the woman a book on hers, where they cannot be used, and the monk looks on with indifference.
Their approach is ridiculous.
Only the mad man himself, strapped to the chair, looks out of the painting, engaging the viewer's sympathy.
Printing — c 1800
FRANCISCO GOYA
The Dream of Reason
The great Spanish painter Francisco Goya marks a turning point, out of the Age of Reason and towards contemporary preoccupations.
His series of prints entitled ‘Caprices’ and ‘Follies’are expressions of a ‘free’imagination.
They are satirical and often so horrific that they were suppressed at the time.
The caption, written into the plynth on which the man rests, is ambiguous.
El sueo de la razn produce monstruos means ‘The sleep of reason produces monsters’.
But the Spanish word sueo can mean either ‘sleep’ or ‘dream’.
So the fearful monsters are created either by the absence of reason, or by a ‘subconscious’ desire of reason itself.
This print was probably intended as the frontispiece of a book — Goya was one of the first painters to look for a wider audience for his work.
Photography — 1930
EDVARD MUNCH
The Fear of Death
The Norwegian artist Edvard Munch said that ‘the camera cannot compete with painting as long as it cannot be used in heaven or hell’.
But he began to use it to express what he called ‘an art which touches and grips one's own heart's blood.’
Here he sits in front of one of his own paintings which, by using double exposure, appears through the left eye in which he was going blind.
It makes his whole face seem insubstantial.
The intensity and bleakness of feeling conveyed in his work reflects a growing preoccupation with death.
Film — 1978
ANDREY TARKOVSKY
Mirror
Everything that torments me, everything I don't have and that I long for, that makes me indignant, or sick, or suffocates me, everything that gives me a feeling of light and warmth, and by which I live, and everything that destroys me — it's all there in your film, I see it as if in a mirror.
For the first time ever film has become something real for me, and that's why I go to see it, I want to get right inside it, so that I can really be alive.’
One surely couldn't hope for greater understanding.’
Andrey Tarkovsky, the Russian film director, quoting a letter he received, in his book Sculpting Time (Faber and Faber 1986).
Tarkovsky's other films include Andrey Rublyov and Solaris.
He died in 1986.
Moonlight, bulldozers and the honeypot
‘We make or break human life every day of every year as probably no other force on earth has ever done in the past or will ever do again…
’ Strangely enough these are the words of an economist from the International Monetary Fund.
Anthony Swift interviewed him in London.
‘Dear Mr Camdessus,
Today I resigned from the staff of the International Monetary Fund after over 12 years, and 1000 days of official Fund work in the field, hawking your medicines and your bag of tricks to governments and to people in Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa.
To me resignation is a priceless liberation, for with it I have taken the first big step to that place where I may hope to wash my hands of what in my mind's eye is the blood of millions of poor and starving peoples.
Mr Camdessus, the blood is so much, you know, it runs in rivers.
It dries up too; it cakes all over me; sometimes I feel there is not enough soap in the whole world to cleanse me from the things that I did in your name…’
Thus begins the unprecedented, open, 150-page resignation letter of Davison L. Budhoo, who this year relinquished his position as an economist on the staff of the IMF in order to raise public clamour for the Fund's reform.
Blasting through the grey language that usually cloaks such matters he accuses the Fund of corruption, self-interest and deceit.
The IMF's programme in Trinidad and Tobago is a case in point and in his resignation letter Budhoo asserts: ‘We manipulated, blatantly and systematically, certain key statistical indices so as to put ourselves in a position where we could make very false pronouncements about (the) economic and financial performance of that country.’
According to Budhoo, IMF employees ‘manipulated’ a key indicator of Trinidad and Tobago's ability to compete and export (the labour cost index) to hammer home the point that massive devaluation was needed if the country was not to head for mounting economic chaos; the true figure he says, was far more encouraging.
‘What we had done was to manufacture this and other statistical indices to allow us to prove our point and push a particular policy line, irrespective of the economic realities of the country,’ says Budhoo, who claims that such ‘errors’were commonplace within the Fund.
Even when the inaccuracy was exposed by the Fund's own statisticians, the IMF neither owned up, nor apologized to the government, nor publicly corrected its misinformation despite the implications of its judgement for foreign investment.
‘It was simply dropped as a hot potato and not referred to.
Publication of a correction would have damaged the case for further devaluation, real wage cuts and other demand management measures wanted by the Fund.’
Budhoo puts the excesses of such ‘joyrides in the IMF bulldozer when the moon is high’ down to the zeal of what he calls the Fund's ‘professionalized’political ideology, rather than to a political conspiracy.
The generous financial rewards paid in salaries and extras to Fund staff, combined with a lack of accountability, have produced a ‘honeypot’ mentality; a preoccupation with material gratification and a lust for power which has stimulated personal greed and ambition, commitment to the status quo and an environment of ‘yesmanship and stultifying conformity’.
Budhoo was allegedly on short rations from the honeypot because of his intransigence, but he nevertheless pulled $143,000 a year in salary and other subsidies, excluding those related to official travel and mission work.
A staffer on the same rate of pay but on assignment in the Third World and with five children being educated in Geneva ‘compliments of the honeypot’, receives more than the basic pay of any head of state.
And the IMF's charms become virtually irresistable when supplemented by the ‘intangibles’: VIP treatment at airports, royalty-class and first-class travel, Dallas-style hotels, generous allowances for overnight stays in playground cities and for high-class nightclubbing in ‘sin cities’, personal secretaries on every mission, G-5 Visas allowing staff to bring maids into the United States, not to mention medical, insurance and pension perks.
‘In a very meaningful way,’ writes Budhoo, ‘our staff perversion is the logical consequence of…the prevailing 1944 international ethos of superior man (sic) and inferior man, and the Western man and his system to be saved and nurtured, and the Southern man to be overlooked and cast aside…’
Hopes of joining what Budhoo dubs the ‘new nobility’ in this ‘ultimate paradise’are often enough to gain the compliance of Third World officials who might otherwise oppose the introduction of Fund programmes.
The honeypot's charms make it easy for the Fund to poach skilled personnel from Third World administrations already desperately short of such skills.
Lured by the honeypot, staff sent on IMF missions to applicant countries develop an evangelical zeal.
‘You go saying: This is what we want.
This is the programme.
We must get it anyhow — whatever is necessary to get it’’.
It's from this spirit that a lot of the manipulation comes.’
What is wanted out of a mission is contained in a briefing paper, drawn up in advance by the mission chief and approved by the managing director of the IMF.
‘You refer to the briefing paper in everything you do, because it details the official Fund stand for the country.
It's the way the Fund operates.’
Less flamboyant and more measured in person than in print, Budhoo speaks with disillusionment about the Fund: ‘The IMF was never designed to help the Third World or end poverty.
It was established by the Bretton Woods conference of 1944 to restore economic and financial order to the Western world.
There was no element of compassion for humanity in its formulation.
The Fund's aim is first and foremost to secure the interests of developed countries.’
Budhoo asserts that the IMF and World Bank are key elements in an economic order that is deepening Third World poverty, the debt crisis, and a flight of capital from developing to developed countries which has soared in recent decades: in 1986 it amounted to well over $30 billion from the Caribbean and Latin America alone.
The IMF package for Trinidad and Tobago is an example of how Fund policies worsen Third World poverty.
This programme required the removal of Government subsidies from basic food-stuffs, school books and drugs.
The Fund also wished to cut the public wage bill (increase unemployment); lift import controls (allowing an influx of consumer goods, thereby undermining local production); privatize national industries at outrageously discounted prices; raise interest rates (also hitting the competitiveness of local producers); and remove exchange controls (‘so that a privileged few could legitimately drain the country of the few remaining dregs of foreign reserves’).
‘Quite frankly, our ‘program’ is nothing but a hotchpotch of irreconcilable and conflicting elements and objectives; it reduces economics to a farce,’writes Budhoo.
‘It's like a terrorist attack, you know, splashing around rifle fire and bazookas and even nerve gas indiscriminately so as to get the highest death toll in the shortest possible time.’
Such packages — which are repeated in scores of countries around the world — affect the poorest first, and amount to economic suicide for the governments concerned.
In effect, Budhoo writes, ‘we are asking the Government of Trinidad and Tobago to…self-destruct itself and unleash unstoppable economic and social chaos’.
Budhoo also explains why the IMF never suggests cuts to defence, police or public control measures instead of to basic services and subsidies for the poor: ‘It's one thing to push around countries and say, OK you have to treat the poor that way’’.
But with the arms industry you are talking about very powerful people — both inside and outside the country.
They won't be pushed around.
They are supposed to be among those who benefit.
The US being a Fund shareholder and the staff taking its cue from the US, who is the Fund to tell a country to limit its arms expenditure?
You can tell them to let people die, but not to limit their arms.’
Meanwhile, there is little evidence that IMF programs
have set countries on any sort of breakthrough path.
Claims have been made about Taiwan and South Korea, but tremendous amounts of US aid have been pumped into those countries for political purposes.
‘I dare anyone in the Fund to point to a country and say it is much better off economically today because of a Fund programme,’ says Budhoo.
And this is not an empty challenge.
For Budhoo deals in cold, stark facts.
He is a man in the know, whose voice is now unfettered.
‘As from today’, he writes in his resignation letter,’ I tear off the mask of studied ambiguity that your organization did give me twelve years ago.
As from today conscience becomes my only guide…
‘In guilt and self-realization of my own worthlessness as a human being…
I would like to enlighten public opinion about our role and our operations in our member countries of the Third World.
Do I hear you bristling with disapproval?
Enlightening public opinion’’ are nasty words in the vocabulary of the Fund; I know it; I know it.
Well, not so for me.
In my new dictionary, ‘enlightening public opinion’ spells the only means to salvation.
For if I can do that — if I can get people to begin to comprehend the universality and the depth of our perversion — I would have achieved something rare and precious for the starving and dispossessed two-thirds of mankind (sic) from whose ranks I come, and for whose cause I must now fight.’
A prescription for disaster
The impact of IMF policies.
Hunger
In one third of recent cases countries were required by the IMF to reduce badly needed food subsidies.
The result was a dramatic increase in malnutrition:
In Peru it rocketed amongst under six year olds from 41% to 68% between 1980 and 1983; Ghana saw pre-school malnutrition swell from 35% to 54% between 1980 and 1984; and in Botswana child malnutrition increased from 25% to 31% between 1982 and 1984.
Sickness
Government spending on health was cut in nearly half the African countries and in 60% of Latin American countries where the IMF was involved from 1980 to 1985:
The money spent on an individual's health plummeted by 85% in Ghana between 1974 and 1982; by 78% in Bolivia from 1980 to 1982; and by 32% in El Salvador from 1980 to 1984.
The grim harvest of these cuts was an increase in preventable diseases and hence child deaths — especially in Ghana.
Poverty
Between 1980 and 1985 inflation soared, and wages crashed by 9 per cent in Latin America and 15 per cent in Sub-Saharan Africa from 1980 to 1985:
In Mexico they fell by 30% between 1981 and 1984; in Ghana by ‘% between 1979 and 1984; and in Sri Lanka by 18% between 1978 and 1983.
The number of people below the poverty line increased by up to 75% in parts of Ghana between 1974 to 1984.
Learning by root
The streets of Toronto buzz with everything from Portuguese to Tagalog; immigration has transformed the city into a cosmopolitan metropolis.
This makes it a more interesting place to live.
But what language should immigrant children use in schools?
Wayne Ellwood reports on the ‘heritage language’ controversy.
My parents were born and raised in The Beach, a solid, respectable working-class Anglo district edging on Lake Ontario in the east end of Toronto.
The little neighbourhood park was (and still is) called Kew Gardens, an indication of the area's British roots.
There were a few Jews, an Italian greengrocer and a Chinese laundry.
But that was about it: for the most part they were loyal, true-blue, Anglo-Canadians.
That vision of Toronto is long gone.
Now when my mother flies in from Vancouver she barely recognizes the city that was her home for nearly 40 years.
And it's not just the dizzying development and the smell of money that pervades the downtown area.
It's the people.
Anglo Toronto is fading fast and a new multicultural city has taken its place.
Downtown is awash in a torrent of languages; you only have to ride the subway to see the city is no longer the prim, white Anglo-Celtic centre of 40 years ago.
Jamaicans, Filipinos, Vietnamese, Pakistanis, Uruguayans, Guatemalans, Chinese, Portuguese and Italians jostle for seats and hang from the straps along with remnants of the Anglo population like me.
For outsiders the cultural energy of the city is palpable.
The variety of languages spoken on the streets and in shops is extraordinary — for new immigrants as well as the old Anglo settlers.
In my neighbourhood I can hear a sampling of Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, Urdu, Polish, Italian and West Indian English when I take my children across the street to the park.
Neither they nor the other kids take any notice of this polyphony.
English is the common language of the playground; it's the grown-ups who are speaking their national language.
But for Anglo-Canadians of my parents' generation the rich immigrant culture of Toronto is more unsettling.
In a lifetime they have gone from a self-assured majority to a beleaguered minority, strangely distanced from the city that has grown up around them.
The Anglo population is now less than 50 per cent and continues to fall.
What has really unnerved the once dominant majority has been the decade-long fight by immigrant groups to have their languages taught in the schools.
Anglo-Torontonians were apoplectic that ‘heritage languages’ like Persian, Portuguese and Punjabi would have the classroom status of French and English — the two official national languages.
The debate was revealing because it exposed the core of racism and bigotry beneath the liberal rhetoric of Canada's much vaunted multiculturalism.
The problem was not immigrants speaking their own language.
They had always done that.
The problem was they now wanted their languages accepted within a major social institution.
They wanted into the mainstream.
Canadians have been raised on the myth that we are part of a rich cultural mosaic, in stark contrast to the self-centred egotism of the US melting pot to the south.
In fact the goal has always been to make newcomers adopt both the language and the values of the white, Anglo majority.
Until the late 1960s, multiculturalism was a word scarcely imagined.
New arrivals were expected to blend smoothly into the fabric of Canadian life.
If they were determined to hang on to their culture then they were to do so quietly, without bothering others.
The heritage language issue was a signal that Canada's non-Anglo immigrant communities were coming of age.
Jim Cummins of the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education has closely followed this public controversy.
‘It's one thing to hear Italian or Portuguese spoken in the street,’ says Cummins, ‘but when you give those languages status within the school system and pay for promoting them, that rankles.’
Opposition was based on apparent commonsense blended with a measure of self-righteousness.
The main point was that English should be the first priority in a society where English is the working language.
Opponents argued that teaching other languages, especially those spoken at home, would impede the ability of children to speak and write English.
As a result they will end up speaking both languages poorly.
Other opponents were more blunt.
‘You knew the rules when you came here.
If you come to this part of Canada,’ they said, ‘then you speak English.’
The second main argument against teaching heritage languages was money.
Critics argued that school budgets are tight and that available funds should be used to reinforce the basics, not to teach frills like Korean or Latvian.
Comments by conservative school trustees bordered on the hysterical.
Teaching heritage languages during the school day ‘will guarantee second-class status to any student attending a third language school,’ wrote trustee Michael Walker.
‘I believe it will ultimately tear the public school system apart.’
‘But the point was not to get rid of English,’ says Antonio Garcon an active Spanish-speaking parent with three children in the Toronto school system.
‘All of us want our kids to learn English — the language of work.
But we also want them to understand their roots, to have some pride in their culture and their history.’
Nick Manimanakis, a Greek-speaking parent, agrees.
‘If you don't know your roots, you are nothing,’ he says.
For many immigrant families there was a strong linguistic schism between children, parents and grandparents.
‘My kids now feel comfortable in the house when we speak Greek,’ adds Mr Manimanakis.
‘They can talk with their grandparents and write to their relatives in Greece.
That kind of confidence and pride in their roots is the most important thing we can give our kids.’
What shifted the debate in the end was the strength of the heritage language lobby.
The immigrant groups had the numbers, even if they didn't have control of the media or the school board.
By 1982 a Toronto Board of Education survey found 37 per cent of first-year high-school students were born outside Canada and that nearly half of them spoke a language other than English or French as their first language.
Society was changing rapidly even if institutions like the Anglo-dominated education system were slow to admit it.
Slowly it began to dawn on school board trustees and education bureaucrats that immigrants were not only voters, they were also tax payers.
‘Look,’ says Antonio Garcon, ‘immigrants are also paying taxes.
If we as tax payers can't decide what is done with our tax dollars, than who can?’
In addition to the emotional arguments of keeping families together and developing cultural roots, evidence was mounting that teaching heritage languages and culture as part of the regular school day also had straightforward educational benefits.
Research by Jim Cummins and others showed clearly that the better kids develop their first language, the better they do in English.
A 1982 report to the Toronto Board of Education noted that a sense of identity and self-respect were the most important by-products of teaching heritage languages.
Says Jim Cummins: ‘Kids who are proud of who they are and who have no ambivalence about that have no problems in school’.
Once that information began to spread into the community the opposition began to crumble.
The bottom line argument against heritage languages was always that they were bad for the children.
When the opposite proved true, opponents didn't have a leg left to stand on.
Even the argument that there was not enough money to pay for the programme soon dissolved when heritage languages were actually seen to help immigrant students succeed in other subjects.
That's why parents like Antonio Garcon believe the $10 million heritage language programme is small change in the province's $500 million education budget.
There are now 90,000 primary school students studying 58 different languages (from Swedish and Lithuanian to Urdu, Arabic and Cantonese) in more than 70 boards of education across Ontario.
The growth and support for the heritage language programme within a decade has been remarkable.
It is now entrenched so deeply there is little chance of it being overturned.
Supporters like Jim Cummins maintain that heritage language teaching is an important step in helping immigrant students realize their potential.
But he says there is still a long way to go in ridding the educational system of what he labels ‘institutional racism’.
What we really have to worry about, Cummins believes, is the ‘Anglo conformity’ that permeates the education hierarchy from top to bottom.
This is not the old-fashioned racism inherent in ‘streaming’ immigrant kids into vocational and technical courses.
That still happens but now teachers and parents are aware of the pattern and are trying to do something about it.
What Cummins refers to is the dominant world view that shapes teachers in the classroom.
If we really want to empower minority students, he says, educators themselves must find out why students are failing and how they can be helped.
Cummins believes that minority students are ‘empowered’ or ‘disabled’as a result of direct interaction with their teachers.
Simply put, the success of immigrant students depends directly on the support they get in the classroom.
Placing value on heritage languages and cultures is important but that value needs to extends beyond primary school and across the entire curriculum.
Too often minority students themselves are blamed for their failure.
Instead, argues Cummins, we should ask whether they are being given the confidence and motivation to succeed academically.
Let's look first at the system as the source of the problem, he says.
‘What we need is not multicultural education but anti-racist education.’
What next?
Ideas, ideology and the future
One day in the mind of Fred Z, NIsubscriber and optimist.
A profile of Fred by David Ransom.
Our ideas and hopes for the future are the stuff of life.
We can't seem to do without them.
But ‘endism’ is in vogue.
Last autumn President Bush said that what was wrong with the Soviet Union was not so much its ideology as the fact that it had had an ideology at all.
Capitalism and liberal democracy have won.
They have defeated their only serious rival — socialist ideology.
Market forces are not an ideology but a fact of life.
So the end of the Cold War is also the ‘end of history’— no more stories to be told, no more thinking to be done, no more fundamental conflicts to be resolved.
‘Perhaps the prospect of centuries of boredom at the end of history will serve to get history started again’, speculates Francis Fukuyama, the US State Department official who started the latest fashion for this idea.
We prefer to spend the day with Fred Z — an unremarkable person living through a not particularly eventful day.
We see how he's shaping up to the ‘new age’ ahead, and offer some thoughts of our own.
That's him, there in the centre of our artist's impression of his household.
Right now, if you asked him ‘what next?’ he'd probably say ‘the hoovering’.
He lives in a large provincial town with his second partner Beth, their small son Henry, and Alice, his teenage daughter by a previous marriage.
Fred craves meat, smokes but doesn't drink alcohol.
Beth works part-time as a physiotherapist at the local hospital and is extremely fit.
She is often on a diet and, like young Henry, has a passion for McDonalds hamburgers.
Alice is an anti-smoking vegetarian who is already too fond of red wine.
By and large they all get on very well together.
It's the kind of household people like to visit and often do.
But Fred finds it hard to take a ‘line’ on anything, from pets to ethical shopping and which TV programme to watch.
So he's in a bit of ideological bother even before he steps out of his front door.
He may look a bit feeble to you, but underneath he's a man of principle.
He doesn't just mess with ideas.
He puts them into practice too.
That makes him a busy and slightly battered person.
He was once a Hunt Saboteur and still has a dent in his buttocks to prove it.
He's an active trade unionist and a good neighbour.
‘Socialistic’ rather than socialist, he tells himself he would belong to a political party if he could just find the right one to join.
He doesn't get much time for reflection, and when he does he tends to get depressed.
He's an enthusiast.
He doesn't just hope for the best in other people — he genuinely believes in it.
But he's not above making furtive preparations for the worst.
A faintly comical figure, he fears ridicule above all else.
He has the ability to infuriate other people for (to him) no apparent reason at all.
For Fred, solidarity between people is a matter of plain common sense rather than ideological preference.
If he has ‘style’ he doesn't know where it came from or what it is.
Only in retrospect does he think he might qualify as a ‘new man’, a supporter of causes from which he is excluded by his situation — feminism, the Third World, anti-racism, gay rights.
So he lives with a lurking fear of exposure as a fraud.
He thinks this keeps him on his mettle, but it often leaves him at a loss for the right word.
Amiable and well-liked, he is basically a happy man who gets intense pleasure from his senses every day — from sunlight on his back, the scent of fresh coffee and the company of others.
You must not think him ridden with angst just because, for once, he's agreed to discuss with us the things he normally ignores.
But he doesn't even try to ignore a deep, child-like, abiding rage.
Poverty, cruelty and injustice literally make him feel sick.
He finds himself at odds with a ‘world order’ he thinks of as noisy, dirty, ruthless, cruel, narrow-minded, increasingly uniform and joyless.
He reckons it's only because he loves the world and the people he knows that he hates the prevailing ‘world order’.
He sees his life as some kind of a preparation for the day when the George Bushes and Margaret Thatchers of this world are dispatched to refine their political beliefs on welfare benefits in an urban slum.
He teaches history at the local state school.
He has a passion for the subject and its relevance to contemporary events.
His pet topics are the Byzantine Empire and the Crusades.
He feels personally vindicated by the demise of all imperial adventures, the defeat of fascism and the disproof of the fundamental tenets of apartheid.
He always thought of the Cold War as a deal between cynical power brokers and military-industrial magnates with money to make from mega-deaths.
You can decree an end to the Cold War, but not to the arms manufacturers like Boeing.
How will they live without it?
Where will they turn for new markets?
Fred, a child of the Cold War, is uneasy about the future, particularly for his children.
He thinks that great opportunities lie ahead, but vested interests, built on the status quo, are trying to keep them out of reach.
He sees the East European revolutions of 1989 as disproving the need for revolutionary violence.
They could happen anywhere and very well might.
He thinks there's more to ‘democracy’ than voting for someone else.
He reckons that the politics of mutual extermination could indeed have run their course, and the opportunity to tackle the most pressing issues of the 1990s — poverty and the destruction of the environment — is finally within reach.
But Chinese philosophy (well, the odd book about it, anyway) tells him that great opportunity and great danger are two sides of the same coin.
He fears we may fall to disenchantment, bad old habits, national chauvinism, racist frenzy — or ‘endism’.
He can sense the options as they come and go, day by day.
As he sees it, the Gulf crisis of August 1990 united the United Nations on a major world issue for the first time in its history.
But the US (with the UK in tow) shaped up for war with Iraq and steamed off to the Gulf to protect their own interests, saying that they were doing so on behalf of the whole world.
An aid worker in Jordanian refugee camps can't get a TV crew from the West interested in tens of thousands of people from the ‘Third World’ who are about to die from starvation — all the crews are off watching Richard Branson pick up a couple of hundred westerners in one of his Virgin Jumbo Jets.
Hundreds of thousands of people from the Philippines, India, Bangladesh, Egypt, right across the ‘south’ kept Kuwait (and much of the rest of the Gulf) thriving.
Few people in the West knew or cared very much if they did.
As always, it is the poor who pay the price of conflict — and there can be no end to conflict in a world where the ‘have-nots’ outnumber the ‘haves’by four to one.
Fred reckons there's never been a clearer example of what he means.
Without a genuine and effective United Nations and a new vision to go with it there is no prospect of a better world order or of identifying and tackling the major world issues.
With the United Nations there is at least the opportunity to start, to work together in new ways on issues that really matter.
Such as global warming — and the West using less of the oil that the Gulf crisis is actually all about.
Perhaps, he thinks, this has finally brought us to our senses.
The prospect of environmental catastrophe has shown us how fragile life is, how inter-dependent we all are, how difficult it is going to be to find our way out — and how important ideas are going to be to finding it.
Yet he is required to hand over his children's future to the ‘non-ideological’ market forces he thinks are largely responsible for getting us all into this mess in the first place.
Given this choice, he reckons there's a balance to be tipped, in favour of the opportunities and against the dangers.
His ideas are all he has to do it with.
And the only way these can make a difference is if he shares them, tests them out, listens to other ideas and looks for ways to put them into practice.
As luck would have it we've chosen a bad day to join him.
He's had one of his rare vivid nightmares; the sort that has him lying rigid in bed, blind eyes wide open, yelling ‘No!
No!
No!’ at the ceiling, Beth trying grumpily to reassure him and shut him up.
It lingers on into the first moments of his wakefulness, leaving him unsure what world he's really in.
Fred has two kinds of nightmare.
In one he's in a lift that doesn't stop at the top but keeps going into a world of claustrophobia and vertigo.
In the other, the sort he's just woken from, he becomes an eyewitness to terrible events he's seen on TV.
In this way he has lived in Nazi Germany or sat beside a small girl in Vietnam who gazes into the distance with a fixed stare and cries into the silence with a monotonous, elemental shriek.
(He has also lived through a revolution and it was hell, but he keeps quiet about that).
The nightmare feels quite different from what he's seen on TV — but he thinks it is closer to the truth.
This time he's been wearing protective clothing.
Whether it's against poison gas or pollution or radiation he can't say.
All he hears is his own breathing and the rustle of the shrouds around him, like flapping bats.
He can't touch or smell.
He tries to shout but makes no noise.
Another shrouded figure comes up to him and rips the clothing off.
He's in a white-tiled room.
But prosaic language can't capture or convey the experience.
He has to turn to poetry.
Waiting for the kettle to boil he grabs a pencil and begins to scribble on the back of an old envelop…
The queue
…
Then I was taken from that room
I didn't recognise.
They marched me through
the gates to my grandmother's old school
and I found myself in a bare street.
Dust lay on the lintels
and dust filled
bird's prints, typed in the concrete.
There was a sound from inside the houses
of wings dragging in the dust.
I tried walking but was held
by a terror of turning the corner.
There was a shop sign
that said ‘Irkalla’.
This somehow held the terror.
The corner turned itself
and I faced three women
in a queue.
I thought I knew them,
gassmasks bubbled on their heads
like mice without ears,
and they were draped
and gloved in black
blown with grey dust.
That dream's own terror
came on me there:
I clapped my ribs
and shouted
and their deaf heads
were turning from my nakedness…
A cup of coffee in bed for Beth — he always brings her one and fears it would all be over with her if he ever stopped.
Bath, shave, teeth, relief, groans, another coffee, Henry's dinner money, where's Alice (was she home when he went to sleep last night?), mail, radio news, feed the cats, wash, dress, briefcase, wake up! wake up!
Jamaica
To the British, Jamaica was the ‘key to the Indies’ when they captured it from the Spanish as an afterthought in 1655.
Three centuries of colonialism were then imposed on the peoples seized from Africa to work on its plantations.
Yet the Jamaicans emerged as the most culturally dynamic of all Caribbean peoples.
In Kingston, as in the tourist strips of Montego Bay and Ocho Rios, the thump of reggae is everywhere.
Reggae is to Jamaica as calypso is to Trinidad.
But whereas calypso now only rarely contains a political message reggae almost always does.
For it was born out of a long histtory of protest.
First there were brave and tragic slave revolts, recalled in folklore.
There there was the message of Marcus Garvey, whose writings and activities before and after the First World War laid the foundations of what became Black Power.
Rastafarianism, or the building of a spiritual sense of Africa in oneself, was born in the horrors of the West Kingston slums.
‘Ganja’, the local marijuana, had long been used to allay hunger.
Now it became the ‘holy herb’, enabling the followers of the new faith to reach new heights of consciousness.
Deliverance is the Rastafarian message.
When set to the rhythm first of ska music (which took the world by storm in the 1950s) and then to reggae, the resulting musical brew was explosive.
‘There can be no liberation without revolution,’ sang Bob Marley.
But he died young and other reggae singers such as Peter Tosh have been gunned down, a reminder of the violence just below the surface.
Singers like Dennis Brown have taken up Marley's mantle; so too have the growing number of rap poets whose patois English is well-nigh incomprehensible to non-Jamaican ears.
Social divisions are stark in Jamaica.
Lifestyles copied from Miami and Fifth Avenue are enjoyed in closely guarded compounds well away from the misery of the slums.
It seems that only music and Red Stripe beer unites Jamaican society.
Yet although Jamaican music is a source of deep national pride, the rich rarely take in the messages.
Neither do the thousands of tourists and reggae devotees from abroad who flock to the annual ‘reggae sunsplash’.
Singers and poets alike have much to denounce.
After over eight years of rule by the strongly pro-US Jamaica Labour Party, a period marked by great hardship as the economy was forcibly ‘restructured’, the February 1989 election returned Michael Manley's People's National Party.
Popular expectations that ‘Joshua’ would lead Jamaicans towards a better future were impossibly high, especially after the devastation caused by Hurricane Gilbert in September 1988.
Manley stood for social justice despite the failure of his earlier administration in the 1970s which was derailed by powerful domestic and US opposition.
But by 1989 Jamaica was heavily indebted and more than ever dependent upon the bankers and financiers.
Moreover Manley could not afford to antagonize Washington again.
The new industries that had sprung up in Kingston's poorer areas making up clothes from pre-cut American cloth to export back to the US relied on cheap female labour.
Their wages are held down as much by non-union agreements insisted upon by the Asian and American employers as by progressive devaluation.
Agriculture remains neglected and underfunded.
There are very few bright spots.
The market prospects for bauxite are improving and the industry is being redeveloped with the help of the former multinational company owners who were displaced by the first Manley government.
The tourist industry is booming.
But little of the earnings trickle downwards: most of the foreign currency earned goes on imports of food and goods demanded by the predominantly white and affluent visitors.
As in the days of slavery there seems to be two Jamaicas divided by class and colour.
No wonder the island needs its music.
Asylum for Mr H
He fled from persecution in Japan, where a gargantuan madness industry has been after him.
Etsuro Totsuka tells the story.
In October last year I was in London and was suddenly asked to see a Japanese client.
To my surprise, a 30-year-old ex-mental-hospital detainee, Mr H, had flown from Japan to visit MIND in London and to seek asylum in the UK.
He told us that he had been persecuted by his family, psychiatrists and a public mental hospital; that he was in imminent danger of being detained against his will in hospital in Japan; that escaping from Japan was the only way to secure his freedom; and that he wanted shelter and legal assistance under international refugee law.
Mr H's initiative in flying to London to claim asylum — an ironic concept for a mental patient — is highly unusual but unfortunately his desperate experience in Japan is not.
Until quite recently mental illness was regarded in Japan as genetic, incurable, impossible to understand and dangerous.
Mentally ill people were thought to be a disgrace to the family.
The Japanese did not want to talk about them, see them, hear about them, get married to them or employ them.
Families hid their ill relatives in a cell at home or in a mental hospital.
Domestic confinement was prohibited for the first time in 1950.
After the introduction of the National Health Insurance Act in 1958 the private sector expanded sharply to cover more than 80 per cent of Japanese medical services.
Mental illness became a very profitable business indeed.
The number of mental hospital beds trebled to over 300,000 in 20 years and has since risen to 340,000.
As many as 250 people per 100,000 population are detained in mental hospitals without their consent, compared with only 2.5 people per 100,000 in Europe.
Mr H is typical of the kind of patient who is locked up in Japan but who would have retained his freedom elsewhere.
He was the eldest child in his family.
His mother encouraged him to study harder and harder so he could become a doctor, one of the most financially rewarding occupations in Japan.
He was 17 years old when he suddenly became generally exhausted and tired of studying.
He simply could not go to school.
He did not speak, stayed in his room and ate there, slept in the daytime and spent many hours listening to the radio.
His mother took him to a prefectural mental hospital.
Mr H says the doctor did not speak to him and did not see him without his mother.
She did not conduct any physical examination.
After 10 to 20 minutes she said that Mr H was mentally ill and would become worse without the medicines she prescribed.
He later found out the diagnosis was ‘schizophrenia’.
A few years passed and he wanted to work.
He found a good job.
A company promised to employ him.
But his mother did not give him permission to work.
As he was under 20 years old, he could not be employed without the permission of his parents.
He failed a university entrance exam.
One day, for the first time, he became violent with his mother.
He was taken to the hospital by police, where he was given a great deal of medicine and became unconscious.
About a week later he realized he was in a locked ward with iron bars.
He had to stay there for a year.
After being discharged and spending a year at home he was again hospitalized because he spent his time listening to the radio rather than studying.
All of his admissions were involuntary, probably ‘consent admissions’ authorized by a superintendent of the hospital and his parents.
There was no freedom, no consent to treatment, no second opinion, no review, no lawyer, no notice of rights, no definite time limit to the detention — and no cure.
He thought that he was schizophrenic.
The doctors had diagnosed it.
He believed he needed a much better hospital in order to be cured.
Life in the hospital was miserable.
He could not refuse strong medicines.
He felt very weak and slept all the time.
A doctor suggested brain surgery.
He finally got himself transferred to one of the best university hospitals.
Here, for the first time, he was interviewed in depth by a psychiatrist without his mother.
He could talk about his whole life.
He was told that out-patient treatment was enough for him.
There was no need for hospitalization.
But his mother became angry at the new psychiatrist's opinion.
She insisted that hospitalization was necessary and threatened to commit him to a private mental hospital unless the university hospital took him as an in-patient.
He decided to take asylum in the university hospital for two years with no treatment.
The doctor cut off all the drugs he was taking with no ill effects.
Psychiatrists there, including the Professor of Psychiatry, certified that he was not mentally ill.
He was frightened and trembled when he saw iron bars because of his earlier experience of detentions.
There was no easy way to cure this.
He was able to go out, however, to a school of English.
Later he found a temporary job and a room.
It was not easy to find the room.
To rent a room, a certificate of employment is required.
To find a job he had to hide the fact that he had been in a mental hospital.
After his successful discharge he had to change jobs several times.
Not because of any failure, but because his employers wanted to promote him from temporary to permanent status and this required checking his background.
Then he had difficulty with his hearing and heard some noises.
He should not have told his family.
His mother once again took him to the prefectural hospital, not to the university hospital.
A psychiatrist there prescribed heavy medication, again without examining his ears.
It was not long before he fainted from the drugs.
He was admitted by ambulance to an ordinary hospital.
He was found to have an ear disease and was given surgery for this.
The problem was still his mother and the prefectural doctors, who continued to believe that he was schizophrenic and should be hospitalized.
He asked a lawyer well known for his work in medical affairs to protect his freedom but the lawyer refused to take on mental-health cases.
So Mr H concluded there was no place for him to live in Japan except in a mental hospital.
He made up his mind to flee to Britain.
Ironically, though Mr H did not know it, mental-health reformers in Japan were at last making some headway.
In the 1980s a series of scandals received widespread publicity.
The most notorious was in 1984 when it was reported that two detained patients had been beaten to death by staff of Hotokukai Utsunomiya Hospital.
There had been ‘2 deaths at the 1,000-bed hospital in just three years.
Very little was officially known about any of them.
Under mounting local and international pressure, and after a long campaign, the Japanese Government finally passed a new Mental Health Act in 1987.
The process of establishing and protecting the rights of mentally ill people in Japan had begun.
Mr H knew nothing about the new law when he arrived in the UK.
I could honestly tell him that there had been improvements.
They could lead to valuable advances in the whole attitude towards the care of mentally ill people, including areas where the law cannot always enter.
With the principle of voluntary hospitalization accepted, and safeguards now surrounding the standards of treatment, the chances are that a better, more professionally trained mental health service will develop.
But the most important change of all needs to take place in public and government attitudes towards mental illness.
And here there is still a very long way to go.
Which is why Mr H is still frightened to return and continues his battle for asylum.
The Third American Revolution
Jesse Jackson almost made it to the White House.
Not only was there nearly a Black President of the most powerful nation on earth but one committed to an entirely new world order.
And he could still make it in 1992.
The Black poet and political essayist June Jordan explains just how close Jesse came — and how he was stopped.
Revolution always unfolds inside an atmosphere of rising expectations.
Given the unexpected, hard-won success of Jesse Jackson's 1988 Presidential campaign, the Third American Revolution may well be on its way.
Certainly, the phenomenon of a Black man bidding for the most powerful office in the world has raised, irreversibly, the expectations of Americans who, prior to Jackson's candidacy, never even dreamed about accurate, or responsive, political representation.
Indeed, the compelling personal history of Jesse Jackson must inspire the least powerful and most despised segments of our body politic.
Born to an unwed teenage mother in South Carolina, Jackson came of age when no Black man or woman would ever request a public cup of coffee, or enter a public bathroom, or undertake to register to vote, without calculating the easily fatal risks attached to such a simple act.
Jackson's example illuminates the value of an aggressive and rallying self-respect that will not yield to hostile stereotypes, or worse.
Moreover, 1988's election results suggest that Jackson will take the Presidency in 1992, over the dead body of the Democratic Party.
In the light of the belated rally for the lamentable Governor of Massachusetts, Michael Dukakis, a rally sparked by his (reluctant) mouthing of the populist Jackson agenda he had earlier shunned, the next Jackson campaign for the US Presidency ought to fly all the way home to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, hitherto known as ‘The White House’.
I know about Jesse and the US because I travel across America, rather incessantly.
I knew Jackson was going to surprise the hell out of a whole lot of people.
I could sit back and wait for him to break through media censorship.
But then, London surprised me.
I could find no one among my internationalist new acquaintances who understood what was happening in my country.
Jackson's name elicited vague looks or angry gossip about caricature treatments of Jesse in the British press.
Ultimately he would emerge as a controversial, and entertaining personality.
No-one supposed we might be talking about the possible next leader of ‘The Free World’.
Of course, London is not New York.
But when I began to fathom the extent of British editorial obedience to America's New York Times and NBC-TV, I got scared.
My complacency seemed altogether unwarranted.
And I returned to the States in considerable agitation: if national white media continued their de facto denial of his campaign, Jackson might really lose the game on grounds of fair-play relentlessly circumvented for the purpose of defeating him.
But media apart, thousands and thousands of white and Black Americans found themselves standing in front of this indisputably charismatic orator.
From his own mouth they understood that, regardless of ethnic or regional or age identity, they would have to surrender nothing in order to gain a great deal: that alliance need not produce merger or submergence, that even racist habits of mind became beside the point — you could vote for ‘the nigger’ not because you wanted a Black man in your family but because you thought he might save your family farm.
Counted multitudes of white Americans eschewed stupidities of racist reflex for the sake of their own self-interest.
More and more listening Americans realized that you don't have to be Black to become ‘an outsider’ in your own native land: in our democracy.
at present, one major illness is enough to financially ruin and emotionally wreck a white middle-class family.
Divorce or the death of a husband is enough to catapult a middle-class white woman and her children into poverty.
One plant closing or relocation is enough to terminate the employment future of an entire city.
Twenty years after the assassination of Dr Martin Luther King Jr, the Reverend Jesse Jackson was standing up, by popular vote, the front-runner Democratic candidate for the Presidency of the United States.
This was the situation for more than half of the official primary season!
He was standing on the principled vision of his predecessor whose humanity had persuaded an awesome number of white Americans to re-examine their notions about ‘minority’ and ‘majority’issues.
Was hunger a Black problem or an American disgrace?
Was equal access to good housing and education a Black demand or a necessity inside a ‘democratic state’?
Was ‘Jobs or Income’ an unreasonable, left-wing slogan, or a matter of human survival?
I look upon the political phenomenon of Jesse Jackson as vindication of Dr King's deepest faith in our collective potential as a democracy.
And, what's more, Jackson's own radiant temerity in the face of negligible funding, press censorship and attack, has elicited the respect, and restored the activist self-respect, of a new American majority: a multi-racial populist coalition of citizens intent upon the humane expression of their citizen entitlements.
Jackson was the first Presidential candidate, 1988, to plead and repeat the plight of 650,000 American farmers losing their farms within the eight years of Reagan's reign.
He was the first to identify drugs as the number one menace to domestic security.
He was the first and only contender for the US Presidency to demand that South Africa be designated a terrorist state and treated accordingly.
He was the first and only candidate to call the rightful name of the Palestinian people; he said the words, the Palestinians, as he called for self-determination and statehood for these beleaguered, taboo human beings.
Jesse Jackson was the first and only candidate for the Democratic nomination to assert that there must be a single standard for the measurement and protection of human rights throughout the world; no country — not France nor Israel not Nigeria not South Korea nor Iran nor South Africa — should be exempted from the requirements of that single standard.
He was the first and only Presidential contender to propose a world-view profoundly alternative to the traditions of imperialist perspective.
Jackson proposed that the majority of human life, the people of the Third World, be accorded proportionate political respect, economic aid, and inventive consideration as potential social and economic partners.
The Third World should no longer serve as a playpen for greedy, killer interventionist maneuvers by aging cold warriors.
And he was the first and the only Republican or Democratic candidate to propose an international minimum wage.
Obviously Jackson could have proposed these many things plus the obliteration of the moon and none of it, none of his isolate and courageous and visionary ideas would have mattered but for the huge national endorsement he received.
After the ‘stunning’ Jackson victory in Michigan in March where he took 55 per cent of the votes and delivered a 2-1 defeat to Michael Dukakis, the currently powerful went crazy.
America was out of(their) control.
He had to be stopped.
Rivers of money rushed into the coffers of the Dukakis camp.
Top Democratic Party officials rid themselves of every pretense at neutrality, at letting ‘the people’ choose their candidate.
Nobody dared to claim that Dukakis represented anything in particular or that he could reliably arouse anything more than a snore, but that was not the point.
In the media, the message quickly telescoped into Vote for Dukakis or…and here the message tended to become diffuse and difficult: or what?
In the teeth of his winning populist support, national white media based in New York or Washington DC released hysterical cover headlines such as‘What Does Jesse Want?’ or, ad nauseam , they broadcast clearly invalid ‘expert’opinions to the effect that Jackson was ‘unelectable’— a disgusting neologism invented specifically to discredit Jackson's gathering success.
They cut him off during televised debates.
They stressed his ‘lack of experience’.
They referred to his dependency upon the Black vote (as though the Democratic Party itself could win anything without the Black vote, and as though Alaska and Vermont were strongholds of Black populations rather than white snow).
When none of these tactics worked, they insinuated that Jackson's good looks must point to marital infidelity (although, as it happens, there was no evidence forthcoming for such envious suppositions).
Racism could not kill the Jackson campaign.
If you pumped hard enough you could probably find some jackass willing to say he'd be damned if he'd ‘let the niggers hold a barbecue on the White House lawn’.
But any rational analysis of the outcome of the Democratic primaries makes it clear that Jackson's racial identity did not and could not defeat him in the voting booth.
Yes, the prospect of a Black man wielding power over white life, the prospect of Black power commensurate with the Presidency of the United States, undoubtedly appalled, if it did not terrify, a host of white Americans still crippled by racist attitudes and habits.
But Jackson was out here, everywhere, testing his faith in a democratic America.
And his courage, his passionate good will, was causing an extraordinary multitude of white folk to obliterate the color line for the sake of their own best self-interest.
He had to be stopped.
And, measured by the number of delegates at stake, the next, the pivotal battleground would be New York.
This was where Jackson's enemies needed to break the neck of his campaign.
But how?
I think it looked easy.
For Jews, there is no subject more profoundly freighted with fear and with hope than Israel.
Israel was, therefore, an ‘issue’ for malevolent, divisive manipulation.
In New York you had the largest Jewish community outside of Israel.
Constituting 23 per cent of the voting electorate, this community tended to deliver a monolithic yea or nay.
You had a big-time lunatic in The Office of the Mayor.
You had the national headquarters of Time magazine, Newsweek, NBC-TV and so forth.
The showdown was set.
The goal was the burying of a startling upstart.
Ah, Israel.
Such a tiny sovereign state with fewer inhabitants than the New York City Boroughs of Brooklyn and the Bronx combined.
Could you reduce a national populist uprising and its leader to ‘one issue’, the ‘issue’ of Israel?
Well, evidently.
But here the clouds converge and mist falls and general miasma overtakes the public brain.
What ‘issue’, exactly?
It seems that Jesse thought that the ‘parties in conflict’— the Israelis and the Palestinians — ought to negotiate their differences directly with each other.
It seems that Jesse thought that the Palestinian people should have somewhere other than atrocious ‘refugee camps’ to live.
It seems that Jesse thought that human rights do not lose their relevance whenever any of us decide we detest somebody else.
Every one of these ideas occupies a commonplace status within the fiercely divided community of Israel itself.
In New York State where 25 per cent of the electorate is Black, where more than 40,000 Americans live homeless, where drug dealing and drug addiction terrorize every neighborhood, where bridges collapse and subways defy your tolerance for filth, and where public schools fail to keep most of their students and also fail to teach the ones who stay, what was ‘the issue of Israel’?
The media made it happen.
Television and newspaper commentators never tired of raising ‘the key question’, as they were pleased to term it: what was Jackson's relationship to the Jews?
According to the media, this was not only ‘the key question’, this was the sole question for examination.
And then, New York City's Mayor, Edward Koch, saved the ugly day: ‘Jews Would Be Crazy To Vote For Jackson’, he declared.
And, having determined the question, the media now brandished ‘the answer’.
On Page One, at the top of the TV news, the fight for the Democratic Party's nomination for the Presidency of the United States had become a media-induced fight between two minorities: Jews and Blacks.
As they say in New York, ‘very nice’.
Within this inflamed, special-case scenario of New York and Democratic Primaries, on April 19, 1988, Jesse took New York City and virtually all of New York's Black and Hispanic vote.
He did not win the Jewish vote.
And he lost the state.
If he had taken New York State, Jackson's nomination by the Democratic Party would have been assured.
It was that close.
He had almost made it.
And nobody knew how close Jackson had come to changing American history better than his most devoted enemies.
With no money, and no Democratic Party support remotely proportional to his demonstrated ‘electability’, Jesse Jackson had emerged the most familiar, popular and small ‘d’ democratic candidate in the public mind and eye.
But New York had cost him the Democratic Party's nomination.
The rest is not history.
America is not the same old anything it was prior to the 1988 leadership of Jesse Jackson.
The reasons for a Third American Revolution have not gone away.
The needs of all the Americans who propelled Jackson to the front of our own uprising have not been met.
Our distinctively humane values have neither been erased from our hearts nor honored by those who scramble to maintain power over our lives.
New York is not the USA: we persist, neither stupid nor satisfied.
And we have not lost the war.
Jackson has transformed the nature and the substance of acceptable political discourse in America.
Even President George Bush will struggle to enunciate metaphors about ‘a thousand points of light’ while his narrow eyes sting and water from his own rhetoric about ‘a kinder, gentler nation’.
And the keynote speaker at the Republican Convention, Thomas Kean, Governor of New Jersey, apparently felt it necessary to assert that ‘we will search out bigotry and racism — we will drag it into the sunshine of understanding and make it wither and die’.
And as for those millions and millions of us who chose Jesse Jackson as our candidate, we would have to be deaf, dumb and blind not to notice how much we scared the currently powerful.
Literally, we scared them to death!
The New Order
Informal workers are playing a key role in the return to pre-1930s labour relations in the West.
Walter Johnson traces how this has come about — and who benefits.
Two middle-aged women are busily spraying and scrubbing the telephone booth as I approach.
‘We'll be finished in a minute’, one says apologetically, and quickly gathers up her paper towels and Windex.
Later I mention this encounter to an old friend who just happens to be a former service supervisor for the phone company.
‘We're not going to pay skilled workers $18 an hour to clean phone booth’, he says to me in an aggressive tone of voice.
‘We have to cut costs or we won't be able to remain competitive.’
The fact that my innocent inquiry had provoked such a defensive, almost hostile response got me thinking about what has been happening to the labour force since the mid-1970s.
It goes under a variety of names such as sub-contracting, contracting-out, out-sourcing, cost-cutting, but whatever the favoured euphemism the end result is the same: the substitution of cheap labour for previously expensive labour.
Certain sectors are more vulnerable to this process than others.
Service occupations such as janitorial work, trucking, cafeteria and security operations are prime targets but increasingly such construction crafts as carpentry, plumbing, masonry, painting, electrical, sheet metal and iron trade works are also affected.
The reasons are not hard to discern.
A unionized plumber expects to earn anywhere from $18 to $30 for an hour's work changing faucet washers.
A handyman from the informal sector will do the same job for less than $6.
Unions don't like it but consumers aren't concerned.
They feel pinched by rising costs in repairs and housing.
Appeal to labour solidarity won't wash either when most of the labour force is non-unionized, many of whom earn only a pittance in the secondary labour market.
Union workers are often viewed as privileged ‘fat cats’ by the growing number of unemployed and underemployed part-time workers.
The trend is not limited to the individual consumer.
Private corporations and government are also getting into the act.
In the province of Saskatchewan, the government recently passed an act to repeal a section of the labour code which prohibited unionized companies from setting up non-unionized spin-off companies.
Within a year of this change virtually every unionized contractor had established spin-off companies.
As a result of this ‘double-breasting’ private sector, construction workers who belong to trade unions have increasingly been shut out of employment.
Similar government actions have occurred in Alberta and British Columbia where even public works projects are contracted out to private sector firms unencumbered with unionized government employees.
In this case, the rationale for contracting-out is ‘privatization’, one of the code words to describe the neo-conservative agenda of the 1980s.
The logic is clear and has roots that go back as far as Adam Smith, the father of economic liberalism or free market capitalism.
In the classical liberal view trade unions, like business monopolies, are impediments to competition among producers in the free marketplace.
Adam Smith believed that competition among capitalists would give the public the opportunity to compare the quality and prices of goods, so that producers who were inefficient or who charged excessive prices would be put out of business.
However, a ‘perfectly competitive market’ could only exist as long as no one individual or group of individuals could influence prices.
If a group of workers combined in an association of union and tried to set wages above their ‘natural’ level, their actions amounted to ‘a conspiracy in restraint of trade’since the price level of goods would be artificially distorted and the competitive market undermined.
To his credit, Adam Smith, unlike the ‘neo-conservatives’ who invoke his name today, saw the real danger coming from businessmen who would pool their power to regulate prices and output to their own advantage.
Thus Smith wrote that ‘people in the same trade seldom meet together but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public.’
The opposition to business monopolies has always been more muted than the opposition to labour monopolies, which businessmen and women have vociferously denounced as the root of all evil.
Since the owners of capital have always had, and continue to have, the ear of government it is their views which prevail in the legislative sphere.
It was left to Karl Marx to strip away the veil of capitalist ideology and reveal the wage system and the ‘free labour market’ as nothing more than the domination of one class over another.
Marx assumed that the capitalist has access to power because of his position as owner of the ‘means of production’ and therefore ‘buyer’of workers' services.
The worker, in contrast, has only his labour to sell and receives only wages in return.
Because of his superior position the capitalist can take advantage of the worker by speeding up the work process, extending the working day, or even displacing him with machinery.
Furthermore, the power of the owner is backed by the political authorities who pass legislation favouring private property and management's rights.
Workers really didn't need Marx to figure out the consequences of this inequality in the distribution of power.
Many attempted to organize unions to ‘take wages out of competition’, limit the length of the working day and gain some security from arbitrary dismissals based on the whim of an employer.
Apart from certain skilled trades, the attempt to unionize was an uphill battle for most workers until the Great Depression of the 30s.
It was only after the failure of the economic system had undermined the free market ethos that unions finally gained legitimacy, if not acceptance, and largely because of government legislation giving workers the right to form unions and engage in collective bargaining.
Trade unions became an important part of the Keynesian neo-capitalist revolution which prompted government intervention in the economy to overcome the inability of an unregulated free market economy to grow adequately or to distribute income fairly.
For 20 years after World War Two it seemed possible that the dog eat dog ‘survival of the fittest’ brand of free market capitalism had been supplanted by a social contract between employers and workers, with only occasional mediation by the state.
But by the mid-1960s it had become evident that the post-war promise of unlimited prosperity and the reduction of class conflict was illusory.
Increased competition in the international economy put the squeeze on North American and Western European producers and forced them to cut costs and improve productivity.
Sub-contracting or contracting out was but one of a number of cost-cutting strategies.
Others included speeding up the work process, automation, the increased reliance on part-time workers and female workers, and the lowering of pollution controls and safety standards.
Government also jumped on the bandwagon, first with wage restraint policies and later with restrictive monetary policies to reduce inflationary pressures.
Large scale unemployment was deliberately generated as marginal firms could no longer find credit and went bankrupt.
The resulting fall in demand also forced other companies to trim back production and lay off workers.
This resulted in downward pressure on wages as many workers competed for scarce jobs.
The threat of unemployment also moderated the wage demands of those who still held jobs.
The purpose and the consequence of this policy was to dampen the expectations of workers, weaken the power of organized labour and restore competition to the labour market.
The growth of the informal sector allows this process of ‘privatization’ to continue in a period of ‘recovery’.
Business people can argue that the ‘realities’ of the new competitive marketplace prevent them from being burdened again with expensive labour contracts, health and safety regulations and pollution controls.
To adequately deal with the rise in the informal sector and the return of the competitive labour market, organized labour would have to start asking some fundamental questions about the distribution of wealth and power in capitalist societies.
Unions are at a disadvantage here because the legal framework which established workers' rights to form unions and engage in collective bargaining was essentially created by government.
To gain recognition unions had to accept the logic and rules of the capitalist system.
As a result of the legal constraints on established unions, their response to the growth of the informal sector has often been narrowly defensive.
Questions which were abandoned in the complacent post-war era — such as who controls the production process, for what purpose and for whose benefit — must once again be raised.
The alternative is an increasingly fragmented and isolated working population open to the same types of abuse which characterized an earlier era of unbridled free market capitalism.
AN URGENT MESSAGE FROM NEW INTERNATIONALIST TO ITS READERS
ARE YOU BACKING A RETURN TO THE KILLING FIELDS?
In the 1970s more than one million Cambodians died at the hands of the Khmer Rouge led by Pol Pot.
Now Pol Pot is poised to return to power.
You might expect the governments of democratic countries to be horrified by this prospect; but no.
Most Western governments are actually helping Pol Pot by giving diplomatic support to the Khmer Rouge-dominated coalition at the United Nations (UN Resolution 44/22 passed on 16 November, 1989).
That is not all.
The United Nations feeds Khmer Rouge soldiers in the refugee camps they use as bases.
And the British SAS has helped train troops fighting alongside the Khmer Rouge.
What is going on?
Ask the question!
And demand change!
What is your country doing to prevent Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge returning to power?
Don't be fobbed off by meaningless answers from politicians.
If you do not get a satisfactory answer ask and ask again until you do.
You can also contact Oxfam UK (274 Banbury Road, Oxford, OX2 7DZ) and get their Cambodia Information Pack which will give you background on the situation and advice on what questions to ask evasive politicians.
Persist!
The fate of seven million Cambodians is at stake.
They have a right to survive.
If the British Government is supporting murderers you have the right to know why.
Write to the following:
Your MP
The Prime Minister
The Foreign Secretary
Send a copy to the Leader of the Opposition.
PLEASE DO IT NOW!
Your letter could save lives.
Spotlight on the shadow
The Soviet Union's massive ‘second economy’ is as legendary as the food queues and half empty shops which cause it.
What's new is that the problem is now openly discussed.
But is this ‘creeping capitalism’ a bad thing for ordinary Russians?
K.S. Karol turns up a few stones — and discovers what wriggles underneath.
A waitress in a provincial railway station buffet declares to her lover, a long distance train ticket collector, that she doesn't love him anymore.
There is another man in her life, she says.
‘It doesn't matter,’ he replies and goes on to ask her to take care of two suitcases full of Austrian shoes he has brought with him with the intention of selling on the black market.
‘But you don't understand,’ she persists.
It's all over between us.
The suitcases too.’
‘You must be mad!’ exclaims the stunned ticket collector.
‘You don't imagine that you can live on the 40 roubles of your salary, do you?’
The Moscow cinema-goers watching this sequence from Eldar Riazanov's A Station for Two broke into knowing laughter.
In a society where everyone must supplement their income in whatever way they can, you have to be very noble to renounce, even for love, a comfortable, clandestine source of income.
That was when I visited the Soviet Union in 1984.
Today, thanks to the glasnost — or openness — introduced by Mikhail Gorbatchev the problems of the Soviet shadow economy are no longer just the subject of gentle irony in feature films.
They are being tackled head-on both in the popular press and Communist Party theoretical journals.
Pravda is full of letters denouncing ‘profiteers’, while writers in more analytical magazines like Kommunist are engaged in a troubled search for solutions.
What then is this second economy which has grown so massively in the shadow of one that the state has planned and controlled for decades?
According to an old Russian joke, socialism in the Soviet Union is characterized by five paradoxes.
The first is that everyone has work but no one really works.
The second: no one really works but the targets are always met or even exceeded.
The third: the targets are met or exceeded but one does not see the results in the shops.
The fourth: the shops are half-empty but everyone finds enough to eat and clothe themselves with.
The fifth: people work little, can eat and dress properly but no one is happy.
Already at the end of the Breshnev era —in the early 1980s — Russian sociologist Tatiana Zaslavskaia was saying in a report which filtered through to the West that despite its planned and ordered appearance the Soviet economy was in fact developing in a spontaneous fashion.
This was provoking strong social inequalities.
Today, as one of Gorbachev's advisers, she goes further to say that it has led to the formation of social groups with diverging interests and destroyed the rational relationship, however slight, that existed between work and money.
The state has found that the bait of higher wages in the official sector has lost its appeal as Russians can make more money by working in the shadow economy.
Official studies show that 70 per cent of Soviets estimate that they are not working to their full capacity, only nine per cent aspire to posts with greater responsibility, while 13 per cent actually prefer jobs with less responsibility, even if they are less well paid.
For there is always their second job and a taxing official post might take up too much time and energy.
One recent change has been among the so-called shabashniki.
A Russian worker, on finishing his or her day's work will usually exclaim shabash!—‘it's done’.
After this he or she might do supplementary work, at higher rates of pay, for private individuals who need their apartment painted or television repaired.
But today the practice is rapidly departing from its original definition.
In many cases the shabashniki have abandoned their official jobs and are organized into independent teams who no longer do work for private individuals but work virtually as ‘troubleshooters’ for public concerns which have run into problems.
‘Do you want to build a hangar or a silo or a workshop?
Well, pay us each 1,000 roubles a month and you will get it built within the time limit you specify,’ is the line these days.
Meanwhile, workers in the official sector, doing the same job, will earn barely 200 roubles a month.
The legal status of the shabashniki is doubtful as in the USSR each person is supposed to have a fixed job and organizations clearly don't have the right to pay some people five times as much as others for the same work.
Nevertheless, there is no question of clamping down on the private shabashniki because they provide a valuable service, especially in the construction industry, which costs the state nothing.
The lot of these workers is far from rosey, however.
Ineligible for social security, they have to be entirely self-reliant.
Often they have to work 12 hours a day to fulfil contracts.
And despite their higher incomes, they rarely become rich because their activities are limited to the few months during the year when the climate is favourable for construction work.
It's another story when it comes to their managers.
These organize the workers into teams, get the contracts, control the funds — and generally make a packet.
Concern about this has recently come through the pages of Izviestia — the official government newspaper.
Although clearly at odds with the ‘socialist’ economy, all this is chicken-feed compared with a far more serious problem — nietroudovyie dokhody — or ‘unearned income’— as it is euphemistically called.
This is basically the way in which state bureaucrats use — or abuse — state subsidies on essential items to line their own pockets.
Subsidies in the USSR are colossal.
Just those on meat and milk — 40-50 million roubles per year — are the equivalent of one month's salary for the entire working population of the Soviet Union.
It is the same for bread, certain clothes and a whole range of other goods sold through ordinary shops.
Public transport is also cheap.
Through subsidies the state has established a vast ‘social salary’ to make life easier for workers and it takes a pride in the extensiveness of the welfare system that has developed from this.
So far, so good.
What complicates things, though, is the existence within the official economy of several different kinds of shops.
Besides the ordinary shops accessible to anyone — selling subsidized goods but often with bare shelves — are the ‘commercial’ shops only for those who can afford it.
Here items in short supply are sold at inflated prices — but still generally lower than on the black market.
Most iniquitous of all are the notorious ‘closed’ shops where everything is sold cheaply but which can only be used by the privileged state bureaucrats.
These elite customers can — and do — make fabulous profits by buying goods from ‘closed’ shops and selling to ‘commercial shops’or even directly to the shadow economy, where the non-privileged are forced to shop because they can't find the goods they want in the ordinary shops.
Such transactions are illegal but the authorities, during the long Breshnev era, did not concern themselves too much with this kind of illegality, allowing the ruling class to radically improve its material situation, even become rich.
Despite vigorous public criticism of the ‘closed’ shops, they continue to operate.
Moreover, rich Soviets whatever the origins of their fortunes, do not hide their wealth.
Nor do they hesitate to make use of it to promote their offspring, generally referred to as the zolotyie dietki — or golden youth.
But with perestroika — or ‘reconstruction’— Gorbatchev and his team are proposing ‘to make one rouble equal for all’.
This would imply doing away with the ‘closed’ shop system.
Reform will have to come in stages, though.
While scrapping the subsidies would hit state bureaucrats abusing the system it would hit even harder the less privileged people who benefit from cheap prices for essential items in ordinary shops.
The fact that the shadow economy is coming into the spotlight of open publicity is encouraging.
And for Gorbatchev, at any rate, this is a key factor in the policy of reform.
LEISURE
Home.
Recreation.
Entertainment.
Family.
Fun.
So where the hell iseveryone?
A note on the kitchen table.
‘Back late.
Alice gone to gig.
Henry staying the night with chum Bertie.
Look in freezer.
Love Beth.’
Fred opens a can of beer, switches on the TV, groans as he slumps over the sofa and looks at the paint peeling off the ceiling.
Free time for sale
In the West, leisure is becoming more important than work.
Geoff Mulgan and Ken Worpole consider the implications for Alice and Henry.
Free time is what people are left with once there is food in their stomachs, a roof over their heads, security for their families and all the bills have been paid.
Alice and Henry will have plenty of it.
Fred and Beth haven't done so badly either.
But what is it for?
Until recently this has never been a problem for Fred and Beth.
‘Politics’ of one kind or another occupied almost all their time between work and bed.
But by the time their financial worries were over their political options seemed to be over too; starting new relationships looked easier than the tortuous process of political realignment.
Free time now means catching up with the things they have missed out on in the past: novels by Michael Moorcock and Toni Morrison, the new Australian cinema, opera cassettes borrowed from the public library, gardening and fishing, weekend trips to the landscapes of their respective childhoods.
They are painting in the gaps of a ‘fuller’ life which was defined originally by nineteenth century European humanist culture: work, self-education, rest and occasional play.
But for Alice and Henry this will no longer be an option.
For them free time is likely to be more important than work itself.
Yet for most of human history people have defined themselves by work.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread says the Old Testament; salvation through hard work go the Protestant ethic and the rigidities of the New Right; labour power, how nature is tamed and society transformed, argues Marxism.
Often people's very names declare past occupations; Smiths, Bakers, Shumachers, Taylors, Millers, Shepherds and Thatchers.
Occupation always defined class and class defined social consciousness and status.
The world of meaning and self-definition seemed rooted in work: hard, physical, diurnal work; fetching and carrying, growing and feeding, making and breaking, communicating and transforming, ordering and being ordered.
Housework, homework, work in fields, farms and factories.
Now, suddenly, in the affluent West, that world has possibly gone for ever.
Alice and Henry might live to be a hundred.
Neither of them will start work before the age of 25 and they will probably retire by 50.
They will pay other people to help bring up their children.
Their aging parents will be looked after in private homes.
Many pastoral and voluntary caring relationships are now bought and sold in the market place.
There will be lots of free time.
It has been computed that until recently in Western Europe the typical working life was 47 hours a week, 47 weeks a year for 47 years, totalling 103,823 hours in a lifetime.
Today this is more likely to be 37 hours a week, 37 weeks a year for 37 years, totalling 50,653 hours — less than half.
Conjuring trick
Much of this apparent reduction of paid labour has not in fact disappeared but simply been transferred to the unpaid domestic sphere.
For the hours spent in the self-service supermarket (where massive cuts in labour costs had been achieved) are now really work too, as is filling up your car with petrol, DIY activities like building new cupboards and painting the ceiling at home, laying concrete paths, mending the car, driving to work.
All these are jobs that in the past other people were paid to do but are now somehow part of ‘free time’.
It is a spectacularly successful conjuring trick that capitalism in the West has pulled off: with one hand cutting down on paid labour by encouraging people to regard the jobs that used to be done by other workers as new forms of leisure, whilst with the other hand establishing new (and more profitable) economic sectors around voluntary pastoral care, such as care for the elderly.
Yet Alice and Henry may feel that all the great stories have been told — all the utopian political experiments have come to nothing, even though most of them have been based on fables, myths, irrational dreams and lies.
Take religion, for example.
Fred and Beth have had to rebel against it (one brought up a Methodist, the other a Catholic).
They suffered years of guilt and dissimulation before they could announce their own agnosticism or adamant disbelief.
It is still a sore point with both grandparents that neither Alice nor Henry have been baptized.
Yet organized religion is already as remote from Alice's or Henry's life as paganism or human sacrifice.
They have been to church once, for Nan Arthur's funeral, and all they remember is the smell of dusty curtains and a dead mouse under the pews.
No golden cities and distant mountains echoing with thunder there.
Heaven and Hell not only hold no terrors or promises for them — they no longer even exist as figures of speech.
Che, Rudi and Kylie
And when the walls came tumbling down in Eastern Europe at the end of 1989 to reveal cowering and bitter populations, overflowing prisons and mental hospitals, ruthless armies of secret police and state informers, corrupt politicians and equality in misery only, they might have wondered how their parents could have given even a second thought to the self-evidently corrupt, ruthless and authoritarian appeal of the ideal of ‘World Communism’.
Where their parents once had posters of Che Guevara, James Connolly, Rudi Dutschke and Rosa Luxemburg on their walls, Alice and Henry have Kylie Minogue, Madonna and Nelson Mandela at Wembley.
There is a spirit of internationalism abroad again, it is true, but it has a solid bass line, a repetitive drum loop.
It is in the shops all round the world within two weeks of being recorded in Detroit and re-mixed in LA.
For the single greatest cultural movement of the twentieth century is the rise and global hegemony of black music.
Even as the century nears its end, this key fact has yet to be properly understood or acknowledged.
The musical forms that emerged out of the American black experience — gospel, blues, jazz initially; soul, funk, rock'n'roll, R&B, reggae, rap, House eventually — went on to become the dominant repertoire of popular music throughout the world, no matter how watered down.
When in the late 1980s that powerful musical expression was joined by African, Latin American and hundreds of varieties of indigenous folk music traditions around the world to form ‘World Music’, the process of globalization of popular culture seemed complete.
Other global forces are becoming evident too, not necessarily derived from popular experience.
The growth of world markets, to which the logic of capitalist development had to lead, has produced international brands of clothes, fast food chains, cigarettes, drinks, cars and advertising campaigns, culminating in what could be described as a ‘Club Class’ global, affluent lifestyle.
Saatchi and Saatchi, the world's largest advertising agency, claim that the French business executive driving a BMW car, flying TWA, wearing Italian clothes and banking with Citibank has more in common with an American counterpart leading the same lifestyle than with a Parisian neighbour who drives a moped and works on the Metro as a cleaner.
Global Eden
All of this leads Fred and Beth to worry that the fatal combination of an explosion of ‘free time’ with a booming global market in consumer goods and leisure industries will spell the death of their great utopian dream that they have cherished for so long — individual self-realization, mutuality in work and levelling out of global economic inequalities.
The historical process of transforming the world, making it a better place, recovering a pre-lapsarian global Eden in its pristine simplicity, will end up with people selling it to each other by the dollar, pound or yen.
Alice and Henry will probably see it differently.
Alice can already see the link between the internationalism of popular music and political concerns — Live Aid, Band Aid, the Nelson Mandela Concert — superseding that of earlier internationalism based on revolutionary social class or a proselytizing religion.
New and intermediate technology seem to be on Fred's children's side.
All they lack now is the levers of power.
Consumer power (the power of free time, choices of spending) rather than producer power (the power of work and the threat of its withdrawal) is their main weapon now.
But will it be enough?
Buying Nicaraguan coffee, ecological soap powder and non-animal-tested make-up from the local Health Food store doesn't seem likely to bring the world to heel or alter the balance of world economic power.
Consumerism has all too evident limits.
Retailing and tourism can't salvage an ailing economy.
You still need food, energy, shelter and transport, however advanced your society.
The ownership and control of these things explains a lot about the way the world still works.
The crisis in the Gulf in the autumn of 1990 reveals once more how heavily the Western lifestyle rests on its ability to buy cheap commodities, backing up the rights of the sovereign consumer with gunboats (or F-111s) where necessary.
Freedom and self-determination for a small country only seem to count when they go along with the freedom to drive large cars and the freedom to consume.
The crisis shows something else — the vulnerability of our economies and lifestyles, and the free time they sustain.
Maybe the age of leisure will turn out to be a brief and unsustainable interlude rather than a new dawn after all.
’ I lie awake and feel the shame of being barren’
MAIMUNA, KENYA
I was 14 when I married.
At first I thought I could not have children because of my age.
But then people started talking, whispering behind their hands when they saw me.
My husband blamed me and said I was infertile.
I cried a lot in those days.
I would lie awake at night and feel the shame of being barren.
It took time for me to accept it.
I would go over it again and again: how could I hold my head up when I am not a full woman?
My husband was so angry: men have to father many children, to show they are strong.
Sometimes he used to hit me, tell me I was worthless.
Sometimes I look at the other women, see one with a baby on her knee, then a little child runs up and tells her something that makes her laugh…
But my husband just refuses to discuss it.
The last time we spoke of it, about five months ago, he just lost his temper and started shouting at me, saying it was my fault.
Now his family are telling him he should divorce me.
They think I am just a burden and they want grandchildren to look after them when they get old.
They tell him to take another wife.
But if he does that, things will be even harder for me.
If his new wife has a child I will become like a servant.
Everyone will order me around and I will just have to smile and do as they say or they will not look after me when I am an old woman.
Most people want many sons because they carry on the family line and that means our clan can claim more land.
But I would have liked daughters because they can help me best in my work.
At the moment I have to do everything by myself: planting and weeding the rice, looking after the bananas, coconuts and sweet potatoes.
If I had a son he would look after the goats and go fishing with my husband.
But girls are a bigger help to a woman.
Even at five or six years old they can look after the smaller ones and start fetching water and firewood.
I wish I could go to the doctor with my husband.
But he just loses his temper and refuses to come, so now I daren't mention it.
But I want to know what is the matter.
My period comes every month, so I think I may have caught some illness from my husband.
You know, all men go out in the evenings — drinking and doing what they will.
You cannot trust them.
There are those in the village who say I am blessed not to have children, because they mean pain and work.
But the people who say that have many children, so how can they know of that other pain that I have?
SAY WRITE SCREAM
LANGUAGE LIVES
Peter Stalker investigates the dangerous world of words
Slave traders packaged their wares carefully.
They were not that concerned about the health of the merchandise; a certain amount of wastage was only to be expected.
What worried them more was the survival of their ships: there was a real danger the captives might rebel and overpower the crew.
Ankle leggings and nailed-down hatches performed most of the subjugation.
But the intelligent trader took extra precautions.
‘The safest Way,’(to avoid such rebellions) wrote William Smith in 1744, ‘is to trade with different Nations, on either Side of the River, and having some of every Sort on board, there will be no more liklihood of their succeeding than of finishing the Tower of Babel.’
If the captives could not speak the same language, reasoned the slavers, they were unlikely to organize effective opposition.
The slavers knew what their slaves were about to discover — that language is a form of power.
Without language human beings are cast adrift.
We all start out helpless.
Babies are weak and vulnerable in the face of huge shapes and loud noises that they can only dimly perceive.
The next 70 years or so are spent sorting out this confusion, deciding first what a face is and then putting a name to it in whatever language comes to hand — be it Thai or Zuni or Swahili or Spanish — or any of the other 4,000 odd languages that the world currently offers.
Human use of language is remarkably skillful.
Here you are, absorbing the NI at around 14,000 words an hour.
Pretty good going.
Exactly how you manage it is still a matter of some dispute.
Whether we get linguistic ability from our genes, or by imitating others or just from general intelligence is not known for sure.
By the time we are old enough to be surprised at our own cleverness we have forgotten how we acquired it.
We certainly achieve more than other animals.
A German researcher claims that the language of chickens has more than 30 different phrases.
But the average NI reader can manage more.
Sometimes much more.
You are likely to be using around 3,000 different words in daily speech and can probably recognize up to 50,000 others.
Using these in different combinations the number of phrases you could cope with is almost limitless.
You will be reasonably happy with all this; you overtook even the most intelligent chickens some time ago and moved smoothly into top gear, taking a fluency in English for granted.
It rarely lets you down.
Every morning the world pops up and the names for everyday objects seem as suitable as ever: bed, toothpaste, coffee, newspaper.
Yet language is nothing like as static as we think.
It is alive and ever changing, constantly in a state of flux — and often flowing away from us.
The vocabulary we have painstakingly acquired is steadily being eroded or expanded or taking on new and important meanings.
Take the fairly harmless word ‘job’(which used mean a temporary task).
It now has such favourable associations of secure wage-earning that we hardly bother to question it or look behind it.
A proposal to increase the number of people poisoning our rivers or those producing carcinogenic substances would not be too popular.
But a proposal to create jobs (in chemical or cigarette factories) causes us to shrug our shoulders and assent.
And correspondingly, not to have a job is highly unfavourable so people outside paid work are considered inferior.
It is almost as though the word job itself has acquired a life and purpose of its own over which we have lost control.
Some people however, are in danger of losing control not just of their words but their whole language.
In recent years there have been language conflicts in Spain, Wales, India and South Africa and more recently in the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia — as different ethnic groups have chosen the language they love as a rallying point.
There is the potential for much more conflict.
A study in 1971 found that of 132 political states only 12 were true nation-states in which everyone had the same native tongue.
And in 39 of the states there was a relatively unstable position where the largest ethnic group comprised less than half the population.
English-speakers are in a relatively privileged position — even if we do worry about the direction our language takes.
There are now at least 350 million of us.
And including second-language users as well as those less fluent there are at least a billion speakers worldwide.
English is used as an official language in 60 countries and is the main language of international business — over three quarters of the world's mail is written in it.
The only really significant inroad into the dominance of English in recent years has come from Spanish in the southern states of the US.
Much of this is a legacy of the British Empire.
Many states created by colonization were left with administrative boundaries within which the colonizer's language was the only common tongue.
In Africa, for example, probably only Somalia is linguistically homogeneous.
However in the post-colonial era, the dominance of English has been more due to the commercial power of the United States.
Faced with mutual incomprehension on one hand and linguistic imperialism on the other, there have been many attempts to introduce a standard world language.
Several hundred have been produced since the 18th century explorers brought more foreign languages into contact — and friction.
The most famous is Esperanto, the invention of a Pole, Ludwig Zamenhof who first published its principles in Russian in 1887.
Esperanto is Esperanto for ‘hopeful’.
Estimates of the number of fluent speakers vary, but there may be no more than a few hundred thousand.
The critical problem for Esperanto, as for any other artificial language, is that it is not really worth learning until a lot of already people speak it.
If you want to widen your conversational circle by 700 million or so, Mandarin Chinese is a much better bet.
And to understand airport signs in as many countries as possible then French is the best prospect.
It has special status in thirty countries — with Spanish next on the list at twenty.
Esperanto hasn't made it anywhere yet.
Zamenhof himself anticipated the problem.
He invited people to sign a declaration: ‘I, the undersigned, promise to learn (it) if it appears that 10 million people have given the same promise.’
Ingenious but unsuccessful to date.
Meanwhile English marches on.
It is the most promising ‘global language’ candidate, or at least the most likely to permeate other languages so thoroughly as to amount to the same thing.
English words, or words which English has adopted from other tongues, seem to be forming the basis of an international vocabulary.
There are few places in the world were you will not be understood if your conversation depends on words like hotel, dollar, passport, music, menu, steak, cinema or football.
The result is likely to be cultural homogeneity.
As languages disappear, so do their particular views of the world.
And the most distinctive languages are often the most vulnerable — those of native peoples.
European languages chop the world up into small and manageable units — often into nouns.
So work, which is a general aspect of life has become a thing — a ‘job’ and aspects of nature which in reality are continuous, like time and space, are named as a collection of small items like ‘minutes’of time, or ‘miles’of land.
And even when logically there can be no individual item we are tempted to invent one.
So we say that ‘it is raining’ when it is not at all clear what ‘it’is, or ‘the wind is blowing’when wind and blowing must necessarily be the same thing.
The languages of native peoples by contrast tend to take a much more holistic view of the universe — a view with which our own relatively recent conversion to a greener outlook struggles to recreate with words like ‘environment’.
Some of the early researchers took a pessimistic view of what we would lose with the disappearance of native languages.
US linguists Sapir and Whorf who investigated the Hopi Indian language in the 1930s believed it to be so distinctive as to represent an entirely different thought process.
They found, for example, that there were no forms in Hopi which corresponded to English tenses like past, present and future.
The Hopi did not seem to need any sense of time as a dimension.
The ‘Sapir-Whorf’ hypothesis was that the Hopi and an English-speaking physicist, say, would not be able to communicate because they were thinking in entirely different ways.
But they could describe the problem in English, which tends to reduce the force of the argument.
And it does always appear possible to translate from one language to another even if circumlocution is required.
Nevertheless the English language seems to find it easier to talk of events rather than processes — and that is the way that we tend to talk.
But do we talk this way because it is the way we think?
Or are thoughts shaped by words?
The connection between language and thought is difficult to unravel — thinking about thinking has perplexed philosophers for millennia.
But there are strands which it is possible to follow.
Certain mental processes do not seem to use language — the emotional reaction to music, say, or the beauty of a landscape.
On the other hand we do quite frequently mutter to ourselves as we try to deduce something logically — or even if we don't make a sound we often use words in our head when trying to work out a complex problem.
Where do the words come from?
Generally they are passed from one generation to another.
But as individuals we develop our own language as we go along.
No two speakers of English (or any other language) have the entirely the same vocabulary or the same pronunciation.
And we will even have different sensitivities to the rules of grammar.
And we continue to expand our vocabulary — in some cases with completely new words.
A Dublin theatre manager called Daly made a bet back in 1791 that he could add a word to the language in one night.
The next morning a mysterious piece of graffiti — the word ‘quiz’— appeared all over the pavements and buildings of the city.
Daly won his bet — and the answer to the first quiz was where the word had come from.
Artificial names can also be applied to objects or even to countries.
Pakistan, for example, is an acronym constructed from its component parts: P for the Punjab; A for Afghan border; K for Kashmir; S for Sind.
The final ‘istan’ comes from Baluchistan.
But mostly we develop our language by analogy.
Babies probably start by seeing everyone as an aspect of their mother and call them ‘Mama’ or something very like it.
As adults we similarly cope with anything new by comparing it with something we already know about.
Take the word ‘shuttle’.
Nowadays you are likely to think that this involves transport moving backwards and forwards.
An 18th century mill-worker's wooden object zipping through a loom seems to have evolved into a vehicle of space travel.
This can hardly do much damage.
No-one is likely to confuse a weaver with an astronaut.
But there are many cases where the merging of meanings are more and we have to be on our guard.
Take the word ‘earn’.
My dictionary has three different meanings for this.
One is ‘to merit through behaviour or action’.
A second is ‘to be be paid for work or service’.
A third is to to be ‘paid interest’ on money.
Two or more of these individual meanings tend, however, to be mixed whenever we use the word.
Suppose now you read that ‘The Chairman of General Motors earns $500,000 a year’.
I would argue that the second meaning is the only appropriate one.
‘Earn’ in the sense of ‘merit’can hardly apply for this sort of sum — yet that implication is built into the language whether we like it or not.
We are constantly faced with such hidden confusions in huge quantities.
Millions of words are fired at us each day by politicians and journalists expressing their point of view, and by the advertising and public relations industries trying to sell us things.
And although we might challenge their right to run our lives we often let them run our language without a murmur.
The renaming of most ministries of ‘war’ around the world to ministries of ‘defence’is an obvious example.
This has not removed the danger of war but it has certainly perverted the concept of defence — there are few defence systems which are not actually war machines.
A similar loss has been the word ‘peace’ which is used by Eastern European countries in the most bizarre way.
If you read propaganda from the German Democratic Republic the Berlin Wall is called the ‘Wall of Peace’.
‘Peace’ is now just another kind of hostility and no-one has offered us a word for what peace used to mean.
A similar fate seems to have befallen ‘liberal’ which in the US today is synonymous with ‘left-wing’or even ‘enemy’.
When the British civil servant Sir Robert Armstrong struggled in the Spycatcher trial to deny that he had lied by claiming that he had been ‘economical with the truth’ he met with well-earned derision.
There was an almost audible sigh of relief around the world that someone had been caught tampering with the dictionary.
Most practitioners do it much more successfully.
The advertising industry is skilled in this kind of juggling.
Have you tried to buy a ‘small’ packet of anything recently — one that was not actually marked ‘standard’or ‘regular’or (heaven help us)‘fun size’?
We seem to be losing the word ‘small’ in any sense that is not pejorative.
And advertisers regularly manipulate grammar as well as words.
A familiar device is the floating comparative.
Ford once advertised one of their cars as being ‘700 per cent quieter’.
That sounds like a good thing.
But wait a minute.
700 per cent quieter than what?
Than all other cars?
Than some other car?
When pressed by the US Federal Trade Commission for an explanation they replied that it meant that the inside of the car was 700 per cent quieter than the outside.
Slaves shipped to the New World lost their languages in one sudden blow.
The disturbing picture on this month's front cover was taken in Haiti where the descendants of those slaves now speak a version of French.
But for most of us our native tongue is alive and constantly shifting.
If your eyesight is good you might look closely at that Haitian face on the cover between the lip and the chin (just above Samuel Johnson).
The phrase which begins ‘WORDS’ offers French writer Joseph Joubert's view of the responsibility we all share for the language we use.
Once it exploded with divine flavour — but no longer.
Sue Shaw charts the apple's spectacular fall from grace.
Faced with a horribly complex problem, do you: a) Panic? b) Go back to bed? c) Break the problem into pieces and look at them one at a time?
The first two options are tempting but the last is more productive.
Big questions are too difficult to understand unless we simplify them.
And looking at small things in detail can produce big truths.
Scientists, for example, map the human body by studying a single cell under a mega-microscope.
And William Blake dreamed of seeing the world in a grain of sand.
So what happens if we do something similar and look at the world through a single object — the humble apple, for instance?
Well not so humble actually.
The apple has suffered delusions of grandeur for centuries — ever since the Biblical legend of Adam and Eve reached north-west Europe and people assumed that the fruit on the Tree of Knowledge was an apple.
It seemed logical, because apple trees were among the most popular fruit trees.
The apple has never recovered.
One day it was just an edible fruit, and the next it was The Apple, star of one of the greatest dramas of all time: The Fall of Humankind.
Pretty impressive stuff?
It thought so.
Ambitious beyond the wildest dreams of the banana or the humble plum, it attempted to take over the world.
Today it has a pip in almost every pie from computers to cosmetics.
The Big Apple — as it likes to be known — is the symbol of the world's greatest metropolis, New York City.
Isaac Newton discovered gravity when he saw an apple fall to earth.
In women's magazines and educational material the apple conjures good food and health.
Even the Beatles used it to symbolize their vision of a more just world when they named their business Apple Corp.
The apple as symbol is all around us but most of us would still think of it first as a tasty snack.
Take a trip down to your local supermarket.
What do you see?
Temptation on a grand scale.
Things that our grandparents could not have even dreamed of.
Go on — excite your palate with a little of what you fancy: the soft, the sharp, the acid tang of novelty.
Avocado, pineapple, coconut and kiwi-fruit, water melon, lychees and other exotic delicacies — all flown from the furthest corners of the globe to quench our insatiable Western appetite for the unfamiliar.
And in the midst of them all are the blushing apples, pretty as you please, proclaiming themselves exotic — from Chile, South Africa or Israel.
Would you believe it?
This oldest and most common of Western fruits — grown since before the first word was written — now wants to be considered a speciality.
To this end it has settled in countries that a few hundred years ago barely knew of the apple's existence.
And with a little help from its friends, the big multinational companies and landowning farmers, it is spreading its roots.
But here is where even the everyday eating apple takes on a different meaning according to the context.
Take the Grabouw region of South Africa which produces 65 per cent of South Africa's apples and exported 250,000 tons to the European Community in 1989.
Many farmers in Grabouw own German sedans and have holiday homes by the sea.
To these people, the apple symbolizes money.
But what does the apple mean to the pickers as they stretch and bend, stretch and bend, dawn to dusk, for less than $19 a week?
Do they see temptation or trouble on the trees?
When their children scream hungrily from inside the damp, overcrowded, concrete houses is it money or mayhem that the apple conjures?
Does the apple tantalize or taunt when the labourer summons her courage to challenge the boss about conditions on the farm — only to be sacked?
That was the fate of the worker on the Anglo American farm estate Vergelegen, dismissed for asking his employers why he was not paid for a public holiday.
He had worked the same hours, on the same farm for nine years but he was paid as a casual labourer, and so had no right to a pension, to notice pay — not even to the right of appeal.
What was his reaction?
Did he tear an apple off the tree and smash it to the ground?
Or did he see it as a force for change?
To others in the farmlands of Grabouw the apple says ‘Organize, fight back,’ and the numbers of farm labourers joining unions are growing.
To Western anti-apartheid campaigners the apple has been saying, ‘Damn the racist apartheid system, boycott South African fruit,’ for at least a decade.
Boycotts and sanctions have bruised the South African fruit industry.
The closure of its US market knocked a hefty 17.5 per cent off South Africa's agricultural exports.
Some farmers have even improved their workers' conditions as a result: at least Westerners are giving Third World workers one small thing of value.
In other respects the influence of the Western apple buyer is less positive.
Take the thousands of Third World labourers who are poisoned every year by pesticides.
They are martyrs to the cause of producing perfect fruit and vegetables to meet consumer demand in the West —‘Have a nice day now’.
Farmers can't get off the pesticide treadmill.
As pests become ever more resistant to the chemicals, ever more chemicals need to be used.
Chemical companies may posture regret, but they have a vested interest in increasing Third World sales, as markets in industrialized countries are shrinking.
Thai farmers test the concentration of pesticide by tasting it, but why should the multinationals care?
They're into wealth not welfare.
And recently the Big Boys of business discovered where a lot more bucks can be found — in fruit and vegetable species, lurking among the genes.
Once there were thousands of varieties of apples just as there were multiple varieties of most plant foods.
Today many of them have vanished.
The apparent tempting diversity on the supermarket shelves actually means uniformity: Red Delicious, Golden Delicious, Granny Smith and more Red Delicious, made gaudy with lights and bagged in polythene.
You may choke on it but it screams ‘success’ to the multinationals.
These companies are buying up genes, storing them in gene banks and patenting them.
If you want to grow a new crop variety, you pay for the genes.
Genes might have been nature's gift in the past, but this is the economicaly mature late twentieth-century.
It makes good business sense in another way too — because it is now cheaper to make plants that fit the pesticide than to adapt the pesticide to fit the plants.
Get breeders to grow crops that can withstand the most vicious herbicide and you have a an ideal source of income: breeders buy more genes, farmers buy more pesticides.
You have to admit it's neat.
It's a sad comedown for the mighty apple: polished with wax to inhibit aging and sprayed with pesticide 16 times a year, it is turning into just another product of the global factory farm.
The rate of change makes it shudder on the branches of the trees where it stands to attention in its sterile, tightly packed commercial rows.
Why, just a few generations ago the grandparents of this trumped-up charlatan blossomed and grew in orchards that attracted humans and animals alike with the sweet scent of fruit as it hung from the boughs.
People, woodpeckers, nuthatches, tree-creepers and flycatchers, foxes and badgers, hedgehogs and other creatures all took sanctuary in orchards which were like symbols of harmony between human beings and nature.
Now all that is going, going, gone to the highest bidder — to the housing estates and industrial complexes, the big commercial farms and roads.
Human memory is short.
Soon it will forget that such orchards ever existed.
Perhaps it would have been better for the apple if it had never had ideas above its station, if it had never started carrying around so much symbolic baggage.
Before it met Eve and became a star, the apple was a humble fruit, a gift from the holy Tree of Life, which accumulated meaning in many cultures long before the Garden of Eden myth took shape.
People through the ages made images of the Tree of Life, as with the stone altar in Neolithic Malta with trees carved on all four sides.
The Bronze Age Sumerians made a ring seal revering both fruit and Tree together: a seated goddess and horned god stretch their hands towards fruit on the tree that grows between them.
Throughout the ages human beings turned to living trees for comfort.
Trees conjured up thoughts of immortality and the cyclical nature of time by their perpetual rhythm of birth, growth, decay and regeneration.
Over time the Tree — and its fruit — came to be understood as part of the sacred source of life, a manifestation of Mother Goddess, from whose body the whole world sprang and to which it would return.
In parts of Europe the apple tree became the noblest tree of all — the tree of immortality.
Most European cultures have their ancient apple myths.
There is, for instance, the Norwegian folk tale about an old woman called Misery, whose only possession is an apple tree to which things stick.
One day Father Death knocks on her door.
‘Of course I will come,’ says Misery, ‘but before I die, grant me this favour — fetch me one last apple from the tree.’
Father Death climbs the tree to gather a rosy apple but directly he touches the fruit he is caught.
For ten long years Misery leaves him there, during which time no-one in the village dies.
Finally she lets him down provided he allows her to live as long as she likes.
Father Death agrees.
And that is why Misery is alive in the world today.
The moral of the story might not be lost on today's Greens: that human beings create their own misery by betraying the gift of the apple tree — the gift of nature.
Happiness can only be theirs if they honour that gift.
Our ancient ancestors heard.
They begged forgiveness from the Mother Goddess and blessed the axe in a ritual of mourning before hacking down trees in autumn.
And they gave thanks when the first buds appeared in spring.
Some of these rituals we still practise today, though their meaning is only dimly remembered.
There is the old English custom of dancing around the Maypole to weave leaves back onto the bare branches.
Or the Christmas Tree which we light with candles and bedeck with gifts to announce the rebirth of the sun.
In parts of England people still worship Pomona, the Roman goddess of fruit trees, through the custom of wassailing which is intended to encourage a good crop of apples.
On Twelfth Night wassailers hang toasted bread on their most productive apple tree to attract the robins which are traditionally held to be good spirits.
Guns are shot into the branches to frighten away evil spirits.
Cider is poured over the roots of the tree and the wassailers circle the tree chanting:
Stand fast root, bear well top,
Pray God send us a howling good crop;
Every twig, apples big
Every bough, apples enou;
Hats full, caps full;
Full quarter sacks full.
This ritual comes from a time when the apple was recognized as a gift from something greater than ourselves — though by then she was only a minor goddess.
For gradually over thousands of years, the Mother Goddess who gave birth to all things had lost her power as people realized that men had a role in procreation.
Male gods were born.
And in some cultures the phallus even became the sacred source of worship, the sacred source of all that lived.
Enter Adam and Eve — and a star was born.
The apple shot to glory.
Or did it?
Bite into a shiny, red apple and taste insipid sponge.
Often picked by impoverished Third World workers, it appears on our supermarket shelves and our tables as a polished, insubstantial thing, available only in two or three varieties instead of in thousands, and grown at the expense of the environment.
With the apple we have tried to naturalize our exploitation of the world, to make oppression and degradation seem part of nature's plan.
But the apple is biting back.
Now it has become associated with appearances and money so that it is a symbol of exploitation itself.
Some of these are explored in the pages to come: computers which siphon even more power from the people who operate them; a dynamic but degraded city; a hippie alternative to capitalism which failed because it never really analysed the problem.
The way we are treating the apple serves as a metaphor for how we are treating our world.
And its spectacular fall from grace should serve as a warning.
Moonlit Money — The Shady World of Underground Work
It's everywhere.
Growing fast.
Hiding well.
But whose interests does it really serve?
Vanessa Baird investigates.
‘Can I have it in cash?’
The plumber smiles broadly as he gathers up his tools and delicately tip-toes between the pools of water.
‘To save me going to the bank, you understand.’
‘Of course’.
Of course.
A nod and a wink.
Making out, off-the-books is the order of the day.
It fits the mood of the times.
And complicity is appealing.
Maybe a few years ago people would have disapproved.
This is cheating the system after all; a system that has provided you with education, health care, roads, even the clean water which now lies in puddles on the kitchen floor.
But few complain nowadays.
You have to admire the ones with the guts to go it alone and make something of their lives when times are hard, even if the ways they do so are not strictly legal.
The right-wing romanticism of the ‘self-made man’ is back in fashion.
‘Self-made women’ you seem to hear less of.
Perhaps there is a clue here.
Women actually make up the bulk of underground workers in many countries.
But they are largely invisible.
That is until you knock on their doors.
Then there is a sudden rustling of materials, a hectic ordering of children and an opening of the door only a fraction.
Just enough to see a nose and one eye.
‘Oh, it's only you.’
She relaxes and opens the door wide.
‘I always imagine it's going to be a tax-inspector!’
A two-year-old is reaching excitedly out towards the hot soldering iron propped up against a saucer on the table.
Meanwhile piles of brightly coloured resisters are proving irresistible to the four-year-old.
There is a loud clatter as a stack of circuit boards comes tumbling down.
This is piecework and it pays next to nothing.
Of the 300,000 women estimated to be doing home-work in Britain today 72 per cent receive less than the legal minimum hourly wage, three quarters of those get 1 ($1.60) or less and some make as little as 20p (30 cents) an hour.
More perplexing is the fact that although she gets all her work from one firm and has no control over the quantity, this woman describes herself as ‘self-employed’.
It suits the firm which has cut costs by firing regular employees and putting out work to people like her.
This way the company doesn't have to pay national insurance contributions, worry about health and safety regulations, bother with sickness or holiday pay or any other statutory benefits.
And it also enjoys the magical flexibility of a workforce which is there when it is needed and simply vanishes when it isn't.
Dog-eat-dog
Something is horribly twisted here.
You have to ask yourself just whose interests this new ‘tolerance’ towards the underground economy is serving.
Who stands to benefit from a growing reservoir of divided unprotected workers?
And where is tax-dodging and myopic self-interest leading us?
Some say straight to where most countries in the Third World stand today, with their dog-eat-dog labour relations and ever-widening divide between rich and poor.
But attitudes towards underground or informal work have been changing in developing countries too.
On the face of it, this could only be a good thing.
After all, just ten years ago in Lima, Peru, police were engaged in violent battles with poor hawkers trying to scrape a living on the streets.
Similar things were happening in other countries.
To Third World governments, the presence of large numbers of people begging on the steps of bank buildings or roasting nuts outside five star hotels was an insult to the progressiveness of their new skyscraper cities.
And the poverty of these people was an all too visible accusing finger.
Nevertheless their energy and inventiveness were getting some development experts excited.
The kettle-out-of-tin-can-makers of Accra, the barefoot engineers of Bombay, and the hawkers of everything-under-the sun of Jakarta were showing flexibility and perhaps even salvation for the Third World poor.
But at that time, the early 1970s, most governments were having none of it; migrants, hawkers and barefoot business meant mess and that was that.
Repressive measures were, of course, ineffective.
The desperation that drives the rural poor to cities in the first place is not going to be quenched by water-cannon, police batons, or bulldozers crashing through shanty-towns.
The best the authorities could do was turn a blind eye.
But in Peru things took a turn in the early 1980s.
This was largely due to a new set of studies in Lima that revealed that the informal sector accounted for 60 per cent of all economic activity and was — apart from the cocaine trade and the gold rush in the jungle — the only growth sector in a sharply declining Peruvian economy.
Politicians sat up and listened.
Conservative Luis Percovich, then Interior Minister, went so far as to hail the barefoot business people as the harbingers of a ‘new Peru’.
Even World Bankers were saying they should be encouraged.
The Right had recognized the informal sector.
But why?
The studies had shown these suddenly visible ‘informals’ were at heart tiny capitalist individualists.
Their ideology was perfectly correct.
They were highly competitive, didn't belong to trade unions and lacked any notion of worker solidarity.
The benefits became clearer as companies, like the multinational Philips, fired their workers and contracted work out, often to the hundreds of small outfits that had sprung up in the surrounding Lima shanty towns of Villa El Salvador, Comas, or Independencia.
This enabled companies not only to cut costs but also by-pass awkward labour-protection laws introduced during the time of the left-wing military dictatorship.
Informal labour relations tend to be more exploitative than those within the legitimate economy.
Fly-by-night workshops only get contracts if they are prepared to do the work very cheaply.
If sweatshop bosses are to be competitive they must pay their workers low wages for long hours, cut corners on health and safety and forget about such niceties as job protection.
If there is a drop in demand the informal outfit has to carry the risks and absorb the shock of fluctuations in the market.
The only people who really benefit from this are the larger companies that enjoy the benefits of both an informal workforce and government grants, loans and subsidies.
The same thing is happening in industrialized nations.
Japan has taught much to the Western business world.
It has been in the sub-contracting game for so long that about a third of Toyota or Nissan cars are to varying degrees made by other smaller firms.
Italy is not far behind with companies that range from Fiat to the rapidly-growing fashion giant Benetton making use of women working in sweatshops or their own homes.
California's Silicon Valley, home of computer high-tech, has more PhDs per square mile than anywhere else in the world.
But it is heading for another record if the local newspapers are to be believed: that for sweatshops employing cheap, illegal, mainly female and immigrant workers who assemble the micro-electronics parts.
Space-age sweat
In fact, sweated labour is making a comeback in the industrialized world.
According to the New York Times it is very much a feature of the 1980s.
The rate of recent discoveries of sweatshops in France, Britain, Italy and other countries suggest it is not just a North American phenomenon.
Unpleasant though sweatshops may be, some argue, any work is better than no work.
Otherwise people would not do it.
If underground outfits had to go legal many of them would go bust, their profitability often lying in their clandestine nature.
So why not turn a blind eye to it in a world dogged by unemployment?
But you have to look at just what is being established here.
Sweated labour forces down the wages of all workers, whether underground or legal.
It directly threatens the poor in proper jobs and in the long term does not help the poor in underground jobs either.
Others argue that because informals often work for themselves they are freer from exploitation than wage labour workers.
This is something of a myth.
Seemingly independent casual workers are often far from being so.
Rubbish pickers on Mexican tips are controlled by garbage mafias.
Shoeshine boys in South Korea hand over 85 per cent of their earnings to the crime syndicates that house and feed them.
And even street vendors are often in the hold of middle-persons who are also their creditors.
For informal workers who genuinely do work for themselves the freedom of being your own boss does not often amount to much amid growing competition and soaring inflation.
There are distinct shades of Groucho Marx's:’ I have worked my way up from nothing to a state of extreme poverty’about the lot of most poor informals in Third World cities.
Political dilemma
Underground work is a tricky issue for all governments.
Its very existence arises from failures in established economic systems: in the West the failure to provide enough jobs for people to do and in the Soviet bloc the failure to provide enough goods for people to buy.
But it is ideologically and practically much more troublesome in centrally controlled economies.
The very scale of the shadow economy in the USSR — an estimated 20 million are involved — has forced Gorbachev to make some concessions.
Hairdressers, for instance, are permitted to work from home — providing they declare their income.
Thus petit-bourgeois underground work is being allowed to emerge in apparently harmless ways.
‘Creeping capitalism’ is getting an officially approved toe in the door.
But it will be harder to crack down on the really powerful and harmful culprits in the shadow economy — the state bureaucrats who use their privileged access to goods heavily subsidized by the state to make fat profits for themselves.
Underground activity generally causes fewer headaches in countries like the the US, UK, Canada and Australia where it is still under 15 per cent of all economic activity.
Its advantages may even outweigh its disadvantages.
After all, a government pursuing anti-inflationary policies that cause wide-scale unemployment can point to a thriving underground economy and claim that its policies are working and that jobless figures don't count.
This removes any duty to create employment and endorses a laisser-faire attitude.
‘You see, things will take care of themselves’
The biggest advantage though for the conservative administrations in Washington, Ottawa, Bonn and London is the fragmentation of labour and the divorcing of workers from traditionally powerful unions.
Far better that workers adopt an ‘I’ m all right Jack’mentality coupled with the chance to make a bit on the side than that they go on strike and make demands for higher wages in their main jobs.
Badly battered by anti-union legislation and low morale, trade unions have responded to the new threats coming from underground with the agility of a Leviathan.
The problem is that they still mainly represent those within formal work.
To be fair, some, like the Transport and General Workers Union in Britain, have launched campaigns to enlist part-timers and informal workers.
But it's not easy.
Many informal workers are either women or black or both.
These groups have no reason to feel that the white male-dominated unions have ever done much to serve their interests.
Action
One thing is certain.
Underground work is going to be with us for some time.
So what can be done to protect those who are being exploited?
In the developed world we need to crack down hard on workplaces that break health and safety regulations.
And there is much that local authorities can do to advise informal workers of their rights, tax and social security matters and to explain how to become legal.
Third World governments need to help the submerged economy emerge and gradually become a part of the official one.
This can be done in a number of ways (see page 12).
Making laws is not one of them.
Removing laws is.
Red tape and bureaucracy are the most frequently given reasons for people working underground.
But the most effective channel for change is underground workers themselves, organizing into groups or networks.
Improbable as it may seem this has actually happened with some success.
In Britain informal workers in London and the Midlands have got together to form ‘Outwork’ campaigns.
So have Mexican immigrants in North America.
In India the Self Employed Women's Association is a co-operative of informals with its own sickness benefit and welfare scheme.
While in Peru informal mini-bus and taxi drivers banded together to lobby the transport ministry.
The threat of a mass blockade by thousands of ramshackle vehicles proved to be an awesome bargaining weapon.
Finally it is essential to recognize that, for all its apparent freedom, informality is undemocratic.
It can indeed present a grave threat to democracy.
Colombia is the most dramatic example of what happens to a country where informal economic activity — in this case drugs — gets control.
The assassination of one justice minister who published a ‘black list’ of big names in the drugs business and the attempted assassination of his successor clearly illustrate the power of this underground lobby.
But there are other less openly undemocratic forces at work of which development agencies and other organizations wishing to promote the informal sector should be extremely wary.
Small enterprise schemes, such as helping to set up engineering workshops in the Third World, can look very attractive on the face of it.
But it is vital that supporting such ventures does not mean playing into the hands of the wrong people and so enabling exploitative interests to pluck the fruit of poor people's toil and initiative.
Dicing with Debt — The Third World Dilemma
Sue Shaw tells a detective story with a difference.
Mr Stevens stared.
The sun shone.
The Hilton Hotel towered indifferently against the Nairobi sky.
Large limousines cruised down wide roads.
And dozens of human beings floundered around the city rubbish tip, searching for food.
Some were barefoot, most were in rags.
And there were so many children.
Mr Stevens didn't even loosen his tie.
He just stood in the sunshine, transfixed.
He had sent a generous donation to the starving Ethiopians at Christmas.
But poverty had been just a word, an image on a screen — until now.
It stank.
Its very ordinariness stunned him.
A question bubbled from some remote corner of his brain, as uncomfortable as the children's sores.
He tried to forget it: in his hotel, at the dinner table, over the bar, but it would not go away.
He completed his business deal, hired a car and drove past coffee and sugar-cane plantations, to Kericho near Lake Victoria where the air was chilly and the fields emerald-green with tea bushes.
From the vehicle he watched women picking tea; gazed at their barefoot, pot-bellied children.
He had heard about the lack of hospitals, the lack of schools; heard that the same conditions exist throughout the Third World.
And the question that had troubled him in Nairobi swelled, until he stopped the car, wound down the window and with a curious naivete called: ‘Please tell me: why are the children here hungry?’
The elderly woman turned her head as far sideways as the basket strap permitted.
She eased the tea-carrier from her shoulders, lowering it heavily onto the red-dirt road.
Wiping her head with the back of her hand, she balanced herself on the basket-edge.
‘No money in tea,’ she said.
‘But we drink it all the time where I come from,’ protested Mr Stevens.
Shaking her head the old woman proffered a calloused palm, into which he deposited a shilling.’
The white men took away our land,’ she said tucking the coin down the front of her dirty dress, ‘And now there is nowhere left to grow maize.
I have to pick tea for money to buy food.
But there is no money in tea.’
‘Then you cannot be producing enough,’ Mr Stevens said.
The old woman shook her head.
‘When we grow more, we earn less.’
She stooped wearily to lift the basket.
Mr Stevens was puzzled.
He climbed out of the car to help her lift the load.
And watching her shamble away up the road, he stood in the sunshine and wondered.
Back home Stevens sneaked out of the office, to visit the local business library.
After scouring through several reports, he ran his forefinger down a column of figures and discovered the facts behind the old woman's plight: commodity prices are plunging.
Looking back over previous years, Mr Stevens found that the more poor countries produce, the less they earn.
Thailand increased its rubber exports by 31 per cent in the first half of 1985 compared with the same period the year before — yet its rubber revenues fell by eight per cent1.
One paragraph particularly intrigued him.
It read: ‘Not only is debt partly responsible for the slump in commodity prices; it also devours the money earned by Third World exports.
Many poor countries are so deeply in hock that they end up borrowing just to pay interest on their initial debts: the poorest people of the world are slaves to the banks.’
Wasn't the word ‘slaves’ a bit exaggerated?
Forgetting his appointment with a client, Stevens read on: ‘It all began in the 1970s when oil prices quadrupled.
The banks were stuffed with petro-dollars.
And Third World countries were desperate for money to fuel development.
It was a marriage of convenience: the loans came thick and fast.
‘Then interest rates unexpectedly rocketed.
After a long struggle, Mexico finally refused to pay: it was 1982 and the country had an 80-billion-dollar debt.
The largest US banks panicked.
They had nearly half their capital tied up in loans there.
Something had to be done.
Enter the International Monetary Fund.’
Stevens shut the book.
He had to go.
Hurrying back to the office he found the would-be client gone and his boss apoplectic.
But Stevens' curiosity was aroused.
How had the IMF made poor countries like Mexico pay up?
Next day after lunch, he told his secretary he was attending a meeting and made his way back to the library where he reopened the book.
The story went thus: The IMF developed a special austerity package.
This required governments to cut public spending and imports, and increase exports, in exchange for fresh loans, or extending old ones over longer periods.
Export or perish was the message received by 98 countries from the IMF between 1980 and 19852.
Very ingenious, thought Stevens.
It certainly ensured that the banks got paid.
But what did it mean in practice?
He remembered those pot-bellied children in Nairobi and he wanted the facts.
Deshelving half the library books, he discovered that in countries where the IMF operates, food prices rocket and wages are cut.
Preventable diseases and malnutrition are returning.
And unemployment soars.
Whoever benefits from Third World loans, it is the poor who pay the price…
Obsessed by poverty
The subject became an obsession.
He wanted to talk.
’ Mr Graham,’he said conversationally to the boss next day, ‘Do you think that IMF policies should be so stringent?’
‘Does this effect the Kenyan contract?’ asked Mr Graham sharply.
They were in the middle of a meeting and he was irritated that Stevens' mind — often his entire presence — had been elsewhere for weeks.
With forced patience he said: ‘If a country borrows money, it has to repay it and sometimes tightening its belt is the only way.
Now can we continue?’
Stevens surveyed Mr Graham's rotund figure as his boss briefly outlined the Kenyan project.
Graham could be right, Stevens thought doubtfully — in theory.
But in practice his own research had proved that IMF austerity programmes force Third World countries deeper into debt.
For one thing poor countries produce similar commodities, and encouraging them to increase their exports has flooded the market.
Moreover the West has developed cheap alternatives for most things they used to depend on the Third World for.
If poor countries want to compete, they must practically give their goods away.
Plus European markets are subsidizing their farmers to grow crops more cheaply than Third World producers possibly can.
No.
He couldn't agree.
‘What do you think, Stevens?’
Assuming Graham was referring to the IMF, Stevens began to explain.
Mr Graham glared at his junior.
‘Listen,’ he said crossly,’I'm as sorry for those people as the next guy but this country spends millions of dollars every year on overseas aid and expertise.
Now concentrate.’
Silence.
Stevens recognized Mr Graham's misapprehension.
The boss thought that the flow of cash (not to mention knowledge and culture) went all one way — from ‘us’ to ‘them’.
And he was wrong.
Over the next few days Stevens confirmed his hunch.
Around 20 per cent of loans to Third World countries have been spent on arms: the weapons go to poor countries, the money back to rich ones3.
The poorest Third World countries spend the largest proportions of their incomes on weapons.
And Stevens understood why, when he read about the 1986 food riots in Zambia.
These resulted from IMF policies that forced the price of maize to double virtually overnight.
If Third World countries are to tighten their belts, then their governments have to be prepared for trouble, because starving people get desperate.
Stevens also discovered that loan money finds its way ‘home’ through the building of extravagant, ill-conceived development projects.
These are often initiated on the advice of Western experts and require the importation of Western goods or services.
From hotels to dams — nothing but the glitziest technological monstrosities will do.
Brazil's purchase of nuclear reactors is a particularly nerve-wracking example which added up to 40 billion dollars to the national debt4.
Caught red-handed
Mr Graham coughed.
Hastily Stevens laid down his book on Third World debt and straightened his reclining chair.
Graham gritted his teeth.
He thrust Stevens the Kenyan dossier.
‘Isn't it time you stopped thinking about old debts and started winning some new contracts?
Third World governments have squandered their loans.’
Factually, Mr Graham was right, thought Stevens.
President Marcos increased the Philippine national debt from $2.7 billion to over $28 billion between 1972 and 1986 — slipping around $15 billion of it into his own bottomless purse5.
But the people who carry the can for Marcos and other corrupt Third World elites are the millions of ordinary, working poor.
Too often the governments that are most genuinely concerned are the ones refused Western aid.
Moreover Mr Graham forgot that the West actually benefits from stolen money — at least the banks do.
Literally billions have been smuggled out of Third World countries to Western banks, often in suitcases.
The ‘conservative’ estimate of one bank is that 55 billion dollars wafted northwards from Latin America between 1977 and 19836.
Many banks gained twice from a single loan — once in interest and again with deposits of stolen loan money.
Stevens bit his tongue.
He gazed floorward, then skyward to avoid Mr Graham's eye.
The vast reservoir of information he had acquired was bursting to be expressed.
He wrestled to control himself, but the faint hope of convincing Mr Graham propelled the words irrepressibly from his lips: ‘Actually,’ he said as his boss opened the door, ‘our banks have done rather well out of the debt crisis…’
Mr Graham spun round.
‘Oh yes,’ gabbled Stevens, ‘a few small banks were hit hard by ‘bad’loans.
Some even went bust.
But for the largest banks the whole business has meant big pickings…’
‘We are not here to sort out the world's problems!’
Mr Graham's face was puce.
‘Besides,’ he added ill-advisedly, ‘banks have been losing money hand over fist to the Third World.’
‘On the contrary,’ Stevens read from the book before him, ‘The profits at Banker's Trust shot up 66 per cent between 1982 and 1985.
At Chemical they went up 61 per cent and at Chase Manhattan by 84 per cent.
Shares in these banks rocketed, and the value of their stock went through the ceiling — in one case by 154 per cent7.
That is why the former chairman of Citicorp Bank, Walter Wriston said: ‘Our strategy is not one of making loans; our strategy is one of making money8.’
His victory was short-lived.
A curt letter of dismissal greeted Stevens next day, reminding him that there is a time and place to speak your mind.
So he worked out his notice, packed his bags and left.
Full of youthful optimism and his consuming interest in debt, he continued reading and applying for jobs.
But the weeks went by.
His job applications got nowhere.
And the mortgage payments began to bite.
Debt was hitting home.
Scraping rock bottom
After the sixth week of collecting welfare, he opened his post and received a letter containing — a credit card offer.
He laughed hysterically.
Credit offers are circulated from purchasable mailing lists just like any other commodity.
The US Bank of New Orleans once even sent credit cards to potential customers with ‘steady jobs’ who turned out to be inmates working in Angola State Prison!
After this, Stevens noticed loan possibilities everywhere: bank loans, hire purchase for clothes and cars, mortgages, credit unions.
Debt earns interest just as easily in the West as it does in the Third World.
And interest is what these businesses are all about.
As he rewrote his curricula vitae yet again, Stevens contemplated the prospect of his home being repossessed by the mortgage company.
He realized gloomily that individually, Western people suffer from debt just as Third World people do.
The difference between their debts and those of Third World countries however, is that while loan institutions can seize an individual's assets, they can't so easily reclaim a nuclear reactor or a dam.
In fact the threat of default by a Third World country could put the banks in a tight spot; which is why virtually all the big banks have recently started to keep money aside as ‘loan-loss’ provision.
This, combined with an unwillingness to lend more money to ‘high risk’ countries, considerably reduces their chances of running into trouble, although it does nothing to help the poorest nations.
He expanded this idea at his next job interview, and finally his obsession with debt paid off: the aid agency offered him a position.
Now he had all the time in the world to read and discuss the serious question: what can Third World countries do to alleviate their debt crisis?
Perhaps instead of competing with each other to sell their wares, Third World countries could get together and force the West to agree to a standard minimum price for commodity prices, like oil-producing countries did with OPEC.
He suggested this to a colleague, only to find it had been thought of before.
Of course many programmes of regional co-operation exist, but unlike oil most Third World commodities are no longer essential to the West.
However Stevens did have a point.
He argued it through: many developing countries have repaid their debts several times over in interest, but still the burden gets heavier.
They certainly have a legitimate case for refusing to pay.
So why don't they?
‘Individually a few have done,’ said his new colleague Sarah, ‘but they get squeezed back into line by the West.’
‘Squeezed?’
‘Reprisals: no more loans: the boycott of their goods — the West can plunge defaulting countries into total obscurity if it chooses.’
‘So why don't those countries get together and refuse to pay?’
Sarah sighed.
‘Western financial institutions operate a divide and rule policy: they strike sweetheart deals with individual governments which benefit Third World elites even though they harm the poor.
But,’ she added, ‘It's becoming obvious — even to the West — that something has to give.
And if Third World countries defaulted together, the very size of their combined debts could give them massive bargaining power.
So there is hope.’
Mr Stevens smiled.
Inside he felt a warm glow, relieved that at last he was getting some answers.
What he didn't realize however, was that the real questions had only just begun.
What progress has the human family made in the last two decades towards fulfilling the basic needs of its poorest members?
Peter Adamson and Chris Brazier report.
‘There are 1,500 million people on the planet without enough of the right kind of food to eat, or safe water to drink, or basic medical care.
And this situation is getting worse.
There are now more malnourished, sick, uneducated and unemployed people in the world than there were 10 years ago.’
That was how the first New Internationalist editorial began, back in March 1973, calling for a second front in rich countries that would help the people of the Third World in their war on poverty.
It asked people to join ‘a growing movement for action on the greatest issue of our times’.
What has happened since?
We all have some idea of the major events in the world over the 1970s and 1980s, though our lists would differ according to individual memory and perspective.
And most of us have a general sense that things are pretty gloomy for people in the Third World: we might remember that Sudanese women must walk hours in search of firewood, that Brazilian peasants are still going hungry, that children are dying all over the world of something as simple and easily treatable as diarrhoea.
But we all too rarely get a sense of movement, an understanding of whether things are getting better or worse.
This magazine as a whole attempts to provide some of that missing sense of movement by tracking down individual people that the NI once profiled to see what time has done to them.
They provide fragments of circumstantial evidence as to what we have done to the world in the last two decades.
But we also need the broad generalizations that help show whether we are closer to meeting the basic needs of all the world's people than we were at the start of the 1970s.
We need to seize the big picture.
The big picture
For most of the world's people, the 20 years from 1970 to 1990 can be broadly divided into two halves — two pictures which tell very different stories.
The 1970s began still full of optimism and confidence about world development.
The NI saw itself very clearly as part of a growing movement.
Western societies were still in the throes of an idealistic phase during which radical change seemed possible and very real social progress on the cards — the major advances in social legislation (the legalization of divorce, abortion, and homosexuality, for example) were all born in this age of this spirit.
And there was much the same spirit abroad in the movement for world development.
We had grasped the problem.
With commitment and amounts of cash that seemed paltry when compared with government defence budgets, that problem could be solved.
The recession of the 1970s hit developing countries even harder than rich ones — the shockwaves that rock the world economy always crash against the poorer nations with most violence.
And the gap between wealth and poverty was still alarmingly large.
But nevertheless genuine progress continued to be made across the board: people continued to get healthier, more literate and more educated.
Quite unexpectedly, the 1980s has been different.
The idealism about development is no longer there.
But, much worse, as the decade comes to a close, the development process has actually gone into reverse for large parts of the world.
In Asia there has been a semblance of continued progress: China and India have such huge internal markets that they are less dependent on the vagaries of the world economy; food production has continued booming; and many Asian countries have begun to compete successfully in some areas with the West.
But in Latin America, even the crudest indicators such as per capita GNP, or gross national product (which takes no account of wealth distribution) show that people's incomes have actually gone down in the last few years and their health, education and nutrition have gone down with them.
For Africa, meanwhile, the 1980s have been an almost unmitigated disaster.
There are three main reasons for this extraordinarily depressing decline: the debt crisis; the brutal ‘adjustment’ policies thrust upon poor countries by the international financial institutions of the rich; and the appalling decline in the commodity prices on which Third World countries depend.
Debt — the mountain above
Developing countries have been climbing hard throughout the 1980s, only to see the summit receding farther up beyond the clouds.
In the 1970s they were eagerly offered loans by Western banks suddenly awash with oil riches; in the 1980s the debt collectors have come knocking.
Put like that and you might think they had it coming.
Margaret Thatcher, for example, would remember her lessons in the grocery shop at her father's knee and conclude that developing countries were foolish and irresponsible to live beyond their means and borrow so much money.
But it's not that simple.
In the first place developing countries accepted the loans that were thrust at them because they believed what the West was telling them — that it would be possible for them to industrialize, to develop their economies to the point where paying back the loan later on would be an easy matter.
In that sense it was like any small business borrowing the capital it needs to expand and survive.
Except that there was no way Third World countries could develop that fast: there was room for no more than a handful of South Koreas or Singapores, ready to beat the West at its own game.
It would have been physically and economically impossible for the whole of Africa, for example, to twist and turn its way out of the straitjacket that colonialism imposed upon its economies and industrialize to the point where it could compete effectively on the world market in the space of 10 years.
Some government leaders may have made foolish and irresponsible decisions in wading deeper into debt — there is certainly no shortage of idiocy and corruption in Third World governments, any more than there is in those of the rich world (look at the current catalogue of woe in Japan's ruling circles).
But it is not the political elite which is now paying the price for any mistakes — it is the disease-ridden baby, the mother who starves herself to feed her children, the farmer without hope of land or work.
When the NI first began it had a series called Myth Exploders which challenged the popular misconceptions about the Third World and our relationship with it.
If that series were up and running today, one of the widely held myths it would have to counter would be the one which holds that our ‘generous’ overseas aid means money is flowing from the rich world to the poor.
In fact aid grants and new bank loans have, since 1984, been far outweighed by the amount Third World countries have given to the rich nations in interest repayments.
The South is now transferring at least $20 billion a year to the North.
If you add on the transfer of resources caused by rich countries paying much less for the poor world's raw materials, then the flow is more like $60 billion.
There can be no moral basis for this.
There can't even be any economic basis for it, since developing countries are so crippled by the weight of their debts that they are not going to offer the West the kind of expanding, healthy markets it craves unless that burden is lifted.
The UN predicts that a reduction of 30 per cent in the commercial debts of the 15 most indebted developing nations would result in a 25-per-cent increase in their national incomes over the next five years.
This would in turn lead to an increase in their demand for imports of $18 billion a year, one third of which would be spent in the US.
Adjustment — turning the screw
What is politely and euphemistically called ‘adjustment’ is the next piece in the jigsaw of a declining Third World.
This refers to the shock treatment applied by Western-dominated financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to the economies of developing countries so as to make them more efficient.
This sounds all very sensible until you realize what it means in human terms.
The IMF's ‘medicine’ involves cuts in food subsidies, wholesale cuts in public expenditure (including social expenditure such as health and education).
As many as 70 countries are currently ‘adjusting’ their economies in this way.
Many of them needed some kind of kick up the financial backside.
But the people who suffer, again, are the poor — the shanty-town dwellers who can afford less food because the subsidy has disappeared overnight; the rural villagers whose primary health post stands empty; the children who emulate the illiteracy and ignorance of their grandparents rather than their better educated parents.
We have grown used to some kind of safety net, extended beneath us in Western countries, even if for some of us the holes seem to be getting bigger by the day.
But imagine what it is to live in a country where there is no safety net, just a rubber mat to break your fall, and then even that is pulled out of the way.
This tumble is not just breaking limbs — it is breaking the spirit.
Commodities — the price of pain
The third presence in this Unholy Trinity of forces pulling the Third World downhill is the catastrophic decline in commodity prices during the 1980s.
The poor countries of the South have always depended on selling raw materials — anything from palm oil to iron ore — to the industrialized North.
Historically the North has then processed those raw materials into specialized products and then sold them them back to the South at a much greater price.
One of the great problems for the future is that rich countries are developing so many synthetic alternatives that they no longer have so much need of raw materials.
But developing countries are still dependent for all their foreign currency earnings upon the fluctuations of commodity prices on the world market.
When the NI began, non-oil commodity prices were actually at a rare high: they reached a post-war peak in 1974.
But then they tumbled the following year, crashing by 31 per cent when measured against the price of manufactured goods.
These peaks and troughs made it impossible for developing countries to plan ahead.
But worse was yet to come, since from the late 1970s onwards commodity prices have steadily declined, reaching their lowest level for 50 years in the middle of 1987.
Since then they have recovered — but only slightly, standing 30 per cent lower than they did in 1979.
The only way to bring figures like this alive is to be crude and personalize them.
These days pay negotiators in the West have one eye always on the retail price index — they broadly aim to secure wage increases at least equal to the rate of inflation.
Imagine then, how you would feel if your income had shrunk each year to the point where you could now buy little more than half what you could in 1970.
When Peter Adamson wrote the NI's first editorial back in 1973 he would have found it hard to believe that things could get much worse in the field of trade — but they have.
This Unholy Trinity of debt, adjustment and worsening terms of trade has started to reverse the progress made in Africa, Latin America and, to a much lesser extent, in Asia.
And it is attacking what we might call the Holy Trinity of development: health; education; and food.
Health — children betrayed
Seen over the whole period from 1960 to 1989 the human family has been becoming significantly healthier.
The length of life we can expect to enjoy has gone up markedly over that period and the number of children who die before the age of five in developing countries has been reduced by half.
This is a great achievement.
Of course the difference between rich and poor worlds in this respect is still enormous and obscene: at the extremes, 30 children in every hundred born in the West African country of Mali will die before the age of five, compared to just one in a hundred in Australia, Canada and the UK.
But the broad trend has been for this gap between the experience of rich and poor worlds to narrow (see the graph on Page 16).
The tragedy is, though, that this improvement is faltering badly.
Overall the rates are still coming down — but much more slowly in the late 1980s than in the decades before.
This is the Unholy Trinity at work again.
The overall world statistics always lag behind by two or three years but surveys of particular countries in Africa and Latin America are now showing clearly that the numbers of children who are malnourished or born with a dangerously low birth weight are increasing.
So too, in some cases, is the average weight per age of children under three.
Put like that, again, it is difficult to comprehend what a disaster this is.
But the development of a child's body and mind in the first three years of life is absolutely vital — any stunting of growth in these years cannot be made up for in later life.
This is the very last thing that should ever suffer in a time of recession or emergency when people's belts have to tighten.
Instead it has been one of the very first things to suffer — and that is the scandal of our age.
At a time when food and money are shorter, there is all the more need for adequate health care.
The NI has campaigned consistently over the years for more emphasis to be placed on primary health care than on expensive technological options — in other words for local people to be trained to combat the most basic diseases, as in China's revolutionary ‘barefoot doctor’ system.
We have hardly been alone in this.
Since the 1978 UN Conference on Health at Alma Ata it has become a universal wisdom that it is much more effective to build a primary health care network than to spend the same money on a few prestige hospitals which could only ever be used by an urban elite.
As a result there have been real achievements: hundreds of thousands of workers have been trained to work in rural areas and attack fatal conditions like dehydration from diarrhoea (still the main killer of young children worldwide) with the simplest and cheapest remedies.
But since 1985 governments have cut down drastically on the amount they are spending on health.
Clinics have closed down, essential drugs haven't been bought or distributed, health workers have been unpaid and had to revert to other ways of earning a living.
There are certainly fewer trained health workers in the field now than in 1985.
A classic case of a country with the wrong priorities in health is Congo.
There they had to cope with an IMF adjustment programme which involved savage public spending cuts.
That was not their fault.
But they chose to implement these cuts by destroying the primary health care programme while devoting almost 90 per cent of the health budget to just one high-tech teaching hospital in the capital.
Governments all over the world have advocated primary health care without taking it seriously.
They have treated it as a cheap option, giving workers a minimum training and offering them the minimum resources and telling them to get on with it — basically because that's good enough for the poor.
Meanwhile in the high-tech hospitals for the better-off it's been business as usual.
So the 1980s has seen a betrayal of primary health care at the very same time as more and more lip-service has been paid to the idea.
And thousands of people are dying as you read this as a result.
Education
The expansion in education in the 1960s and 1970s was phenomenal.
There were all kinds of problems: overcrowded classrooms, high drop-out rates, not enough girls going to school.
But overall the picture was fantastically encouraging.
Even in the poorest countries of all, there was a dramatic surge in the proportion of children receiving primary schooling: from just 30 per cent of boys and 14 per cent of girls in 1960 to 68 per cent of boys and 43 per cent of girls in the mid-1980s.
This encouraging trend arose from a tremendous idealism about education in the 1960s and early 1970s.
There was a real feeling that this was the key to development — this was the great crusade that was going to spirit newly independent Third World countries towards their prosperous destiny.
And it resulted in funds being channelled into education, in millions becoming literate, millions having at least four years at school.
The steam has completely gone out of that.
You meet nothing but apathy about education now, whether in the governments of the Third World or the aid-givers.
Partly that is because the people in power are primarily interested in the high-quality urban schools that their own children attend — and the best schools in Delhi or Nairobi are now the equal of any in the West.
But it is also because people in the Third World have realized that there are very few jobs available in which their children can use an education.
Back in the time of idealism it all seemed to connect: you trained more young people and the ‘educated’ sector of the economy would expand as a result.
But it hasn't happened.
So the impetus has gone, and with it the cash.
And when the bankers and the IMF come knocking, the education budget is one of the first to be hit.
According to the Director-General of UNESCO, Federico Mayor, in roughly one in five developing countries primary student numbers have actually started declining and in two out of every three developing countries expenditure per student has declined in real terms since 1980.
And that is disastrous.
Because education isn't only useful for those countries chasing an impossible dream of Western industrial development.
It gives peasants more control through literacy; teaches women about family planning and child nutrition.
It saves lives.
Food
In the area of food, at least, there has been some improvement: both Asia and Latin America now have food surpluses where before there were deficits.
India is the classic case of transformation in food production over the last two decades.
Back in the 1960s, and still to some extent in 1973 when the NI began, India was considered to be ripe for ruin.
Its population was expanding so fast that it seemed impossible that food production could keep pace with it.
Instead there has been a miraculous turnaround.
India in the 1980s has been exporting food.
Not only that but a drought in Maharashtra in 1987 and 1988, probably the most severe of the century in the subcontinent, has caused barely a ripple of news interest in the world.
The reason?
India coped with the resultant food shortage itself, without recourse to international food aid.
In the past there would have been a major famine; now they have simply called on their own 30-million-ton reserve of wheat.
This extra food production is the result of the Green Revolution, which has transformed agriculture in Asia and Latin America in the last 20 years.
The NI has always been concerned to point out what is wrong with the Green Revolution: that it favours richer farmers who can afford its high-yield seeds and extra fertiliser; that its ecological impact is worrying.
But we have probably not emphasized enough the obvious benefits it has brought about.
The food that India produces does not find its way to the people who need it as efficiently as it did in the Maharashtra drought.
Too often it is exported for foreign exchange while poor people without the money to buy it or the land to grow it go hungry: South Asia still contains the majority of the world's ‘absolute poor’.
But at least the food is there in a crisis — and is also there ready and waiting in the event that a government comes to power which is serious about getting food through to the poorest.
But the Green Revolution has not reached Africa and what were high hopes for that continent in the 1960s have now dissipated in both a series of chronic famines and a general food shortage.
There are all kinds of reasons for Africa's food problems — rich and precious land being used for cash crops instead of to grow food for local people; a much smaller proportion of land fertile enough for cultivation than is the case in Asia or Europe; farmers being paid such pathetic prices for food crops that they turn to coffee or tobacco in order to survive.
And the world is all too prone to assuming that a scientific solution can work a miracle.
But nevertheless if it were handled properly the high-yielding seeds of African maize, upland rice and cassava which are on the way could make a real difference.
Zimbabwe provides the model — and the lesson that Green Revolution techniques only really work when they are part of a total package that includes radical social reform alongside the free-market measures.
After independence in 1980, Zimbabwe's government placed a new priority on the three quarters of a million black farmers who had hitherto been neglected.
There was some land reform, redistributing large white estates among these black smallholders — though not by any means as much as might have been expected.
But the other changes have been both radical and far-sighted.
Loans to small farmers have been increased 25 times over; research and investment has gone into new seeds and fertilizers specially designed for the needs (and the purses) of the small farmer; and maize prices have gone up by 129 per cent so as to provide an incentive.
It is a total package, well-thought-out and administered — and it has paid dividends.
Zimbabwe has quadrupled its food production in the last decade and has proved not only that small farmers are vastly more effective than large landowners but also that Green-Revolution techniques can be harnessed to help the poor — provided the political will is there.
Looking at the story of food in Africa over the last two decades is a depressing business.
But Zimbabwe's example, together with the hope that new seeds might make a difference to humid parts of the continent in the first half of the 1990s (and to the Sahel in the second half of the decade), at least give us something to work for.
The overall picture is clear.
Development in the Third World has stalled, ground down by the relentless wheels of the global economic machine.
The 1990s could be different.
Western governments, and the populations that vote for them, have to be persuaded that it is in their own interests, quite apart from any considerations of common humanity, to start the reconstruction of the developing world.
The Unholy Trinity must be dismantled.
Realistically world leaders are not going to accept this, still less act on it.
But they might be forced to accept a reconstruction package by another route.
The NI has always been sceptical about the value of government-to-government overseas aid, which too easily finds its way into the pockets of an elite or is wasted on the wrong kind of project.
Aid is generally better given through voluntary agencies which are more sensitive to local needs.
But given those provisos a massive transfer of cash from rich to poor is still vitally necessary.
The closest moral and practical precedent for what is needed is the Marshall Plan by which the US helped to restore Europe in the years after the Second World War.
Then the US gave as much as two per cent of its gross national product every year to Europe.
Today, when US wealth is two-and-a-half times greater, it gives only 0.22 per cent of its gross national product in overseas aid.
If all industrialized countries were to increase their overseas aid to the 0.7 per cent of GNP recommended by the United Nations, it would cost an extra $50 billion a year.
That is a huge sum.
About as much as is spent on the military by those same countries every four weeks.
That is one of the NI's most famous phrases, which would be well worth updating and remembering every year.
The numbers change but the plight of the poor in the Third World is still the greatest issue of our times.
Space traveller Sue Shaw reports strange developments on Earth.
Here is a transcript of her narration to the Fourth InterGalactic Council, made in the Age of CKAMP
My vessel arrived on Earth during Christmas — the festival of glut.
This is the biggest religious celebration in the wealthy zones.
This human is a slave to the primitive religion of ‘more’.
Like millions of others, she thrives on excess.
It is the only god she knows.
Worshippers gaze reverently through temple windows, praying for offerings that adorn the altars to consumption; shiny shoes, gift-wrapped talcum powders, personal stereos, costumes and cars.
When the spirit moves them, they rush in to exchange.
Many dedicate their lives to worship.
They harvest currency by toiling silently before flickering screens, pressing keys like rosaries, or pushing papers ritually around office desks.
The monthly compensation-cheque is their ticket to salvation.
Ownership is all that many Believers understand.
They seek life's meaning in possessions, and use inanimate objects to tell other Earthlets who they are.
Strange and costly garments branded Gucci or Dior are worn to signal that humans have judgement, style and personality.
‘You are what you buy,’ is a common hymn.
And when they tire of their offerings, Believers throw them away to replace them with ‘better’ things.
Waste, for them, is an inevitable by-product of worship.
All over this world — in New York, Singapore, Hong Kong, London — Earthlets worship in the temples.
Their religion keeps the inter-zonal economy growing.
Consumption is demand; demand brings enterprisal growth; and growth provides the means for still more consumption.
The cycle is governed by a holy commandment: ‘Thou shalt consume to thy maximum capacity, according to thy means and the artifacts available.’
Humans have obeyed for generations — and in their millions.
First they satisfied their individual material needs for food and shelter.
Then they fulfilled needs fostered by each other.
‘If my neighbour buys a car,’ one typical consumer told me, ‘I buy a bigger one.
If she has a holiday, mine is more expensive.
Whatever she has or does, I try to stay ahead.
This brings me status.’
But the combined effect of this consumption for their private good, has damaged the public interest.
Breathing-gas is polluted.
Fish are dying.
The soil is impoverished.
Individuals possess conveyances to go to the country.
But the country is no longer fit to be enjoyed.
Fellow Councillors, this strange religion has smacked up against the limits of Earth's resources.
The cult is destroying the very planet upon which it depends.
But Earth Children are also changing.
They are realizing how small their world is — and that zonal actions have inter-zonal consequences.
This understanding has dawned slowly.
First they discovered that an atom-smashing war would have catastrophic effects — like planetary winter and the death of terrestrial cultivation.
Then humans inflicted a trail of environmental catastrophes on themselves — from a leak at ‘Bhopal’ chemical factory on the V-shaped landmass, to a nuclear-power-plant explosion in ‘Chernobyl’region.
Two reforming priets helped the process of realization: Brandt publicly declared that the world's poorest hemisphere was being destroyed; while Brundtland associated poverty, the energy crisis and planetary pollution with unbraked economic growth.
Earth Dwellers have now begun to grasp that they are tattering the ozone layer, which protects them from the harmful rays of their sun (star 4135 in our heavens).
Some humans have prophesied a global temperature rise of around three degrees centigrade by the year 2030 as a result of atmospheric contamination — and Councillors you have to smell this pollution yourselves to believe it!
Even Government high priests are uneasy.
Earthlets themselves have reacted variously.
Non-believers have created their own ‘Green’ sects which argue for negative economic growth.
But Believers as yet cannot praise this solution — though they have likewise despaired of waiting for political leaders to become planetary saviours.
They have prayed for new ways to effect transformation and green consumerism has been revealed to them.
Green consumerism encourages humans to consume in ways kindly to their planet.
It is an auspicious development, similar to the religious movement which marked the beginning of our own Green Age.
On Earth, progressive tabernacles called ethical investment schemes have been using currency to support social causes for some time.
And recently the radical sect Friends of the Earth campaigned against squirters or ‘aerosols’ containing ozone-damaging CFC gases, by persuading Believers to use CFC-free artifacts.
Eight of the biggest enterprisals agreed to stop making the offending items.
This gave Believers hope that things could change.
They started buying artifacts that they saw as environmentally benign — with remarkable effect.
For example, the McDonald's pantheon was forced to stop using CFCs in fast-food receptacles as a result of the threatened boycott of Big Mac flesh-burgers.
Even supermarket pantheons commenced going green.
Ordinary Earth Dwellers are discovering that they can control what happens to their planet.
Today ‘Green’ temples are sprouting everywhere.
‘The Body Shop’, which makes and vends environmentally-friendly beautifiers, has proved astonishingly successful.
From a single small temple opened in 1976, it now operates in 33 zones.
Oracles set up to confer green rites on business-priests are booming.
Worshippers are demanding environmentally-friendly artifacts.
In Zone ‘UK’, 67 per cent of humans are willing to exchange more currency for such objects.
Earth-Dwellers in Zone ‘Canada’ exchange up to 10 per cent more for ‘green’goods.
And suddenly the temples of consumption are proliferating ‘green’ offerings; green batteries, green cleaning-fluid, green fuel.
Even ‘sweets’— a mild drug which induces a brief taste-high but damages the body — sport the verdant claim.
Traditional consumption could soon become socially unacceptable.
Humans are on the road to accepting what they call the Gaia Principle, which sees Earth's living matter as one.
They are moving towards an inter-zonal community based on environmental sustainability and respect for all.
But the path is not assured.
Unscrupulous businesses are milking green consumers of their currency.
Unsliced wholemeal bread which has not been expensively purified exchanges for more than its sliced white imitation.
And low-alcohol beer — which incurs no duty — is more expensive than the real thing.
The cost of organic fruit and vegetables — that grown without chemicals — is particularly inflated.
The environmental panic is heaven for the high priests of advertising whose function it is to capitalize on fears and desires.
They are multiplying phrases like ‘environment-friendly’ and ‘phosphate-free’, to obscure the real ‘greenness’of an artifact and confuse Worshippers into exchanging more.
They are enabled in this by the lack of language controls to describe offerings.
‘Free-range’ can refer to animals kept in barns which are even more crowded than batteries.
And ‘ozone-friendly’ often designates soft CFC gases which, though less destructive than others, still destroy.
Parents are even offered ‘environment-friendly’ disposable bottom-wrappers for their sproglets.
And some high priests have told falsehoods.
The BP multi-zonal company initially affirmed that its ‘supergreen’ unleaded petrol did not foul the environment — even though all such fuel produces nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide.
Similarly the Shell enterprisal spawns glossy scriptures about community environmental projects that it will fund, while manufacturing some of the Planet's most treacherous chemicals.
New gospels have appeared instructing humans how to ‘go green’ in style.
These depict foppish dwellings, tastefully furnished in plain wood and provisioned with all kinds of ‘environmentally-friendly’ gadgets.
Commercial airfresheners bow to ionizers, as if raw breathing-gas is no longer good enough.
Drinking water comes in bottles.
Low-radiation televisions transcend the humble picture-box.
And the old commandment remains unchanged — buy, buy, buy.
‘Saving the planet’ is being translated into a religion for Earth Children who can afford for it.
The god of conspicuous consumption has been refashioned, and money-harvesters now worship frugality with style.
Pleasure was what Believers sought in their old god; innocence and naturalness are what they buy in the new.
When Earthlets discovered they were devouring their planet, they repented.
And penitence is buying green; buying green is their prayer for grace.
Old gods die hard, fellow Councillors, as I'm sure you recall.
Yet there is hope.
Believers have gluttoned on the god of excess and found it wanting.
Some may be tempted by old dogmas, but most are identifying deeper hungers within themselves.
From this hollowness green consumerism springs.
My suggestion is this.
Earthlets are crossing the bridge we traversed in the Age of Darkness.
They could get lost.
I propose sending them a guider — a transcript of this report will mysteriously appear in a reputable Earthly magazine and will make the following recommendations.
Humans should demand that businesses guarantee them accurate information about green products.
If Earth Children lobby and demonstrate; if they pray only at the tabernacles of the worthy, they will propel the high priests of consumerism towards Earth sustainability.
Zonal governments should be compelled to decree controls on manufacturing enterprisals and make the money-harvesting polluters pay.
Earth's richer zones have erred by forcing others to pay for their religion.
The poorest half of the planet has been drained to resource the god of conspicuous consumption.
Now there is a danger that this ‘poor world’ will fall victim of the greening process.
For example, rich zones which long ago destroyed their own glorious estate, now claim the poor world's tropical kingdom as a legacy for all.
They suggest that tropical forests be translated into zonal parks or exchanged for poor-world debts.
Rarely do they investigate the needs and desires of the forest-dwellers themselves.
Yet it is poverty which drives these poor worlders to hew their saplings.
And this poverty needs correcting or greening will translate into more domination.
Green Believers are now pressing the priests of rich-world industry to scan supply chains right down to their poor-world beginnings.
This is quite correct and yet the preferences of green consumers are already impairing sales of poor-world wares like palm oil, coffee and sugar.
And they could lay waste to that hemisphere's traffic in tropical lumber.
There is only one remedy.
Green Believers in the rich world will not save their planet unless they guarantee the sustainability of poor-world economies: rich-world money must pay for poor-world industry to go green.
Old temples must be cleaned and green ones opened.
The poor world has great potential in this respect, including some 2,000 divisions of poisonous plants which might become pest killers.
Green Believers should also support the chapels of fair trading which return rich-world profits to poor-world workers.
From our own experience, Inter-Galactic Councillors, we know that if Earthlings want to save their Planet they must realize their predicament is a global challenge.
It can only be met if zonal governments connect through all-planetary councils.
Green Believers must quicken these connections.
Green consumerism is a hopeful token of more substantial change.
Earth's children are dawning — rather later than we did but perhaps not too late.
And when their space-vessel reaches Pluto, they may hurry their Green Age even faster.
I touched down on that planet during my homing, and all that remains of that great civilization, dear friends, are mountains of empty drink cans and a carpet of potato-chip packets.
LEARNING TO LIVE WITH THE FEAR OF MADNESS
This is a picture of my great-uncle Fred.
It was taken in 1902, when he was working at an engineering factory in West London.
He lived in poverty and became a socialist.
In his spare time he sold copies of The Clarion, a socialist newspaper, on street corners.
In middle age he was offered a job with the management of the factory and he took it.
He found it difficult to do.
Before long, overtaken by ‘melancholia’, he was admitted to a mental hospital and never came back.
He died there 30 years later.
I think my family concluded that Fred had been led astray by his idealism, his ‘foolishness’.
He had shouldered the troubles of the world and been crushed.
For my part I prefer to imagine that he made a mistake.
Socialists have an uneasy relationship with management.
Perhaps remorse at having joined it had tipped the balance of Fred's mind.
All of us have someone like my great-uncle Fred in our family history.
But not all of us know it.
By the time Fred died I was old enough to have known that he existed.
But I didn't.
Not really.
Not in the same way that I knew of his brother, who made money in biscuits and owned a gleaming Daimler car which he drove very cautiously over the potholes in the road outside our house.
It's not that my family deliberately kept Fred's existence a secret.
What, after all, can be said to a child about a man who lives in a mental hospital?
Today madness is called mental illness.
Tomorrow it may be called something else.
But the chances are it will still be there, and the evidence is that it has existed in a recognizable form throughout human history, everywhere in the world.
What is it?
The most straightforward definition I've come across is ‘unusual or undesirable behaviour’.
But there is a problem with using the term ‘illness’ to describe behaviour.
Illness is identified or diagnosed by medical practitioners.
But society decides what makes behaviour unusual or undesirable.
Illness may be what motivates or causes this behaviour.
But what causes illness?
Here the problems get even bigger.
In crude terms, the causes of mental illness seem to be of three main kinds.
The first is biological — what we inherit through our genes.
The evidence is overwhelming that there is some kind of genetic factor involved in the most serious forms of mental illness, the ‘psychoses’ like schizophrenia.
The second kind of cause lies in the other part of our inheritance — the treatment we receive as our personalities form in childhood.
The sad fact is that we do not always treat our children very well.
We were not always well treated as children ourselves.
Abuse can cause mental illness.
But it is not just children that are abused.
We can abuse or be abused by anyone.
And we can join together in groups and as a society to treat other people or other groups very badly indeed.
Poverty, hunger, violence or homelessness, our social conditions, are the third main cause of mental illness and the least acknowledged.
It is, however, very difficult indeed for any one of these causes to produce mental illness on its own.
Even a genetic predisposition to psychosis usually has to be ‘potentiated’ by one or both of the other causes.
They interact together in a continuous, incredibly complex and unpredictable process.
The trouble with using the term mental illness to describe this process is that illness and ‘the mind’ only encompass a part of it.
They live out their lonely existence entirely within the individual sufferer.
They cannot easily be used to describe those events outside of us, like our social circumstances or what psychiatrists call ‘life events’, that have such a critical impact on our emotions.
Nobody says ‘It's a mentally-ill world!’ even when it is.
I can find no term other than‘madness’, with all its abusive connotations, that embraces the whole process, the interaction between ‘internal’ and ‘external’factors.
We seem to have lost a common language.
We have lost it, I think, because we have been trying to lose the people and feelings it used to describe.
We have locked them away, in the vain hope that by doing so we could make them disappear.
But we couldn't.
The result is that we have been steadily betraying mentally-ill people for at least a century.
The mental hospital where my great-uncle Fred spent the last 30 years of his life was one of a chain built around the fringes of London in the second half of the nineteenth century.
Similar chains enclosed all the new industrial cities of Britain as they grew up.
They appeared soon afterwards in the United States as the biggest institutions ever built, incarcerating as many as 10,000 people.
They have been appearing more recently in Japan.
They seem to appear as if by magic wherever industrial capitalist society grows.
At first they were called asylums — a Greek word for a place of sanctuary and refuge.
The word is still used today, of course, to describe something desirable to which political refugees are entitled.
This is what the people of the old ‘madhouses’ were led to expect when they were taken there.
What they found were prisons.
They were betrayed.
Slowly the asylums were taken over by the medical profession.
Wardens became psychiatrists, guards became nurses, asylums became hospitals — and madness became mental illness.
But there was no cure, though the hospitals carried on as if there were.
Another betrayal.
Today the hospitals are closing (or just falling) down.
‘Psycho-active’ drugs can replicate the walls of the old institutions within our heads.
The institutions are becoming superfluous.
Mentally-ill people are being moved out into ‘the community’.
But this bogus community, spirited up to serve administrative convenience, does not exist.
The resources, money and commitment needed to make ‘care in the community’ work have all been withheld.
The closure of the hospitals has proved too tempting an opportunity to be missed by the cost-cutting Right.
And, because we have tried to exile madness, to exclude mentally ill people from society, as a community we no longer know anything about them.
Yet another betrayal.
It was betrayal, too, when in the 1960s and 1970s many people like me who thought of themselves as ‘progressive’ came to believe that mental illness did not exist.
There was a strange comfort in the idea that a society of everyone except ourselves was ‘manufacturing’ mental illness.
But when we faced its devastating impact on the lives of people we knew, we had no idea what to do.
All too often we preferred to deny their existence than acknowledge the presence of mental illness.
We blamed ‘psychiatry’ and ran away.
Why all this betrayal?
The reason is, I think, that madness has something to say to us that we prefer not to hear.
It is not dumb.
It speaks with its own voice about things we can only vaguely sense because we are afraid.
We have good reason to be.
The kind of society we live in — broadly the industrial capitalism which is being embraced by more and more of the world — is making us prone to the alienation and isolation on which madness feeds.
A friend once told me about a Xingu ‘Indian’ he met in Brazil who went to Sao Paulo, a gigantic city, for the first time.
He began to cry.
He could not bear to walk past other people without any sign of recognition.
To someone living in Sao Paulo he would have appeared to be crying for no reason at all.
The Xingu man fled back to the forest, unable to believe that anyone could wish to live in such a place.
Over the years industrial capitalist society has been casting off many of the more obvious outward signs of inner distress.
The conditions known as catatonia and hysteria were once quite common.
They are still common almost everywhere else in the world.
They are characterized by extravagant gestures, posturing and the like.
For that reason, they are hard to ignore, easy to identify with distress.
But they have all but disappeared in the West.
The distress they show has been subsumed into other more modern conditions like schizophrenia, which cannot be so readily seen.
The bodily expression of inner distress needs a framework of bonds between people if it is to have any meaning.
In the West, such bonds have been broken by industrial capitalist society.
Even the nuclear family is in the process of disintegrating.
The reason is the increasing emphasis on individualism that industrial capitalist society imposes.
The possible consequences of this are very disturbing indeed.
As Julian Leff points out: ‘it seems likely that if the uniqueness of the individual's inner experience became the dominant value in society, the bonds between people would be so attenuated that such a society would probably not be viable.’
This sounds like a society writing a suicide note to itself.
And suicide too has something important to tell us.
Social trends in suicide are not always what you'd expect.
For example, they decline sharply in times of war, as they did in Europe during both the two ‘World’ wars.
The common threat of war produces greater cohesion in a community, reducing the risk of individual isolation and the level of suicide too.
Social cohesion is the most powerful defence against madness, the most important contributor to mental health.
But the West is losing its cohesion.
Suicide rates are rising everywhere.
The last time they fell, bucking the global trend, was in Britain in the 1960s, when faith in the National Health Service was at its height.
Now they are rising sharply again.
The lure of self-destructive, suicidal war may wield an irresistible and largely subconscious appeal to a society that is locked into headlong and seemingly involuntary flight towards individualism.
We are, in fact, in the midst of a ‘pandemic’ of mental illness, a genuine crisis, spreading across the world with the isolation and ‘alienation’of the individual in capitalist industrial society.
So there is some urgency to the search for a better future.
What is needed is nothing short of a complete, gentle revolution against what we have been taught.
We have to learn how to reconstruct the bonds between people.
We have to learn how to live with our own fear of madness, not of its captives.
All we have to go on is what other societies do.
But again Western culture is failing us.
For instead of learning, it is teaching.
Global organizations like the World Health Organization (WHO) are dominated by Western medical science, and their work on mental health by psychiatric medicine.
Worldwide initiatives concentrate on how to ‘validate’ or apply Western methods across the globe — not on how to learn from each other.
There are at least two important barriers to this enterprise within Western culture.
One is racism, the notion that one culture, one race, is innately superior to another.
Racism has permeated Western society, and Western psychiatry is no exception.
While interest in ‘transcultural’ issues blossoms, blindness to racism remains as pervasive as ever, obscuring what is of value in other cultures and races.
The second barrier is the Western attitude to mentally-ill people themselves.
We have acquired the habit of assuming that they don't know what they want, don't want to decide anything about their own lives and have nothing to contribute.
So we have lost all hope of communication with them, and thus any prospect of learning from their experience and what they have to say.
Their participation, particularly in the planning of new ‘community care’ schemes, is more of a good principle than a working practice.
Added to this, while the bogus community invented to accommodate the closure of mental hospitals does not exist, another one actually could.
For most mentally-ill people are being looked after in the community anyway, by relatives and friends who cannot bring themselves to have the people they love locked away.
They pay a terrible price in the same currency — their own isolation from society, the prospect of guilt if they fail.
They should be cherished, respected and, above all, learned from.
I began to learn something myself when I was working with a group of homeless people trying to Get Something Done.
I shall call him Jack, the man we watched slowly disintegrate as the excitement of the campaign mounted.
One day he fell to the floor at my feet, shaking violently.
I rang the local mental hospital.
Did they know him?
Yes, they did.
Could they help?
No they couldn't.
Why not?
Untreatable personality disorder.
(It was just as well I didn't know at the time that Jack would once have been called a psychopath, which to most people effectively means ‘murderer’) Untreatable?
That's right.
But there had to be something they could do!
No, there really wasn't.
What was I to do?
Stay with him until he got better.
He did, after a fashion.
He wandered off when we weren't looking and we never saw him again.
But I can still see myself, trembling with fear of Jack (and yes, for him, too), desperately ringing a mental hospital I thought should not be there to ask for help with an ‘illness’ I thought didn't really exist.
Believe me, there are thousands of men and women like Jack in every Western society.
For them the issue is not how good or bad the ‘treatment’ they receive is, but that they receive no treatment at all.
So I got a bit more interested.
I went on a course for amateurs.
A kind and intelligent psychiatrist (one of the few we ever saw outside the hospital) came to talk to us about schizophrenia — the most feared mental illness of all.
What was it we wanted to know?
Did we want to be able to identify a ‘schizophrenic’ at ten paces?
What for?
Reluctantly he began to describe common symptoms.
‘Flatness’ and ‘Delusions of Persecution’.
‘Perplexity’, ‘Self Neglect’, ‘Obsessive Thoughts’.
I began to feel uneasy.
These were all, the psychiatrist assured us, very precise diagnostic terms.
OK, fine.
‘Poor Rapport’, ‘Hopelessness’, ‘Situational Anxiety’, ‘Negativism’ and, yes, ‘Lack of Insight’.
I really did feel very uneasy indeed.
Surely, I had them all!
Then it came to me.
Yes, maybe I did have them all, or a good number of them anyway.
Things go wrong when you have too few, or when one gets out of proportion to the rest.
Trying to stay sane is a delicate balancing act: it's easy to overbalance, particularly if you're pushed.
Not, perhaps, a very precise or scientific conclusion.
But I could at least sense that even the most feared and serious of all the mental illnesses did have something to do with me, however disturbing that may have seemed at the time.
For I too have the same taint of ‘foolishness’ upon me as my great-uncle Fred, though I've so far escaped the anguish of his illness.
His ‘melancholia’, with all its evocative associations for me, no longer exists as a diagnosis — it's been swept away into the vast, featureless ocean of modern ‘depression’.
It may have taken me a long time to find out about him.
But now that I have I can sense him as a personality much better than his biscuit-rich brother.
‘Come along, now, Fred!
Shake yourself by the hand!’ my grandfather used to say to him when he went on a visit.
‘My trouble is,’ Fred would say, ‘I'm the only one in here who knows he's mad.’
Bonfires in Bolivia
In the contest between the sun god and the ozone layer, Bolivians know what to choose every time.
Susanna Rance reports.
Bonfire night in Bolivia — on 23 June, the eve of San Juan — is reputed to be the coldest night of the year.
Stones break open on the windswept high plateau and fires are lit to defy the bitter chill and summon back the rays of the sun god, Inti.
Migrant families have brought the tradition with them to the urban shanty towns.
Everywhere San Juan stands for warmth, fun and companionship.
Bonfires are built not in people's backyards but on the streets outside their doors.
The further you climb away from the town centre, the more alive the custom is.
The narrowest, poorest alleyways glow with flames, lighting up the hillside paths.
Neighbours sit on each other 's doorsteps, chatting and sharing hot punch, jumping over the flames, dancing and carousing until the drink runs out and the embers have died down.
Each year on San Juan, a hundred thousand bonfires dot the slopes of the huge crater which holds La Paz.
Next morning the city's crystal-blue skies are covered by a curtain of grey smog which hides the snowy Andean peaks and causes havoc to local flight schedules.
Two years ago, news of the ozone layer hit Bolivia and the San Juan celebrations — and the smoky aftermath took on a new significance.
There was serious talk of ecological suicide, criminal irresponsibility and the evils of toxic fumes merging with alcoholic ones.
This year fires were banned in the main cities.
The La Paz Police Force nobly sacrificed its traditional bonfire party and patrolled the wintry hillsides — some sneakily in plain clothes — to enforce law and order in pagan territory.
Up in the shanty towns subversion ruled.
As night fell, the neighbours in our dead-end street furtively stacked piles of wood and old furniture in their doorways, listening for radio reports in the hope of a reprieve.
The first bonfire was lit, glasses of punch were passed around and the winter chill started to mellow.
After a while, two soldiers in khaki ponchos came up the hill and asked us somewhat apologetically to put out the fire.
When we protested that ours was a dirt track and not a paved city street, they seemed uncertain of the rules and phoned their chief.
It turned out he was being bombarded by similar queries and was none too sure of the answer.
‘Phone back in half an hour,’ he said, and the soldiers went on their way, warmed by glasses of hot liquor.
When they returned, eight bonfires were blazing and our new friends from across the way were dancing to lively Peruvian music.
The soldiers got their chief on the phone again and made the situation sound quite dire.
‘There's not a lot we can do,’ they said.
‘There are fires everywhere and some of the locals are getting stroppy.
We're trying to deal with it peacefully…
’ The lieutenant applauded their efforts and said the tactic was to avoid aggro and let the fires die down gradually.
‘Well, that's it then.
Time for a drink,’ said the soldiers, relieved at having accomplished their mission so early in the evening.
It was true that things were getting out of hand.
On a brief stroll through the nearby alleyways we counted 70 bonfires and spirits were rising.
As our tipple changed from hot tea with grape liquor to Dona Eva's lethal milky punch, previously unknown neighbours became dancing partners, tongues loosened and inhibitions faded.
It seemed quite natural for us to end up slumped together on the ground, leaning unsteadily against each other, watching the children play while the more resilient dancers still staggered and turned in the firelight.
Next morning, painful rays of sunlight somehow filtered through the haze hanging over the city.
Our street was a charred mess and the corner shop didn't open.
As the neighbours started to emerge later in the day, everyone agreed it had been a great San Juan.
But would it be the last?
Environmentalists and defenders of popular culture launched into a week-long debate about the pros and cons of the bonfire culture.
Some went to town on Bolivia's planetary responsibility, warning that such barbarian customs would eventually lead to the flooding of New York and Miami and the extinction of the human race.
But as one leading ecologist pointed out, close-knit communities and their traditions tend to stay in greater harmony with the environment than modern urban society.
Banning the yearly fiesta of San Juan may be Bolivia's gesture towards fighting global warming.
But it also signals the end of an ancient rite rejoicing in human warmth and in the sun's return.Susanna Rance has lived and worked in Bolivia for several years.
The real heavy music
Susanna Rance meets a musician who has discovered the musical weight in traditional bamboo pipes.
‘Are you stoned or just stupid?’ reads a sticker on the back window of the red jeep.
We pull up at the door of the drum player's house in a middle-class suburb of La Paz.
Sun streams into the upstairs room as I step gingerly through a maze of wires and find a corner to sit in amidst the jungle of electronic equipment.
Miguel, in pony tail and purple-embroidered shirt, opens his Yamaha synthesiser case and takes out three sets of bamboo pan pipes.
These are put on one side for his evening rehearsal with a native music group.
Now it's time for Wrack ‘n’ Ruin to start their afternoon practice session.
The speaker behind my left ear starts to howl and bark like a dog, and the room shakes with the vibration of rock rhythms.
‘I was 11 when I started saving pennies to buy my first guitar’, remembers Miguel.
‘I grew up listening to rock.
The chords and melodies seemed more complex and exotic than those of Bolivian music.
By the time I was 18 I had my first group — all kids from my neighbourhood.
Our idols were Santana, Kiss, The Eagles, Led Zeppelin.
For us that music really was magic.
I guess we were quite alienated: in a way we had no real identity of our own.’
For most Bolivian town-dwellers, rural life represents poverty and isolation.
The cultures of some 40 indigenous peoples are considered backward and irrelevant to the values of the modern, free-market state.
Social progress means heading for the city, dropping Aymara or Quechua in favour of Spanish, adopting modern dress and weakening ties with the countryside.
Music is an integral part of life and ritual in the Andes.
Dressed in ponchos with colours and stripes that announce their village of origin, troupes of pipe and drum players frequently converge from distant villages to celebrate local religious and agrarian festivals.
Their shrill sounds and pounding rhythms echo through the valleys, calling communities to unite and appease the natural forces which could damn their crops.
To play music in this way is considered both a privilege and an obligation, an expression of pride in the ancestors' memory and their own heritage.
The most renowned of these pipe bands travel periodically to the cities, where they perform in night spots for tourists.
The foreigners admire, applaud and take photographs.
The musicians are paid a pittance, eat out on the street at night and pay for floor space to sleep in a garage until they are turned out at dawn.
When their moment of glory is over, they merge once more into the mass of peasant farmers who speak broken Spanish and for whom the city is alien territory.
Not surprisingly, the younger generation find more prestige in imitating the Northern fashions and rhythms which monopolize films, TV and radio programmes.
Like many Bolivians, Miguel only started to discover and appreciate his own cultural roots when he went abroad.
‘I was 20 when the change came,’ he recalls.
‘I went to study in Brazil where people called me ‘Indian’.
I felt quite shocked, and I said, ‘I'm not Indian, I'm Bolivian’.
But I realized I was different from the Brazilians, and that was when I started to rediscover my own identity.’
Three years later, when Miguel got the chance to go to Sweden, he still got called ‘Indian’.
‘But there, it seemed more like a compliment’, he says with a grin.
‘And I started telling them, ‘I'm not an Indian, I'm Aymara.
We have our own name, our own language and culture.’
I started to feel stronger as a person.
And I came to the conclusion that we ought to develop our own music, and let the natural children of rock — the Europeans and North Americans — do their own thing.
These days, I only play rock to keep up friendships and meet the new generation.
It's not a burning interest like it was before.’
Now Miguel belongs to two groups: Wrack ‘n’ Ruin, and Marka Laika, a large band playing native instruments.
His dream is to combine the two to produce a Latin-ethnic-rock fusion.
‘I'm a sort of bridge between the two’, he says.
‘Both have their value, and they can enrich each other.
Right now my idols are the sicuri players of Nino Corin, not Santana any more.
I say to my rock-musician friends: ‘What could be heavier than 15 people all together, blasting out on those bamboo tubes?
They make the ground shake and you shake with them.
This is the real heavy music’.’
Susanna Rance has lived and worked in Bolivia for several years.
Dreams in miniature
Susanna Rance finds out why serious-minded La Paz dwellers can be seen walking down the streets intently fondling toy cars, play-money and doll's house pieces.
The Ekeko is a squat, grotesque little god — with moustache, pink cheeks and black staring eyes.
His expression is understandably strained.
From trilby-hatted head to sandalled feet, his whole body bristles with a jumbled collection of objects.
This particular Ekeko figure is bearing not only furniture, clothing, pots, pans, food, musical instruments and garden tools — but also a laden truck and a three-storey house.
A cigarette juts from his painted mouth.
Each Friday that shy stub is ritualistically lit by the Ekeko's guardian — in this case a writer, intellectual and left-wing politician.
The latter then anoints his personal ‘god of abundance’ with a sprinkling of alcohol.
The Ekeko is a young god, a year short of his 200th birthday.
The story goes that in colonial times, La Paz's upper classes used to hold a three-day festival in the main square, graciously dispensing banknotes and coins to their children and servants.
The republican era saw the end of this aristocratic bounty.
So mestizo culture — reluctant to let go of tradition — created its own deity to host the yearly handout.
The festival of Alasitas lasts three weeks.
Miles of city streets are taken over by stalls offering tiny banknotes and articles of all kinds for sale.
The Ekeko's fair is where dreams and wishes are sold, where even the city's poorest inhabitants can buy, in miniature, what they hope to obtain in real life during the course of the coming year.
But buying the goods is not enough.
They must be blessed at midday on January 24 or they will have no more value than toys.
You would not expect a self-respecting La Paz office worker to walk down a main street fondling a doll's house three-piece-suite or a Dinky-sized Toyota jeep.
But these objects, ritualistically sprinkled and gestured over by a Catholic priest or Aymara sage, take on a new significance as promises of future prosperity.
Alasitas is about a mix of cultures and religions, classes and values.
Even its name is a hybrid of the Aymara verb to buy something for oneself and the Spanish diminutive.
The goods sold in the fair are a true reflection of the contrasts in modern Bolivian society.
Minute bales of coca and sacks of shrunken potatoes sit beside inch-high cartons of Argentinian wine, Peruvian detergent and Brazilian drinking-chocolate, which now compete with Bolivian goods on the contraband market.
Native wind instruments fashioned from tiny straws are sold at a fraction of the cost of matchbox-size ghetto-blasters.
Tiny banknotes have always been the most traditional item at the fair.
They have to be re-issued yearly to keep up with inflation.
A decade's collection of Alasitas money will give you a good idea of the unsteady course of Bolivia's economy.
For example, one year the Government stopped printing money and instead resorted to issuing cheques valid for 90 days.
Another year five-million-peso notes were overprinted with their new value — five Bolivianos.
And Alasitas money faithfully imitated these changes.
There are other ways in which Alasitas customs mark changes in social habits.
For example, as the population becomes more mobile, miniature ID cards are no longer enough — passports are all the rage, especially since the immigration office ran out of the real thing.
Or, in compliance with the Government's aggressive tax drive, model houses and cars are now accompanied by the correct documents.
Children, naturally, have a field day, storing treasures in tiny suitcases and deciding between wide, native skirts or Barbie-style gear for their dolls.
Some set up their own stalls selling quail egg sandwiches or thimble-sized glasses of juice.
But for adults, choosing what you need is serious business, despite a bit of modern-day scepticism.
‘You have to know what you're buying,’ says Doña Teo, a domestic worker and mother of four.
‘You need a lot of faith, otherwise it won't come true.
Of course I don't really believe in it at all.’
‘You don't believe in it?
But what if you didn't do it one year?’
Her jaw dropped.
‘Ah well…it might be unlucky.
You have to buy banknotes and some food provisions at least, so you won't go without.’
Sexist demon
I thought your issue on Masculinity (NI 175) was a good attempt to wrestle with the demon of sexism.
It's heartening to see NI take up some of the challenges of feminism in a thoughtful, provocative way.
Still I find it hard to believe most men would want to cede their privilege and power on the evidence you present.
It's important to have a sense of the ‘personal and political’.
But that doesn't go very far unless you also examine the structural influences which shape personal behaviour.
Most men, bombarded by the Rambo phenomenon, ‘Olliemania’ and widespread flirtation with militarization, will need more convincing than the worthy examples of the new man you mention.
The cult of the warrior hero provides the overwhelming context for constructing the male identity today.
It is a pervasive ideology that bolsters the global political economy, capitalist and non-capitalist alike.
The lie of the fast gun must be exposed in all its waste and brutality for the gentle man to be born.
Sexy pears
But why the apple rather than anything else?
(The secret life of the apple NI 212) OK, so the pear didn't make it big in the Garden of Eden but the Romans worshipped it as an aphrodisiac, and consecrated it to Venus, Goddess of Love.
They also grew pears as a source of medicine.
And in old England people used pears as a disinfectant by rubbing the cut flesh on an infection.
My guess is that you could dig up wacky facts about any animal, fruit or mineral you choose to look at.
But is that enough reason to do a magazine about them?
Perhaps your next issue should be about the arbitrariness of categories.
Royal respect
Your comments on royalty in NI 211 (Classic) seem designed to reduce respect for our monarchy.
I esteem the devoted service given by our royal family because they provide high standards clear of petty politics in an age when voluntary respect for authority — which is the foundation for democratic peace and social discipline — has been seriously undermined.
Too many families fail to get this over to their children and teachers are often left with too little energy for teaching after gaining class control.
Lydia's call
Thank you on behalf of the City of London Anti-Apartheid Group for the article that appeared about the Upington 26 Campaign (Endpiece NI 210).
Last month we phoned Lydia and were shocked to hear that the Appeal against the convictions of the prisoners had been postponed, condemning them to another nine months in prison — until May 1991.
On a happier note however, one of the group called Eveline de Bruin, is being transferred to the ‘local’ prison at Kimberley.
This concession would not have happened but for the pressure brought to bear on the authorities.
Lydia asks me to pass her thanks to everyone who has contributed so generously to the campaign and says that while little has changed in the way of living conditions for the prisoners and their families, the campaigners are confident of their victory.
Emasculated Bible
In your editorial article on fundamentalism (Reaching for certainty NI 210) you suggest that because people fail to live up to standards, the doctrine should be changed.
One of the problems in the Church today is caused by this very philosophy.
If the Bible says something that is inconvenient or difficult to follow, it is rejected as not relevant to the modern world.
One after another biblical truths and standards are thrown out and we are left with an emasculated Bible and an emasculated Christian faith where anything goes.
But Hebrews tells us that Jesus is the same yesterday, today and forever.
The answer to failure and sin is not to move the goalposts but to repent and try again.
Let Christ really be Lord of all your life and not just some of it.
Marx-imising success
I have difficulty linking marxists with religious fundamentalists (NI 210).
Fundamentalism is a belief system that cannot be refuted because it comes from a supreme being.
Marxism is the inverse: it is a criticism of capitalism, not a cast-iron belief system but an argument against the mainstream of accepted political-economic ideology.
Marxists defend the right of all to practice religion, and the right to criticise religion, which is hardly a fundamentalist standpoint.
If they do have a belief it is the ‘self emancipation of the working class’— that the exploited sector of the global population recognise their material conditions and take control of the means of production through collective struggle.
The main plank of Leninism is an organisational structure which will allow the best arguments in society to be aired and the argument that has most support to be taken as policy.
There is no prescribed text to adhere to.
Fanatical madness
I was interested that your issue The fear of madness (NI 209) was followed by one on Fundamentalism (NI 210) because they are certainly connected.
I know this from personal experience: my father acts ‘schizophrenic’.
He hears voices, acts on orders from above and has delusions of grandeur — he thinks he is the second coming of Christ.
Traditionally one would not apply the ‘schizophrenic’ diagnosis to other religious fanatics, but why not?
It is surely just another kind of mental disease.
Escaping into dogma has not helped my father deal with his mental dis-ease.
Society doesn't recognise his pain, hidden behind the walking Bible he has become.
The pity is my father is not alone in his excessive use of religion.
Fit of rage
I was dismayed to see epilepsy included under ‘Madness — The Facts’(The fear of madness NI 209).
People with epilepsy are not mad.
Epilepsy does occur in some cases as a symptom of brain damage, but for it to be classified alongside psychosis, mental retardation and other disorders, without qualification, only serves to reinforce the stigma of insanity that health organisations worldwide are trying to eradicate.
Nazi eugenics lumped epilepsy with mental disorders.
But I would hope we live in a more enlightened age.
Burning sheep
French farmers recently sought to protect their markets by setting fire to a lorry load of live sheep being exported from Britain for slaughter in an abbattoir in mid-France.
It was the latest in a sad catalogue of atrocities integral to the live export trade.
Last year over half a million sheep were exported from the UK for death in foreign abbatoirs and the numbers are set to increase.
Many animals die from trauma en route.
Their suffering is totally unnecessary when they could easily be slaughtered near the farm of production.
Readers might like to support Compassion in World Farming which is approaching the final stages of an international petition to the European Parliament, seeking proper protection for animals.
If so they should send a stamped addressed envelope for details to Compassion in World Farming, 20 Lavant St., Petersfield, Hampshire, UK.
Authoritative words
With reference to your Country Profile on Papua New Guinea (NI 208) the constitution of this country does not recognise any language as the official language.
The de facto official languages are: English, Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu.
Steps forward
As a professional working in the field of disabled welfare for the past 12 years, I take issue with your article on the disabled in
India by Dinyar Godrej (Tea, charity, pain and performance NI 207).
Disability is no longer a ‘non-issue’ in India.
Anyone who has kept track of developments in this field would easily notice a dramatic change in the government's approach.
It is planning comprehensive legislation for the disabled, encompassing their education, training, employment and right of equal participation.
Blind and deaf people have also been recruited for certain jobs in central government, and a number of state governments have reserved a percentage of jobs for the disabled.
Various funding agencies including Sight Savers are promoting integrated education enabling blind and sighted children to accept and adjust to each other.
Conservation swap
Global pollution could be more effectively tackled if countries would share their conservation ideas.
In Japan, for example, garbage cans have covers with special holes in them to separate soft drinks cans from other rubbish, so that they can be re-cycled.
But few Japanese beverage companies yet make drinks-cans with tab openers that remain attached to the cans — even though companies in the US and Canada have been manufacturing these for almost 15 years.
And most countries should benefit from copying the few nations who have introduced legislation banning companies from manufacturing drinks-cans in two different metals — as this makes recycling harder.
A trivial game
Your trivialization of important issues is getting way out of hand.
First in your Country Profile section you started giving star ratings for people's life expectancy and women's oppression.
Then you set up a review section which reduces books about famine and war to a star rating for entertainment.
And now you devote a whole issue (NI 179) to a ridiculous game — giving gold medals to the countries you approve of and dumping on the countries you don't.
Okay, so you ‘consulted experts in the field’ before delivering your judgments.
But isn't the NI always telling us to distrust the authoritative views of experts, especially when they are pontificating about the Third World?
What makes these ‘experts’ different — the fact that they think the same as you?
Land rip-off
Michael Ball's article on UK property prices (Land NI 177) doesn't mention the cash value of planning/building permission from the local council, which increases the land price one hundredfold—a windfall for the owner, a burden for the rest.
We need housing to rent.
Local councils, housing associations, and self-help groups should be enabled to buy suitable land for building at existing use value.
The monstrous inflation of land values from building permission means the majority must pay, or sleep under the arches.
Cop-out
Your magazine is not Internationalist, it's a cop-out!
Where's the issue on British imperialism in Northern Ireland?
And you seem to have debased the idea of personal politics to group therapy for affluent liberals trying to feel less guilty.
Go away and eat quiche!
Silent minister
Thanks to the hundreds who wrote for information following our article Womenwealth (Update NI 172).
Womenwealth is still unfunded so we can't respond individually or put out a catalogue to open up the market for our womens' products.
Again we have asked Christopher Patten (Minister for Overseas Development) for support, reminding him of the government's obligation to follow the agreed recommendations of the UN Decade for Women.
We pointed out that in Holland, America, Scandinavia, Canada or Italy a unit such as ours would receive support from the national aid ministry.
We have had no response.
Should the situation change we will let you know.
Batting order
Michael Ball's batting order of the people responsible for appalling rises in the cost of housing—financiers, builders and landowners—could plausibly be reversed,(Land NI 177).
At least financial agencies have some pressure to provide funds at competitive rates, and builders to guard against pricing themselves out of the market, but landowners just have to sit on the land until they get the price they demand.
One way of halting this tyranny would be a tax on unused, unprotected land.
Plant room
Though sharing many of the concerns aired in the Population issue (NI 176), I'm still disturbed by the complacency about the rising population.
The prospect of the Kenyan population swelling to only 120 million, with vast areas of arid land, is devastating.
A world population of 10 billion is equally cataclysmic, if we believe in co-existing with animals and plants, and the right of future generations to a healthy environment.
Action please
The temporary success of Greenpeace in preventing the dumping of noxious wastes in the North Sea by actually boarding the dumping vessel is an object lesson to those still locked in the non-violent action syndrome, like those in the campaign to close US bases in Australia and the anti-uranium movement.
The bases will not be closed until a sufficient number go in and dismantle them, and uranium will be exported till the opposition is strong enough to physically prevent it.
No South Vietnam
Thank you for printing my latter (Chinese Aggression NI 171), but I must ask you to publish the following correction: Claire Culhane, Quang Ngai, South Vietnam, should read: Claire Culhane, Vancouver.
There is no longer a designated area called South Vietnam in the present Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
I used to be the adminstrator of the Canadian Tuberculosis Hospital in Quang Ngai.
Off the shelf
Your debate on masculinity (NI 175) is an essential part of the debate on gender relations which is usually left to the feminists to pursue.
Recently while looking for a book on masculinity I was advised by the assistant to look under ‘womens studies’!
But I was disappointed by the absence of any exploration of the notions of hierarchy and competition so deeply imbedded in our male-dominated society.
The deficiency was further illustrated by the reference to one co-author as a professor and the others as ‘working in the same department’, a perfectly male way of expressing the relationship.
NI frisson
Neutrality on a subject like male prostitution (Masculinity NI 175) and child absue ‘men bring their 12-year old sons to try out a travesti’ is a political cop-out.
To give an entertainment rating to books dealing with economoic exploitation or hideous human rights abuses, is obscene and evidence of a de-humanized mentality.
It seems NI extracts a frisson from contemplating exploitation.
We must now add ‘entertainment’ to Herbert Gans' list of the ‘Uses of Poverty’.
Ungrateful feminists
‘Not another issue on male-bashing’ I groaned, flipping through Masculinity (NI 175), but I was pleasantly surprised.
There was, however, one odd problem which was not discussed.
It frequently happens that feminist women have relationships with men who are sensitive, communicative, share emotional and domestic chores and are committed to feminist ideals.
But often the woman becomes distant, loses interest in sex and sometimes even goes off with more traditionally masculine men.
This leads me to believe that the questions surrounding male/female relationships are not simple, and we have a long way to go before we can simply pursue the ‘if only men would’ formula.
Maybe we need more humanism and less feminism if we are really going to unravel the solution.
Russia bashers
The article attributed to Natasha, USSR in the Population issue (NI 176) was astonishing.
Having recently spent a holiday in the Soviet Union I saw streets crowded with animated, healthy, well-dressed people.
Yes, I saw them queuing for tomatoes, but the stall was still well-stocked the next day.
Yes, there is austerity — broken pavements, grubby old buses, but ‘life is very hard.
You cease to be human’ is melodramatic, dishonest rubbish!.
You can do better than that,
Stateless Brit
Thanks for letting me use your page to publicize a human rights abuse in the UK.
I was born to a British mother, and a father serving in the British Army in Malaysia during 1963.
At six weeks I was brought back to Britain, and spent the following 24 years here.
The Home Office has refused me British citizenship.
My Member of Parliament responded to my appeal by pointing out that their refusal is in line with the law.
I say the law is racist, sexist and inhuman.
I am fighting to change it and minutely, perhaps, the world in which we live.
Any help or support will be gratefully received.
My address is available.
Of otters and eagles
While your issue on Population (NI 176) led me to adjust my thinking, I remain convinced that overpopulation is the Third World's worst problem.
But a reduction in the First World is also essential.
Specifically it would be good news for women, otters, German forests,
Stonehenge, eagles, cyclists, Spanish beaches, cave paintings, the Parthenon, dolphins and trails in the Himalayas.
Private Scotland
Of Scotland's 8.7 million hectares, overwhelmingly rural, 50% is held by 579 landowners, 40% by 269, 30% by 134, 20% by 49 and 10% by 13.
This represents the most concentrated pattern of private land ownership in Europe and compares unfavourably with many of the Third World countries you touched on in your Land issue (NI 177).
Sexual feelings
Regarding your issue on Personal Violence,(NI 187), can you or any of your readers tell me how to differentiate between erotica and pornography?
When can the pictorial depiction of the sexual act be called art — or would you ban it completely?
And what about writers like D.H.Lawrence who made their reputations and sometimes their livelihood from describing sexual experiences?
These questions are not addressed by the simplistic rhetoric of ‘Porn is the theory, rape is the practice’.
I suggest that pornography, like anything else people devise for their pleasure, is simply a tool.
Like alcohol or money, it is capable of vast abuse by those who exploit it for financial purposes.
But I have read and enjoyed ‘pornography’, just as I have been aroused by the pictorial depiction of sex — and I refuse to feel guilty for it.
The simple-minded conclusion you arrive at — that people must not use pornography — does not address the complexity of this social phenomenon.
Statistical terror
I intended to write to you months ago about your Housework issue (NI 181) but have been too busy ironing, cooking and looking after children — as well as‘working’.
You say of housewives that ‘You will be 154 per cent more likely to die of cancer than women in paid employment’.
Well I believe in Twyman's law — that when a statistic looks interesting it is usually a mistake.
If your figure is accurate, a government health warning should be hung above every sink and ironing board, or printed at the foot of marriage certificates.
Banking on sperm
I represent a group of women wanting to have children by men prepared to be semen donors.
The women have various attitudes to the donor's involvement in their child's upbringing.
Some require anonymous donors who perceive their role as similar to that of blood donors.
Others prefer men willing to be known, at least by name, to the child.
A few wish the father to develop a relationship with the baby.
If any NI readers are interested please would they write to: PO Box 164, Brunswick East, 3057.
Black gap
The editor who replied to the letter which protested at the lack of blacks on the magazine's editorial board (NI 185), has hung himself (sic) with his own belt.
I quote: ‘By far the best candidate has been white’.
Surely a journalist of NI caliber must realize that ‘best’ is a subjective term.
Your reply reminds me of my son paging through the brochure for George Washington University.
When he asked about the lack of black faces, he was told that no blacks had qualified for the university because of the institution's high standards.
Boxing back
Regarding your cartoon of Pandora opening the box of science (NI 184)— it was Epithemeus, Pandora's jealous husband who done it!
He was the one who released famine, pestilence and all the other evils into the world.
The myth of a woman taking the blame to protect the male foible should not be perpetuated.
Discriminating science
Research by neuro-psychologist Dr Dianne McGuiness of Stanford University in the US refutes many feminist theories.
Monitoring motor activity in newborn babies, Dr McGuiness found boys to be significantly more active, spending less time asleep and performing more facial grimaces than girls.
She also discovered that boys responded to ‘mathematical’ stimuli such as flashing lights and geometrical shapes, whilst girls reacted more to social stimuli like faces and voices.
These differences exist from birth and cannot be attributed to socially conditioned roles or the expectations of ‘sexist’ parents.
I suggest that a lot of so-called ‘equal opportunity’ is based on political myth — ignoring our in-built sex differences.
A woman's place is in the home — not only is this common sense, it is also backed by scientific evidence.
(I'm glad my mother believed it anyway.)
Graphic illustration
Although I partly agree with Jacqueline Prelimo that photographs represent an attempt to possess the moment by turning it into something tangible (Letters NI 185), I have some reservations.
A recent visit to Bangladesh and India gave me photos which have educated others about cultures they are not fortunate enough to have experienced.
I did not ‘acquire’ people or their lives through these prints.
They simply gave me the means to share some sad, courageous and beautiful things.
Native protection
In his letter concerning ‘native peoples’(aren't we all?),
David Kemp argues that destruction of the environment has always occurred
(NI 187).
True — but only recently has technology made it possible to destroy life faster than it can be replaced.
I have recently returned from the tropical rainforests of South East Asia where the almost negligible cutting down of trees by ‘native peoples’ caused no real destruction over millions of years.
Now unscrupulous logging companies assisted by corrupt officials are destroying forests at the rate of 50 million acres a year.
Money-talks
I disagree with your directive to ‘pay up cheerfully’(NI 185) when taking photographs of people in the Third World.
I think this reinforces a beggar mentality which does not help the photo subject and encourages a form of prostitution.
Amongst children it may even make begging more lucrative than going to school or helping the family in the fields.
For others it could create feelings of resentment about their material inferiority.
I discuss this issue often with tourists I take trekking in rural Nepal, and my line is that the photograph takes second place to the opportunity for personal contact and an understanding of the culture.
This needs time and sensitivity — not money.
Indeed unless this contact is desired there is little point in taking a photo at all.
Nameless frustration
I sympathize with Sue Robson's Chinese women friends who are angry at the way names inscribe their inferiority to men (NI 185): I find it insulting to be addressed as Mrs D. Patterson (D being my husband's initial.)
Where am I in this name?
And I see no point in reverting to my maiden name since that belonged to my father.
I rejoice in the ambiguity of being called ‘Chris’.
But this brings its own problems — like mail addressed to ‘Mr Chris Patterson’.
Animal passions
I would like to add two points to your issue on violence (NI 187).
First, many chemicals cause sudden uncontrollable rages: notably lead, the chemicals used to tenderize burger meat and certain food additives.
There are also a vast number of chemicals in food which have been recently introduced, the effects of which are unknown.
Second, much violence in the West results I believe, from a sense of impotence.
Many of us have as much control over our lives as animals in a zoo.
The more centralized, urbanized and mechanized a society becomes, the less control we have and the more violence is bred.
Your issue concentrated too much on women deploring male violence: if men are to become less violent, women must stop requiring them to enslave themselves to the industrial machine in order to support a family.
Palestinian pain
Phil Lumley writes that ‘Israel is fighting a war of survival against Islamic aggression’(Letters NI 187).
It beats me how he can describe opposition to military occupation as ‘aggression’.
Would he call the activities of black South Africans seeking freedom, as aggression or legitimate struggle?
Could Mr Lumley tell us just how Israel is trying to ‘resettle and improve the lot of the Palestinians’?
Is he referring to the deportations, or does he mean that by making life so miserable in the refugee camps people will leave voluntarily?
I have been to the Holy Land twice this year and have seen the appalling conditions Palestinians are living under.
In their position, I have no doubt that anyone would throw stones and anything else one could lay hands on in order to change the situation.
Cloud cuckoo land
Here we go again, I thought.
With its headbanging title, your issue on the Politics of Greed (NI 188) seemed to promise the usual hellfire and damnation about the iniquities of Thatcher, Reagan and Co.
I thought I'd end up feeling frustrated by you staying on your moralistic high horse without ever offering any concrete political proposals.
Instead your lengthy debate between editor and a ‘reader’ left me feeling the opposite.
We're supposed to be inspiring people with our vision of how things could be different.
And what's inspiring about a treatise on who can own brown rice stores and how many people it takes to make up a windmill construction co-operative?
Thatcher never laid out her ideal world for everyone to shoot down — she and her cronies unveiled it bit by beautifully packaged bit.
So why are you jumping through all these self-imposed hoops?
And if your modern drawing of Sancho Panza has been ‘liberated from the master-servant relationship’ why does he/she/it end up with the donkey?
Mega-flop protests
Your article Mega-flops: Sri Lanka (NI 183), was factually incorrect.
There were five dams built, none of which had to undergo frequent repairs, and the total expenditure incurred by the project up to the end of 1987 was $1.4 billion, not $14 billion as the article asserts.
It is also quite untrue to say that any foreigners obtained land.
All of the newly irrigated land has been allocated to Sri Lankan farmers and their families in plots of one hectare.
Finally whilst it is true that prices and costs did increase between 1978 and 1987, none of this was directly attributable to expenditures on the Mahaweli Project, which was financed by outright grants and concessionary loans from friendly governments: basic social services and food subsidies were never curtailed.
In undertaking such a vast development programme as the Mahaweli Project, it is perhaps inevitable that unanticipated problems arise.
The challenge is to overcome them, and this we have done.
Editor: First we must apologise for an error of a decimal point which grossly distorts the real expense of the project.
However our concern about the social, environmental and economic impact of the scheme on Sri Lanka's poor remains.
The Mahaweli project — the largest foreign aid programme to date — will affect one third of the country's land mass and lead to the relocation of 10 per cent of the country's population.
It will both radically alter the ecology of the region, and shift rural producers from subsistence agriculture to chemically intensive cash cropping.
It marks a decisive shift on the part of the Sri Lankan government to sacrifice self-reliance for the possibility of increased foreign revenues.
Top marks
We very much appreciated your decision to grant our country a medal within the framework of your interesting initiative entitled Running for Rights (The Right to Food NI 179).
This decision, which honours Cape Verde, has been interpreted by us as a recognition of the unwearying efforts the Capeverdian government and people are making in the struggle to build a new society based on social justice, progress and equal opportunity.
Thanks to these efforts, the spectre of famine is banished forever and the fundamental needs of the population are provided for.
We hope we will continue to deserve your attention and we wish to subscribe to your monthly New Internationalist magazine for a year.
Think big
I found your issue on the Palestine/Israel question fascinating (NI 199) but I'm not sure I agree with your proposed two-state solution.
It seems hardly realistic for Palestine to exist on two sides of Israel.
And what if all Palestinians scattered around the world do return home?
Where will they go?
There isn't room for them in the Gaza Strip and West Bank.
The overcrowding that could result would inevitably escalate the conflict.
Also, your assessment that Palestinians will be able to build high-tech industries in the territories is incredibly optimistic in the light of the limited infrastructure there at present.
A more realistic solution might be for Jordan to give the Palestinians some of its land — especially as a large number of Palestinians already live there.
AIDS alert
We were shocked to read the factual errors in your article on the Cuban Government's AIDS policy (Briefly NI 198).
You state that Cuba is not testing its drug-users for HIV when in fact the country is testing its entire adult population for the virus.
People found to be HIV-positive are denied work.
The contrast between Cuba and the US is also unfortunate.
When President Reagan finally spoke out about AIDS after many years of ignoring the crisis, he stated that testing should be the main thrust of the US Government's AIDS policy.
This ‘test and isolate’ approach, of which Cuba is an extreme example, has been universally condemned by AIDS activists and people working in the AIDS/HIV field who advocate community-based education, support and treatment, and research.
Not only does the test and isolate approach violate human rights — it is also ineffective because it undermines the personal responsibility upon which educational efforts depend.
Although the Cuban Government reports that the number of people with AIDS is shrinking, they have produced no evidence to support this claim.
Rodolfus Rodriguez, head of the Cuban AIDS testing programme, has publicly stated that Cuba may have to further tighten its restrictions on foreigners.
Critical approach
I find it incredible that you reprint without comment an item on compulsory AIDS testing in Cuba (Briefly NI 198).
The notion that certain groups of people — rather than unsafe practices — should be the focus of concern in the fight against AIDS should not go unchallenged.
A major reason for the spread of the virus in the US was the ignorance, complacency and prejudice of the authorities — resulting in the lack of funding and public education, and the scapegoating of some groups.
This lead other sections of the community to believe themselves safe.
You wouldn't quarantine cancer patients, would you?
Wake up NI.
Cocaine co-ops
You can't please all of your readers all of the time.
Valerie Jones of London (Letters NI 198) criticizes you for not wholeheartedly supporting Sendero Luminoso (A shining path of blood) in Peru, while I was thinking that you were not sufficiently unequivocal in your condemnation of Sendero Luminoso.
There are times when armed struggle is necessary.
But I class Sendero Luminoso as a terrorist organization rather than a liberation movement, which is only capable of reproducing in a different form the structural violence which destroys peasant organizations and delivers death threats.
Valerie Jones damns the Izquierda Unida out of hand but what are the policies of Sendero Luminoso for dealing with Peru's economic crisis?
State-run cocaine co-operatives perhaps?
Glum picture
Your issue on the use of images a few months ago was excellent so why not stick to your own guidelines?
Your cover-photo on the Peru issue (NI 197) is a perfect example of the misuse of children's images.
Of course there are increasing numbers of hungry children in Peru who stare mistrustfully at camera-laden gringos (white tourists), but your front cover does nothing towards providing an image of either the anger and creativity of Peruvian people, nor the barbaric economic situation that has been imposed upon their country by the current world economic order, both of which are well described within the issue.
Spectacular stories
Your issue on Peru (NI 197) was almost exclusively about the politics of the country.
Virtually every page revolved around the current guerilla war.
I look to NI for an alternative view of the world.
The mainstream media gives us a perspective distorted by their criteria for ‘news’ which includes anything spectacular like politics, violence, money, drugs and human interest stories.
With the exception of money, this was precisely the criteria used by NI to give us a view of Peru.
There was even a two-page spread on the personalities of current politicians.
Yet not a word about Peru's rainforests, or the state of the topsoil on those steep Andean slopes.
And almost nothing about Peruvian society as a whole.
Certainly the political and military situation in Peru is important, but not to the exclusion of all else.
Stuck on guns
Throughout the issue on Peru (NI 197) there is no viable alternative suggested to organized armed-resistance as a means to deal with oppression.
Mixed blessings
I was interested to read Susanna Rance's Letter from La Paz (Resistance in a ghost town NI 197) in which she seemed to be be-moaning the closure of the Catavi and Siglo XX mines in Bolivia and the consequent breaking up of the communities there.
Working conditions in these mines were absolutely horrific for miners.
The management had no regard for either health or safety; the workers were bound to the mine by contract and debt, and there was no hope of escape.
This suffering radicalized the miners.
And it is arguable that the mine closures were a blessing, not the disaster which Susanna Rance seems to suggest.
Stalin's success
I am angry with some of Chris Brazier's History of the World (NI 196)— particularly the vitriolic, unscientific and inaccurate references to Stalin and the great Russian revolution.
The revolution was not ‘highjacked’ by a ruthless dictator as you suggest.
It was brilliantly led by Lenin and the Bolshevik party and brought to fruition under the beloved leader of the Russian people, Joseph Stalin.
Despite attempts by the treacherous Trotskyites and others including Gorbachev to denigrate Stalin, he remains a source of great inspiration and leadership to millions of oppressed people throughout the world.
Personal prejudice
To think that I have contributed to the felling of trees so that the myopic gropings of a pseudo-intellectual can be printed (History of the World NI 196).
The cant that occasionally surfaces in NI articles has finally staged a revolution and overthrown a complete issue.
History is one person's interpretation of events.
But an acknowledgment of bias is not a license to parade personal prejudice as sound reasoning, which you do in this issue.
Burning issue
With such a clear overview and a balanced feminist perspective in your History of the World NI 196, how is it possible that you failed to mention the witch burning of the 16th and 17th centuries, when nine million women, men and children were executed?
Evolutionary doubt
I must commend you on your excellent History of the world (NI 196).
I disagree with one point however.
If we did evolve one species into another, why are there no half-fish or half-humans today?
The anatomy of living things is so complex and delicate that they could only have been created by a Supreme Creator.
Goddess worship
Never has the time been more opportune to revive the worship of the Great Earth Goddess and her consorts (History of the World NI 196).
Orthodox monotheism stinks — Jewish, Christian and Muslim.
This planet is cursed by the worship of a jealous super-male who ‘fashioned’ the world rather than‘giving it birth’.
This has long encouraged people to hold Nature in contempt with ruthless practices of commerce and technology threatening life's very viability.
Driving women
Thank you for the impact and clarity of your Car Chaos (NI 195).
But I think an important addition would be an analysis of women and cars.
More women than men use public transport world-wide; fewer drive; fewer own their own cars.
You also failed to mention safe transport schemes for women.
Cars are the only alternative to unsafe streets for many women.
Dangerous discussion
Your magazine is potentially very dangerous.
I presume you wish to help underdeveloped countries but I fear you could do them considerable harm.
The April issue, How to help children (NI 194), is especially bad.
You depict rare occurrences — like Westerners paying for foster children to visit their affluent country — as a major problem.
You criticize aid agencies for trying to get affluent people interested in the welfare of Third World poor, without offering practicable alternatives.
You accuse these agencies of improper motives — such as using children as bait for donors — when you are guilty of the same shortcoming on your cover.
And you make ridiculous statements — as in your Born to beg article which asserts that the use of children by heroin addicts to support their habit is more ethical than aid agencies' publishing children's photos to help their fundraising.
Unless you offer positive alternatives you do more harm than if you had done nothing at all.
Sexist slip
Why does the Peters Atlas of the World have a major heading that says: ‘Nature, Man and Society’?
(NI 193) NI should be ashamed.
Imaginative solution
People in the British colony of Hong Kong could settle in the British colony of the Falklands and form an independent state.
This would solve three problems.
The Hong Kong people would have a home.
Britain could stop spending so much on defending the Falklands.
And Argentina might bankrupt itself with a second invasion.
The Vietnamese boat-people could settle on Britain's other island, South Georgia.
Rubbishing homes
I read your issue on architecture (NI 202) with dismay.
To proscribe beauty and decide what people should and should not like about where they live smacks of arrogance and elitism.
You espouse democratic participation in design.
But you do not consider the possibility that some may actually enjoy the view from atop a highrise.
It is also simple-minded to assert that everyone can or should be involved in the complexities of designing universities or opera houses.
Your tendency to romanticize the vernacular belongs to the imperial era of glorifying ‘the noble savage’ while stealing his/her land.
How many shantytowns of the Third World would not cherish one of those suburban bungalows you so despise?
Shocked response
I was horrified to read that Bishop John Shelby Spong has received death threats because he supports committed monogamous relationships between gay and lesbian people (Homosexuality NI 201).
I am a Christian and cannot agree with what John wrote in his article Sodom revisited.
But it saddens me that people could send death threats because they don't agree with something.
Where is the Christian love that Jesus talked about?
People who write things like that make themselves as bad as the thing they attack.
Silly joke
Re the ‘Enaye Islands’(NI 200)— who are you kidding?
These islands do not exist!
I searched loads of encyclopedias, gazetteers etc.
No mention of the ‘Enaye Islands’.
I even searched the Cambridge Encyclopedias of Languages for a mention of the ‘Enaye’ language.
Zilch!
And then it struck me.
‘Enaye’— pronounced NI.
The signature at the bottom, clinched it: Jane Doe — which is a synonym for The-Woman-in-the-Street.
How could you do this to me?
I look to NI for factual-thought-provoking journalism, not April Fool's Day articles.
And while you are about it, please drop that stupid name Aotearoa for New Zealand.
The whole world apart from a handful of Maoris know it as New Zealand…are you trying to con a few subscriptions from them?
Delinquent goddess
Goddess worship (History of the World NI 195) is primarily suitable for extreme feminists who want to dominate men.
The stories about these goddesses show that they are not beneficent; they are mostly older females who choose young men — sometimes even their own sons — as lovers to be kept in subjugation.
Goddess worship is associated with human sacrifice, prostitution, castration and sexual orgies — it should not be recommended.
Fortress right
In The Palestine/Israel conflict (NI 199), Ms Shaw refers to ‘Israel's fortress mentality’.
She should understand that every country in the world has an incontrovertible right to a ‘fortress mentality’ and every country has been historically allowed the right to keep its borders intact and protect its people from invasion by hostile forces.
She should recall that Arabs were very aggressive towards Israel, refusing to admit the possibility of a Jewish State in the Middle East.
And she should also remember Israel's small size.
Torn apart
Amid a difficult debate, the recent edition dedicated to the Palestine/Israel conflict (NI 199) was a brave one.
It failed, however, to highlight the efforts made in the past to create a bi-national state in Palestine.
Early Jewish pioneers to Palestine favored the creation of a bi-national state — one Jewish, the other Arab.
In 1919 Emir Feisal wrote that he wished the Jews ‘…a hearty welcome home…
We are working together for a reformed and revised Near East, and our two movements complement each other.’
The Jewish settlers supported this situation until 1948 when the Arab powers rejected the UN proposals for a Partition Plan.
Instead the Arab armies invaded.
By the 1960s the State of Israel had become more secure.
Yet many on the left in Israel still called for a Palestinian homeland while guaranteeing Israel's security.
The Allon plan was just such a proposal.
It envisaged an initial Palestinian homeland in both the West Bank and Gaza.
Eventually, the whole of Palestine-Israel-Jordan was to have become a confederation, rather like Switzerland.
This would have allowed the right of abode to all citizens in any part of the country.
Workers unite
The concluding discussion on historical inevitability in The History of the World (NI 195) wants much stronger resolve.
It should have stressed — as Marx does — the importance of workers everywhere gaining complete control of production as the way out of their historical tyrannies.
The ‘industrial railroad track’ is altered and the ‘new direction’attained by the concrete realization of ‘workers of the world unite’.
Religious challenge
We have noticed certain errors concerning Islam in the History of the World (NI 195).
It was stated that Islam was based on the worship of a ‘Father God’.
This is totally unfounded.
The God that Muslims worship is free from any ‘creaturely’ attributes and in fact the Arabic term ‘Allah’possesses neither gender nor plural.
Moreover, the presence of an image of the ‘Great Goddess’ on the Black Stone in the Kaaba is certainly a myth.
It is difficult to believe that a religion so strongly anti-idolatory would allow such an image to exist in the holiest of shrines.
Cancer cure
I was extremely interested to read your special issue on Cancer (NI 198).
Since my wife was diagnosed with the illness, I have been researching alternative cures during which time I have come into contact with the ‘Association stop au cancer’ based at 29 Bd Gambetta, 73000 Chambery Cedex, France.
This was set up to promote the theory and findings of Dr Ryke Geerd Hamer, who claims that the real causes of cancer are mental conflict experienced in isolation.
There has been a 97-per-cent success rate in treating over 10,000 cases of cancer on the basis of Dr Hamer's theory, and details are available from the above address.
Insensitive treatment
Your article Ten ways to get cancer (Cancer NI 198) was written in a negative and insensitive way and implied that the responsibility for getting the illness lies solely with the individual.
In fact, we have little control over some things in this world; some have less control than others according to economic status, geographical location etc.
To imply that individuals ‘deserve’ or choose to get cancer through their actions is absurd and wrong.
As someone bereaved through the disease, I felt angry and upset by the flippancy with which you dealt with this subject.
Painful cuts
I read your article Two Decades in the Life of the World (NI 200) with both pleasure — because it is well written — and despair, because development has been thrown into reverse.
It is very hard convincing powers like the World Bank to adopt policies that truly help the poorest.
And the recent World Bank and IMF meetings did not sound encouraging for the most indebted nations who are constantly forced to make cuts where it hurts most: health, education and food subsidies.
If these institutions genuinely want to help the poor, they should give priority to helping voluntary organizations.
It is also time to insist on a borrower having a good track record in ending hunger in their own country, before they get money.
Elitist posture
Dexter Tiranti's meeting with the New Zealand customs officer (NI 200) should have taught him not to make assumptions about people.
He might then have thought twice about his ridiculous and insulting implication that readers of the ‘gutter press’ and ‘popular newspapers’are not concerned about the state of the world.
You may like to consider the fact that readers of the popular press contributed millions to BandAid, SportAid, Comic Relief etc; have taken solidarity action in support of trade unionists in South Africa and Namibia; are informed about workers' conditions in the same industries in the Far East and so on.
Come on NI, stop your elitist posturing and question the quality of your coverage.
Just because the Guardian hasn't got tits and bums on every page doesn't mean it isn't sexist.
Happy birthday
May I extend my heartiest congratulations to Dexter Tiranti, Lesley and Peter Adamson, Troth Wells and the whole NI team on reaching the 200th issue.
Please do not be concerned about measuring how much NI has done over the years; it is not easy to quantify the awareness, understanding and other benefits your publication has brought to the children of the Third World.
Magazines like NI do change public opinion, though it may take a long, long time.
Bigots and bondmaids
I wish to refute Alan Davidson's comment in NI 174 (Letters) that ‘Christianity does not have exclusive possession of the truth.’
Christianity does not possess one ounce of truth, let alone exclusive possession of it.
It was invented by ignorant bigoted priests of the Council of Nicaea in AD 325.
Christians quote from the Bible as if it had divine authority.
Yet this religion has caused escalating hatred, wars and disease, because of passages in the Bible, surely inserted by evil fanatics.
How about this gem: ‘Both thy bondmen and thy bondmaids which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy them bondmen and bondmaids.
Moreover of the children of the strangers…shall ye buy and of their families…and they shall be your possession.
And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen forever.’
(Leviticus 25: 44-46).
Because the slave traders were brought up in the belief that every word of the Holy Bible was inspired by God, they honestly thought that they had divine sanction to enslave blacks.
Gleeful dodging
You assume, in your issue on Underground Work (NI 173) that the relationship of the individual to the state is both natural and inevitable, and that it in some way presupposes fair treatment of the citizen by the powers that be.
One of your writers actually says: ‘If there is to be government somebody has to pay for it.’
But does there have to be government?
I question both the justice of all governments and the principle by which my taxes can be used to pay for machines of mass destruction.
The glee — and clear conscience — with which most people here avoid taxes if they can, is to do with their feeling of powerlessness in relation to government, and that is what fosters selfish competition.
Gay immunity
To dispel the myth that AIDS is a gay disease you argue (The Politics of AIDs NI 169) that the disease has been around ‘from the very beginning’ but that gays succumbed more quickly than straights.
This you claim happens because gays have poorer immune systems through earlier exposure to diseases such as hepatitis.
Here I get lost.
Why should homosexuals be more susceptible to hepatitis than heterosexuals?
Does this mean anyone who has had hepatitis is at risk during heterosexual sex?
Graham Hancock replies: Hepatitis B is predominantly a sexually transmitted disease.
As, prior to the AIDS epidemic, homosexuals tended to be more promiscuous than heterosexuals, they were particularly susceptible.
Because Hepatitis B impairs the immunity system, people who have had it are generally more vulnerable to infections than people who have not.
Holy food
Your Punchline cartoon (NI 174) was too one-sided.
The ‘base communities’ of Latin America know more than we do about hunger and sickness, but it is study of the Bible that gives them understanding and courage to demand justice in the name of the God of justice.
They — and we — need food for mind and spirit as well as body in order to be truly human.
This world
Many Christians do stand ‘shoulder-to-shoulder with the oppressed’(Letters NI 174) and have taken the preferential option for the poor.
To name but a few: Archbishop Romero, gunned down by right-wing death squads while saying Mass in the Cathedral of San Salvador; Father Ed de la Torre Filipino priest, poet and political activist, who spent nine years in prison under the Marcos regime; and numerous priests and pastors working in Nicaragua, one of whom was recently killed by a Contra-laid mine.
Justice for the Poor is a vision which can unite us all.
Let's not worry too much about claims to exclusivity where truth is concerned — perhaps these are best left until the next world!
Vision fuel
The moral of the Punchline cartoon in NI 174 seems to be that bibles should not be offered to anyone who is short of basic necessities.
Is this consistent with respect for intelligent human beings?
The motives of some missionary societies may be suspect, but the bible itself has helped to fuel the visions of many human rights movements.
Needled
Your articles (NI 169) continue to promulgate a frequently held misconception about AIDS.
You mention that: ‘In Africa, heterosexual intercourse has long been established as the primary transmission route — with the number of men and women infected being almost equal.’
There is evidence that the widespread re-use of non-sterile needles could be the primary transmission route of AIDS in Africa.
This would explain the one-to-one ratio of infection that exists just as clearly as heterosexual intercourse.
It would also explain the increased incidence amongst African prostitutes and their clients.
These people would be having greater contact with non-sterile needles during treatment for sexually transmitted diseases.
AIDS in Africa is widespread because of poverty and poor medical facilities, not promiscuity.
You have done a disservice to the African people by ignoring this fact.
One-man Oman
Is it not patronizing to assume that ordinary Omanis are not interested in affairs of state and to imply that all the peoples of Arabia prefer strong leaders to participatory democracy (Country Profile NI 173)?
Oman is indeed united under one leader who maintains diplomatic relations with East and West.
But it should also be mentioned that Sultan Qaboos overthrew his own father and needed the military support of the Shah and the SAS to defend himself against those of his countrymen not recognizing the benefits of his traditional Arab-Islamic leadership.
His armed forces are still dependent on non-Arab personnel, secrecy surrounds the extent of military ties with the United States and Oman has been less than enthusiastic in supporting Arab League action against the Camp David accords.
Thus he has ensured that ‘Oman is run by Omanis and not by foreign powers’.
Exiled voices
Your issue on Chile (NI 174) was a truly significant and encouraging publication both for Chileans in exile and those working within the country.
The space you gave to exposing our national dilemma is a triumph for anyone persisting in the struggle against the Pinochet dictatorship worldwide.
In our opinion, few other publications on the Chilean struggle have been so generous.
Nor is it usual for the foreign press to first travel and then write the story.
Your articles bring alive the voices of our Compañeros in Chile.
We sincerely hope that this will encourage the work of other committed Chileans in exile together with our European brothers and sisters in the struggle against fascism worldwide.
The empire's new clothes
I read with interest and some misgivings your Soviet Union issue (Moscow Circus NI 190).
You are too enthusiastic about Gorbachev and his reforms for my tastes.
The reform program has not even raised the subject of the ultimate right of the party to control society.
How is it possible to imagine that socialism (control by the workers) is compatible with the monolithic rule of the Soviet Communist Party?
The same system of privileges survives almost untouched.
For example Gorbachev, for all his reforming zeal, is currently having his own multi-million rouble country estate built in the Crimean sunshine.
In short new clothes but the same old bureaucrats.
The issue lacked the clear-headed analysis that I have come to expect from NI.
It is simply not on to believe that those at the top will willingly give up power for the overall health of society.
I wouldn't expect this to happen in a capitalist country so why expect anything different from the USSR?
Your articles on women and workers make fascinating reading but provide us with little hope that a movement for change is likely to come from these quarters.
I see no reason to be optimistic about the prospects for Soviet democracy.
Born targets
The Humane Society of the United States has reported that two toy gun manufacturers — Ray Plastics and LNJ Toys, makers of the new Gotcha enforcer gun — test their products by firing shots into the eyes of rabbits at distances of five feet, three feet, six inches, three inches and half an inch.
The manufacturers defend the practice saying that the rabbits are anesthetized for the shootings and that ‘they are raised specifically for this purpose’.
If you are as outraged as I am, write to Jack Friedman, President LNJ Toys, 1107 Broadway, New York, NY 10010, and to Raymond Leclerc, President, Ray Plastics, Inc, Mill Circle Road, Winchendon Springs, MA 01477.
Tentative travelers
In your issue on Solving the Development Puzzle (NI 183) you state that we should accompany Third World people down the uncertain, dangerous road of political change.
But when are things like self-defense and armed struggle justified?
And how far should we should we go in supporting these?
NI skirts around these problems.
But my experiences in Guatemala, where the government has murdered tens of thousands for taking the tiniest steps towards development, have convinced me that non-violence does not always work, and that it is arrogant and dangerous to insist on such methods.
Hard lesson
Thank you for the Personal Violence issue (NI 187).
I was married to a violent alcoholic for a year.
I learned that even if you pay the mortgage on your home and your husband contributes nothing to bills, you cannot legally lock him out of the matrimonial home.
This law must be changed.
My husband is now off the booze and he is a different person, but I would never marry again and allow anyone that power over me.
Division decision
I am sure that your decision to fragment your coverage of the New Right's impact along geographical lines in The Politics of Greed (NI 188) wasn't taken lightly.
However in doing so you deprived us of detailed insights into the conditions of life in other parts of the world, and played into the hands of the New Right with its ‘divide and conquer’ tactics.
Waving hopefully
There was an expression of bemusement and depression in The Politics of Greed (NI 188) concerning the advance of the New Right.
The depression is understandable.
Sadly the Right has hijacked the moral high ground by diverting attention away from social justice and focusing on issues like homosexuality, abortion and promiscuity.
However there is still room for hope.
Although the capitalist waves of greed are growing higher there is a strong undercurrent too — a green alliance of individuals and organizations with varying commitments to social justice.
Left disappointed
Your Politics of Greed issue (NI 188) is sickeningly liberal and middle class.
The values and assumptions implied in the quiz ‘How right wing have you become?’ are best described by the term ‘cultural imperialism’.
Many of us aren't in any position to consider buying a house or car, let alone shares.
Similarly the group of four articles advancing the route to an ideal society, amount to nothing less than ‘kind capitalism’— a popular fantasy amongst the socially aware middle class, and a contradiction in terms.
Capitalism is a system of producing profit and gain for a few at the expense of others.
Poor question
The theme of The Politics of Greed issue (NI 188) was the greed/envy of the ‘have nots’ for the salary, property, and education of the ‘haves’.
As the issue pointed out, many of the ‘have nots’ are unemployed.
What it did not say was the frequency with which they have chosen that condition.
Why should these people expect to be supported by those who have chosen employment?
Painfully pious
Regarding your issue on Personal Violence (NI 187): please try to be a little less ‘holier than thou’.
Some of us old fogies — I am 60 — are non-violent from necessity.
Sharpen up
I was surprised to see that you used the colonial mis-spelling ‘Mururoa’ instead of‘Moruroa’to name the Polynesian atoll devastated by French nuclear testing (Facts NI 186).
To anyone interested in knowing more about this region, I strongly recommend the book Poisoned Reign by Bengt and Marie-There’ se Danielsson (published by Penguin).
Debt dismay
I welcome NI tackling the difficult but vitally important issue of Debt (Dicing with Debt NI 189).
However your emphasis in most of the articles is on the middle-income countries and bank debt.
The poorest countries — especially in Africa — also have a devastating debt problem which, though small by international standards and offering no threat to the West's financial systems, nevertheless represents a crushing burden for the peoples of these countries.
Although overlooked by your ‘Action Directory’, the World Development Movement is running a major campaign on official debt and the World Bank and IMF ‘adjustment’ policies.
We can provide campaigning materials for NI readers around the world wanting to take action.
Our base is: Bedford Chambers, Covent Garden, London WC2E 8HA.
Sub-human sin
I have not seen the film The Last Temptation of Christ (Reviews 189) and my comments therefore rely on your excellent review article.
The main theme of the film seems to be that since Christ was meant to be truly human, it is not unreasonable to portray him as subject to the same faults that bedevil all our lives.
The main flaw in this argument is that though Christ was fully human he was also fully God and therefore did not sin.
This apparent contradiction is only resolved when we realize that man in his (sic) present state is sub-human — ie less than God intended and created.
The emphasis of the New Testament is that Christ resisted the temptations thrown at him and it was this that qualified him for dying on the cross.
Sharing spirit
In your desperate struggle to dig up hope for Africa in the 1990s (NI 208) you gave naive solutions.
Of course the continent needs greater democracy.
But you ignore the power struggles between ethnic groups — and the widespread practice of nepotism — which have soured democracy in the past.
Democratic rule can only become a reality when African people place their interests as individuals and communities before kinship bonds.
This is possible.
In the harsh terrain of north-eastern Sudan, the Rashida and the Beja nomads compete for scarce resources.
They only survive by acknowledging their common interests and ultimately, by co-operating.
The Beja nomads even coin the word silif, to connote this sharing.
It might just be that the best way forward in Africa is by falling back on the spirit of silif, and building on it.
Drinking rubbish
Your issue on water (Thirsty for life NI 207) is both interesting and horrifying.
Even 40 years ago, Thames river police who fell into the river were taken straight off to be stomach pumped.
And then the upper Thames seemed relatively sweet.
Like many others I have protested in all directions against water-privatization.
Goodness knows how much rubbish we have already drunk.
Counting days
I beg to differ with J Williams (Letters NI 207) that Sunday is the first day of the week.
Ignoring the disagreement between Christianity and Judaism as to which is the seventh day, working people start the week on Monday, and Sunday is their day of reward — however indulged.
I just could not do without a diary that starts on Monday.
Nuclear threat
The issue on global warming (Turning down the heat NI 206)
was full of good information to back its arguments — except, as usual, about nuclear power.
Too many people fear this energy.
A world energy shortage is far more dangerous and could even lead to wars.
Of course we must save 25 per cent of energy through better insulation and so on.
And we should develop renewable sources of energy.
But we will still need 50 per cent of energy to come from more concentrated power sources.
As fossil fuels become scarcer we will have to increase nuclear-power stations.
Properly processed and buried nuclear waste will provide less of a pollution risk than the radiation-filled environment which we inhabit at present.
Expanding doom
I was confused by Nigel Harris's article Halfway to liberation (Trade wars NI 204).
An expanding economy can only mean disaster for the world.
More energy will be needed, which will increase toxic gases being pumped into the atmosphere; finite resources will dwindle and pollution will rise.
Humankind cannot afford to believe that adjustments to our market-orientated economy will meet and solve the problems.
As US scientist Lester Pearson said, ‘There is a need for a revolution in mankind's (sic) thinking as basic as the one introduced by Copernicus, who first pointed out that the earth was not the centre of the universe.’
Growing pains
The article Halfway to liberation (Trade Wars NI 204) might have been written by an IMF boffin.
It ignores the major problems facing our planet.
‘Growth’ is a false and mesmerising idol, a euphemism for greed and lack of global foresight propagated by most industrialists.
The depletion of stocks of minerals and fossil fuel is done mainly to satisfy the First World's boundless greed for gadgetry, and to encourage the Third World to follow its degrading example.
Light living
Readers who enjoyed your issue on Green consumerism (NI 203) might be interested to stay with a working-class family in Kerala, India, for a month to discover how a happy life can be lived at very modest levels of consumption.
Those interested can write to Good Life Study Tours, Institute for Food and Development Policy, 145 Ninth Street, San Francisco, CA 94103, US.
Lonely lives
Thank you for your issue on homosexuality Pride and Prejudice (NI 201).
It was waiting for me when I recently returned from Namibia where lesbians and gay men are isolated and unrecognized, and have no solidarity network.
The magazine served to reinforce my own feelings that we in the UK must fight to preserve lesbian and gay rights which were so hard won and which Mrs Thatcher seems determined to destroy.
Solar enthusiasm
I was fascinated by the article on solar energy (Global warming NI 206) which seems an excellent idea for developing countries, especially in remote villages where there is no electricity.
I am originally from Mauritius — a small island in the Indian ocean — and I think the system would benefit a lot of low-income people there.
Growth gripe
In an otherwise excellent issue about Global warming (NI 206), I found Jeremiah Creedon's rambling article very unconvincing.
In particular it was singularly inappropriate to quote John Stuart Mill as the uncritical advocate of economic growth.
Of all classical economists — Adam Smith, Ricardo, Malthus etc — Mill was the only one to question the philosophy of growth in his Principles of Political Economy.
Chattel challenge
My husband has not paid the community charge which has been operating in Scotland for a year.
He is totally against this tax.
But my contract of employment forbids me from getting involved in contentious politics; I do so at the risk of having a court order taken out against me.
So I have paid my tax.
Nevertheless a sheriff officer has the right to come to our home, take possession of items which I have paid for and take me to court.
The community charge is wiping away the principle that each person takes charge of their own affairs.
The married woman's status is changing and from being a person in her own right she is becoming a chattel.
Diaper dispute
I would like to challenge the widespread assumption advanced in Shopping for the planet (NI 203) that dealing with diapers is an impossibly difficult task.
During the last two years I have spent a total of 15 minutes a day with my son's diaper bucket and can deal quickly with even the most challenging mess.
As for the new US system of having a laundry pick up a bucket each day — the worst is over by the time you have put the diaper in the bucket.
With a washing machine there is very little work involved.
Chainsaw hypocrites
While countries and citizens everywhere decry the rape of rainforest in Brazil, Malaysia, Indonesia and so on, Canada is actively pursuing massive deforestation to fuel equally massive pulp-mill projects.
In the province of Alberta alone, public timberlands almost the size of the UK have been leased to a dozen firms.
In fact two Japanese firms — Mitsubishi-Honda and Daishowa — have received rights to tracts which cover 15 per cent of the province.
These deals, made largely in secret, ignore the fact that pulp prices are plummeting and US legislation requires newspapers to be printed on recycled paper.
How ironic that Canada criticises Third World nations for environmental insensitivity, while simultaneously planning to destroy the world's largest untouched boreal forest.
Student defence
Macdonald Daly (Reviews NI 207) should get his facts straight.
Ox-bridge colleges only display ‘closed to visitors’ signs during exam time, for the sole reason of allowing students peace and quiet in which to study without coachloads of tourists trudging past the window.
To suggest that the signs are up in order to show a ‘vigorous contempt for the people whose productive labour pays for all their intellectual endeavour’ is not only wrong but reinforces the old stereotype of ‘them and us’which at least some colleges are trying to break down.
Irish concern
In the last 21 years the British state has developed a range of counter-insurgency techniques which have been exported all over the world: ‘special units’ such as the SAS, sectarian shoot-to-kill squads, political laws, special courts, media censorship and new styles of torture which leave no mark.
Surely these should interest anyone struggling against injustice?
Youth opportunity
‘Killa Wail’ is an idea for television being developed by Headless Wonder Productions on behalf of the ‘Television Trust for the Environment’and the Dutch Government.
‘Killa wail’ is a drama series about 16-30 year olds who want to do something to save the planet.
I am currently researching the pilot episode and would be interested in hearing from any of your readers who would like to take part.
Ideas about T-shirt design, Third World debt, safe sex, biodegradable plastic boots, dolphins and so on, would be all welcomed.
And we especially want to hear from youngsters who want to make a short piece of film themselves.
Please write to me at: Workstation, 1-11 Ironmonger Row, London ECIV 3QN.
The empire is dead.
Long live the imperial lingo
India has at least 20 languages in common use and many others are widely spoken.
The language diversity of its 800 million people makes the communications problems of most other countries seem trivial by comparison.
Ashok Mitra explains the predicament.
Every evening at prime time I switch over to Bangladesh television from Doordarshan — the Government of India's television monopoly.
Prime-time programmes over here are mostly in Hindi.
On Bangladesh television they are in Bengali, my own language.
During the evening's jaded hours one does not like to listen to an alien tongue.
This is just one of the predicaments of belonging to a polyglot nation.
Eight hundred million Indians between them speak at least twenty different languages, each having its different script and each marked by umpteen dialectical variations.
The Constitution stresses the primacy of Hindi which, written in Devanagari script, is the nation's official language.
But English remains in widespread use for official purposes.
There is a kind of functional anarchy.
Nearly two-fifths of the nation speak and write — when they can — a variant of Hindi.
But other languages like Telegu, Bengali, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, Gujarati, Kannada and Malayalam can hardly be ignored; each is probably spoken by more people than the population of 145 of the member-states of the United Nations.
There is, besides, the issue of cultural pride.
The other linguistic groups are reluctant to accept the position of Hindi as primus inter pares.
And the situation is complicated by the embarrassment that Hindi is relatively under-developed, with a limited vocabulary and a crude grammar.
Much of the controversy is actually mixed up with the nation's political history.
No unified Indian nation existed before the arrival of the British.
The Raj brought the different linguistic groups together under one administrative umbrella.
A political union was imposed through imperial fiat, and the Indian nation emerged.
And while the Empire disappeared in due course, the Indian nation continues, laying claim to be the world's largest democracy.
India has a quasi-federal set-up, with a central government and a number of states organized according to language.
But power and resources have gradually concentrated at the centre, leading to fierce political bickering in recent years.
The two controversies — one over the distribution of power between the centre and the states, the other on the issue of language — have overlapped.
Radio and television, for instance, are the central government's monopoly.
They have been used not only to propagate the virtues of tightly-centralized administration, but also to emphasize the dominance of Hindi.
The non-Hindi-speaking populace have resisted; the political and linguistic battles have intermeshed.
A common official language might hasten the pace of integration for a nation burdened with India's diversity.
On the other hand, forcing such a language on men and women not born to it can have the perverse effect of increasing the number of languages.
This is precisely what has happened in India.
In most parts of the country there are now three languages: the local language, English and Hindi.
In the northern states, whether in the sphere of education, in official files or for the purpose of business, Hindi has largely displaced English.
Elsewhere, Hindi is at best tolerated, and English and the local language rule the roost.
Railways, airlines, banks, and insurance companies are all controlled by the central regime.
From time to time these institutions are instructed to speed up the introduction of Hindi.
So notices for insurance premia arrive at Trivandrum in South India, say, printed only in Hindi, which no-one in the area can decipher.
All hell breaks loose.
Indignant letters appear in newspapers, angry questions are raised on the floor of Parliament, and occasionally fights out.
The police have to march in to quell the riots; when the police fail, the army.
This is very different from the United States where English was already the language of the thirteen original States; as others joined the Union, English was accepted as a matter of course.
Migrants came in waves with their babble of tongues.
But they knew that in order to get assimilated into the great American nation and imbibe of its great opportunities, they had to master English.
The Indian situation is also quite unlike that of the Soviet Union following the October Revolution.
There a single-party State was able to enforce decisions although, even as the use of Russian spread, equal attention was also given to the development of local languages.
So what does the Indian nation do?
If you try this linguistic experiment some groups object, you try out that, some other groups object.
So you abandon both, and try another tack.
It is considered unwise to burden girls and boys with more than two languages at school.
So English falls by the wayside — or Hindi, or the local language.
Whatever happens, the implications are serious.
If the use of Hindi is soft-pedalled, the prospect of evolving a common national language recedes further.
If English is to be dropped, parents worry over the ability of their children to hold their own in the jungle of career-making, where a knowledge of English carries a premium.
Should the suggestion be to drop the mother tongue, local patriotism is immediately aroused and a whole quantity of scientific and technical evidence brought to bear to prove the point that a child's intellectual development is the fastest when instruction is provided in its own language.
The result is a stand-off.
There are government and other agencies which exist to foster exchange between Hindi and the other Indian languages.
But apart from spasmodic translations of some popular fiction and poetry, they don't do much work.
Each language is seemingly happy to stay perched on its insularity.
Since Indians have been unable to resolve their intra-mural debate, English, the language from six thousand miles away, continues to hold sway.
It remains the means of official communication between the central and state governments, and between individual state governments.
Most universities and higher technical institutions use it, and of course it maintains its position as the link language with the rest of the world.
English-medium schools are proliferating.
And not just in the towns and cities.
With agricultural prosperity, such schools are appearing in villages too.
In examinations for entry into the national civil service, the choice for writing the answer scripts is between Hindi and English.
Those with Hindi as their mother tongue thus enjoy an advantage.
There is much heart-burning on this score in the other parts, accompanied by intensified efforts to improve the quality of English instruction.
For non-Hindi households, English is now the weapon which will enable them to have a sufficient say in national administrative affairs.
The English that has developed in the country — certainly its spoken version — will not be readily comprehensible to those from outside the sub-continent.
It has its own flavour, just as Caribbean English has, and phrases and expressions with essentially local roots have filtered through.
The grammar is occasionally suspect.
The syntax is often disjoined.
It is however the language politicians have grown accustomed to, as have businessmen and industrialists, for cross-country communications.
As far as the spoken word is concerned two parallel traditions are being established in the country.
The first is a loosely-structured Hindi.
This is spoken in the north and also understood in the eastern and western states; but it receives short shrift once it ventures to enter the south.
The second oral tradition concerns English.
A variant of the language has evolved in the course of the past half a century or thereabouts, and is used everywhere.
People do not sit down to write it, but those who need to communicate with people in the other parts of the country love to speak it.
And it enjoys a laissez passer in the south which Hindi does not.
Indians have discarded the Empire; they have clung to the language of the imperialists and shaped it in their own manner.
They use it for official purposes and are likely to continue to do so for some considerable while.
Even the most obtuse of the Hindi fanatics will have to, willy nilly, sooner or later, accept the logic of the situation: if they want to save the nation, they have to put up with English.
India is a battlefield.
Its languages are at war; English operates as the International Red Cross.
What happens to national development in such a milieu, did you ask?
Well, skirmishes over language are a certainly a distraction, they prevent you from pursuing other national goals.
To assuage the tension resulting from linguistic warfare, you have to go on humouring group A or group B or group C or group D, and conceivably all of them together.
Resources have also to be diverted to strengthen the police and para-military forces who need to be used to subdue the language rioters.
But, have a heart, you have to first keep the nation together before you can think of developing it.
Home-truths About Homework
At 12.30 everyone stops for lunch in Mary's kitchen: Jane leaves her word-processor; Mark and Lily their picture-framing; Mary her computor; Jean her sewing machine.
They all join Dick and John who run the creche next door, and their children.
A vignette of working life in the coming years?
Not a chance, the way things are going.
For the contemporary reality of homeworkers bears as much relation to this scene as a Dutch interior does to a squat.
Homeworkers are at the bottom of the pyramid created by strategies of fragmenting and farming-out work, in order to save on labour costs and the payment of statutory benefits, and to avoid the hassle of organized opposition to poor conditions.
Homework is done by women whose role as unpaid caretakers of a nation's dependents forces them out of the competition of the job market, and, still needing to earn, into work which is desperately tedious, which has to be carried out in isolation, thus losing for them the only element which makes tedious work bearable — the cameradie of the factory floor.
Isolated, earning low wages, they mostly lose the statutory benefits which it has taken most of the century to establish —sick pay, paid holdiay, paid maternity leave, national insurance and redundancy notice and compensaiton.
Working at home is different to working from home — the latter involves selling professional skills to clients, as do plumbers, translators or fortune-tellers.
Working at home means working for an employer, usually on a piece-work basis.
In fact few homeworkers enjoy employee status.
In Britain today about one third of workers at home are in traditional manufacturing — garments, toys, footwear, stationery, electrical goods and so forth.
The rest do clerical work — a lot of it computor-assisted.
Rough guesses suggest they number round 300,000 and all predictions are that their numbers will increase.
The fact that we can only guess at the figures is one of the first clues to their situation.
Homeworkers are often invisible and inaccessible.
Employers may be reluctant to admit using them because the terms of their employment are embarrassing.
Many of the workers hide through fear and ignorance,(many of them are immigrants) they are uncertain about their tax liabilities loss of existing benefits, their immigrant status.
Many women from immigrant communities are hidden by their men, who may be entrepreneurs, and they fear offending both their men and the community by complaints about their work.
The paid work of women at home is as invisible as the unpaid work of women at home, and as poorly rewarded as the work of women the world over.
The precise number of homeworkers is hard to assess, and so is their real pay, for many of them do piece-work, and find it hard to calculated how much they do.
For example homeworkers in the East Midlands were paid 3.5 pence for straightening before packing a dozen tights.
To earn 20 they would have had to straighten 6,200 tights.
Small wonder at the end of a week, punch-drunk wth boredom, they were vague about how many they would normally do in a specified time-period.
Most of them earned the remarkable sum of 13 per full-time week.
The most recent surveys showed that 72 per cent of homeworkers earned less than the statutory minimum established by the Wages Council (which the present government is hoping to abolish).
A study in 1984 showed three quarters earning 1 per hour or less.
There is nothing to suggest these levels have imporoved.
Getting away with extremely low wages is only one of the benefits enjoyed by the employer ofhomeworkers.
Formore than half are regarded as self-employed absolving the employer form any obligations with regard to insurance, sick pay, holiday pay, overtime, maternity leave, redundancy notice or compensation (the boo-word for these benefits amongst the new promoters of self-employment is ‘red tape’).
Most improtant is that homeworkers are easily disposed of ‘Outworkers are used as a buffer against market fluctuations, particularly in the manufacturing sectors’ said the Employment Gazette blandly.
This ‘buffer’ is what is meant by ‘flexibility’of labour, another current rhetorical favourite.
However this is not all.
There are other treats in store for the employer who ‘streamlines’ production and uses outworkers apart from the fact that it is not uncommon for them to supply their own machinery, they also carry all the overheads of power, lighting, and heating, and the maintenance and cleaning of premises.
Here the homeworkers poorly paid job dovetails neatly into the work for which she is not paid at all.
Homework makes a mess.
The family living room is filled with bulkly materials which create dust and refuse, and often it stores dangerous glues and solvents and sharp instruments hwich have to be guarded from the children.
Rita in her small flat is typical.
Rita has given up the daily struggle to clear the family's only dining table of the piles of skirts to be hemmed, the cottons, machine, and bags.
They eat standing up in the kitchen.
The two children play all day in the space between the beds in one of the two small bedrooms, for the rest of the living room space is blocked by great plastc bags of ever more skirts.
The women who assemble stationery or shoes have to inflict on their families the permanent, sickly, and probably unhealthy smell of glue and solvents.
Even where it is possible to clear up after the day's work, another couple of unpaid hours work is added to the women's costs and subtracted from those of her employer.
All these advantages for the employer, together with the incapacity of isolated workers to mount opposition to exploitation, are the perfect answers to the call to streamline production.
Into this economic context, women with small children fit like pieces of Lego.
For even in Britain today there is no serious challenge to the idea that care and domesticity are exclusively female responsibilities.
Accepting this state of affairs many women are actually grateful to ‘understanding’ employers who are ‘flexible’about hours on site, or who provide them with homework, to be done simultaneously with looking after the children.
The women have little choice.
Leonie, a machinist, said ‘We'd never survive for long without my money, rotten though it is (averaging around 30 a week), for sooner or later one of the kids needs new shoes, or the iron busts, or there is a birthday — the 55 a week I get from Sam, when I get it, doesn't begin to touch things like that.
I can't do anything else.
And people think that you work when you like, when it fits in, like, with homework, but I have to work every minute to make enough to make it worthwhile.’
Women trapped at home sewing and gluing and stapling are at the dustbin end of dreadful employment practices.
At the smart end are the computor programmers and analysts.
They earn a lot more, at the last count, averaging 4.63 an hour — though this was a lot less than their on-site colleagues, for they only earned when there was work.
Still, more of them had employee status and the associated benefits.
They were, too, more likely to enjoy the actual work, for they had undertaken training to do it.
Nevertheless the essential social situation remains they same — they are marginal and disposable as workers, they are isolated, even more than women with young children who don't work, for they don't have time to meet others in parks and playgrounds, and they have the stress of simultaneously minding children and working.
As Marianne, a programmer, said ‘My only reason for doing this at home is to be with the children, and the worst thing about it is never getting away from the children.’
In very few cases is homework a freely chosen option and the more women are trapped into it the more likely is the erosion of services, nursery centres and transport, to trap them into it.
But the long revolution to share out caring responsibilities, the re-skilling of work and the training of women, and the provision of facilities for finance and marketing of their own products, looks like being a very long one indeed.
In some ways organizations in the Third World like Gabriela in the Phillipines and SEWA in India, seem further along the road than we are here.
For they concentrate on building up co-operatives which allow women to be responsible for the whole production and marketing process.
Here, at the moment, some local authorities have set up Homeworking Units.
These use the authorities' potential, through planning permission, loans, and contracts to press firms into Good Employer practices.
These cover homeworkers.
In addition they try to contact homeworkers and provide Factpacks in several languages to inform them about local authority facilities which already exist — like childcare and contact centres, and telling them about the health and safety risks of homework and how these can be reduced.
They also show them clearly the massive benefits enjoyed by employers and the costs which they are carrying.
Perhaps, most important, they spell out clearly the situation with regard to benefits and tax and offer help with legal problems.
The re-marriage of work and domesticity and the reduction of hours of commuting still utopian.
for it to become reality, virtually all its present features have got to change.
The benefits of increased efficiency have to be shared properly and the invisibility and marginality of homeworkers has to go.
Some firms in the US and France have tackled the problems of isolation by setting up small centres which are a meeting point for homeworkers as well as a focus for organization.
The de-skilling, which currently forms the basis of homeworking and which is the worst destruction of human potential has to be countered by new modes of organization which could challenge the power of the new capitalism.
Most important, caring responsibilities have to be shared out, respected and paid for.
Then men or women could choose what kind of contribution they are gong to make to all societies work.
LETTER FROM MAWERE
Margaret St Clare has been living and working in the Zimbabwe countryside since January 1984.
This month she describes the pitfalls and pleasures of local ways of working.
This morning I put the kettle on the gas before going down to the Blair toilet at the bottom of the maize field.
The grass was high and golden in the morning sun.
After breakfast of tea without milk and rolls with cheese and marmalade, I wrote myself reminders of what to discuss today at the ‘Keep Trying’ bakery, collected useful handouts and a picnic lunch, fetched the bike from its tiny sleeping house, pumped up the back tyre and I was off.
It is a ten-minute ride to the road, first on a narrow path along the side of a field of parched maize and groundnuts, then down across the stream, up the smooth rounded granite and along the top, passing by my neighbour's home, down round her fields under the trees and up to the tarred road.
Laid for white tourists, this road hugs the flat land by the lakeside, going nowhere in particular, while the road south through the communal area which I soon turn onto is much busier, yet is untarred and in many places steep and treacherous.
Passing the township, both brakes jammed on, I slither and judder down the newly regravelled surface, hoping for something to pass and pick me up, but also marvelling at the open splendour of the valley scenery which surprises me afresh every time I look.
Nothing passes during the eight miles to Dimatima.
I slow down for some cows and greet many people but I don't usually have to stop now, even for elders.
I've gradually learned how to carry on casual yet animated extended greetings, including weather and work comments and the odd joke, even respectful clapping (hand to shoulder) while pedalling past.
When I get to the township, three women have already prepared the bread dough in a bucket.
I see they have made new breadpans of the right size out of empty cooking-oil cans from the US AID supplementary feeding programme — these were brought out recently by a local agency who helped the women to build a new oven.
They should make a bit more profit than they used to with the old, oversized pans they made from bigger oil cans.
The new oven is popular.
The women are glad not to have to labour in their sweltering, smoke-filled little pole-and-dagga houses.
Previously they had to remove embers from the long fire-pit to lay on corrugated metal sheets, then embed the breadpans in the cinders and replace the hot sheets over the hole.
The new mud and brick oven is designed around two used oil drums — a piece of ‘appropriate technology’ developed and introduced, in part, by an expatriate ex-colleague.
It's nice to see it in action.
To my amused horror, I find myself urging the women to try baking buns (more sugar, more profit!) and working out the amounts for a trial run.
With government-subsidized bread prices, it is very hard to make a rural bakery worthwhile for 15 members by making bread alone, even mixing local maize meal with the flour.
Though it depends, of course, on what you mean by ‘worthwhile’.
Certainly this bakery is not yet a going financial concern, but who can measure the value of the women's enthusiasm, optimism, pride and enjoyment of their co-operative effort?
It was their own idea, started without help before I began my work as an adviser and I want to try and help them make it a success.
In between the business talk people are coming and going with news of death or illness, words of praise and encouragement and proposals for mutual support between local co-operatives.
Among the women, the talk is of Kubereka (childbearing).
A woman starting her twelfth pregnancy says her mother scolded her when she heard: ‘You will die!’
She says her mother had six and then stopped.
Writing this down, I realize she is afraid, but this morning she shared her fear so publicly and laughed so heartily that this didn't strike me till now.
This morning, as often happens, the women urged me to marry here and have a family.
They even jokingly offered me a brother or son — I used to think this was a straightforward, if surprising and rather frivolous show of openness to newcomers.
But maybe it is rather a response to the real threat which we single expatriate women, with all our means and mobility, present to family structures here.
Instead of being repressed, the frightening possibility is voiced, dramatized and laughed about and so acknowledged as part of life.
Everything from bereavement and marriage to the price of yeast is taken as it comes at these rural meetings.
This contrasts with the ‘proper’ business practice of prioritizing, following an agenda, and excluding the personal (which often reappears with us in various professional disguises!).
This way of working is often frustrating for me, of course, and it makes for economic inefficiency.
But if efficiency ultimately aims at improving the quality of our life, there is surely another, more important, kind of efficiency here, in the holistic practice of these women and men.
Better safe than sorry
That's the philosophy of modern contraception.
But it's not a philosophy that all women share.
Many would prefer to risk a pregnancy than put up with the side-effects of ‘efficient’ contraception.
Mary Warren reports.
‘We would gladly accept family planning,’ said women at a village meeting in Java, ‘provided that it doesn't interfere with our work, or do us any permanent harm, or be against our religion.
It also has to be explained to us by a woman, who will examine us if necessary and keep it a secret.
It should also cost very little money.’
They seem such simple, such obvious, requirements — requirements that few women anywhere in the world would want to add to.
Yet, on these grounds alone, not one of the widely-touted types of modern contraception would be acceptable.
Take the first two, about health, for instance.
Side effects of the IUD and hormone contraceptives like the pill and Depo Provera are major reasons why between 40 and 70 per cent of users in the Third World to abandon them within two years.
Fear of side effects prevent a further 25 to 33 per cent using them at all.
In the rich world, too, women are abandoning the pill and IUD in droves.
Pill use in the US dropped from 61 per cent of couples in 1973 to 45 per cent in 1982.
The growing distrust of such methods arises from a mixture of sources.
It only takes one media scare story (Pill Deaths Quadruple!) or one neighbour being suddenly rushed to hospital, to make thousands of women think twice about using a particular form of contraception.
‘A woman in the next neighbourhood has one of those coils inside her,’ said someone at a village meeting called by family planning workers in Bangladesh.
‘It hurts and she bleeds all the time.
She wants it taken out.’
‘Go and get her,’ the workers ordered.
Eventually a frail young women appeared, shaking with fear, and was taken into a nearby house.
Five minutes later she emerged, clearly in pain, covering her face with a sari.
One of the family planning workers laughed: ‘It may have hurt but she didn't get pregnant.
Now she will — and she'll be sorry.’
She was sorry.
She died later.
No-one knew the exact cause, but many had their suspicions.
Such suspicions are justified — not only by individual horror stories, but also by a growing number of scientific studies of the side effects of modern contraception.
Half of all maternal deaths in the US in 1975 were caused by contraceptive complications.
One in 500 pill-users in the UK are hospitalized each year as a result of its adverse effects.
Two-thirds of women using the injectable, Depo-Provera, experience what has been dubbed ‘menstrual chaos’ in the first year, some bleeding so frequently and profusely that they have to receive transfusions.
Over a third of the 950 sterilised women in a Bangladesh study were unable to resume work for over six weeks after their operation and there are at least 50 deaths a year from the operation in the Punjab in India.
This does not mean that all these methods should be banned: on the contrary — banning contraception might simply lead to a sudden rise in both abortion and childbirth, both of which are likely to be at least as dangerous for women's health in a poor country.
Even in the rich world, childbirth is between one and a half to three times as dangerous as taking the pill and nearly 11 times as dangerous as being sterilised or using the IUD, whereas early, legal abortion carries a mortality rate similar to the pill.
In fact women are clearly already making this kind of calculation for themselves and many do decide they would rather run the gauntlet of contraceptive side effects than risk a pregnancy and cope with the consequences.
But the numbers deciding in favour of contraception are far fewer than might be predicted from a simple comparison of relative death risks.
And this has the experts confused.
Why, they ask themselves, do women continue to subject themselves to the terrors of a backstreet abortion or the tortures of perilous labours, when reliable means of preventing pregnancy are at hand?
One reason is that women, particularly in the Third World, are often not aware of the real dangers of contraception because health staff and pharmaceutical companies keep them in ignorance for fear of making them stay away from the clinic.
Unfortunately this produces the exact effect they are trying to prevent.
Without proper information, women simply become suspicious — quite rightly — that they are being manipulated and interpret even perfectly unrelated symptoms as being due to their contraception.
Another reason why so many women reject the battery of contraceptive weapons on offer at the family planning clinic is that the arsenal has not been designed with their needs in mind.
Women who want a number of children, for instance, may not be too concerned that their contraceptive should be 100 per cent reliable.
They would gladly put up with a certain level of pregnancy risk if it meant fewer side effects.
And if safe abortion is available as a back-up, then so much the better.
For them the dangers of infertility — real or imagined — may far outweigh the dangers of fertility.
The fact that IUD users are up to nine times more likely than non-users to contract a sterilising infection is enough to rule it out for large numbers of women, despite it's reliability as a contraceptive device — if they are aware of the dangers, that is.
Both the pill and injectables are also known to interfere with fertility after people have stopped taking them.
And it is not only in the Third World that people shy away from permanent sterility.
In the US, where nine million women have been sterilised, a survey in Texas found, not surprisingly, that women would far prefer a reversible operation, were one available.
Sadly, population planners and contraceptive manufacturers do not seem to share women's concerns.
Since 1965, for instance, less than 10 per cent of research money for contraceptives was spent on studies of safety.
Over thirty times as much public money was spent globally on hormonal and surgical contraception in 1978 than was earmarked for the less ‘reliable’(but infinitely safer) barrier methods, such as condoms and diaphragms.
In 1980 to 1983 only 12 per cent of research money went into developing a male contraceptive.
And research into traditional methods such as rhythm, Billings, coitus interruptus, beast-feeding, and others is negligible.
The reasons for these biases are many and varied, including the profitability of certain preparations (zero for traditional methods, minimal for reusable contraceptives like the diaphragm), the extent to which they depend on continuing ‘motivation’ of the user (high for traditional and barrier methods and the pill), and of course the efficiency of the method itself.
But, ironically, there is evidence that these ‘efficient’ methods may in fact turn out to be less reliable than their less efficient counterparts.
In Bangladesh, for instance, the birth rate in one village went up after the pill was introduced: because it both interfered with lactation (90 per cent of the users were lactating mothers — and lactation is known to help prevent ovulation), and was abandoned by 80 per cent of the women because of side effects.
In the Punjab in India, too, the birth rate went up after spermicides were introduced because people abandoned their traditional forms of birth control and then failed to use the unpleasant pessaries.
In the UK a study in 1970 found that people were twice as likely to continue with coitus interruptus than with the diaphragm and in 1974 the International Planned Parenthood Federation declared that this time-honoured method ‘probably remains the most widely used of all on a global scale’.
However, the one problem with traditional methods of family planning is that they almost invariably require that the man be involved as well.
As Gandhi put it: ‘The problem of unwanted pregnancy would be solved if men would but love their wives’.
AUSTRALIAN MOONLIGHTER
Mike was married twice by the time he was 20: first to Jenny, and then to a large mortgage.
He had intentions of studying to become an engineer, but found that a job as a cadet draughtsperson with the government would pay quite well and give him more free time.
The substantial mortgage was by no means essential, but Mike's parents had always owned a large, well-appointed home on Sydney's prestigious North Shore and he didn't see why he should settle for less.
His wife, Jenny, decided to stay at home with their young child and to become more involved with the area's social life.
‘We married early,’ Mike said, ‘so I don't see why we should miss out on what life has to offer.
We've worked hard enough.’
Mike took an evening job with his brother, cleaning in a nearby shopping centre.
The hours weren't too awkward and the money was helpful for all those little essentials like clothes and records, their wine subscription and toys for their boy.
Jenny had gone without a few things in her youth and was determined that their boy would lack nothing.
Due to a few simple changes on employment records, the cleaning income was tax-free.
‘I pay enough tax on my first job’, Mike said, and didn't accept the connection between taxes and help for the unemployed.
‘There's enough work around if you're willing to look for it,’ he added.
Mike finished his studies with the help of generous study leave (official and unofficial) from his government employer.
Within a year he was earning A$24,000 and a further $8,000 from his cleaning job.
Jenny inherited a substantial sum from the estate of an aunt and used the funds to buy a second car and to establish a trust account for their child.
Mike left his cleaning job and through friends at his office started contract drafting work after hours for an agency.
The pay was good — $35 an hour — and he was able to use materials and equipment (particularly computer time) from his office unnoticed.
It also gave him the excuse for being able to claim a whole series of ‘expenditures’ on his taxation forms, such as furnishings, heating, materials and travel.
With the help of another friend, an accountant, he was able to net an additional $12 — $15,000 a year from this work.
By his mid 20s, Mike was earning around $40,000, but paying tax on far less.
He was also quick to claim the government's dependents' allowance for his wife and the child endowment for their boy.
‘The allowance is a pittance’, Mike said, ‘when you consider the cost of decent schooling.’
Food and flames
In the Zambian food riots they burned down the supermarket and looted the shops.
John Mukela went to the Copperbelt to find out why.
His name is Thomas Kasonde but his friends call him Texas.
Throughout our long conversation his head is constantly in motion, eyes darting to and fro consciously avoiding my gaze.
He can't be more than 25 years old.
And without an education or marketable skills Texas epitomizes the majority of Zambia's army of no-hopers, caught in a web of urban poverty from which escape is almost impossible.
Speaking in the local Bemba dialect, Texas tells the story of Zambia's worst civil unrest in post-independence history — the 1986 food riots which arose from the burning desire of Zambia's poorest people to survive.
President Kaunda had been forced to implement an International Monetary Fund-inspired 120 per-cent-increase in the price of Zambia's staple food, maize meal.
And for the first time ever, Texas tasted victory:
‘In the morning we heard they had increased the price of maize meal.
We thought we should force them to bring the price down.
So we went on the rampage.
We stoned the buses belonging to the United Bus Company.
And those of us who could drive, collected passengers and appointed our own bus conductors.
It was a revolution!’
Rioters targeted state-owned properties: attacks on these buildings represented a public statement of indignation against the Government.
In Kitwe city centre normality ceased altogether and the area resembled a war zone.
Looters carried clothes out of shop windows along with anything else they could lay their hands on.
Many stripped off their clothes on the spot and changed into new ones.
They raided the main city bakery to dispense scones and cakes to workers at the civic centre.
And seven new Peugeot cars were driven off from the Central African Motor Services: two were never found.
One of the three supermarkets looted was razed to the ground.
The most violent rioting was in Chimwemwe, a sprawling impoverished township on the outskirts of Kitwe: the hub of the Copperbelt.
The Copperbelt has been a political melting pot for years.
In the 1950s the newly-urbanized mineworkers provided the centre of anti-British nationalism.
The rioting ignited here in 1986 became so severe that on the second day President Kaunda imposed a curfew and closed all of Zambia's borders.
Although the borders have long since re-opened, Zambia's relationship with major international bodies like the IMF and the World Bank has ceased: the economic packages prescribed by these organizations were ditched in May last year.
The country now survives largely on individual grants.
But with an external debt of $5 billion and scheduled interest payments of over $180 million1 annually, there is little hope that the meagre amounts pledged by sympathizers will be sufficient.
The country's economic troubles are rooted in a string of global crises: specifically the oil crisis of the 1970s and the steep drop in copper prices, a commodity upon which Zambia depends for over 80 per cent of its foreign earnings.
There has been an 80-per-cent decline in trade since 1970 and an equivalent decline in government capital expenditure from 1975-1979.
Prices have gone up and up for as long as Texas can remember.
This July for example the government hiked up the price of milk by over 40 per cent.
Texas can't recall when he last drank milk.
Even black-market bread is difficult to come by.
Having no steady work means Texas has little money for such luxuries, anyway.
He refuses to say exactly how he makes his living.
Like others in his position he might get casual jobs carrying bags of maize meal for customers at nearby shops.
Or he could wash cars, polish shoes or more lucratively, engage in the growing underground economy selling rare commodities at home or smuggling them across the border to nearby Zaire.
The technicalities of Zambia's international grants and debt mean little to Texas Kasonde.
The struggle for survival is all that he knows: ‘When we were in charge during the riots,’ he says ‘we pulled down the national flag outside the supermarket.
In its place we hoisted our own flag.
It symbolized victory.
Do you know what it was?’
I didn't.
Texas looks wistful.
‘It was an empty polythene bag of maize meal.’
MISCONCEPTIONS
Is it possible to work out some fancy way of writing this headline, so that it implies its meaning?
Perhaps have the headline inside a thought-bubble issuing from our character's head and being pricked with a pin?
Maybe even a condom that he's blowing up?
This entire magazine is aimed at unlocking the mind-set that says: overpopulation is the Third World's worst problem, that therefore the poor have only themselves to blame for their poverty, and that therefore the solution should always begin with a family planning programme.
Below we challenge some of the major misconceptions arising from the overpopulation mentality.
MYTH 1.
EXPONENTIAL GROWTH
‘Birth rates are rising in the Third World — population growth is getting out of control.’
Drawing of a man (NI reader type) trying frantically to hold back a crowd (of Third World Africans), like a policeman at a demo.
In fact, population growth rates are slowing down everywhere in the world — even in Africa.
If you can imagine population growth as a rocket, then it passed the peak of its upward trajectory in 1970 and has begun to fall back down again.
And, just like a spent rocket, the plummet to earth is happening even faster than the upward rise.
According to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), the world's population will stabilise at around ten billion in approximately 60 years from now.
Of course ten billion is an enormous number of people, but it doesn't seem quite so alarming a figure when you realise that it's only twice the current population of the world.
In some countries the numbers are even declining.
In West Germany, for instance, there are predicted to be 15 per cent fewer people when the population finally stabilises.
In others the slowdown has only just begun.
But even in Kenya — the country with one of the fastest population growth rates in the world — there will only be 120 million people by the time Kenyan population stabilises.
That's only twice the current UK population.
2.
LACK OF CONTROL
‘Without contraception people have as many children as possible.’
Drawing of same man (NI reader) as a contraceptive salesman knocking on door of household full of people — looking out of windows, pressing past the women who opens the door, etc.
This could be a Latin American couple in a shanty-type house.
In fact people who have never even heard of contraception and have never stepped inside a family planning clinic still plan their families.
In Mauritania, for instance, where only one per cent of women uses contraception, the average number of children born to a woman is only 6.25 and the number surviving is even fewer.
In Greece, where contraception was not legalised until 1980, women bore an average of only 2.3 children in 1978.
Yet each woman could, theoretically, have given birth to as many as 15 children spaced two years apart or 30 spaced a year apart.
So what are they doing to curtail this potentially crippling sequence of pregnancies?
The answer lies in the time-honoured methods of withdrawal, abstinence, non-penetrative sex, douches and abortion, plus a whole plethora of folk methods — herbal potions, amulets, spells — of unknown efficacy.
There are at least six million abortions every year in India alone, five million of which are illegal.
In the Philippines, where the Catholic Church makes contraception unacceptable or difficult to obtain, marriage is delayed, on average, until the woman is aged 24.5.
And the table shows the large numbers of women currently using what the World Fertility Survey dismissively (and inappropriately) calls ‘inefficient’ methods of contraception.
MYTH 3.
DEVELOPMENT IN REVERSE
‘A poor country's fragile economy just can't keep up with population growth, so people will just get poorer and poorer.’
Drawing of our NI reader slicing a cake into thin slices, while a waiting queue of hungry (Thai/Indonesian) people waits patiently, with empty plates, to be served
Proponents of this myth argue that countries with increasing per capita incomes, like Japan (21% increase from 1980 to 1986), have low population growth rates (0.7% a year), whereas those with declining incomes, like Nigeria (28% decrease from 1980 to 1986), have much higher population growth rates (3.0%).
They therefore conclude that population growth causes poverty.
This myth can be countered in its own terms: first by pointing out that the impressive economic performance of countries like Indonesia and the Philippines, whose per capita incomes have grown by an average of 3.0% a year in the last few decades, took place alongside rapid population growth; second by showing that Africa's ten richest countries have similar population growth rates to the continent's ten poorest countries.
But the myth is also based on the assumption that people are consumers rather than producers of wealth.
For instance: Japan fears that providing for its growing proportion of dependent old people (an increase in the over 65s from 9% in 1985 to 21.3% in 2025) will destroy the economic miracle of the last 40 years.
But the real problem is employment opportunities, not absolute numbers.
The retirement age in Japan is often as low as 50 years, so Japanese old people are turned from producers into consumers long before their time.
Meanwhile France and Belgium are trying to encourage people to have more children in an effort to revitalise their flagging economies.
MYTH 4.
PRESSURE ON RESOURCES
‘The world can't support all those extra hungry mouths.
There are simply not enough resources to go round.’
Drawing of NI reader opening cupboard shaped like a globe (the earth) and finding, to his horror, that it's empty
The NI challenges this myth, or a variant of it, almost every month.
But for some reason it just refuses to go away.
The problem, as we point out over and over again, is not the resources themselves, but the way they are distributed.
With apologies to those of you who've read this before — here we go again…
CONSUMPTION
The average American consumes 300 times as much energy as the average Bangladeshi.
In fact, the 16 million babies born each year in the rich world will have four times as great an impact on the world's resources as the 109 million born in the poor world.
Each American consumes 26,000,000 tons of water, 21,000 gallons of gasoline, 10,150 pounds of meat and 9,000 pounds of wheat in her or his lifetime.
And there is one born every 7.5 seconds…
LAND
The Netherlands (one of the richest countries in the world) is twice as densely populated as India (one of the poorest) and the UK is two and a half times as densely populated as China.
In fact, if every Briton decided to go to the seaside on the same day there would be only four inches of sand per person!
Land is only a concern when it is a direct source of people's livelihoods.
The UK, for instance, imports 36% of its cereal needs.
In the Third World land scarcity among the poor is due to skewed ownership, not an overload of people.
In South America, for instance, 47% of the land is owned by just 2% of the population.
RAINFOREST
Yes, the world is losing its precious rainforest: in Central America, for example, the decline has been 38% in just over 30 years.
But it is a few rich people who are responsible for this, not the growing numbers of the poor.
In the Philippines 34.6 million acres of rainforest was reduced to just 5.4 million acres by logging programmes during the corrupt Marcos regime.
In Brazil too, the major culprits are big multinational corporations like Goodyear, Volkswagen, Nestle and Mitsubishi, who have diversified into lumber and cattle ranching in the Amazon.
DESERTIFICATION
Nearly one-fifth of the world's land is threatened with desertification.
The overgrazing of livestock and cutting down of brush and trees for firewood are held responsible.
But it was skewed development priorities that forced people into a continued dependence on livestock in the first place and huge, often foreign-owned ranches that pushed those people and their herds onto fragile, marginal land.
Some estimates predict that Kenya's fuelwood will be exhausted in less than 20 years if current rates of consumption persist.
But women will adjust to any shortage long before that time comes.
Rather than spend eight hours a day gathering firewood, they will conserve fuel by cooking less frequently or more communally.
It takes the same amount of fuel to cook for 20 as it does to cook for 10.
FOOD
The United Nations states that ‘food supplies might be adequate if they were evenly distributed in relation to needs’.
In fact one (admittedly optimistic) international study of agricultural potential estimated that the world could feed 25 times its present population.
With the population due to stabilise at merely twice the current numbers, there would appear to be little cause for concern on a global level.
However, per capita food production in Africa has been declining slowly and steadily over the last few decades.
Yet this is the continent where the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization envisages the greatest potential increase in production: from 43 million tonnes in 1975/79 to 108 million tonnes in 2000.
One of the most important constraints on food production in Africa is lack of person-power in the rural areas.
MYTH 5.
BIG FAMILIES ARE POORER
‘Poor people would be much better off if they had fewer children to feed and clothe.’
Drawing of NI reader standing proudly beside his smart, well-dressed child, while another, ill-kempt,(Indian) parent looks harassed with his brood of urchins all wearing patched hand-me-downs.
This depends on whether children are an asset or a liability.
In the US, for instance, the cost of supporting a child to the age of 18 — excluding college fees — is over $100,000 and 50% of American women using contraception are doing so because they feel they can't afford another child.
But in Bangladesh boys are already producing more than they consume by the age of 10 and have repaid their parents’ investment in their upbringing by the time they are 15.
In Java, Indonesia, children are net income-earners by the age of nine.
This is one reason why sons are so important in some countries: girls usually leave home when they marry, so no longer contribute to their parents' income.
In the Sahel a couple has to bear 10 children to be 95% certain of producing a son who will survive to the age of 38.
When there are no pensions, bearing a son is absolutely vital for old-age security.
MYTH 6.
FEWER DEATHS EQUALS MORE BIRTHS
‘If we prevent children dying in infancy they will just grow up to have children of their own and population will increase even faster.’
Drawing of NI reader peering, aghast, into pram pushed by a pair of Third World children
Every day more children die in the poor world than are born in the rich world.
To parents whose present and future livelihoods depend on their children, those deaths are more than an emotional tragedy.
They are a source of great uncertainty and insecurity that leads them to have more children than they would otherwise.
In the Philippines, for example, couples who have lost a child have larger families than those whose babies all survived.
In Egypt women who have lost a child want larger families than those who have not yet been bereaved.
In fact UNICEF estimates that preventing seven million babies dying each year will lead to the prevention of between 12 and 20 million births by the end of the century.
It is true that there is likely to be a time lag while parents gain confidence in their children's improved survival chances.
But no country has yet managed to achieve a low birth rate while infant deaths rates remain high.
Hardwari Devi sits under a tree on a pavement near a five star hotel in New Delhi and runs a ‘paan’ and cigarette stall.
Her stained fingers deftly fold betel nut and spices into a betel leaf to hand the paan or a packet of cigarettes to customers who come to her.
Most of them are men.
It is unusual for women to sell paan and cigarettes in India becuase men gather around these stalls and exchange local gossip.
Hardwari Devi, 38, who came to Delhi years ago from a village in Uttar Pradesh, says:
‘I started working many years ago, I cannot remember how many, certainly over 15.
I am 30 plus 8 years old.
Till about 5 years ago I used to run a tea stall.
Then I switched to selling paan and cigarettes.
My husband helps me.
‘We used to be harassed constantly by officials of the Municipal Corporation for running what they called an illegal business.
The Municipality truck would come without warning and dump all our goods in it and whisk it away.
We would have to go to their office and pay maybe Rs 200 to get our goods released.
It is not easy to get licenses to run these roadside businesses.
They are not given as a matter of course to whoever applies.
You need political godfathers to get them.
I was lucky because we heard that the Government was encouraging women's employment, so my husband and I went to the Prime Minister's residence with an application.
And I managed to get a ‘Tehbazaari’ which is a kind of license.
I pay the Municpal Corporation a tax of Rs 60 per month for running a stall on the pavements here, but at least there is no harassment now.
There is the occasional policeman on his regular beat who comes and eats a paan or smokes a cigarette.
Of course, policmen never think of paying for what they buy and we do not ask them for money.
But that is alright; at least they leave us alone.
A stall on the pavement as you see is not the same as having a proper shop, In the summer it gets so hot.
But it is even more difficult to get a shop allotted.
And I do not have the time to leave my stall and chase after politicans.
But I hope I shall have a shop one day.
Now that my son Subhash is grown up, he also comes and mans the stall for a few hours.
He has dropped out of school because he is not interested in studies.
My younger daughter Sonu goes to school.
My older two daughters are married.
My husband and I take turns to sit at the stall.
I come after finishing the domestic chores at home which is not far off.
Our turn over is Rs 200 to Rs 300 per day, but then the items we sell are also expensive.
Cigarettes become expensive every year.
So may be we make about Rs 2,000 every month.
Neither I nor my husband are educated.
I learnt to do arithmetic only when I opened the tea stall.
Even now when I have to count fast, I tend to make mistakes.
Then I ask my neighbour, also a paan seller, to double check for me before I return the change to the customer or else I would be cheated.
We have a spirit of camaraderie in this area between the shopkeepers.
For this reason no one dare harass me.
I suppose it is unusual for a woman to sell paan and cigatettes but then one has to work to survive.
In any case, I sit at the stall during daytime.’
TUNED IN AND SWITCHED OFF
It's not so much whatthey watch but thatthey watch — for hours and hours and hours.
Many children spend more time in front of the television screen than they do in the classroom.
Joyce Nelson assesses the performance of the teacher in the living-room and looks at the lessons being taught.
For years US statistics have been telling us that people watch, on average, more than seven hours of television a day.
In fact, by the time they reach the age of 18, most children have spent more time in front of the TV set than at school.
As adults, the only activity which rivals TV-viewing (in terms of time devoted to it) is sleeping.
As this profile of human life in the late twentieth century becomes a planet-wide characteristic, it raises grave doubts about the future of human intellect, and the goal of educating children to become balanced and rounded human beings.
Television erects major obstacles to that goal both by imposing its own definition of what a whole person is and by teaching us a way of living that accords with its own curriculum.
The overt part of television's curriculum is its programming content and its advertising.
Television is a mass classroom — for adults and children alike — in which we are educated in a quite narrow range of behaviors and values.
Recently people have begun to to criticize the violence, sexism and racism in many programs, the exploitation of children's needs by commercials aimed at them, the biased politics of ‘objective’ news reporting, and by the threat to cultures in the developing world by the widespread broadcasting of TV programs created for a US audience.
But there is another aspect of television's curriculum that is more hidden — and perhaps even more powerful — than that contained in specific programs.
Just consider, for a moment, all the things a person is not doing during those seven hours they spend in front of the set each day.
A whole range of leisure pursuits, hobbies, social encounters, information sources, are automatically excluded.
The most powerful impact of TV's hidden curriculum is simply that of keeping people switched off from life outside the living-room.
And as more and more people tune in and switch off, so everything else has to become more like TV in order to appeal to people who have become unable to tune into anything else.
In this way television sets standards for writing textbooks, editing newspapers — even for the most ‘effective’ ways to teach in the school classroom.
Needless to say, there have been certain noticeable effects on people raised on TV over the past 40 years.
Psychologists Dorothy and Jerome Bruner, co-directors of the Yale University Family Television Research and Consultation Center, found that addicted TV viewers have a shortened attention span and a lack of ‘reflectiveness’— the ability to think, in other words.
Another study, in Harvard in 1981, revealed that children learning from television showed poorer logical thinking than those who obtained their information from books.
Other research, by child psychologist Dorothy Cohen, found that extensive TV viewing led to atrophy of childrens' imaginations.
Given this type of evidence, it is hardly surprising that TV addiction is associated with low achievement in school.
A major survey of the relevant literature, carried out by the National Institute of Mental Health in the US, found that all the research (bar just one study) agreed that television was a significant factor in failure at school.
In an attempt to counter this, many North American teachers have begun making a conscious effort to help their young students ‘develop’ a child's ‘natural’curiosity about the world — not the TV world, but the actual world around them.
Other teachers report that children don't know how to play.
They know how to imitate scenes they see on TV, but not how to generate their own imaginative games.
When teachers give them a few simple objects (cardboard boxes, old clothes, bits of material, and the like) which could be the basis for playful construction, the children don't know what to do.
They are so used to watching TV images that they have no capacity for formulating their own images at all.
Some people defend television by pointing out that, though children read less as they grow older, the actual number of books they read is on the increase.
But when we examine exactly which books are being read, we find that it is usually books first encountered as TV programs or movies.
This means there is no need (or chance) to imagine one's own version of the characters or their environment — it's already been done.
Today many people find it virtually impossible to conjure any face other than Clark Gable's as Rhett Butler in Gone With The Wind.
So reading becomes little more than a way of replaying Hollywood's movies in our minds.
It is the erosion — or elimination — of the imagination that is perhaps the most worrying aspect of TV's hidden curriculum.
The imagination is one of the most important — and potentially political — characteristic of the human species.
Through it we can challenge the status quo, raise the possibility of social change, imagine things that have never existed before, social arrangements that have never been tried.
But television tends to block this ability by filling our minds with its own images and reiterating them over and over again.
Our own capacities diminish as they become dominated by TV images.
And it more and more difficult to imagine any world other than the one portrayed on TV.
There is also evidence that TV, as a technology which works by electronic scanning, effectively shuts down the functioning of those parts of the brain that reason and think actively and logically — the skills that have been associated with the left hemisphere of the brain.
Switching off this mode of processing allows the complimentary mode to predominate.
This mode has been associated with the right hemisphere and tends more towards passive, visual processing, during which the overall emotional tone if a situation becomes paramount.
One consequence of this ‘switching-off’(and how many of us describe flopping in front of the television with exactly these words?) could be as follows: you are watching a party-political broadcast in which a candidate is giving a speech.
One part of your brain is able to identify the flaws in her arguments; but the other is only aware of the emotion in her voice.
Normally the brain continually pools these complimentary sources of information to provide you with a relatively complete experience.
But if you are watching television you are likely to be much more affected by the knee-jerk emotion of the speech than by its political content.
Much of this research has been done by TV advertising agencies and TV organizations themselves — so we can only assume that they have used it to shape their programs to appeal to that level of consciousness.
Obviously this is dangerous.
We need to be alert to all aspects of our environment if we are to live sanely in the world.
And it is essential that we should be the ones who control just which parts of our brains we use so that we can achieve what we have decided are our goals.
The person who graduates from television's school, then, is someone who has little imagination and few skills in logical analysis and critical discussion; they have a marked preference for images rather than reality; and a deep and increasing commitment to just one activity: watching television.
Educators, and others, who abhor the idea of a world filled with TV's graduates are clearly out of step with the times.
But that, in itself, may provide reason for hope.
Choosing to be Childless
Sixteen year-old Mina lives in Nepal.
If she doesn't get pregnant soon, people will think there's something wrong with her.
For Mina there is no choice.
Thirty-five year-old Monica lives in England.
If she doesn't get pregnant soon, people will think there's something wrong with her too.
Does she have a choice?
‘Wouldn't you like a nice little baby like that?’
The question popped up so regularly I was getting used to it.
‘She's beautiful,’ I said, stroking the soft, downy cheek.
‘And I'd love one.
But not yet.
Maybe in a year or so we'll stop using contraceptives.’
At first everyone had been smiling, thinking how right I looked holding the baby.
But then the smiles had given way to whispering.
The words themselves were tactfully disguised, but their gist was clear: no childless, married woman uses contraceptives, so I — poor thing — must be trying to cover up my barrenness.
For Mina — who, at 16, was exactly half my age — there was no question of postponing motherhood.
She desperately wanted a child.
She told me that she couldn't be happy until she'd given birth and, in the course of time, I began to understand what she meant.
She was married to the eldest son in the household where I lived, high in the Himalayan mountains of Nepal.
They'd been betrothed since she was two and, when she reached puberty, she'd left her home village several miles away and came to join her husband and his extended family.
The early years were misery.
She'd never been away from home before and her new husband and in-laws were virtual strangers.
They didn't treat her badly, but she was made to feel a burden.
She was always the first to start work in the morning and the last to stop at night.
She rarely spoke and, when addressed, she replied in a whisper, eyes averted.
At festivals she went back home and often stayed away for several days, despite the knowledge that her late return would meet with an endless round of angry curses.
One day Mina was taken to the spirit medium because she wasn't getting pregnant.
He assured her that she would, in time, give birth.
But he told another women, barren after five years of marriage, that she was a witch.
Mina's sister, too, was childless and her husband had humiliated and rejected her by marrying a second wife.
Eventually Mina did have a baby — a son — and the family was jubilant.
A family with sons had wealth and status.
There would be an extra pair of hands to tend the sheep, to trade, to work the land, or go to school then work in the city and send money home.
With sons they'd be powerful voice in village politics.
With sons they'd be cared for in their old age, their death rituals would be properly performed and their souls would rest, satisfied.
And Mina was right.
She blossomed in motherhood.
No longer feeling the need to escape at every opportunity to her parents' home, she talked and laughed, openly relaxed.
At last this was her home and family; this was where her son belonged and she belonged beside him.
True, contraception was virtually unobtainable in this remote village.
But this was not the main reason why women like Mina give birth so frequently or so young.
Far more important is the value of children, particularly sons.
To ensure that the desired number of sons reach adulthood — allowing for miscarriage, stillbirth, infant death and, of course, daughters — a woman has to be pregnant as many times as possible.
Twenty years from now, Mina's body will undoubtedly be depleted by continual childbearing and it will become progressively harder for her to keep up her agricultural and domestic work throughout each grueling pregnancy.
She will probably often feel ill and exhausted, and giving birth will become more and more dangerous for her.
Several older women, desperate about this situation came to me for contraceptives (which I didn't have).
The only contraception that was on offer (though sporadically) was for use by men, whose interests were arguably better served by the birth of another son than by their wives' good health.
(When a visiting paramedic distributed free condoms, the children blew them up and played with them like balloons.
And when a team of doctors came to perform vasectomies, they were sent away, their services unused.)
In a society where a woman's very livelihood depends on her affiliation to a man, her ability to determine her own life's course is negligible.
At two Mina was passed from father to husband.
As a mother she was reprieved.
The rewards of motherhood made it her main source of self-esteem and satisfaction.
Small wonder, then, that at 16, she ‘desperately’ wanted a child, that her own ‘personal desire’coincided exactly with society's requirement of her.
As a woman in my mid-thirties, living in England, there is an underlying assumption that I, unlike Mina, am self-determining in my choices about sexuality and motherhood.
Until now, I have unfalteringly exercised that choice to postpone motherhood.
Now I realise, with growing apprehension, that my fertile years will soon be over and that the time has come to make another choice.
The issue is now no longer when to have a child but whether to have one.
Despite the urgency, the question numbs me.
How do I decide rationally when I hear a thousand different voices screaming contradictory advice?
In calmer times I try to analyse, weighing up the pros and cons.
Surprisingly, I find that all my reasons for postponing giving birth still apply: I don't particularly like children; I value my independence, the freedom to come and go, the open doors; I want to write, and literary history tells me that my chances of succeeding as a writer and a mother are pitiful; I hate and fear the nuclear family, the stifling atmosphere, the exploited wife and mother, the generation gap.
Occasionally, these voices come across loud and clear.
But then the hubbub starts again, and other voices ask me what I'll do in 20 years' time.
Will my life be bleak and empty?
Will I dry up, bitter with regret?
I must be mad wilfully to deny myself this ultimate creative act, this absolute satisfaction, the most passionate love affair of many women's lives.
The persuasive power of these latter voices is astonishing.
When they speak, I feel the force of history bearing down on me.
They are commanding and authoritative, bloated with conviction that their advice is right, the best thing for me.
In the Nepalese village, the pressures forcing women into motherhood are clear and tangible.
Here they are more subtle.
There a barren woman is a potential witch and punished with low status and harsh treatment.
Here, too, to call a woman ‘barren’, or even ‘childless’, implies that — whether she can't have a child or simply doesn't want one — she is somehow wrong and unnatural.
In Nepal, only a sick or crippled woman fails to marry and if the female population exceeds the male, men will marry twice.
Here, too, the word ‘spinster’ evokes an ugly, lonely woman who has failed to get her man.
One day there will be a word for a woman without a husband or children that is not pejorative; a single word that conjures up the image of a strong, sexual and feminine woman who revels in her voluntary freedom.
When that word becomes common currency, then we'll know that the present stereotypes have lost their stranglehold.
Until then our sexuality and fertility are not our own: they are the property of a patriarchal society which fears women's freedom and penalises deviants like spinsters, lesbians, unmarried mothers and the childless.
Until any woman can stand up and say freely, without the fear of social reprobation, that she doesn't want a child, then no women is free to ‘choose’ to have a child either.
Fear and freedom
The people of Central America have been paying the price of war in emotional as well as material currency.
Lucy Marks and Val Ford contrast the attitudes of Guatemala and Nicaragua to the mental health of their own people.
‘It was seven years ago that the military attacked our village,’ said the midwife in the Guatemalan province of??????.
‘Many of our people were killed.
And others were so deeply affected that they withdrew from the community, shutting themselves away in their homes.
Seven years…but still every now and then one of them will suddenly run out into the street screaming.’
The people of Central America have had to live with fear for decades.
We measure the region's troubles in terms of assassinations and war deaths but often forget the toll taken on the living by that everyday acquaintance with fear.
No-one visiting Guatemala and talking to people from its majority Indian population could fail to see the psychological scars.
Equally no-one travelling on to Nicaragua could fail to notice the difference from Guatemala — people still have to live with civil war but for ten years have had a government that has actively promoted mental health.
And in the aftermath of the February elections the worry is that Violeta Chamorro's new UNO government might stray off the positive mental-health track that has made the contrast between these two countries so striking.
In Guatemala, a beautiful country with a superficial air of tranquillity, the civil war has lasted for the past 30 years.
In that time the military have killed 100,000 civilians and 40,000 people have been ‘disappeared’ by death squads.
We talked to health workers and campesinos all over the country.
Many had witnessed extreme violence.
In the early 1980s the military began destroying entire villages in an attempt to eradicate civilian support for Leftist guerillas.
The long-term psychological effects of this kind of violence can be devastating.
A nun told us, for example, of a man who had seen a massacre take place in his village.
He kept a list of all those who had been killed, but could not talk about what had happened — he just cried incessantly.
A dread of torture and physical mutilation haunts the countryside — not least because so many people have witnessed the mutilated bodies of victims dumped in the street by the security forces.
In a quiet moment our Guatemalan guide said that many people fear torture more than death.
Everybody is affected — but not everyone is overcome by feelings of despair and powerlessness.
We spent an afternoon with plantation workers who continue to do health promotion training even though they earn little and live in an area where such work can be rewarded by a place on a death list.
And in the absence of government initiatives a non-governmental health organization has started training ‘mental-health promoters’ to work with their own communities.
Local people are familiar with the traditions and concerns of their community and are more likely to be trusted.
But this is clearly not enough.
A psychological war is going on, one that controls the population by disrupting communities and instilling a climate of mistrust.
The war must end.
And until it does the people of Guatemala will need appropriate psychological support to help them resist.
This was the stage the Nicaraguan people had reached before the Sandinista revolution in 1979.
Until then the only mental-health facility in the whole of Nicaragua was the psychiatric hospital in the capital, Managua.
Well outside the city centre, it was ideal for removing the ‘mentally ill’ from the community and locking them away — out of sight and out of mind.
Two wards, built for 60 patients each, came to accommodate more than 550 people.
President Somoza personally pocketed the international funding that was raised for a national mental-health programme in 1972.
One of the first decisions taken by the revolutionary government was to create multi-disciplinary mental-health teams operating in the community.
Many people were already returning home and being supported in the community even before the new official policy of ‘de-institutionalization’ was implemented in 1981.
The hospital, now with fewer than 150 patients, is due to close altogether within five to seven years.
Acute psychiatric cases are to be treated in general hospitals or new Crisis Intervention Centres.
In the mean time Dr Santiago Sequeira, the hospital's director, has been fighting his own revolution, battling against incredible odds to humanize the physical environment of the hospital and improve the general quality of patient care.
Instead of the familiar mental-hospital pyramid (psychiatrists at the top, other staff below, patients at the bottom), relationships throughout the hospital are relaxed and friendly.
Ward meetings are jolly occasions.
Patients wander in and out of staff rooms at their leisure and no-one seems to mind.
The next step is to safeguard these changes by formalizing patients' rights and encouraging the development of self-advocacy movements.
Dr Sequeira and his team have inherited some 65 long-stay patients who have no family and no prospects of living in the community without financial and other support.
Careful plans have been made for these people so that when the hospital eventually closes they will not find themselves on the streets.
One of these schemes is an agro-industrial project, ambitious by any standards and quite amazing in a poor country ground down by war and economic blockade.
Four ‘sheltered’ homes, twelve family units and four staff houses are to be built on a site around a farm growing fruit and vegetables, with a factory to process the produce.
The scheme aims to ensure the residents' economic survival and to maintain or create family units wherever possible.
It has the support of the farmworkers' unions, not to mention soil technicians and mental-health professionals.
More important still, patients are involved in the planning.
But the state of a country's mental health lies not only in the fate of its hospital patients but also in the general condition of its people.
The greatest improvement of all has of course been the removal of the old climate of repression and fear.
And people now have much greater control of their own lives through their participation in neighbourhood committees in the barrios as well as in the mass organizations.
But the Sandinista also took the initiative by training brigadistas up and down the country in preventive techniques like simple listening skills, bereavement counselling, relaxation methods, even family and group therapy.
There is general agreement that in the elections which removed the Sandinistas from power earlier this year the Nicaraguan people voted against the long US-sponsored Contra war and their empty stomachs, not against the social reforms of the Revolution.
But one of the first steps of the new UNO government may well be to wield its public-spending axe against health care.
They should look very closely at the Guatemalan experience before doing so.
Nicaragua has shown that people can improve their psychological well-being and their quality of life, even in the face of extreme material poverty.
Guatemala remains a terrible reminder of what Nicaraguans have fought so long and hard to replace.
Third World novels — the top ten
The quickest way to absorb a distant culture is to bury yourself in a novel.
No matter how vivid the TV reports or press articles, they rarely penetrate as deeply.
There are many gifted Third World writers who can help you transcend barriers of language and tradition but you might find it difficult to know where to start.
As a guide, the NI has chosen its ten best novels — the ones which are both enjoyable to read and give a vivid impression of life in developing countries.
God's bits of wood
Sembene Ousmane
French West Africa in the late 1940s might not seem the most urgent subject for your attention.
But set aside the location and the time, and even the fact that the story is built around a strike by workers on the Dakar-Niger railway line.
Sembene Ousmane is a story-teller and a skilful writer who can carry you along with the drama and the atmosphere regardless of subject.
The ‘bits of wood’ of the title are a colloquial term for human beings and it is through their eyes, and their culture, that the story unfolds.
Ousmane looks at the struggle between the colonizing French masters and unionized African workers who are beginning to sense their own strength.
And he explores the tensions between two generations of Africans: the younger French-speaking union organizers find they have to take responsibilities in the strange new world that their elders cannot cope with.
Overlaid on this are strands of sexual politics as the strike allows women to take greater responsibilities.
But don't be daunted by the prospect of heavily significant material.
Such themes are there if you choose to identify them but they are woven through a tightly-written narrative which will hold you from beginning to end.
…
Like rejected lovers returning to a trysting place, they kept coming back to the areas surrounding the station.
They would just stand there, motionless, their eyes fixed on the horizon, scarcely speaking to each other.
Sometimes a little block of five or six men would detach itself from the larger mass and drift off in the direction of the track.
For a few minutes they would wander along the rails and then, suddenly, as though seized with panic, they would hasten back to the safety of the group they had left.
Then again they would just stand there, or squat down in the shade of a sand hill, their eyes fixed on the two endless parallels, following them out until they joined and lost themselves in the bush.
Something was being born inside them, as if the past and future were coupling to breed a new kind of man, and it seemed to them that the wind was whispering a phrase they had often heard from Bakayoko: ‘The kind of man we were is dead, and our only hope for a new life lies in the machine, which knows neither language nor a race.’…
Things fall apart
Chinua Achebe
A tribal society seen from the inside looking out.
In a beautifully simple piece of writing Achebe transports us back to the earliest days of colonialism.
This is the story of Okonkwo, the strong son of a feckless father who builds a position of respect and authority for himself in the tribe — only to see things fall apart as he is undermined by the arrival of whites.
Achebe is a Nigerian writer who is achieving much greater international recognition.
This was his first novel and probably his best.
One of its great strengths is to show how many of the traditional values help people make sense of the world around them — no matter how irrational they might seem to outsiders.
How true is it?
Only those who come from that place at that time can judge.
But to the Western reader at least he offers an affectionate but unsentimental portrait with the taste and smell of authenticity.
…
And now the rains had really come, so heavy and persistent that even the village rain-maker no longer claimed to be able to intervene.
He could not stop the rain now, just as he would not attempt to start it in the heart of the dry season, without serious danger to his own health.
The personal dynamism required to counter the forces of these extremes of weather would be far too great for the human frame.
And so nature was not interfered with in the heart of the rainy season.
Sometimes it poured down in such thick sheets of water that earth and sky seemed merged in one grey wetness…
Petals of Blood
Ngugi wa Th'iongo
This should be required reading for all tourists to Kenya — though they would need no coercion beyond the first thirty pages or so.
After absorbing the first batch of strange-sounding names this is a book which is difficult to put down.
Petals of blood is set in post-colonial Kenya.
It's a village-level view of the rapid stages of development through which Africa's capitalist success story has been jolted.
Ngugi is unimpressed by much of this ‘progress’; he has been an outspoken critic of the Kenyan Government and spent time in jail as result.
The book is set in the village of Ilmorog and tells the story of four new arrivals including an ex Mau-Mau freedom fighter and a prostitute.
All are searching for peace of mind and for a while it seem that Ilmorog can offer this.
But then the village is hit by a devastating drought.
In desperation the villagers turn to their MP and organize a march to Nairobi.
And as the drama unfolds it reveals complex layers of corruption and influence-peddling.
…
It was not only the floodlight of the moon that made Ilmorog a wonder!
There was also something soft and subdued and beautiful between the hour of the sun's death and the hour of darkness.
For an inexplicable reason the low, billowy Donyo hills seemed to rise and to touch the sky.
Standing anywhere on the ridge one could catch sight of the sun delicately resting on the top of the distant hills which marked the far end of the grazing plains.
Then suddenly the sun would slip behind the hills, blazing out a coppery hue with arrows of fire shot in every direction.
Soon after darkness and mystery would descend on the plains and the hills…
One hundred years of solitude
Gabriel Garcia Marquez
A terrific roller-coaster of a book.
This is the novel that defines that strange genre of ‘magic realism’.
The story-line and the characters may seem incredible — like beautiful Remedios who floats up into the heavens while folding the household sheets and is never seen again — but Marquez defies you to disbelieve in them.
For all its dream-like episodes it locates you firmly in the village of Macondo in the jungles of Colombia through a century of dramatic development.
The really unbelievable thing about this book is the power of imagination which gave rise to it.
The story chronicles the Buendia family.
As the book opens the only outside visitors to the sleepy town of Macondo are a troupe of gypsies, but by the close its residents have been exposed to a railroad and the attentions of a rapacious banana company.
In between they have experienced all sorts of eccentric people and weird events.
…
When they got there a group of men were already pulling the monster off the sharpened stakes they had set in the bottom of a pit.
It was as heavy as an ox in spite of the fact that it was no taller than a young steer, and a green and greasy liquid flowed from its wounds.
Its body was covered with a rough hair plagued with small ticks, and the skin was hardened with the scales of a fish, but its human parts were more like those of a sickly angel than of a man, for its hands were tense and agile, its eyes large and gloomy, and on its shoulder-blades it had the scarred-over and calloused stumps of powerful wings which must have been chopped off by a woodman's axe.
They hung it to an almond tree in the square by its ankles so that everyone could see it, and when it began to rot they burned it in a bonfire, for they could not determine whether its bastard nature was that of an animal to be thrown in the river or a human being to be buried…
Midnight's Children
Salman Rushdie
The children in question were all born around midnight on 15 August 1947, the moment of India's independence.
All are blessed with remarkable powers — from a boy in Kerala who could step into a mirror and emerge through any other reflective surface in India, to a girl (or boy) who could change his (or her) sex at will.
Most remarkable of all is Saleem, born precisely on the stroke of midnight, who has the ability to wander into other people's lives and share their experiences.
The book traces his family history leading up to that midnight stroke and carries it through to the dark period of Mrs Gandhi's emergency.
Rushdie might only just qualify as a Third World novelist.
For although he was born on the Indian sub-continent, he was educated and lives in the UK.
But Midnight's Children gives an unsurpassed insight into Indian life at all levels.
The ‘magic realism’ is conjured up with great skill and paints a vivid historical picture which few history books can better.
…
How do eleven-year-olds react to the announcement of a coup?
Hearing the words, ‘…national finances in frightening disarray…corruption and impurity are everywhere…’ do their jaws stiffen, too?
Do their eyes focus on brighter tomorrows?
When General Ayub Khan said, ‘Martial Law is now imposed,’ both cousin Zafar and I understood that his voice — that voice filled with power and decision and the rich timbre of my aunt's finest cooking — was speaking a thing for which we knew only one word: treason.
I'm proud to say I kept my head; but Zafar lost control of a more embarrassing organ.
Moisture stained his trouser-fronts; the yellow moisture of fear tricked down his leg to stain Persian carpets; gongs-and-pips smelled something, and turned upon him with looks of infinite distaste; and then (worst of all) came laughter.
General Zulfikar had just begun saying, ‘If you permit, sir, I shall map out tonight's procedures,’ when his son wet his pants.
In cold fury my uncle hurled his son from the room; ‘Pimp!
Woman!’ followed Zafar out of the dining chamber, in his father's thin sharp voice; ‘Coward!
Homosexual!
Hindu!’…
Woman at point zero
Nawal El Saadawi
This is the story of Firdaus — as told to the author in the condemned cell of a prison in Cairo.
Firdaus is a prostitute about to die for the murder of her pimp.
A pretty depressing read you might imagine but the story of Firdaus is one of dignity and determination that transcends the grim environment.
The novel expresses the powerlessness which many Arab women feel.
Prostitution is almost offered here as one of the less exploitative circumstances for a woman.
Certainly the happiest and most confident period in Firdaus' life is when she can pick and choose her customers and determine for herself the relationship she will have with them.
Then a customer calls her shameless.
Firdaus is so stung by this that she looks for another job.
She turns to office work quite successfully.
But still she is exploited by men — and a lot poorer.
She returns to prostitution but then the final exploiter, the pimp, forces himself onto the scene and her life effectively comes to an end.
The novel is brief — 100 pages or so — and a remarkably effective narrative which you could get through in one sitting.
…
When one of his female children died, my father would eat his supper, my mother would wash his legs, and then he would go to sleep, just as he did every night.
When the child that died was a boy, he would beat my mother, then have his supper and lie down to sleep.
My father never went to bed without supper, no matter what happened.
Sometimes when there was no food at home we would all go to bed with empty stomachs.
But he would never fail to have a meal.
My mother would hide his food from us at the bottom of one of the holes in the oven.
He would sit eating alone while we watched him.
One eveing I dared to stretch out my hand to his plate, but he struck me a sharp blow over the back of my fingers.
I was so hungry that I could not cry.
I sat in front of him watching as he ate, my eyes following his hand from the moment his fingers plunged into the bowl until it rose into the air, and carried the food into his mouth.
His mouth was like that of a camel, with a big opening and wide jaws.
His upper jaw kept clamping down on his lower jaw with a loud grinding noise, and chewed through each morsel so thoroughly that we could hear his teeth striking against each other…
The wine of astonishment
Earl Lovelace
This novel is written entirely in the dialect of Trinidad.
Yet such is the skill of the writing that you will forget the strangeness of the language after the first couple of paragraphs.
The story is narrated by Eva, a stoical woman who is constantly surprised at what life throws at her.
The book's title comes from Psalm 60: ‘Thou has shewd thy people hard things: thou has made us to drink the wine of astonishment’.
Eva is married to a preacher and the tale she tells is of their Baptist congregation whose exuberant spiritual style of worship was banned by the colonial Government in 1917.
The story finishes when the ban was finally lifted in 1951.
The book explores the lengths to which a community, particularly a Christian one, should go to stand up for its rights when faced with oppression.
The instinct of Eva's husband, Bee, is to tone down the services and comply with the law.
But one of his congregation is made of more aggressive stuff and refuses to live a life of compromise; in the end he turns his rage destructively against the poor people around him — with tragic results.
…
So now we have this church on top of this hill on the edge of the village.
We have this church, where Bee preach the sermons quiet, without spirit so as not to move the congregation to sing too loud or ring the bell or catch the Spirit and speak in tongues, so when Corporal Prince break into the Church one evening, he and the whole Bonasse Police Force, he finds us singing soft and low as children in a Sunday School: ‘God moves in mysterious way His wonders to perform.’
We wasn't breaking the law so they had to put up their batons and go away without beating anybody…
And so we go.
But the more we go on with this type of service, this soft praying and quiet singing, and not ringing the bell or catching the Spirit, the more we realize that we ain't solving the problem.
All we was doing was taking away the ceremonies natural to our worship.
All we was doing was watering down the beauty and appeal of our church.
And what was we becoming?
What was we becoming?…
The real life of Alejandro Mayta
Mario Vargas Llosa
This chronicle of a futile revolutionary uprising in Peru in the 1950s is written in a style which falls somewhere between journalistic investigation and an adventure story.
Vargas Llosa has quite a few fine novels behind him but this is the most directly political.
Mayta, the hero, is a member of the Revolutionary Workers Party (Trotskyist)— the RWP(T).
He is also gay.
Given the author's centre-right political stance (he is a potential Presidential candidate in Peru) one could hardly expect the portrait be sympathetic.
And it isn't.
Alejandro Mayta the revolutionary theorist who heads for the hills in the hope of joining a mass uprising comes over finally as a misguided almost pathetic figure.
But Vargas LLosa paints an vivid and authentic picture both of revolutionary fervour and of the sectarian splitting and in-fighting on the Peruvian Left.
Visitors to Lima will also appreciated the picture he paints of that crumbling city — the grey metropolis of South America.
…
‘Jauja!
Jauja!
What a shame you've never been there.
All Peruvians should visit Jauja!’
Mayta then heard him launch, with no preamble, into a discourse about Indian life.
The real Peru was in the mountains and not along the coast, among the Indians and condors and the peaks of the Andes, not here in Lima, a foreign, lazy, anti-Peruvian city…
These were things which Mayta had heard and read often.
But they sounded different coming from the Lieutenant's mouth.
The novelty was in the clean and smiling way he said them, blowing out gray smoke rings at the same time.
There was something spontaneous and lively in his manner of speaking that made whatever he was saying sound even better.
Why did this boy arouse in him that nostalgia, that sensation of something altogether extinct.
Because he's sound, thought Mayta.
He's not perverted.
Politics hasn't killed his joy in living…
A house for Mr Biswas
V S Naipaul
Impossible not to recommend a book by V S Naipaul.
But which to choose from his marvellous output?
Naipaul was brought up in Trinidad but as a young man settled in England where he has been based ever since.
He has written novels and travel books set in Latin America, Africa, the Caribbean, India and Europe; what he has to say about any country is worth reading.
A house for Mr Biswas is an engaging comic novel set in Trinidad about a poor man who marries into a large extended family from whom he struggles to escape.
Mr Biswas's main aim in life is to have a family house of his own.
He works as a journalist (Naipaul's father was also a journalist) and some of the funniest scenes include his imaginative coverage of local news.
The novel offers a rich portrait of a lower middle-class Hindu family — an ethnic minority in a black colonial society.
…
Purist, Mr Biswas thought, when he saw Pankaj Rai.
The man is a purist.
He was elegant in a long black close-fitting Indian coat; and when he shook Mr Biswas by the hand Mr Biswas surrendered to his graciousness, at the same time noting with satisfaction that Pankaj Rai was as short as himself and had an equally ugly nose.
He also had unusually heavy, drooping eyelids which could make him look comic or sinister, benevolent or supercilious.
They dropped a fraction of an inch and converted a smile into a devastating sneer.
This was particularly effective when he began to ridicule the practices of orthodox Hinduism…
Of love and shadows
Isabel Allende
Isabel Allende is Chilean now living in Venezuela.
Her first novel House of the Spirits is also highly recommended — a tour de force of magic realism.
Of love and shadows is more of a political thriller and perhaps easier to read.
Both are evidence of a wonderful writing talent.
Chile is never mentioned once in this book.
But one is left in no doubt about the location.
Irene the heroine is a journalist from an upper middle-class family engaged to be married to an army officer.
An assignment to cover a strange event in a peasant family changes her life.
She and the photographer she works with are caught up in an investigation that shakes her out of her complacency — and into the shadowy world of covert operations against the dictatorship.
…
Until the day she visited the Morgue, Irene Beltrán had lived in angelic ignorance, not from apathy or stupididy but because ignorance was the norm in her situation.
Like her mother and so many others of her social class, she escaped into the orderly, peaceful world of the fashionable neighbourhoods, the exclusive beach clubs, the ski slopes, the summers in the country.
Irene had been educated to deny any unpleasantness, discounting it as a distortion of the facts.
One day, she had seen a car screech to a stop and several men overpower a pedestrian and force him into their vehicle; from a distance she had smelled the smoke of bonfires burning blacklisted books; she had glimpsed the outline of a human body floating in the dark waters of the canal.
She had heard patrol cars and the roar of helicopters shattering the night skies.
She had stopped to help someone who had fainted from hunger in the street.
Irene had lived surrounded by the gales of hatred, but remained untouched by them behind the high wall that had protected her since childhood…
Green Grow the Neutrons-O
The advertising world can turn anything green — including nuclear power.
Robert Woods reveals some of the tricks of the trade.
In a British advertising agency, two stereotypes — both with striped shirts and red braces — are talking.
Justin: OK, Nigel, clients due in 10 minutes, let's have a final run through.
The brief is: with environmental consciousness as consumer flavour-of-the-month, we have to Make Nuclear Power Green.
Nigel: We have to make nuclear power seem green.
Justin: Same thing, Nige old boy.
The Government must be seen to be green.
The Government in its wisdom has backed nuclear power, so nuclear power must be seen to be green as well.
Dammit, there are votes at stake.
No-one minds a few Greenpeace loonies demonstrating, but when you get nice middle-class housewives not wanting a nuclear station in their back-yard, you're in trouble.
One government has already fallen over green issues.
Nigel: Only a Dutch one.
Justin: Yes, but even so.
We can avert that danger here.
If people buy Volvos because they think a better car will plug the hole in the ozone layer, they will buy nuclear power on the same principle.
Nigel: Oh, stop getting so philosophical.
Just give me the facts.
Justin: There are no facts in advertising.
You know that.
Nigel: I mean the facts that we're meant to sell.
About nuclear power being environment-friendly.
Justin: ‘It's clean, it's safe, it's non-polluting, and, as we both know:
Both: IT DOESN'T ADD TO THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT’
Realizing that they have an easy theme for an otherwise unsellable product, they join hands and do a music-hall turn singing:
NonpollutingOzonepluggingGreenseemingGreenhousesaving
NUKE!
Nigel: Yes, folks, dirty coal-burning power stations create carbon dioxide — the greenhouse gas that warms the earth, brings disastrous climate changes,
melts our ice-caps and threatens to flood our cities.
Only Batman Can Avert This Threat!
Justin: You mean ‘Only Nuclear Power Can Avert This Threat!’
Nigel: Yes, sorry — got a bit carried away there.
Stops the music-hall turn, and comes down to earth.
Nigel: But 40 leading scientists do say that carbon dioxide is made in producing uranium and building the reactors, and power stations are not the main source of greenhouse gases anyway; and nuclear programmes divert money from energy-saving programmes, and it takes six years to build a nuclear power station and you can save that amount of carbon dioxide in six months by saving energy.
Justin: You can always find a scientist to back any position, no matter how absurd.
Nigel: But 17 of these are Fellows of the Royal Society.
Justin: Doesn't matter.
Their arguments are slightly complex, requiring thought.
Against our simple, easy-to-grasp message, they stand no chance.
I mean, which is easier to put across in a 40-second commercial?
Nigel: ‘It beats as it sweeps as it plugs up the hole in the ozone layer?’
Justin: Precisely, old lad.
Not a bad slogan either.
But flippancy is better suited to selling food — so unless you buckle down it's back to the Fission Chips account for you.
Nigel: I hate your puns.
But listen, we still have an image
problem.
What about the geese born with heads on backwards?
Or the couple who are suing because they couldn't sell their house on account of the plutonium in the vacuum-cleaner dust?
Justin: Those aren't facts, they're fears.
Nigel: Chernobyl is a fact.
Justin: Chernobyl is the biggest fear that we are trying to stop people thinking about.
Nigel: How do we do it?
Justin: We reassure them that it won't happen again without actually mentioning that it did happen.
A simple code-word is all we need, understood by everybody.
It is…
Nigel: Responsibility.
Justin: Exactly.
Nigel: As in ‘With This Much Power Comes This Much Responsibility’.
Justin: The implication is clear enough, I think.
Our power-station workers are far too responsible to fiddle with controls they don't understand.
They are dependable.
Salt of the earth.
Not like
the Russians — you'd expect their nuclear power stations to go wrong.
Nigel: I know — maybe we should rename nuclear power.
A rose by any other name smells infinitely sweeter.
Justin: Patience, boyo, not till after the next accident.
But you are right about the image.
We have to get nuclear power seen as the Volvo of the power industry: safe, efficient and reliable.
Nigel: But without a safety cage?
Justin: Analogies can be carried too far.
Right.
Let's see Presentation One.
Stick the video in, Nigel.
This is the play-on-fear-of-Greenhouse-effect one.
The lights dim.
The video flickers into action.
A portentous voice announces:
Portentous ‘Scientists say that the greatest threat to our planet Voice: is global warming…
’(Picture of a child with a garden hose under a blazing sun.
The water from the hose stops.
The child looks fearfully at the sky).
‘The Greenhouse effect…
’(Picture changes to a different child standing in a desert.)
‘Glaciers
melt…
’(Picture of a lump of ice, dripping:
time is running out.)
‘The seas rise, flooding our cities…
’(Threatening picture of a wave rising to overwhelm; seen from the front, as if the viewer is about to be swallowed and filmed in slow motion to add tension.)
Portentous ‘Suppose there was a power that didn't add to the voice, greenhouse effect; that didn't burn limited fossil turning kind: fuel.
A power that served humankind, without harming the planet we live on.
A clean power.
Shouldn't we have the courage to embrace that power?’
(Picture of skylark ascending.
Clear blue sky.
Happy music.
Caption across screen: ‘Nuclear Power: Courage for a Clean Future.’)
Portentous ‘Some day, your children will thank you…’
Voice again:
Nigel collapses into laughter.
He intones:
Nigel: Suppose there was a power that caused birth defects in
sheep and people.
That made the Irish Sea the most radioactive stretch of water in the world.
That produced a form of waste that was hot, highly toxic, radioactive; that will remain dangerous for hundreds of years and that no-one has yet thought of a way of disposing of?
Shouldn't we have the courage to say ‘This is not a terribly good idea?’
Justin: Be fair, this ad was your brainchild.
Nigel: How true.
The things we all do to earn an honest living.
And seeing as it was my brainchild, would you not say it was possibly the best commercial of all time?
Justin: No.
Too messianic, too end-of-the-worldish.
And with a sensitive subject like nuclear power, the end of the world is the last thing we want to remind the punters of.
Nigel: You prefer your idea of the vile, lisping child, I suppose?
Justin: Actually, I do.
It puts over the message succinctly and simply: nuclear power is clean — coal power is dirty.
And there are a lot of hidden fears about coal miners as bogey-men we can play on: nasty dark
creatures from underground…
Nigel: But we've used the lisping child gag in the electricity commercials already, haven't we?
A horrid kid actor mouthing fake-innocent puns: ‘You can eat a
currant bun so why can't you eat an electric current?’
Justin: We've used it before, so what?
Why knock a winning system?
Stick it in the video.
The lights dim as before.
(Shot of five-year-old child waiting in nice middle-class hallway for daddy to come home.
A playmate is alongside.)
Child 1 ‘My daddy handles more power than your daddy.
My daddy lisping: makes power for everyone.
Child 2: ‘Mummy says that in the old days daddy would have worked down a coal mine to make power for people,
and he'd have come home all black and dirty, and the coal he made would have covered everything with soot
and smoke.’
(Camera pans through window to show that the front garden is green and beautiful with no industry in sight.)
Child 1: ‘I don't think I'd like hugging daddy if he was all (thoughtfully) covered in soot like from a fireplace.
It would make my clothes all dirty.’
Child 2: ‘It would make everything dirty.
(scornfully)
Child 1: ‘What, the whole world?’
Child 2: ‘Yes, that's what my mummy says.
And the air, and the sea, and the garden…
(Daddy strides down the garden path, walks in with briefcase to show he no longer uses a pick-axe.
He bends to embrace children.
Close-up of brief case reveals a Nuclear Fuels logo on it.
Caption across screen reads: ‘Responsible Power.
For Responsible People’.)
Justin: I like that.
It shows that nuclear power workers are nice, middle-class people who wouldn't hurt the environment
for anything.
Nigel: Nuclear workers for nuclear families, I suppose.
Justin: And what's wrong with that?
Our man with a briefcase almost certainly drives a Volvo.
The ad works at a subconscious level too.
Nigel: OK, OK — but we'd better hurry.
The client should be here any minute.
Have we got the brochure?
Justin: Yes.
Nigel: Did we change the cover to green?
Justin: Yes.
Nigel: Did we print it on recycled paper?
Justin: God, no, it would look like bog-roll.
What sort of cheapskate outfit would they think we are?
We're trying to impress people, remember, not save the
world…
What you can do
1.
Save electricity.
Turn off lights; insulate roofs, tanks and pipes; fit a thermostat to your boiler; make your doors and windows draught-proof.
2.
Campaign against nuclear power.
Nuclear power is just as dangerous as coal power.
There have already been a series of devastating accidents — most notably at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl.
Much of the waste cannot be reprocessed or disposed of safely and therefore threatens to pollute the environment for hundreds of years to come.
And there are concerns that small amounts of radioactive materials constantly leak from power plants into the surrounding area, causing cancer in humans.
3.
Cultivate healthy scepticism.
There is as yet no completely safe and efficient power-source so don't believe anyone who says there is.
The best rule is to conserve energy and to increase funding for research into renewable energy sources.
To the world at large, the Sultanate of Oman attracts attention for its strategic position guarding the Straits of Hormuz through which passes fifty per cent of the world's oil supplies.
Omanis are used to foreign attention.
Ever since the Sumerians, the Assyrians and the Persians began trading with other early civilisations thousands of years ago, Oman's natural harbours have played an important role in world history.
Omani sailors gained fame for their navigational skills and indeed an Omani pilot guided the first Portuguese ships on the earliest European discovery of the trade routes to the East.
The helping hand for foreign travellers, a hallmark of Omani hospitality, proved misplaced on that occasion since the Portuguese — having mapped the routes to the lands of silk and spices — simply destroyed the Omani merchant fleets to prevent competition, while they occupied key ports to ensure that no other foreign vessels could pass by.
No wonder the Omanis are cautious about opening up their country to foreigners, including tourists.
Like its Gulf neighbours, Oman has undergone a dramatic transformation from underdevelopment to a modern oil economy, building roads, housing, hospitals and schools at a great speed.
But Oman differs from its northern neighbours.
It is a vast country with many different peoples and terrains.
Semi-nomadic tribes live on the fringes of the notorious Empty Quarter desert, where they have been given the task by Sultan Qaboos and the World Wildlife Fund of reintroducing the rare Arabian Oryx (antelope) to its natural habitat.
The seafaring Omanis of the Batinah coast had little contact with the interior, but travelled far and wide in search of trade, even building a maritime empire in the area between Portuguese and British domination of the trade routes.
Zanzibar was for many years an Omani-owned territory.
On the southern Dhofar coast, monsoon rains provide a fertile climate in which bananas and citrus trees proliferate.
The Dhofaris who were neglected by the previous ruler are now enjoying the fruits of extensive agricultural development, so that the region once famed for providing the ancient world with frankincense may soon be a major source of food for other Gulf states.
Oman was racked by perpetual civil wars and tribal feuds throughout its history.
Only under the present ruler Sultan Qaboos, aided by modern communications and social development, has the country become united under one leader.
Ruling in the traditional Arab-Islamic style, he enjoys supreme power as long as he has the consensus support of the people who are consulted through an appointed Advisory Council.
The system is part of the regional heritage and is currently more relevant than Western forms of democracy.
Oman's military face, demonstrated by annual joint manoeuvres with American or British forces, is maintained to discourage foreign interference from any source.
The country is one of the few Arab states which has full diplomatic relations with both Superpowers and China, for similar reasons.
But these affairs of State are of little daily concern to the ordinary Omanis: industrious people striving to make their country prosperous.
This they are doing at their own speed through a process of education and development, ensuring that Oman is run by Omanis, and not by foreign powers with distant interests.
’ My mother-in-law would never allow it’
MUMTAZ, PAKISTAN
I had my first child one year after I got married.
Then I had a baby every year after that until I had five girls and three boys.
My husband sells fruit on the streets of Lahore.
I have no idea what he earns, but he gives me about 1,500 rupees ($) a month to run the house.
Two of my sons are working too and they bring in about 300 rupees a month each.
I wish I'd had fewer children — if I'd known the way prices would go up…
It's so difficult to manage on what my husband and sons bring home.
When they get married I'll tell them to use family planning because prices get higher every day and it's impossible to support a large family.
Myself, I never thought about using birth control before because my mother-in-law would never allow it.
She believes that children are a blessing from God and we shouldn't do anything to stop them.
So when I did go it was in secret.
I found out about it from one of my neighbours.
She was using condoms and advised me to do the same.
I can't read or write so I don't know if there were posters or books about it.
There are no health visitors in this area, so if my neighbour hadn't told me I still wouldn't know anything about it.
I don't know whether my husband knew either.
But when I asked him for permission he just agreed.
The doctor at the hospital told me about the pill, but said you have to take them regularly and if you forget even once, then you'll get pregnant.
Anyway, I was sure my husband would forbid me to use the pill, so I thought it was better to use condoms.
They were five or ten rupees a packet and they hurt a lot and I had some internal injuries.
So I went back to the lady doctor and she gave me a cream and some tablets.
My in-laws didn't know — I didn't tell them.
But my mother-in-law was suspicious and asked us, so we had to tell her we were using condoms.
Then there was a big fight and she said I mustn't use them ever again.
My husband was on my side — he wanted us to use family planning.
But in the end it was all for nothing, because I got pregnant anyway.
So then I went secretly to have an abortion, and my mother-in-law found out about that too.
So there was another huge fight.
Recently I've heard that there have been advertisements on the television and people say the doctors give you 50 rupees if you go for the sterilisation operation.
I think it's a sort of a bribe they have to offer because otherwise the people wont go, and they want to control the population.
That's why they give you the money instead of making you pay.
Men have the operation too, but it's mostly the women.
I've seen it with my own eyes.
They do the operation and keep the woman there for about an hour then give her 50 rupees.
The cost of formality
The Institute of Freedom and Decomcracy, a private research organization based in Lima headed by Peruvain economist Hernando de Soto, has carried out detailed research on the informal economy.
Founded in 1980, the ILD, as it is known by its Spanish acronyms, has proposed better ways for the government and the informals to iron out their problems.
De Soto and his researchers, which include economists, sociologists and anthropologists and lawyers, have worked out some of the stark costs of formality in Peru: if a group of humble families gather and ask the government to give them an empty plot of land to live on, they must fill out a maze of forms and go to scores of ministry, municipal and other government offices, a process that averages six years and 11 months.
It is no surprise, then, to find out that half of Lima's population of six million live in informally constructed homes, most of them built on land that had been previously illegally invaded.
With time, the government grants a De Facto recognition by installing running water, electricity, and by paving the roads.
And where the government doesn't reach, the locals improve their lot on a block-to-block basis.
To get legal authorization to open a newspaper kiosk or a small store, it takes 43 days of paperwork and costs $590 in fees and lost work time.
Consequently, most merchants simply open their stores or kiosks, frequently by invading parts of the street or the sidewalk.
Some try to get the legal approval; others simply ignore it.
If they are kicked out, they'll be back as soon as the police move out.
To dramatize the bureaucracy's stifling effect, the ILD set up a phoney manufacturing shop and tried to get it legally recognized, step-by-step.
It took them 289 days of bureaucratic proceedings, and they were forced to pay two bribes (out of 10 solicited).
The cost and the estimated monetary value of the worktime lost came out to $1,231, which is about 30 times the legal monthly minimum wage.
And put together, all the legal paperwork that had to be filled out for the approval was 31 metres long.
The ILD concludes that the problem of the black market is not the informals themselves, but the State's bureaucratic system that refuses to admit them in as legitimate.
Half a million different laws (although no one knows for certain how many) have insured that the legal system is rigged, keeping the cost of formality far beyond the reach of the average small Peruvain entrepreneur.
The mercantilist, bureaucratic Peruvian government — and by extension, that of many Third World countries — has created a subtle system of economic apartheid, where the poor are legally kept from any upward social mobility while the rich legally protect themselves from anything that threatens their social standing.
This monstrous legal system smothers the informals, who the ILD consider most energetic and enthusiastic members of the economy by limiting their growth.
President Alan Garcia's socialist government that took office in July 1985 has taken a tolerant view of the informal sector.
In his inaugural address, Garcia praised the informal workers as ‘modern heroes’, who shun delinquency and terrorism to make a decent living, and are ‘the expression of honest people that wish to work in equality and well being’.
Informals are no longer persecuted, and a limited form of credit, called ‘credito chicha’, is handed out to groups of informals, without the need of any backing.
If the amount of credit requested is large, the government requests the informals to legalize.
Detractors of the program insist that the government is throwing money into a bottomless bucket.
It might be too early to say, but researchers from Lima's Universidad del Pacifico say that the informals are amazingly responsible, and punctually keep up with the interest payments on their loans.
Pigs can fly
Three little piggies learn the facts of life.
Debbie Taylor tells a tale with a twist.
Once upon a time there were three little piggies.
Bright-eyed and curly-tailed they were.
Minding their own bristle-backed business; snuffling for acorns and truffles in the mud.
One day they decided to visit their best friends, the three billy-goats Gruff who lived over the rickety bridge.
But the journey took longer than they planned, because they had to watch out for the evil troll who lurked under the bridge.
There seemed so many dangers in the world: wizards, witches, giants toppling down beanstalks…
Every day Chicken Likken was out with her placard warning ‘the sky is falling in, the end is nigh’.
It made you afraid to step out of your house.
And, of course, there were the wolves.
Wolves.
The word was enough to send a shiver of pink terror down their spines, from best end to loin, spare-ribs and all.
The three billy-goats Gruff felt the same.
Everyone did.
Why only the other day Little Red Riding Hood barely escaped with her life after finding a transvestite wolf hiding in her grandmother's bed.
That was the terrible thing about wolves: you could never tell where they were because they were always in disguise.
Thank goodness for sheep, thought the three little piggies as they trotted along in the sunshine.
The money they had to pay the sheep for the Cuddly Woolly Protection Racket did seem a lot.
But it was worth it to keep the wolves from the door.
Since they had started paying ‘interest’, they no longer woke up in the middle of the night squealing with fright from nightmares.
They felt so grateful to the CWPR for protecting them — even though they couldn't afford pigswill and potato peelings for their supper anymore.
Anyway, that day was obviously a lucky day.
The troll was out to lunch, the sky did not fall in and the three pals arrived without mishap at the Gruff's house.
Standing on tip-trotters, they rang the bell.
Ding-dong!
No answer.
They tried again.
Ding-dong!
Still no answer.
Perhaps the pussy had fallen down the well again, they thought.
The Gruff's had a marmalade tom cat that was always getting into trouble.
So they went round the back of the house to find out.
There was no sign of the three billy-goats — or the pussy.
Psst!
Three pairs of little piggy eyes darted nervously round the garden.
Psst!
It was coming from the house — through a small hole in the wall.
The three piggies went over to investigate.
But all they could see was a big brown eye staring anxiously back at them.
It belonged to Middle, the second-eldest of the billy-goats Gruff.
‘Has he gone?’ he asked.
‘Has who gone?’
The piggies were mystified.
‘The sheep.’
The big brown eye rolled in its socket, obviously terrified.
The piggies looked round the garden.
There was no sign of any sheep, but they did notice some strange-looking footprints in the earth by the house.
‘Why are you hiding?
There's no-one here except us,’ they said.
‘Although there are footprints in the flower bed.’
The brown eye rolled again, so violently that it nearly popped out of its socket: ‘Do they look like sheep's footprints?’
The piggies looked closer and their blood ran cold.
There in the fresh brown soil were the unmistakable footprints of a wolf.
They rushed to the door, panic-stricken.
‘Let us in,’ they cried.
Shaking from snout to tail, they heard a clattering and scraping as the Gruffs unbolted and unbarred the door.
In the twinkling of an eye they were safe inside with their friends.
Middle leaned against the door panting while Little and Great Big rebolted the door and lifted the bars back into place.
The three little piggies looked around the room.
There was quite a crowd: Brer Rabbit, his cousin Peter and all their friends and relatives, Toad of Toad Hall, Muffin the mule, Kanga, Roo and many others.
In the corner sat Turkey Lurkie, sniffing and shivering.
Chicken Likken was holding him to her breast with her wings, trying to comfort him.
‘What's going on?’ the piggies asked (they tended to speak in unison).
‘Why are you all here together?
Why is Turkey shivering?
Is he cold?’
‘Goosie Lucy's dead,’ clucked Chicken Likken, ruffling her feathers miserably.
Turkey Lurkie blew his beak loudly and sniffed a few more times.
‘It was the biggest sheep from the CWPR,’ he explained.
‘He called round as usual to collect the interest.
But we couldn't pay.
The market for golden eggs has dried up completely.
Lucy explained this to the sheep.
But he insisted she pay him anyway.
So she told him she had to keep enough to feed the little giblets.
She was so brave…’
Turkey Lurkie couldn't go on.
His wattle started to quiver and he buried his head in Chicken Likken's feathers again.
Great Big took up the tale.
‘The sheep was a wolf in disguise.
When Goosie Lucy refused to pay, the wolf threw off his sheep's costume and bit off her head.
Then he wolfed her down, just like he did with Little Red Riding Hood's grandmother.
Poor old Turkey Lurkie saw it all and rushed round here to warn the rest of us.’
The three little piggies looked aghast.
‘But that means that all the sheep could be wolves in disguise.
We've been hoodwinked.
They've just been terrorizing us and taking our money to protect us from themselves!’
Then they had another thought.
‘If the sheep can't be trusted to keep the wolves from our doors, none of us is safe any more!’
There was a sudden silence.
Everyone shuddered, dreading the fate that seemed in store for them.
And then — as if on cue — there came a knock on the door.
Bang, bang!
The friends clung to one another, absolutely petrified.
No-one said a word.
Bang, bang!
Middle put his big brown eye to the hole in the wall and looked out.
‘It's the sheep…
I mean the wolves!’ he gasped.
‘They're all there.
They must have realised that we know about Goosie Lucy.
They've come to collect their interest payments.
Quick, quick!
Has anyone got any money?’
The three little piggies snorted in disgust.
‘Don't be silly!
The money was to pay the sheep to keep the wolves from our doors.
But now we know they're just wolves in sheep's clothing, no amount of money is going to keep them away.’
‘So what shall we do-o-o?’ wailed Middle.
But before anyone could come up with an answer —
Bang, bang!
‘Come on, my sweet morsels, open up for the nice sheep.’
A wheedling voice came through the keyhole.
‘We're so sorry about what happened to poor old Goosie Lucy but she gave us no choice.
I'm sure you understand.
We had an agreement, and she broke it.’
The voice grew stern: ‘Unilaterally.’
‘What does unilater-whatsit mean?’ whispered Little.
‘Sshhh,’ hissed the others.
‘Now, be reasonable,’ the voice went on, growing irritated.
‘You will have to give in sometime.
We're so much stronger than you.
So why don't you avoid a lot of unpleasantness and unlock the door?’
The animals shuddered at the word unpleasantness.
They couldn't help imagining the wolf licking his lips as he crouched over poor Goosie Lucy's headless body.
‘We're not going to pay you any more interest,’ cried the three little piggies in unison.
The other animals gasped and put their paws, trotters, wings — anything — over the piggies mouths.
But the piggies pushed them away.
‘You've been slowly starving us to death,’ they said.
‘Well we've had enough.
Why don't you just kill us outright — right now.
At least it will be over quickly.’
There was a long silence.
The wolves milled around restlessly outside, while inside the little house there was much hushed argument as the piggies tried to convince the others to stand firm.
‘Don't you see?’ they whispered impatiently.
‘The wolves need us more than we need them.
They killed Goosie Lucy so now there will be no interest payments from her — and no more golden eggs.
They wouldn't dare to kill us too.
What on earth would they live on?’
Bang, bang, bang!
‘Open up!’ roared the wolves.
‘If you don't open this door right now we'll huff and we'll puff and we'll blow your house down!’
The animals huddled in a corner, shaking with fear.
Muffin galloped to the door and started undoing the bolts with her teeth.
The three little piggies rounded on her angrily.
‘Don't be scared.
It's nothing but hot air.
You'll see.
If we all stick together and no-one gives them anything, they'll soon be starving hungry themselves.
In a few days they'll be back here begging us for food.’
Bang, bang, bang, bang!
‘We're going to huff and puff!’
‘Go on then,’ said the three little piggies.
‘We're not scared of you any more.’
‘Huff and puff and blow your house down!’
‘What are you waiting for?’ taunted the piggies.
‘Ready or not, we're coming…
’ A note of uncertainty had crept into the wolves' voices.
‘We'll give you ten seconds to open this door.
ONE.
TWO.
THREE.
FOUR.
FIVE.
SIX.
SEVEN.
EIGHT…’
But the animals inside the house couldn't hear them.
They were holding paws and singing.
Great Big had found some dandelion wine and they were passing the bottle round.
‘Three cheers for the three little piggies!
They saved our bacon!’ cried Middle.
The piggies blushed even pinker than usual as they were hoisted onto the shoulders of their friends and carried round the room.
‘Who said that pigs can't fly?’ they said with a grin.
Quietly the wolves sloped off into the woods, drooling hungrily.
Enaye Islands
Palm-fringed beaches bid a warm welcome to the thousands of tourists who visit the beautiful Enaye Islands in the South Pacific.
Their breathtaking scenery, beaches and ruined cities are rapidly putting this out-of-the-way nation firmly on the tourist map.
Away from the colourful markets selling bananas, tomatoes and baskets, the peasants face a life of poverty and ferocious government repression.
The dizzying heights and plummeting depths of the volcanic mountains have their social parallels in this deeply divided country.
The Enayes have a delicate racial balance between the indigenous Enayas, the Indians brought in as indentured labourers, the Arabs, the Carib-Enayas and the nomadic Karfonas.
After independence in 1965, the future looked bright enough.
President Julio Lacidar said that although the country was backward in some respects the First Five Year Plan would help launch the new nation.
It aimed at boosting rice production and improving literacy and health care, and was partially financed with the revenues from oil which had been discovered in the 1950s.
But the US found it difficult to tolerate ‘communism’ so close to its nuclear airbase at Arandar.
Branding Lacidar as ‘the black Fidel’ it closed its markets to the islands' main exports — sugar and coffee.
Without the foreign exchange, and with continuing but hidden US subversion, Lacidar's government could not maintain the social reform programme.
Discontent in the capital, Nabru, led to riots as prices rose.
In 1971 a military coup brought in General Tren Son Taim (a Taiwanese refugee who had led a tiny fascist force on the islands during the Second World War), and Washington lifted the trade embargo.
The oil price hike in 1973 turned Nabru into a boom town.
But corruption and mismanagement meant that few ordinary people saw the benefits of oil — the industry was entirely controlled by five multinationals.
Western influence is apparent as you walk the streets of the capital — Levis, hamburger joints and Dallas on TV.
And in the countryside the Fanta signs spell empty calories at a high price.
The huge hydro-electric dam project at Konable will flood good farming land, but the flow of investment dollars has financed a boom in luxury goods for the rich minority.
There are some underground opposition groups which have used imaginative tactics to capture the world's attention, calling on celebrities like Bob Geldof to endorse their struggle.
After a recent visit, Geldof commented ‘It's terrible’.
The way ahead is full of difficulties.
The Catholic church, led by Bishop Torukwon has tried to hold the Tren regime in check, but is becoming increasingly isolated, especially with the rise of the powerful Islamic Faction.
Already, public consumption of alcohol has been banned, depriving people of their ‘Chundra’ beer.
In 1987 a series of IMF missions visited the islands and proposed a familiar package of measures: restructuring the economy to produce more cash crops like the delicious perdiem fruit; increasing the price of basic commodities; and the reproductivization of the country's $2.5 billion debt.
Plans to hold the 1996 World Shark-fishing Championships in Nabru have been greeted with resignation by most people.
Some welcome the brief diversion that the jamboree will bring and the possibility of earning some money; others recall the lines of a local saying ‘The soil of my country is purer than gold’.
These friendly and hard-working people will not wait for much longer to reclaim their birthright.
A teacher's tale
Children's interests are the starting point for learning.
But the children in Marianne Puxley's class were interested in video nasties, street vandalism and the amusement arcade and she had to re-think her ideals.
I would have been a progressive teacher's ideal pupil.
I was bright, imaginative and interested in most things.
In my spare time I wrote stories, painted wonderful illustrations, and made magazines, with crossword puzzles and problem pages.
I wanted to be an archaeologist and find exciting things in the mud.
I also loved making gadgets out of wood, and my heart's desire was a chemistry set.
I thought chemistry sounded like magic.
I organized the neighbourhood children into having jumble sales, cake sales and ‘fe
tes’ in aid of any charity I alighted on.
But most of all I organized plays.
We sang and danced our way through a motley repetoire.
The subjects of these plays were pure fantasy, mingled with themes from wide reading.
No heroes or heroines from TV ever entered my world, for I was brought up in a society that banned television.
I should have been my teacher's ideal…but I wasn't.
My primary education didn't explore or exploit one single aspect of my talents or interests.
I went to an authoritarian, exam-orientated school.
Creativity, practicality, initiative and enthusiasm were not valued.
The teachers categorized all pupils as poor, satisfactory or good — or (sometimes) excellent.
I was never more than ‘satisfactory’.
We did no drama, music or practical science.
We never made models or did projects and there were no school trips.
‘Facts’, copied from the blackboard, were what mattered.
My favourite lessons would have been Art and Composition.
But Art was spending an hour a week in the playground drawing a tree,(one tree, the same tree) every week.
‘Compositions’ were only corrected for spelling mistakes.
My complex stories and fantastic drawings usually scored just two out of 20.
I abandoned the idea of grubbing for a living as an archaeologist and decided to be a teacher: a progressive teacher — by then I had read A S Neill and Herbert Kohl.
I swore my pupils would never be restricted and repressed as I had been.
I knew, though, that there was no possibility of teaching the way I wanted to in the South African system.
So I went to Britain.
Britain, in the mid-1970s, seemed to me like the promised land of progressive education.
People talked about creativity, child-centred learning, and the development of individual potential.
I was in my element.
I got a job under a free-thinking Head in one of the most progressive education authorities.
The school was rural and the children from supportive, stimulating homes.
I taught drama in an original and compassionate way, as I would like to have been taught when I was at school.
My approach was successful and I was popular with the pupils, the parents, and the headmaster.
And so we all lived happily ever after.
No, of course not.
I have told my childhood story because it seems to me to parallel the general evolution of a progressive, child-centred approach to learning.
The waste and boredom typified by my early schooldays are what liberal educationalists have aimed to eradicate.
But my tale does not end in a rosy sunset.
After a few rosy years teaching in the rural school I got a job on a city estate.
The bare statistics of the school (85 per cent of children on free school meals, 25 per cent from single-parent families, 45 per cent of parents unemployed) only hint at the difficulties some of the pupils faced in their home lives.
Schooling was seen by many parents as an irrelevance at best; at worst as a downright intrusion.
Support and stimulation at home was minimal.
Ask a child ‘What are you interested in?’ and the usual reply was ‘Nothing’.
Frequently, the only spare-time activity which pupils would admit to was ‘watching telly and videos’.
These were often porn or ‘snuff’ videos.
So where does a curriculum based on the children's own interests start now, I asked myself.
The teachers at the school were committed and well-meaning.
You had to be, to stick it.
But I had to face the fact that most of the pupils were completely untouched by every part of the curriculum.
The truancy rate was high.
And when the children did come to school I often got the feeling that they were merely being ‘contained’ rather than involved.
My own standards dropped.
A quiet lesson was a success.
Blow insight or awareness.
Partly, of course, this lowering of a teacher's personal criteria for success is necessary to save one's sanity.
The task facing teachers in ‘front-line’ schools is a mammoth one and most of them deserve every support.
I don't think I've ever done anything as difficult as containing one particular class of 13-year-olds at that city school.
One colleague described the experience as ‘trying to hold on to a handful of wasps.
If you catch them, you don't really want them.’
I found myself in an increasing dilemma at that school.
Initially it seemed that much of the children's disaffection was because the curriculum was so irrelevant to them.
What did someone who was going to work on a production line need to learn French for?
Was there really any point in trying to make a girl interested in Geography, whose sole aim in life was to get pregnant?
We shouldn't be imposing these ridiculous academic exercises on these children, said the progressive in me.
We should be starting from their interests, their prospects, their culture.
If need be, we should educate them for unemployment, rather than trying to pretend that they are all going to get jobs in which French and Geography will come in handy.
Ah, yes, but…objected another voice.
This is a terrible arrogance — just class prejudice by another name.
By depriving these children of the chance to learn languages or humanities we are depriving them of all those resources that the ruling elites of the country find so important.
And isn't that the reality?
The South African authorities used unequal education as a tool of oppression too.
Maybe by eschewing academic standards the radicals are playing their own part in keeping the working classes in their place.
An argument with a colleague clarified and resolved the dilemma.
I had dropped out of regular English teaching and set up a special-needs unit in the school.
We each took students for whole-day sessions dealing not just with basic literacy and numeracy, but also with social and organizational skills, survival skills, and communication and co-operation exercises.
The children responded well, and at last I felt that I was achieving something.
We were trying to equip the pupils for life.
In or out of employment, certain skills are vital, after all.
However, one day I my colleague attacked me for imposing my ‘middle-class values’ on the children because I had emphasized polite speech and decent manners in my sessions.
Seeing myself as a lifelong progressive, I was mortified.
Maybe he was right.
It was only when I saw a magazine produced by his students' class that I relaxed.
The ‘magazine’ was a collection of photocopies of drawings and slogans that could be found on any underpass on the estate.
There were smutty jokes, crossings out and misspellings.
There were scrawled adverts for discos.
One memorable gem was ‘Deb is a slag’ plus appropriate illustration.
The teacher had faithfully reflected the kids' culture.
He said that he saw himself as a ‘medium, not a message’.
I felt sure then that my approach was justified: an individual cannot develop her full potential if her experience of the world is restricted to trashy TV shows, video nasties, street vandalism and the amusement arcade.
Of course I am not advocating a return to the kind of education that so wounded me as a child.
It is possible to be creative while still having high expectations of pupils.
Our special-needs unit is a good example: the children knew they were being stretched and their feelings of achievement and self-esteem went up markedly.
It must be possible to encourage creative expression and to correct spelling mistakes.
One of the most important gifts a teacher can pass on to pupils is a sense of control over one's life.
The culture that my colleague's ‘magazine’ reflected was itself a culture of deprivation.
He was merely perpetrating that deprivation.
If we, as teachers, don't expect and introduce certain standards of behaviour, presentation, and academic achievement, we condemn a section of the population to a cultural ghetto.
True some of these ‘standards’ are those of the ruling classes.
But these classes are the ones that run our society for their own benefit.
Unless everyone knows their rules, they can't play them at their own game, and there can be no equality of opportunity.
How green are you?
There is more to being green than recycling your newspapers and using unleaded petrol.
Here is a chance to test your ecological intelligence.
1.
Which choice of dining-room table would be most ecologically sound?
a)
mahogany
b)
handcrafted oak
c)
anything from a second-hand shop
2.
Which of the following does not pollute indoor air?
a)
carpets made of artificial fibre
b)
electrical equipment
c)
household solvents
d)
chipboard furniture
3.
Which uses the most energy in your home?
a)
fridge
b)
cooker/stove
c)
washing machine
4.
What is the best way to make cars ecologically safer?
a)
buying a car with a catalytic converter
b)
using unleaded petrol
c)
buying a more fuel-efficient vehicle
5.
How much food colouring will a child have eaten by the age of 12 years old?
a)
a tablespoon full
b)
a large cup full
c)
four large cups full
6.
Which of the following does not damage human health?
a)
metal polish
b)
aspirin
c)
roast beef
d)
excessive intake of vitamin C
7.
Which uses most water in your home?
a)
the toilet
b)
the bath
c)
the washing machine
d)
the dishwasher
8.
Which one of these statements about ‘ozone-friendly’(non-CFC) aerosol cans is true?
a)
they contain no ozone-damaging propellants
b)
they are biodegradable
c)
they are an energy-intensive form of packaging
d)
they are recyclable
9.
Only one of the following is not associated with the destruction of the Amazon rainforest.
Which is it?
a)
greedy Brazilian land barons
b)
paper-consumption in the West
c)
soft-drinks cans
d)
the greenhouse effect
10.
Which is the best way of improving the quality of drinking water?
a)
buying bottled water
b)
collecting water in a barrel
c)
lobbying for a dual water-supply system
d)
boiling tap water
11.
Which of the following statements about disposable nappies/diapers is true?
a)
they damage the ozone layer during production
b)
they are biodegradable
c)
they are the US's second biggest refuse problem
12.
Which is the best way to dispose of waste?
a)
burning waste in incinerators to generate energy
b)
recycling
c)
composting
13.
Which is the most environmentally-friendly form of energy?
a)
nuclear power
b)
coal
c)
gas
d)
oil
14.
Which of the following has not been associated with increased rates of miscarriage?
a)
sleeping under electric blankets
b)
working in operating theatres
c)
too much sex
d)
VDU (visual display unit) use
e)
excessive coffee consumption
15.
Ecologists agree that eating less meat is better for you and the environment.
Which of the following is untrue?
a)
many crops produced in the Third World go to fatten up livestock for Westerners' consumption
b)
meat contains residues of antibiotics, pesticides and hormones
c)
vegetarians can expect to live nine years longer than regular meat eaters
d)
meat-eating in the West is the major cause of world hunger
16.
Pentachlorphenol is
a)
a soft plastic made with a dangerous gas
b)
a toxic emission given off from car exhausts
c)
a powerful poison contained in many wood preservatives
d)
a banned chemical that was contained in artificial sweeteners
17.
Which is the best way of giving rubbish a new life?
a)
returnable bottles
b)
recycling broken glass (‘bottle banks’)
c)
re-smelting aluminum cans
d)
newspaper home-collection schemes
18.
Which of these statements about ‘environmentally sound’ washing powder is untrue?
a)
it can be used in the washing machine as well as for handwashes
b)
it contains no phosphates
c)
it contains no bleach
d)
it contains no enzymes
19.
Which of the following does not pose a risk to wildlife?
a)
discarded condoms
b)
railways
c)
tourist souvenirs
d)
acid rain
20.
Which one of these statements about plastic cling-film is untrue?
a)
it may cause cancer
b)
it soaks into fatty foods like cheese and meat
c)
it is less harmful at lower temperatures
d)
it contains bacteria which can cause salmonella
ANSWERS
1.
c Mahogany almost always comes from tropical forests rather than plantations.
Choosing sustainably produced native timber is reasonable, but it is even better to buy something second-hand.
2.
a High-voltage electrical equipment and household appliances with bad connections can produce toxic ozone.
Chipboard and other pressed wood products are made with a resin containing formaldehyde, an irritant and suspected carcinogen.
They have been identified by the US Environmental Protection Agency as an important source of indoor air pollution, along with air fresheners and cleaning solvents.
3.
b The cooker/stove is one of the most energy-hungry machines in the house but gas cookers are more efficient than electric ones.
Ask about the energy-consumption of gadgets when you buy them.
4.
a All these options are useful but a catalytic converter will cut out 90 per cent of emissions of carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and hydrocarbons.
These gases are toxic and damage human health; the second also contributes to acid rain and the last is the main cause of photochemical smog.
However, a catalytic converter does not tackle carbon-dioxide emissions, which contribute to the greenhouse effect and are only combatted by greater fuel-efficiency.
By far the best course is to use your car less.
5.
b By the age of 12 years old a child will have eaten about half a pound weight of coal-tar in the form of food colouring and dye.
Some colourings cause allergies and hyperactivity, while the effects of many others are unknown.
6.
d Taking too much vitamin C is unlikely to be harmful.
Metal polish, on the other hand, often contains ammonia which can burn skin and petroleum distillates which are highly poisonous if swallowed; aspirin — one of the most widely used painkillers — can damage the stomach lining and is dangerous for people with stomach ulcers and kidney problems; and more cases of salmonella food poisoning were caused by beef in the UK during 1984 than by any other single meat.
7.
8.
c Some non-CFC aerosol propellants still damage the ozone layer.
And the manufacture of aerosol cans takes considerable resources and energy.
Refillable pump-action containers are preferable.
9.
b If any paper used in the West derives from Amazon trees it is a negligible amount.
But vast tracts of tropical forest are destroyed to create grazing for cattle which will be turned into hamburgers and other fast food.
Tropical forests are also destroyed to make way for the hydro-electric plants to smelt bauxite — used in aluminum cans.
And the burning of wood contributes to the greenhouse effect.
10.
c Relying on bottled water encourages a wasteful trade.
Besides the cost of fuel for transport there is the expense of packaging.
And there is no way of checking that bottled water is any cleaner than tap water.
Rain is often too polluted to drink.
Boiling tap water does nothing to remove harmful pesticide traces.
But a dual-water-supply would mean that only less good water would be used for wasteful practices like flushing the toilet and washing the car.
11.
c Even disposable nappies/diapers which claim to be biodegradable are in practice virtually indestructible.
It is increasingly difficult to find sufficient land to bury them.
The unbleached disposable diapers which have recently become available should not be called ozone-friendly as bleached nappies do not damage the ozone layer either.
Busy lifestyles can make the prospect of dealing with endless buckets of towelling nappies very daunting.
A growing trend in North America is for parents to pay a laundry service to pick up a bucket each day.
12.
b Incinerators sound like a good option but they release highly toxic gases.
If the temperature in an incinerator is below 900 degrees centigrade — as it often is — plastics, pesticides and wood preservatives can give off dioxins which are among the most poisonous substances known.
Composting is good, though highly labour-intensive because the rubbish has to be sorted manually into biodegradable and non-biodegradable material.
But recycling at least saves on raw materials.
13.
c Gas appliances are usually more energy-efficient and cheaper to run than electric ones.
Gas also produces less pollutants than oil or coal — which generate large amounts of sulphur and nitrogen dioxide that end up as acid rain.
Nuclear power carries the risk of accidents and produces radio-active waste which will pollute the environment for centuries.
There is no totally ‘green’ energy source and if we want to help the environment we must be sparing with what we use and campaign for renewable energy sources — like wind, wave and solar power — to be invested in and taken more seriously.
14.
c Decreased fertility and increased miscarriages have been recorded among couples who sleep under electric blankets — because of the zigzagging wires which generate electromagnetic radiation.
Prolonged exposure to anaesthetics has been associated with reproductive problems, and cathode-ray VDU screens have long been suspected of causing foetal deformities and miscarriages.
In the US pregnant women are advised to drink less coffee.
15.
d Because of a, our consumption of meat is connected with the world food problem but there are other much more significant causes — the most significant of all is simply poverty, since well-off people never starve even in a famine-stricken country.
But vegetarian diets are so much healthier overall that they significantly increase people's life expectancy.
16.
c Applied to timber it is meant to keep fungi away by killing spores, but it remains active for many years and is a health hazard not only for people in their homes, but also for the workers who make it.
Cirrhosis of the liver, bone-marrow atrophy and nervous disorders are all part of the price paid for this common household poison.
17.
a All of these are useful but a returnable bottle system (as with doorstep milk deliveries in the UK) uses fewer raw materials and less energy than even the most efficient recycling scheme.
18.
c Some washing powders are pure soap flakes and therefore do not contain bleach.
But most ‘alternative’ powders still do, although the bleach is sometimes packaged separately.
19.
c The increased use of condoms due to the spread of AIDS is causing farmers to worry that discarded condoms could choke their grazing bulls.
Tourist souvenirs like furs, ivory, animal skins, coral necklaces and shells can devastate wildlife.
And acid rain is killing the fish in lakes across the rich world.
But while trains kill some creatures that cross the line, they preserve a wild habitat for many more creatures in their cuttings and help minimize the much greater destruction wrought by cars and roads.
20.
d Plastic cling-film does not cause salmonella.
THE VERDICT
16+
Dark Green: Very aware of green issues and the practical side of green living.
Your understanding of the earth's plight is greening everything and everyone around you.
11-15
Light Green: Growing greener by the minute.
The world may be shriveling around you but you are doing your bit to bring it to life again.
6-10
See-through: Try a bit harder — or you may not be able to hold up your head when your children ask what they can expect from the future.
0-5
Brown: Your head is firmly in the desert.
The same difference
The greatest Western psychiatrists were tainted by racism.
Suman Fernando points the way to a view of mental health that would be worthy of our rich and diverse world.
Sigmund Freud once drew parallels between ‘the mental lives of savages and (European) neurotics’.
Carl Jung, writing about black Americans in the 1930s, believed that ‘the inferior man exercises a tremendous pull upon civilized beings who are forced to live with him, because he fascinates the inferior layers of our psyche’.
Racism is not dead.
It is deeply embedded in Western culture — so deeply that few are aware, for example, how far both Freud and Jung integrated it into Western psychological theories.
They were, of course, only reflecting commonly-held views of the time.
Today reactionary forces, such as the overtly racist National Front in France, seem to be gaining ground.
Adherence to ethnic identities appears to be growing in strength all over the world.
On the other hand, races and ethnic groups are increasingly having to interact and learn to live together.
People the world over are really not that different!
In the field of mental health, the concepts of ‘illness’ and ‘madness’reach across cultures.
There is common, very fertile ground here.
But for this to be productive, and a new, better, more genuinely ‘global’ understanding of mental health to emerge, Western culture and psychiatry simply have to come to terms with their own racism.
Racism is not unique to Western culture — what matters is that at present the West has the power to go with it.
Throughout the past 300 years racism has distorted Western thinking about other people and their cultures.
First, Rousseau's concept of the ‘Noble Savage’ proposed that ‘savages’who lacked the civilizing influence of Western culture were free of mental disorder — and it was this idea that many psychiatrists in England, France and the US latched on to in the late eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries.
Second, about the same time, there was a view in Europe that non-Europeans were mentally degenerate because they lacked Western culture.
Finally, some psychiatrists in the US argued that the black person was relatively free of madness in a state of slavery, but became prey to mental disturbance when set free.
Underlying all these views were racist assumptions about black people, their cultures and their place in society; civilization was associated with white races and primitiveness with others.
A new approach to mental health must stand apart from existing power structures.
It must accept the fact that most of the world is neither culturally Western nor racially white.
It must recognize the validity of the black experience in a white-dominated world.
It should acknowledge the importance of concepts about human life from Asia and Africa and the relativity of all ‘knowledge’ in a subject that encompasses human feelings, beliefs and behaviour.
First of all, we have to redefine mental illness.
Many forms of human distress and misbehaviour, seen through Western eyes as ‘illness’, are not medicalized in other cultures.
Eastern psychotherapies, for example, deal with contemplative awareness; ‘neurosis’ can be a path to enlightenment for a Buddhist.
Much of Western psychotherapy is currently directed towards problem-solving or decision-making, reflecting the value given to personal self-sufficiency and the control of events by Western culture.
In Western thinking an illness is generated by causes arising from biological or psychological change.
In older cultures all changes are seen as relative — as in the thinking of modern physics.
And it is just possible that Western ideas in psychiatry could be incorporated into a relativity model.
Biochemical and genetic influences might come to be better understood in dynamic balance or imbalance with each other, and with others — social, cultural, spiritual and cosmological.
In psychiatric research and theory, self-knowledge could eventually replace objectivity as the basis for understanding.
Psychiatry would take on the study of consciousness, including altered states of consciousness, without identifying some states as ‘pathological’.
So people who ‘hear voices’ or have intensely meaningful experiences would no longer be seen as ‘pathologically hallucinated’or ‘suffering’from various symptoms.
Illness would be about disturbances of balance — within individuals, families, and societies in relation to the universe.
The second thing we have to do is restructure the way we organize mental health care.
The international agency of the United
Nations concerned with it, the World Health Organization (WHO) spreads the gospel according to Western psychiatry.
The ethos of psychiatry suits the marketing of Western drugs and fails to address racism.
So, rightly or wrongly, one gets the impression that the WHO itself is condoning racism and is dominated by Western economic interests.
This alliance must be broken.
At a national level changes are needed in both rich and poor countries.
Western economic pressure may be creating mental ill-health in the Third World; and Western ‘hi-tech’ psychiatric methods are so inappropriate in this context that they may be doing little to mend the damage.
Western ‘aid’ in the mental-health field must change gear to address the needs of the people it is supposed to help: concentrate on the villages and towns where most poor people live; require as little capital investment and new training as possible; and make the maximum use of local talent and resources.
In the Third World, governments and mental-health professionals must also change their attitudes.
They must face up to the limitations of the Western model — though the baby of Western expertise should not be thrown out with the bathwater of its failings.
Finally, mental health must be seen as something applicable to people — to individuals, families and communities.
So promoting mental health is about personal interactions, the stability of communities, relationships between groups of people and even matters of international peace and harmony.
The principles of mental-health promotion must be clear: a commitment to social equity, community participation and ensuring a ‘technical fit’ with what can actually be achieved on the ground.
Mental-health promotion programmes in the Third World must start off with clear aims before seeking help and advice from Western countries.
They must steer clear of any involvement with Western drug firms.
The same basic principles apply everywhere, not just in the Third World.
The final vision is of a world in which the concept of illness would remain but would not be fixed in firm categories assumed to be universal.
Mental health is not unlike happiness or sorrow, which are both experienced in relation to other things.
There would be diversity within unity.
Different cultures should be understood as different paths towards the same basic goal — that of living together in relative peace, in communion with one another and our environment.
Mental health is different because of culture and race yet the same irrespective of either.
That is a paradox — but it is also the reality.
Grannies make their mark
Women huddle around blackboards on windy Andean hillsides.
Paper is scarce.
Pencils are snapped in two so there are more to go round.
Learning to read and write in Bolivia can be tough.
Susanna Rance reports.
Through the wind, the harsh sound of wooden flutes draws the surrounding communities to a small point on the Andean high plateau.
A flat sea of farmland near the Peruvian border is brightened with a splash of colour.
There is an atmosphere of excitement and anticipation in Iruhito Urus, home of native Aymaras who live by hunting and fishing in the Desaguadero river.
To muted applause, a small white flag fringed with red is slowly hoisted in the blustering wind to just below the bright Bolivian tricolour.
‘Iruhito Urus celebrates its first triumph over illiteracy’, it reads.
All present sing the national anthem in Aymara, language of almost one third of Bolivia's six million inhabitants.
Over half of adult Bolivians are unable to use the written word, with the rate for women being twice that for men.
Most have had no education at all.
Others have had two or three years of primary schooling but, without access to written materials, many of these have forgotten what they once learnt.
A gap of even six months after initial training will, according to some studies, return the learner to the status of a ‘functional illiterate’.
‘I only went to school for two years,’ says Maxima Flores, forty-year-old mother of four.
‘I was orphaned so I couldn't carry on studying.
I did know how to read and write, but I've forgotten, what with the kids and all.
Now I'm learning again, it's coming back to me.’
Thousands of adults like Maxima have joined local literacy groups.
In some of these there is now an insistence that rural Bolivians should be able to learn first in one of the country's three major native tongues rather than in Spanish the official language.
‘Aymara, Quechua and Tupi-Guarani aren't officially recognized by the State,’ says teacher Eddy Cadima, director of an innovative adult education centre.
‘But we have found that people learn much more easily in their mother tongue, with their own logic and symbols.
Then they can go on to learn Spanish with more confidence.’
A programme called SENALEP was started up when Bolivia had a government which was prepared to fight illiteracy.
But then three years ago, President Victor Paz Estenssoro introduced monetarist principles and followed them to the letter.
He produced a Bolivian ‘miracle’: economic stability and a halt to hyperinflation.
But it had a brutally high social cost.
Poverty and unemployment are escalating; education and health are back at the bottom of the agenda.
‘There's no need for trained people under the present system,’ says Cadima.
‘All that's wanted is cheap labour, so logically, there's no investment in education.’
SENALEP struggles on.
Deputy Director Rolando Soliz describes his work as a ‘mission’: he earns the equivalent of $50 monthly, and supports his family by giving evening classes at a private computing institute.
‘We have no notebooks, no pencils or blackboards,’ he says, as we talk on the half-hour bus ride over bumpy, unpaved roads to a new literacy group on the outskirts of La Paz.
‘When we can, we give out sheets of paper and break each pencil in two so they can carry on.
Obviously we feel discouraged, but we do what we can.’
Most of his staff are currently on strike because they haven't been paid for two months, so Soliz is going personally to open the new group and give the first lesson.
We walk over to a dusty square where over a hundred women, migrants from the countryside and recently closed state mines, are digging and paving with picks and shovels.
Some are elderly, some are pregnant and many are carrying babies in striped, woven shawls on their backs, toddlers trailing behind them.
‘They're with the Food for Work programme,’ explains Soliz.
‘The Adventists have an agreement with the Town Hall to give each woman 100 pounds weight of donated US foods monthly, in exchange for three days' municipal work a week.’
SENALEP has managed to negotiate an interlude in the women's backbreaking workload: one group is freed from manual labour for two or three hours each day to join in the literacy programme.
Today, 40 women stroll over to an open yard under the hot Andean sun carrying tools and babies, many knitting as they walk.
Sitting on the ground in a semicircle for their first lesson, their faces radiate interest, hope and curiosity.
The class begins.
Text books are handed out: ‘Let's read about our reality!’ is the title.
The first step: learning how to hold the book the right way up.
The first page shows a picture of Bolivians from different regions and social sectors.
‘They all want to learn.
And what about us — why do we want to get educated?’
The answers come immediately: ‘So we won't be cheated’;’ So we won't have to say, ‘I don't know how to sign my name’’; ‘So we can help the kids with their homework’; ‘So we'll know who to vote for.
That's why we want to learn.’
As the class progresses, those women who have had some schooling race ahead, while the rest, who speak little Spanish, stumble and get confused.
Aymara vowels are different from Spanish ones, so they cannot easily distinguish ‘u’ from ‘o’, ‘i’from ‘e’.
There is no chance for writing, as there are no materials.
Toddlers start to fret, and some women are walking to and fro soothing restless babies.
After an hour, boredom has set in: the quick learners are impatient with those who can't follow, while the older women mechanically repeat five or six words in succession after the others, without even looking at their books.
‘Right, that's the end of the first lesson.
You'll have to remember it because there's going to be no revision.
If you don't make an effort, you're not going to get anywhere’, says Soliz, tired and hot under the bright sun.
He hands over to a young man with a toothless grin under a Coca-Cola hat who has been elected locally as the group's ‘popular educator’.
‘I'd just like you to understand the problems we have…we do the best we can,’ sighs Soliz as we walk back to the bus stop.
Further down the hillside towards La Paz, another women's group is meeting in the early afternoon.
This one is run by a non-governmental organization, the CDA, which works with 63 such groups all over the city, promoting literacy, health and nutrition.
The CDA's hallmark is its firm popular base: all its regular workers are women volunteers from the shanty towns, without professional training.
Adelaida Parra coordinates seven literacy groups each week spending long hours travelling by bus between the distant shanty towns.
Over her traditional ‘pollera’, the wide, thick skirt which indigenous women wear, she has the bright blue overall of the CDA staff.
Today, eighty women sit scattered on the brownish-grey stony ground.
Adelaida points out the different groups: the ‘grandmothers’, who sit in the sun spinning and chatting; the ‘complete illiterates’, mostly older Aymara women who are making their first letters with painstaking care; the’ functional illiterates’who have had some schooling and progress more rapidly; and the groups which practise their recently acquired literacy skills using materials on health and nutrition.
Carolina, a sixteen-year-old whose mother is learning to read and write for the first time, is a voluntary helper with the grandmothers' group.
‘I'm teaching them to hold the pencil properly and write their names,’ she says.
‘Most of them can't do any more than that because their eyesight is bad.’
‘I know A, B and all that, but now I want to learn to sign my name, that's all’, says Juana Monroy, felt halt pulled down over her wrinkled face.
‘It's my eyesight that gets me, I can't read, my eyes start to water.
You need a big head for studying, it's a bit difficult.’
‘How's the group getting on?’
I ask Adelaida.
‘The numbers have really gone down,’ she says.
‘There used to be 200, but since the food stopped coming…a lot of women came mainly for the donations.
Now they've gone off to other groups handing out food, like Food for Work and the Mothers' Clubs where they do weaving and knitting and things like that.’
‘It's difficult for us to get time off to come here’, says Justa Quispe, mother of five.
‘My husband says, ‘Why are you going to waste your time there if they aren't giving anything out?
You're too old to learn, it'll just make your head spin.’
I just tell him: ‘Look, I'm going for a bit of a break.
I get fed up here at home with the kids and problems and all.’
‘Have you got any books at home?’
I ask.
‘Books?
Well…
I've got this one, and my son's school books.
Newspapers?
No, we can't afford to buy them.’
Back downtown in the CDA office, the staff are discussing the problems they're having with the groups.
‘There are lots of women who really want to learn,’ says Sonia.
‘But people have such bad financial problems at the moment, they have to give up the chance to study and go for whatever will fill their families' stomachs.’
‘The women often have to move, too,’ says Esther.
At harvest time, a lot of families up here visit relatives to help get the crops in, so it's hard to keep up continuity in the group.’
‘And what about the poor diet?’ puts in Gaby.
‘If the women aren't well fed, they can't concentrate enough to study.
And if they've been malnourished since they were kids, they're often slow in learning and remembering.
That's what we're up against.’
It's a long hard struggle.
But there are successes as well as setbacks.
Back to the Peruvian border.
Another community, Jank'o Amaya, is now hoisting its own white flag.
This regional literacy programme has really taken off.
Why here?
One important factor is that the villagers have something to read and a reason to read it.
The literacy programme has been linked with agricultural training whose leaflets and bulletins are produced specifically for those who are recently literate.
There are also mobile teams who travel to outlying communities so that people do not all have to come to one centre.
And literacy is not the end of the road: there is the added incentive that those adults who can read and write now have the opportunity to go on to higher education through a special rural matriculation scheme.
This gives everyone much more confidence in the future.
‘We lost our own voice, but now we've regained it,’ says one of the teachers.
‘Literacy means more than learning a code or writing a word.
It's understanding our reality, reflecting about our country.
It's being able to write our own history.’
This time, the silky white banner is larger and bolder.
‘Jank'o Amaya defeats illiteracy’, it reads.
Flying in the wind to cheers and raucous pipe music, the banner does not halt under the national flag, but carries on up the flagpole, vying with the tricolour until it covers it triumphantly.
Worth reading on…
LANGUAGE
A good store could manage 10 feet of shelving on books about language and not have got past C for Chomsky.
Much of this is actually linguistics, however — something of an acquired taste.
It's a subject whose passion for diagrams and abbreviations and formulae can give nuclear physics a run for its money.
If you only buy one book on language, then there is no competition.
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (Cambridge University Press, 1987) is a masterpiece of comprehensiveness and clarity.
‘Encyclopaedia’ might give the impression of the usual rag-bag of independently-written articles stitched together in alphabetical order.
This is nothing of the sort.
For a start it is written by one person.
David Crystal is a British linguist with a prolific output on language — one could recommend almost any of his publications.
And the book eschews alphabetical order in favour of thematic logic — to good effect.
You won't see much change from a $50 bill or a hard-earned 25 but if you are remotely interested in the subject it's an excellent investment.
If the encyclopaedia has a weakness it is that it sits on the fence on controversial issues.
That's not a criticism you could level at Language — the loaded weapon by Dwight Bolinger (Longman, 1980).
Bolinger, a Harvard Professor shoots from the hip.
His ostensible targets are the ‘shamans’, the TV and magazine pundits who lament any change in the way language is used.
But many other speakers and writers stray into the firing line.
He shows just how loaded is the language we use — and how easily it can be subverted.
Many of the issues raised in this edition of the NI have their origin in this particular book — so if you want more evidence this is the place to go.
By the same author but less polemical is Aspects of Language by Dwight Bolinger and Donald Sears (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), 1981.
This is written for students of linguistics but also offers a good introduction for the general reader.
It's a pity not to be able to recommend any books by Noam Chomsky himself.
They are mostly technical and make few concessions to the casual browser.
A better way to approach him is through books like Modern Linguistics — The Results of Chomsky's Revolution by Neil Smith and Deirdre Wilson (Penguin, 1979).
Chomksy's theories are constantly developing and this book explains clearly the stages through which they have passed.
Worth reading on…
POPULATION
The trouble with reading about population is that you really have to decide what you think before you choose your reference book.
This is because each tends to be written from one of three main analytic standpoints, each of which is extremely convincing — in its own terms.
Take Julian Simon's The Ultimate Resource (Princeton University Press, 1981), for instance.
Pick it up unknowingly and you will quickly be convinced that 10-child families are a cause for celebration rather than concern.
I had an urge to slap a Warning sticker on the cover to alert people that this cogent little number comes from a High Prince of the New Right.
But, despite its politics, Simon's book cuts a refreshing swathe through some rarely-challenged assumptions and does a rather neat demolition job on the second type of writer on population.
Simon calls them ‘the doomsdayers’ and they are just as persuasive as he is, but are putting the exact opposite case: that rapid population growth is destroying our green and pleasant planet along with all its economic and social institutions.
If that's what you think, then the excellent Worldwatch Paper series from the Worldwatch Institute (1776 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington DC 20036, USA), will provide all the facts and arguments to support your worst fears.
For a somewhat less biased view of the global scene it's worth sending for the latest Report on the State of World Population from the UN's Fund for Population Activities (485, Lexington Ave.
New York NY 10017, USA).
A subscription to the International Planned Parenthood Federation's quarterly house magazine, People, is also a must.
It's well-written, informative, full of on-the-spot reports and case studies from all over the world — though somewhat eclectic politically (however, many would consider this a point in its favour).
You can get it from IPPF, PO Box 759, Inner Circle, Regent's Park, London NW1 4LQ, UK.
Another must is the booklet that sums up the findings of the World Fertility Survey, World Fertility Survey — Major Findings and Implications, and its companion volume of statistics, Fertility in the Developing World, both obtainable from the WFS at 35-37 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0BS, UK.
Finally I have to recommend the book that best tallies with my own (feminist) analytic standpoint on population: Betsy Hartmann's Reproductive Rights and Wrongs (Harper and Row, 1987, due to be published in the UK this month).
If you believe that women, and not planners, should be the people to decide on the size of families they have, then this is the book for you.
But I think another Warning sticker might be appropriate here — to remind the reader that there are many dedicated women and men out there trying to provide poor people with the means to choose the size of their families.
Stunned by Hartmann's catalogue of crimes committed in the name of ‘family planning’, it's easy to forget such people exist.
The Vegetarians of Love
by Bob Geldof(Phonogram)
In which Saint Bob takes up again the slings and arrows of an outrageous career — and turns in a halfway decent record.
Geldof has come a long way since his first single with the Boomtown Rats, a hymn to selfishness called Looking After Number One.
But his musical achievements have been decidedly slender.
No more than a couple of good songs and much sub-Jagger ligging and leering with the Rats; Do They Know It's Christmas?; a mediocre first solo album; and there the list peters out.
He deserves some sympathy: how on earth could he deliver artistic goods that have the weight of his global charity work?
Answer: by turning in a record with echoes of Bob Dylan and Van Morrison, which must be as close as popular music comes to high seriousness and sainthood, to being untrammelled by earthly concerns like chart success.
It's a smart move which leads him out onto a limb of high-flown verbiage, as in the charmingly titled Thinking Voyager 2 Type Things: ‘I'm electric with the snap and crackle of creation/ I'm mixing up the mud with the spit/ So rise up Brendan Behan and like a drunken Lazarus/ Let's traipse the high bronze of the evening sky/ Like crack crazed kings’.
Geldof gives up struggling to be a singer of quality and pitches for the spoken individuality of a Dylan.
He ends up with the non-voice of Mark Knopfler but given that gentleman's sales figures (Dire Straits' Brothers In Arms was the UK's best-selling album of the 1980s) Geldof will hardly complain about the comparison.
The musical setting is carefully selected too to remove him from the tawdry everyday fray of the pop marketplace: violas, accordions, pennywhistles and assorted kitchen utensils conjure up the timeless integrity of Irish folk music (or ‘roots’ in 1990-speak).
But ultimately you have to say that the music is the weak link — that it lacks the depth and the melodic assurance that the consistently interesting words cry out for.
Still, it's a bold attempt to put his art where his mouth has always been and you can't help willing him to succeed.
If nothing else you feel for a man blighted by an absurdly exalted image — and one who can make a joke out of it in the wonderful tongue-in-cheek prophecy of The End of the World that closes the album (‘Nostradamus and Jesus and Buddha and me/ We said it was coming/ Now just wait and see’).
One thing more.
The title is ironic: one of this man's many crusades is against vegetarianism.
Think of that (and him) what you will.
FILM
Mo' Better Blues directed by Spike Lee
Spike Lee's fourth feature film is the story of Bleek Gilliam (Denzel Washington), a perfectionist jazz trumpeter who puts his music before everything else.
Bleek has two girlfriends (Joie Lee and Cinda Williams), each of whom he betrays with the other as a matter of course.
He also has a quartet he attempts to rule with a very firm hand and an inadequate manager called Giant (Spike Lee himself) whose obsession with gambling is one reason why the group is prone to the exploitation of (white) New York club owners.
An interesting and very entertaining hybrid of flamboyant style and too predictable content, Mo' Better Blues balances Lee's characteristic from-the-hip immediacy of camerawork, dialogue and performances against a storyline which, but for some very significant trimmings of colour, language and attitude, could well have come out of 1950s Hollywood.
All cool elegance and effortless authority, Washington gives a charismatic star performance and the soundtrack, combining imposingly lush orchestrations with soaring trumpet and sax solos, is uniformly excellent too.
Unfortunately the substance of the tale is too thin and familiar by far.
The painful spiritual growth of Bleek, his learning that love is more important than music, is acceptable enough, but Lee concentrates far too much on his own character, a much less sympathetic figure than was intended.
Giant, hogging screen time as he stumbles from one tedious gambling-led crisis to another, severely unbalances the movie.
Meanwhile Bleek's relationships involve a large number of bedroom scenes which for too much of the time seem to present the women as carnal accessories passively accepting his attentions.
Still Mo' Better Blues is full of fine moments and happens to have one of the very best opening-credits sequences you'll see in this or any other year.
Don't arrive late — for that alone repays the price of admission.
Long Time Companion directed by Norman Rene
‘Survived by his long time companion…
’ Taking its title from this sober standard phrase of the modern obituary column, Norman Rene's film is an attempt to assess the impact of AIDS on the gay community and at the same time to celebrate the very strong sense of pride and resolve which the disease has paradoxically fostered.
The movie progresses in nine yearly stages from 1981 through to 1989, with AIDS gradually looming larger and larger until it finally seems to dominate everything else.
In 1981 AIDS hadn't even been properly identified, which means that while the New York Times carries a famous first article on a new ‘rare cancer’ afflicting gay men, the confident and unselfconsciously gay lifestyle of the film's seven central characters is presented as a kind of nostalgic idyll.
By 1982 one of them is seriously ill in hospital with pneumonia; by 1983 much more is known about the HIV virus; by 1985 another of the men is clearly dying.
As the years pass the disease takes a heavier and heavier toll not only physically but also emotionally as it progresses through the group.
At the same time qualities of loyalty, caring and unashamed affection are highlighted as lives become ever more intimately linked by bereavement.
One of the major strengths of Long Time Companion is its avoidance of the ‘Government Health Warning’ approach to AIDS.
Transmission routes, precautions, various types of treatment and so on are deliberately kept in the background.
Instead the emphasis is on the developing relationships between characters becoming more and more of a genuine community through common loss.
The film could be criticized on the grounds that all of the characters are white, ‘respectable’ and economically advantaged.
But on the other hand this helps avoid the pitfall of showing people with AIDS as passive, somehow guilty victims.
These are intelligent, sophisticated, emotionally mature individuals rather than stock figures or caricatures and this lends the film a credibility it otherwise wouldn't have.
In the end it is perhaps rather too tidy and symmetrical an affirmation of the human spirit.
But Long Time Companion's comprehensive avoidance of manipulative devices and, not least, its sense of humour, ensures its authority both as drama and as a piece of fundamental optimism.
Karate Kids directed by Derek Lamb
You're not going to see this one at your local Bijou nor are you likely to pick it up at the corner video store.
Karate Kids is a ‘-minute AIDS education cartoon aimed at Third World street kids.
Produced by Canada's National Film Board and the Toronto-based Street Kids International, in consultation with the World Health Organization and UNICEF, the video is already being used by health educators and street workers in Kenya, Ethiopia, Egypt, the Philippines and more than two dozen other countries.
And it is easy to see why.
This is a courageous and inventive bit of film-making, building on the potential of video as a democratic medium for grassroots education.
The film is technically impressive (Academy Award-winning animator Derek Lamb directs) but more admirably it zeroes in on kids' interests without patronizing them.
The cartoon features a gang of street children who hang out in the town market — begging, stealing, doing odd jobs and just horsing around.
The market setting is purposely generic — it could be Khartoum, Bangkok or Recife.
And the kids themselves are a mix of black, brown and yellow.
To refine the final video an early version of the cartoon was screened for children from five different countries.
The results were encouraging and their suggestions practical.
(For example, the young critics suggested the cartoon kids should be barefoot since street kids can't afford shoes.)
The story focusses on Mario and Pedro, two kids who are having a tough time scraping together enough money to live on.
Mario is tempted by ‘the smiling man with the black car’ to sell sex for hard cash.
But the streetwise Karate Hero intervenes and warns the boys against the danger of AIDS: ‘Anyone can get AIDS from sex: we must all protect ourselves and our friends’.
The language used is direct (‘That man wanted to fuck you,’ Karate warns the boys) and the lessons clear: people with AIDS need our help and support; condoms can protect us from the HIV virus.
Along the way there are tears, laughs, harrowing chase scenes, infectious Afrobeat music — and the villain even gets his comeuppance in the end.
The video is part of an education package which includes a pocket-size Karate Kids comic book and a ‘What we need to know about AIDS’ guide for educators.
The material is available in Portuguese, French, Spanish and English and Street Kids International will help translate and adapt the material.
Though conceived for Third World kids the video has also been used with inner-city kids in Washington and New York and with Canadian Indian children.
When the Bough Breaks…by Lloyd Timberlake and Laura Thomas(Earthscan)
Child Slaves by Peter Lee-Wright(Earthscan)
One reads When the Bough Breaks…with a horror that is familiar — and an anger over one's own impotence that is perhaps equally familiar.
This is a comprehensively researched document which records the effects of an industrially devastated environment upon the most vulnerable group of human beings — children.
We meet children from all parts of the world.
There is Iwonka, the Polish schoolgirl who breaks down and cries as she tells of her mother's miscarriage (caused by the fumes of the steel plant where she worked).
Or Pavitra, who drinks contaminated water in her Delhi slum.
The point of meeting them is to understand the ruthlessness of international economic policies which drive the poorer nations of the world to environmental disaster in an attempt to repay their debts.
It reads at times like a catalogue of economic aggression of which one telling example may be sufficient: in 1976 Ciba-Geigy purposely sprayed a group of Egyptian children with the pesticide Galecron in order to test its effects.
Such ruthlessness has another face which is passionately explored in Peter Lee-Wright's Child Slaves.
It recounts the dehumanizing conditions under which children labour in the Third World in order to provide commodities and services to consumers usually from the West.
Lee-Wright doesn't shrink from naming names and one recognizes many familiar superstore products that originate from some fume-choked hovel halfway across the world.
And if the faint heart should quail at this then think of the children being sexually exploited in the Philippines and Thailand where the Western male consumer can see the misery behind his gratification but still cannot resist.
In most cases, the author cautions, the answer is not an immediate ban on the products of child labour — that would mean an even worse fate for the children concerned — but the more difficult option of pressurizing the exploiters to improve conditions and alter policies.
Child Slaves is written in prose that pulls no punches and is strident when it has to be, unlike When the Bough Breaks…which is a bit bloodless by comparison.
Both books imply what childhood should be like by being very straightforward about the present reality for all too many of the world's children.
Bananas, Beaches and Bases by Cynthia Enloe(Pandora)
In the 1940s Carmen Miranda sang and danced her way to success beneath exotic head-dresses festooned with leaves, flowers, fruits and berries.
This bizarre get-up helped slot Latin American women into a caricature of fruit-bearing flamboyance in the US mind.
Carmen Miranda's image was deliberately used as a vehicle to help consolidate a commercial mnage trois between the Brazilian singer, the US-Latin American ‘good neighbour’ policy and the banana.
It is this kind of intriguing connection which makes Cynthia Enloe's book seem so promising.
The subtitle is ‘Making Feminist Sense of International Politics’, which itself should be striking enough to secure it a decent sale in alternative bookshops.
But Enloe doesn't quite deliver.
She attempts to show, for instance, how the middle-class Western housewife is as exploited by male-dominated multinational policy as the Honduran woman working in the banana-packing plant.
She argues that the diplomatic wife is as much a victim of male-dominated foreign policy as the peasant woman farmer.
This kind of overstatement does not help her case.
There is plenty of good material here — about the proliferation of prostitution around foreign military bases, for instance, or about the men's club atmosphere of international policy-making circles.
But ultimately it is lost in a quagmire of stylistic density and what could have been a startling book ends up feeling turgid.
MUSIC
Mama Mosambiki by Eyuphuro (?)
Ngola by the Kafala Brothers (?)
Eyuphuro, from the Macua word meaning whirlwind, is an apt name for a band which whirls you away from the all-too-prevalent perception of Mozambique as a place of war, famine and refugees, to the image of a young and dynamic society.
Formed in 1980 and led by dual singer-songwriters Gimo Remane and Zena Bakar, the group has always made an effort to maintain the traditional rhythms of their home in Nampula province but also take inspiration from a cosmopolitan mix of Latin and Arab styles: the delicate lilting Portuguese-influenced guitar cuts across sliding Arabic rhythms.
Mama Mosambiki deals mainly with the social and cultural relations of men and women in modern Mozambique: it criticizes, for instance, the old traditions that leave a wife with nothing after a divorce and celebrates the resilience of women in the face of men's negative attitudes.
This sympathetic focus on women is very refreshing.
Eyuphuro's lyrics come from a Mozambican context and from the heart.
Although they have chosen to deal with personal dilemmas, the songs in Mama Mozambiki can also be seen as metaphors for what is happening in a nation struggling to overcome years of civil war fuelled by South African destabilization.
The Samukhela, people who are always harking back to the good old pre-independence days and want to emigrate, are addressed in the first song: ‘But Samukhela when you get there you'll think of home — the home of Africa…you'll miss your mother you'll miss your father’.
The Kafala Brothers' debut album Ngola (the king of the Ndongo people and the basis of Angola's name) is a good point of comparison.
Angola and Mozambique share many similarities: from their days of suppression under Portuguese colonial rule to the problems of post-independence South African aggression.
And, like Eyuphuro, the Kafala Brothers have a cosmopolitan influence, blending traditional and urban styles and reflecting Congolese, Zairean, Brazilian and Cuban rhythms in a combination of vocals, flute and guitar.
But in contrast to Mama Mosambiki's oblique approach, the Kafala Brothers have chosen in this album to sing directly about the cruelty and devastation of civil war in Angola.
Their songs are sad and haunting tributes to their people's sufferings —‘the bitter taste of darkness’— making use of the hypnotic quality of traditional chants to moving effect.
The overall result is a collection of beautiful and ironically harmonious expressions of pain which literally cry out for some of the vibrancy and hopeful energy of Mama Mosambiki.
FILM
Bringing it all Back Home produced by Sheffield Film Co-op
The slinky strains of Sade's ‘Smooth Operator’ introduce us to Sheffield's affluent West End, where other smooth operators are discussing the layout of a glossy new magazine for glossy yuppies.
Meanwhile the East End of the city looks like a polluted, litter-strewn beach after the tide has gone out: derelict, depressed, abandoned.
Bringing it all Back Home is about East and West; about the poor and the rich in the UK; about poor countries in East Asia and rich countries in Western Europe.
And about the spider's web of international capital that links them all — rich and poor, East and West — together.
The film's message is ‘beware’.
It argues, in no uncertain terms, that levels of exploitation undreamed of outside the sweatshops of the Third World are coming home to roost in the depressed urban ghettos of the West.
The ‘beware’ is aimed most urgently at women, the chosen workforce of the multinational corporations who have begun setting up shop in Western ‘enterprise zones’.
And the warning comes from other women — in countries like Sri Lanka and Malaysia — who have seen it all before in their own free-trade zones.
The logic is coherent and chilling.
And the interviews with women — with a cleaner in Barking, an electronics factory worker in Fife, a Sri Lankan activist, an Indian sociologist — are inspired and inspiring.
These are not just talking heads: their testimonies are a fascinating mix of anecdote and analysis that are a real credit to the film-makers' skills.
What's more, this film was made in full consultation with its subjects.
Buy it, hire it, borrow it.
Steal it if you have to.
MUSIC
Red by the Communards (London)
What do you do when your most distinctive feature is also your biggest drawback?
Jimmy Somerville's falsetto voice first grabbed people by the lapels on Bronski Beat's excellent Smalltown Boy, which had the added virtue of being about the dilemma of a gay teenager.
But when that voice was stretched over an LP it started to wear a bit thin.
It is simply not extraordinary enough — not a miraculous vibrato instrument like that of Pavlov's Dog's David Surkamp.
Instead it is too often reedy and has difficulty carrying assurance.
The Communards have done their best to offer added attractions: they put the politics farther upfront (songs here about AIDS victimization and Thatcher's election victory) and recruited a group of talented women string players.
But Red is still not entirely satisfying.
It's a compromise between the straight-ahead disco that guarantees a toehold in the charts — the retread of Never Can Say Goodbye is a rather cheap cash-in on the success of Don't Leave Me This Way — and the more varied explorations where their hearts probably lie.
Only on the stirring finale C Minor does everything come together: a quality song, beautifully played, with Somerville's anguished vocal adding rather than subtracting.
They should follow their hearts.
Thunder Before Dawn by various artists (Earthworks/ Virgin)
The second record in a series called The Indestructible Beat of Soweto — a title which shows a sharp eye for selling to the South African solidarity market.
This is a compilation of mbaqanga music, very typical of the township jive you would have heard in any shebeen since the 1960s: lively, rollicking music with fluid, chattering guitars.
Don't look here for anything rousingly political — instead we are offered the everyday concerns of township life from ‘shared beer’ to a sister's wedding, marital arguments to ‘the importance of proper education’.
And listen here for rhythm and exuberance rather than passionate singing — the best vocal moments are the cool interjections of the Mahotella Queens, part of the township supergroup Mahlathini Nezintombi Zomgqashiyo.
There is overall a certain uniformity to the record.
But it is an astutely packaged and worthwhile collection nonetheless, with translations from the Zulu on the sleeve.
BOOKS
Gone to Soldiers by Marge Piercy (Michael Joseph)
Marge Piercy has always invested a popular format — the racily narrated blockbuster — with a radical message.
Civil rights activist, feminist, pacifist, since the mid-1960s she has steadily produced novels of anger and integrity that deal with contemporary issues.
Gone to Soldiers, however, is a book of dismaying sentimentality in which Piercy seems to have succumbed to enticing absolutes: heroism or cowardice; innocence or culpability.
Beneath its denunciation of war and its apparent modernity there is the chauvinist roar of good and evil.
Despite its great length and Piercy's painstaking research, Gone to Soldiers fails to grapple in any intelligent way with its massive subject.
A huge cast of characters — each of whom are given intermeshing chapters to narrate the US perspective on the mess and sacrifice of World War Two — is flung out all over the globe.
One character is in the Resistance, another witnesses Hiroshima, another goes to a concentration camp, others stay at home.
All suffer and all demonstrate the barbarism of the conflict.
But war is simply a dramatic backdrop to the novel, for the material of history is recycled into a mush of individual lives.
The Second World War tore across this historically accelerating century, breaking up families, eroding class systems and challenging sexual mores, but at the same time marking the post-Holocaust, post-Hiroshima age.
It is painful, then, that someone like Marge Piercy can ignore its reverberations in our present age.
BOOKS
Broken Promise by Annie Allsebrook and Anthony Swift (Hodder & Stoughton)
The promise?
That of growth through childhood as well as guardianship by the adult world.
Broken?
Each year some 14 million young children die of preventable diseases.
Estimates of street kids vary between 30 and 100 million worldwide.
Goodness knows how many others are emotionally or physically crippled.
Broken Promise is a collection of vivid personal accounts by ‘endangered children’— and it conveys the reality and universality of the problems they face better than a hundred or more straight world development textbooks.
The pages seem to turn themselves, partly thanks to fluent writing and an attractive design but also because the subject is so compelling.
There are the teenage hookers in the New York Port Authority Bus Terminal and the beach gang with their guns in Recife; there are the granite-quarry labourers in Bangalore and the Ugandan child soldiers toughened by the Luwero Triangle massacres.
Yet in the interstices of the personal accounts, the authors never lose sight of the political issues which underpin the problems: the relationships between rich and poor, women and men, North and South.
The only real fault is the looseness of the structure: in higgledy-piggledy fashion and at breathless speed, we move from female infanticide in Tamil Nadu to disabled babies in Nairobi.
A touch more organization might have made even more of this rich material.
This autumn the United Nations is due to pass the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Kids will not overnight be protected from warfare, child labour, or sexual abuse as a result.
But it is a start.
For countries which have ratified the Convention can be held to task if they refuse to allocate resources to deal with these issues domestically.
To heighten concern about the Convention, Broken Promise could not have come out at a better time.
Agents of Repression by Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall (South End)
Paramilitary police operations and death squads directed against dissidents are usually associated with Third World regimes.
This book documents the use of these, and other repressive techniques, in the secret war that the US FBI waged against the American Indian Movement (AIM) and the Black Panthers during the 1960s and 1970s.
By 1971, when the official counter-subversion program COINTELPRO was ‘ended’, the wide range of tactics used, including assassination, heavily armed raids, falsification and fabrication of documents, misinformation as news, and tying up activists in endless trials, had succeeded in destroying the Black Panthers and other militant Black groups.
But the secret war, increasingly against AIM, continued under other names and even intensified under FBI direction.
In 1973, the US Army engaged in its first domestic operation since the Civil War when its forces, including armored cars, assisted heavily armed FBI agents in laying siege to the village of Wounded Knee.
This had been occupied by AIM members in support of the traditional Lakota (Sioux) of Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.
But Wounded Knee was not the end of the war against the Lakota.
Between 1973 and 1976, 69 AIM members and supporters died violently and 300 more were physically assaulted, sometimes shot.
The political murder rate, attributed primarily to the tribal police, was almost equivalent to that of Chile in the three years after the coup against Allende.
The authors end their book by calling on the US Left to start seriously organizing against the FBI and the apparatus of political repression that continues to operate in the US.
Given the increasing dissent in the US and recent revelations concerning new illicit actions against activists, it seems like good advice indeed.
MUSIC
Mind Bomb by The The(Epic)
Matt Johnson, who constructs The The out of different musicians for each album, continues to skirt the fringes of commercial success.
Critical respect is no problem — and the innovative video for his last album, Infected, even won a prize at the Cannes Film Festival, despite the troubling sexism of a couple of its sequences.
Mind Bomb offers as uncompromisingly bleak a world-view as ever.
As before, Johnson rails against injustice and oppression, but more as an everlasting fact of human existence than as something that might be fought and corrected.
You get the feeling that if a genuine utopia ever came into being, Matt Johnson would be the one person wanting to tear it all down.
His ‘love songs’, for example, are like nobody else's on earth — they positively scream with the pain of relating.
‘You will come to me,’ he says, ‘to stroke my hair, to cuddle my flesh, and to quell the torrents in my subterranean depths.’
This is uncomfortable listening, especially when coupled with Johnson's own determinedly ‘spoken’ singing.
But the discomfort is cased in rich, and even beautiful arrangements.
Johnson has always had the ability to find haunting, complex musical settings for his songs and here they have the extra benison of ex-Smith Johnny Marr.
If there is a theme here, it is religion.
At first it seems to be an entirely negative force.
Yet at other points the problem is rather the hijacking of the original message, as in the phenomenal lines: ‘If the real Jesus Christ were to stand up today/ He'd be gunned down cold by the CIA/ Oh the lights that now burn brightest behind stained glass/ Will cast the darkest shadows upon the human heart/ But God didn't build himself that throne/ God doesn't live in Israel or Rome/ God doesn't belong to the ‘yankee dollar’ /God doesn't plant the bombs for Hezbollah’.
Few Christians would quibble with that, and by the end Johnson is even talking about ‘previous incarnations’ and straining for ‘a happiness beyond human reach’.
He's confused.
But he is also utterly compelling.
Barbarous English Fayre by King of the Slums (Play Hard)
‘Political’ pop needn't put text before textures, needn't deliver messages or manifestoes, or imagine that it can recreate ‘community’, ‘roots’or ‘pride’(as do senior ambassadors like Tracy Chapman, Elvis Costello and U2).
King of the Slums manage as much social comment in a dozen songs as others do in a decade but they belong among bands that eschew political persuasion in favour of chronicling the lives of the despairing or dispossessed, the people for whom political solutions have failed.
King of the Slums are the sound of people going nowhere.
Their post-punk scaffolding of taut bass and clenched guitar attack meets up at acute and difficult angles with the chafing, jagged white bars of violin and the half-guttersnipe-half-muezzin wail of vocals.
This band sounds like an ulcer, a festering sore, a self-consuming but nonetheless exhilarating secretion of bile.
King of the Slums' cast of losers, survivors and sharpers turn their disappointment against themselves and their own kind.
All that's left for them are the smallest triumphs, revenges or consolations — together with a fascination for the England of 15 or 20 years ago.
They have been left behind by the economic restructuring of the 1980s, shunted off on a branch line of history and left back in the twilight of the 1970s along with flares and skinheads, a time when demagogues made last-ditch efforts to salvage working-class pride and channel it in a fascist direction.
King of the Slums make distempered, dyspeptic pop about forgotten people — and it's grievously, frettingly good.
FILM
thirtysomething produced by the Bedford Falls Company/MGM
For once this is going to be a personal review, since I can't really stamp an official seal of NI approval on something which is so removed from our normal territory.
I'm also well aware that for all the people who take thirtysomething to their hearts, there are at least as many who can't abide it.
For those who haven't yet encountered it, thirtysomething is a weekly US TV show which has reached the end of its second series.
It focusses week after week on the same seven characters, all of whom have reached that certain stage in life — they're having children, their marriages are foundering, they're wondering what on earth they're doing in their work, or their parents are dying.
In that sense it's a glorified soap — and I've heard it dismissed more than once as a yuppie Dallas, though I find it as difficult to understand how anyone could see it that way as those people would find it to understand how I can curl up, laugh and cry with the characters each week and carry their dilemmas around with me in the days in between.
Why do I care about these people?
Probably because it's as close as I have ever come to seeing myself and my friends up on the screen.
Soaps don't usually focus on characters like this, people who grew up with the idealistic values of the 1960s and early 1970s, who have put off having children until their thirties, who worry about the environment but also worry about how they're not managing to do enough about it.
Charitably, you might say they represent the struggle of a generation to come to terms with a responsibility and authority they would once have rejected.
Uncharitably, you might say they were middle-class people who have long since sold out and ceased to do anything about changing the world short of creating more personal angst for themselves.
Still I care because I recognize the life that Hope and Michael, Melissa and Ellyn hold up before me.
But I also care because of the high quality of the scripts. thirtysomething is to soaps what Hill Street Blues was to cop shows: sharp, irridescent and innovative.
The writers take risks and every episode has something wacky about it: elaborate dream sequences; an argument played back four different ways from the perspective of each of the participants; the cast transported into the world of the Dick van Dyke Show.
Occasionally and inevitably they go over the top — but that's in the nature of risk.
Besides, the fantasy moments are balanced by and anchored in an amazingly acute eye for detail, for the nuances of real relationships: in this sense thirtysomething produces the quality of the best feature films, week in and week out.
That's doubtless because originators Marshall Herskovitz and Edward Zwick are writing about themselves and their friends: like Michael Steadman, who is at the centre of this universe, they are Jews in their mid-thirties married to non-Jews and with young children.
But however they originate, it matters to me that Michael never seems to share the childcare, that Melissa always winds up alone, that Gary is losing his teaching post.
Perhaps they have been a touch too comfortable — but the collapse of Elliot and Michael's business has put paid to that.
They could certainly do with more political fibre in there somewhere — and hopefully a new character, the abrasive community activist Susannah, will supply that.
And maybe you need to be thirtysomething yourself to feel as I do about these people.
But on the other hand a quarter of the total US TV audience tunes into it each week.
And I find it somehow very encouraging that television can present us with real people instead of the usual cyphers and still strike such deep and resonant chords in so many.
thirtysomething is a minor source of hope from the very heart of the beast.
FILM
Yeelen directed by Souleymane Cisse
This is a magical-mythical story set in pre-colonial Mali.
It makes an unlikely feature film.
The dialogue is in Bambara and the plot is sometimes confusing and mostly incredible.
Yet Souleymane Cisse has made a movie anyone can enjoy.
The photography alone is worth a couple of hours viewing.
Yeelen means ‘light’ and the yellows and ochres of the bleached-out landscape of the Sahel shine across the screen.
The sound too adds a timeless dimension of endless desert days and nights.
Technically — and particularly impressive for a film produced on a shoe-string — this is wonderfully done.
The storyline has twists and turns to challenge the inattentive.
But it is essentially an inter-generational struggle between a father who has magical powers and a son who is usurping them.
Soma the father pursues Nianakoro the son across the landscape with the help of a stout magic pole borne on the shoulders of a couple of servants.
The pole jerks the hunters off in the right direction rather like a heavyweight human-diviner.
Some of the episodes and dialogue are intentionally comic — as when the son helps a friendly local chief to shake off some warriors from a neighbouring tribe by bringing down a swarm of bees on them.
On other occasions one is less certain.
At one point the father decides that the thing to do is ‘immolate an albino and also a red dog’.
Both victims then walk backwards into view.
Mercifully we don't see the presumably nasty outcome.
Translation is a problem.
Not the words so much as the culture which produces them.
Many long exchanges are carried out entirely through metaphors like ‘the snake always sheds his skin’.
After a dozen or so of these, those of us used to more direct forms of speech are tempted to interpret them as self-parody.
But such is the skill of the production that in the end you just suspend disbelief, accept that you are absorbing a different way of looking at the world and take whatever comes.
You might not be sure what Yeelen is about but you'll be glad you saw it.
BOOKS
Nicaraguan New Time by Ernesto Cardenal (Journeyman)
Poetry somehow has so much more meaning in the Third World.
Whereas in the West it is generally the province of the privileged, in developing countries it is often the beating heart of resistance to oppression.
Not least in Nicaragua, a celebrated example of revolution conducted by poets.
Ernesto Cardenal is their current Minister of Culture.
His writing in Nicaraguan New Time, a collection of material from both before and after the overthrow of Somoza, is quite unabashedly dedicated to his social and political concerns — and, unlike other Sandinista leaders, he is also an enthusiastic communist.
The poetry is direct and unadorned, occasionally rather too much so.
But every now and then his plain-speaking style and his political passion come together: as, for example, when he switches between a dry, self-indulgent debate in the US Congress about Contra Aid and a graphic evocation of the atrocities committed by those Contras in Nicaraguan villages.
Or when he meditates on The Price of Bras:
A niece of mine complains about the Revolution
because of the very high price of bras.
I have no experience of having breasts
but I think I could cope with breasts without a bra.
My friend Rafael Cordova
lives near the hamlet of Esquipulas
and he told me many funerals used to pass
along the road
with tiny coffins
four, five, six, eight funerals
every afternoon,
they were children's funerals
each afternoon.
Old people did not die so often.
And not long ago the Esquipulas undertaker
came to him:
‘Doctor, I need a little help from you,
I am out of business.
There are no funerals now in Esquipulas.’
In the old days there were cheaper bras.
Now in Esquipulas funerals are far fewer.
You tell me: which is better?
Aid for Just Development by Stephen and Douglas Hellinger and Fred O'Regan (Lynne Rienner)
US foreign aid, the authors say with some irony, has contributed greatly to the ‘modernization of Third World poverty’.
Their response is more than mere cynicism, however, as they offer excellent concrete proposals for an overhaul, not just of US, but of all major aid and development agencies' programs.
The writers have spent years working with the major international development institutions: they are not just natural opponents carping from the outside, which lends their criticisms all the more value.
Put simply, they believe aid fails due to the dichotomy between theory at a distance and practical reality at the local level.
There is in this a particularly serious challenge to the World Bank.
They uphold the belief that even the most deprived and humble person is capable of determining his or her own needs with both creativity and industriousness in working towards a solution.
Humility, therefore, is an essential component of development work.
Many Western projects and programs have failed because of their basic lack of respect for the dignity of others and the tired assumption that the West always knows best.
Their guidelines for ‘equitable, locally defined and self-sustaining development’ are helpful and deserve close study by anyone working in the field.
Unfortunately it is only the voluntary agencies which are likely to take its message to heart — and not the government aid departments and World Bank ‘experts’ who need most to hear it.
MUSIC
Paradise in Gazankulu by Harry Belafonte (EMI Manhattan)
This is Harry Belafonte's anti-apartheid record: the whole album rises and falls to the distant drum of black resistance in South Africa.
‘We are the wave,’ he sings, gradually wearing down the rock of oppression by our sheer persistence and will to endure.
This might seem a bit rich coming from a man who has spent most of his career luxuriating in material wealth as one of the US's most enduring entertainers.
But the sentiments are sincere — Belafonte's anti-apartheid commitment not only predates the Nelson Mandela concert but also the births of many of the performers at it.
He finds a neat but dubious way of skirting Paul Simon's problem with the cultural boycott: South African musicians laid down backing tracks in Johannesburg in his absence and then he overdubbed vocals in the US.
Though had Simon produced such a ringing anti-apartheid statement as this there would surely have been little grounds for complaint about his Graceland trip.
Musically this benefits from the South African connection, too, lending an unfamiliar depth to Belafonte's rather plain voice.
Paradise still tends towards blandness in places but overall this is a strong, proud piece of artistic solidarity which merits notice beyond the middle-of-the-road bargain bins to which it has already been consigned.
I Didn't Mean It by Leon Rosselson(Fuse)
‘Land of Dreams’ by Randy Newman(Reprise)
The latest albums by performers from either side of the Atlantic with long and distinguished track records for setting social comment to music.
But their approaches could hardly be more different — and neither could their sales figures.
Leon Rosselson is a bit like a house bard for the British Left.
He describes himself as having ‘worked his way single-mindedly downwards’ since a burst of popularity on the Sixties satirical circuit — and part of the reason for that is his determined production of radical anthems regardless of political or musical fashion.
This record is typically full of causes and caustic humour, lambasting nukes, spycatchers and experts with equal venom.
It is extremely wordy, not least on the best track No Cause For Alarm, which demolishes the official defence of nuclear power.
That is his strength — but also his weakness, since music tends to take second place and leave him locked in a radical cabaret slot from which he is unlikely to emerge.
Randy Newman has also consistently used humour to undermine reactionary attitudes.
And here there is another of his astute parodies of redneck views, as a deprived black child is urged to ‘roll with the punches’ like a good American; elsewhere he laments ‘it's money that matters in the USA’.
But more affecting still is the first half of the record, in which he looks back with a wry, but far from dry, eye on his own childhood.
The ‘Land of Dreams’ of the title is both childhood and the US — and in both cases the quote marks are very deliberate.
As always, the music is as carefully constructed as the words — Newman's grasp of the basics of popular song has been amazingly consistent from his orchestrated debut in 1968 through the height of his popularity with the brilliant Little Criminals to this, the latest jewel in the crown of a quite exceptional body of work.
FILM
The Handmaid's Tale directed by Volker Schlondorff
Canadian novelist Margaret Atwood's bleak view of an anti-feminist future was shortlisted for the Booker Prize in 1986.
Now it has been made into a film by British scriptwriter Harold Pinter and German director Volker Schlondorff.
The Handmaid's Tale projects a not-too-distant future in the US where the evangelical right wing has come to power and the themes of fundamentalist protest have become the dictates of the state.
An epidemic of infertility caused by widespread toxic contamination means that known ‘breeders’ are herded together and eventually selected for insemination by the powerful.
The main character (played by Natasha Richardson) is dragooned into serving as breeding stock for a childless couple in the evangelical-state hierarchy.
Robert Duvall and Faye Dunaway as the couple do a marvellous job portraying the ‘family/hearth’ ruthlessness of those in control.
The film suffers from a lack of the social detail that made Atwood's feminist novel so credible.
The ideological points are still there but it's hard to believe that totalitarian regimentation could be so tight.
The unravelling of communism in Eastern Europe and the USSR has shown that if anything the notion of total control exercised by an all-knowing state has been badly overplayed by Cold Warriors.
Still, the film remains a compelling update of Orwell's — and with the breakdown of Stalinism the notion of the fundamentalist Right as the prime totalitarian threat has a thoroughly contemporary flavour.
The Handmaid's Tale is at its best in its frightening portrayal of gender politics and the depths to which people can sink when women are reduced to their biological functions.
Karate Kids directed by Derek Lamb
You're not going to see this one at your local Bijou nor are you likely to pick it up at the corner video store.
Karate Kids is a ‘-minute AIDS education cartoon aimed at Third World street kids.
Produced by Canada's National Film Board and the Toronto-based Street Kids International, in consultation with the World Health Organization and UNICEF, the video is already being used by health educators and street workers in Kenya, Ethiopia, Egypt, the Philippines and more than two dozen other countries.
And it is easy to see why.
This is a courageous and inventive bit of film-making, building on the potential of video as a democratic medium for grassroots education.
The film is technically impressive (Academy Award-winning animator Derek Lamb directs) but more admirably it zeroes in on kids' interests without patronizing them.
The cartoon features a gang of street children who hang out in the town market — begging, stealing, doing odd jobs and just horsing around.
The market setting is purposely generic — it could be Khartoum, Bangkok or Recife.
And the kids themselves are a mix of black, brown and yellow.
To refine the final video an early version of the cartoon was screened for children from five different countries.
The results were encouraging and their suggestions practical.
(For example, the young critics suggested the cartoon kids should be barefoot since street kids can't afford shoes.)
The story focusses on Mario and Pedro, two kids who are having a tough time scraping together enough money to live on.
Mario is tempted by ‘the smiling man with the black car’ to sell sex for hard cash.
But the streetwise Karate Hero intervenes and warns the boys against the danger of AIDS: ‘Anyone can get AIDS from sex: we must all protect ourselves and our friends’.
The language used is direct (‘That man wanted to fuck you,’ Karate warns the boys) and the lessons clear: people with AIDS need our help and support; condoms can protect us from the HIV virus.
Along the way there are tears, laughs, harrowing chase scenes, infectious Afrobeat music — and the villain even gets his comeuppance in the end.
The video is part of an education package which includes a pocket-size Karate Kids comic book and a ‘What we need to know about AIDS’ guide for educators.
The material is available in Portuguese, French, Spanish and English and Street Kids International will help translate and adapt the material.
Though conceived for Third World kids the video has also been used with inner-city kids in Washington and New York and with Canadian Indian children.
BOOKS
Bananas, Beaches and Bases by Cynthia Enloe(Pandora)
In the 1940s Carmen Miranda sang and danced her way to success beneath exotic head-dresses festooned with leaves, flowers, fruits and berries.
This bizarre get-up helped slot Latin American women into a caricature of fruit-bearing flamboyance in the US mind.
Carmen Miranda's image was deliberately used as a vehicle to help consolidate a commercial mnage trois between the Brazilian singer, the US-Latin American ‘good neighbour’ policy and the banana.
It is this kind of intriguing connection which makes Cynthia Enloe's book so novel and fascinating.
The subtitle is ‘Making Feminist Sense of International Politics’, and those very words make you realize how little we are used to seeing feminist analysis applied to the ebbs and flows of global power.
We are used to bursts of solidarity with, say, African women farmers, with women suffering genital mutilation or with women confined to their homes in some Islamic societies.
And we have latterly seen a feminist perspective informing the debate about nuclear weapons.
But while we might note that international politics is conducted almost entirely by men, we are not usually aware of gender as we analyse it.
Enloe sets out to prove not only that ‘the personal is political’ but also that ‘the international is personal’.
Governments depend on a network of unacknowledged female support to survive.
‘If we can expose their dependence on feminizing women,’ she says, we can show that this world system is also dependent on artificial notions of masculinity: this seemingly overwhelming world system may be more fragile and open to radical change than we have been led to imagine.
The book is consistently thought-provoking and written with one eye firmly fixed on the reader's attention span: each chapter has a different theme and has numerous subsections, each with its own headline.
But while this makes the book accessible it is also an admission of weakness: instead of in-depth analysis it offers a series of snapshots — of the tourist industry; of military bases and the women that serve them; of diplomatic wives and so on.
Nevertheless this is, as she says, a way of thinking about international politics which is still more or less in its infancy.
And Bananas, Beaches and Bases at least takes those vital first few steps.
MUSIC
Mama Mosambiki by Eyuphuro (?)
Ngola by the Kafala Brothers (?)
Eyuphuro, from the Macua word meaning whirlwind, is an apt name for a band which whirls you away from the all-too-prevalent perception of Mozambique as a place of war, famine and refugees, to the image of a young and dynamic society.
Formed in 1980 and led by dual singer-songwriters Gimo Remane and Zena Bakar, the group has always made an effort to maintain the traditional rhythms of their home in Nampula province but also take inspiration from a cosmopolitan mix of Latin and Arab styles: the delicate lilting Portuguese-influenced guitar cuts across sliding Arabic rhythms.
Mama Mosambiki deals mainly with the social and cultural relations of men and women in modern Mozambique: it criticizes, for instance, the old traditions that leave a wife with nothing after a divorce and celebrates the resilience of women in the face of men's negative attitudes.
This sympathetic focus on women is very refreshing.
Eyuphuro's lyrics come from a Mozambican context and from the heart.
Although they have chosen to deal with personal dilemmas, the songs in Mama Mozambiki can also be seen as metaphors for what is happening in a nation struggling to overcome years of civil war fuelled by South African destabilization.
The Samukhela, people who are always harking back to the good old pre-independence days and want to emigrate, are addressed in the first song: ‘But Samukhela when you get there you'll think of home — the home of Africa…you'll miss your mother you'll miss your father’.
The Kafala Brothers' debut album Ngola (the king of the Ndongo people and the basis of Angola's name) is a good point of comparison.
Angola and Mozambique share many similarities: from their days of suppression under Portuguese colonial rule to the problems of post-independence South African aggression.
And, like Eyuphuro, the Kafala Brothers have a cosmopolitan influence, blending traditional and urban styles and reflecting Congolese, Zairean, Brazilian and Cuban rhythms in a combination of vocals, flute and guitar.
But in contrast to Mama Mosambiki's oblique approach, the Kafala Brothers have chosen in this album to sing directly about the cruelty and devastation of civil war in Angola.
Their songs are sad and haunting tributes to their people's sufferings —‘the bitter taste of darkness’— making use of the hypnotic quality of traditional chants to moving effect.
The overall result is a collection of beautiful and ironically harmonious expressions of pain which literally cry out for some of the vibrancy and hopeful energy of Mama Mosambiki.
Month of Pure Light by Elizabeth Kemf (The Women's Press UK)
This remarkable book shows that happy conjunction of the personal and the descriptive which marks the best travelogues.
But it is a travelogue with a difference.
Elizabeth Kemf's journeys are all in the service of documenting the devastating effects that US bombing and chemical defoliation had upon the people and the environment of Vietnam — and the attempts to mend the damage.
And while there is a fair slice here of the usual details of travel, of botched arrangements and chance encounters, the personal story is also much more worth telling than usual.
Elizabeth Kemf is an American now living in Switzerland and working for the Worldwide Fund for Nature.
She first went to Vietnam in 1985 at a time when the country was still much more closed to journalists than it is now, full of enthusiasm that she was finally fulfilling a long-time ambition.
Her visa had already come through when she found out that she was pregnant with her first child.
The Vietnamese were appalled at the idea of a woman undergoing a trip in such a condition and in the end their forebodings proved justified: Elizabeth lost her baby.
She was to return four times, each time learning more about the ecology and the people.
Despite its poverty and its international isolation, Vietnam has been making a unique attempt to restore its tropical forest, one-fifth of which was lost in 20 years of war and its own mistakes.
And as Kemf witnesses more and more of the damage and the recovery for herself, she becomes closer to the Vietnamese friends who help her with her project, most particularly to Vietnam's most eminent environmentalist, Vo Quy.
But her personal loss echoes through her researches to the end — just as the tragedy suffered by the Vietnamese during the US War informs everything and everyone she meets.
Recommended to anyone keen to delve beneath the stock images of this troubled but beautiful country.
BOOKS
Front Line Africa — the Right to a Future by Susanna Smith(Oxfam)
This book is timely — and surrounded by controversy.
It forms the centrepiece of Oxfam's Front Line Africa campaign and has prompted an inquiry by the UK Charity Commissioners into the agency's political campaigning activity.
It has also provoked a spate of anti-Oxfam stories in the British media.
Looking at the book one is tempted to ask what all the fuss is about.
Its tone and contents are hardly revolutionary.
Rather it is a calm, thoroughly documented and well-illustrated report drawn from Oxfam's 30 years' experience of working in Southern Africa.
Newspaper reports, photos and personal accounts intersperse the often somewhat dense copy.
What emerges is a cool, comprehensive picture of how the evil machine of apartheid routinely devours lives and sabotages all hope of peace and development.
We have the personal testimony of the South African Oxfam partner detained and tortured by security forces before being forced into exile; the telex messages from Oxfam's Mozambique office saying that South African-backed rebels have just burst into a hospital full of women and children and massacred over 400; and the telex that tells the dreary tale of Oxfam emergency relief trucks blown up by the agents of apartheid.
What makes Front Line Africa controversial is also what makes it particularly useful — that a third of it is entirely devoted to the political and economic steps the rich world can and should take to hasten the end of apartheid.
It is absurd that Western citizens should give money to help victims of apartheid in Mozambique and Angola, only to find their own elected governments undermining that work by continuing to trade with South Africa.
Development agencies are well placed to make this point with the authority of people trying to get a job done.
One can only hope that policy-makers (and knee-jerk media pundits) will take to the trouble to read beyond the title.
1001 Ways to Save the Planet by Bernadette Vallely(Penguin)
The trouble with book titles like this is that the optimism they inspire is fast eroded by the guilt-making subtitle; in this case ‘How you can change your lifestyle now…’
We know we should, of course.
We want to help, as long as it doesn't take too much time or effort, or make us too obsessive and puritanical.
And this book is the best possible help, managing to be both positive and non-preachy.
It delivers just what it promises in the shape of 10001 short paragraphs, each containing a simple practical idea which might be put into practice in our daily lives.
It avoids the pitfalls of other so-called green guides which might tell you which lead-free BMW to buy but which neglect to deliver the most essential message of all about consuming less.
Some examples: cut out paper towels and handkerchiefs — use washable fabric ones instead; reject chemical scourers in favour of the traditionally effective baking soda; and go back to wind-up watches and fountain pens to reduce the number of waste batteries and plastic pens.
Often these have the flavour of turning back the clock but they are nearly always sensible.
The book also touches on problems such as cash-crop production in the Third World.
On these more complicated issues the short-paragraph style is less satisfactory, leading to over-simplification, but at least it puts these concerns on the green consumer's agenda.
Regular NI readers will be pleased to note that frogs' legs get a mention — our Briefly page has long campaigned against this gruesome trade.
1001 Ways to Save the Planet deserves to experience the irony of being consumed in vast quantities — and it's interesting that Penguin has been willing to launch it towards a mass readership sheathed in a determinedly dowdy recycled cover.
Colombia: Inside the Labyrinth by Jenny Pearce(LatinAmericaBureau)
Colombia is supposedly the ‘most democratic’ of Latin American states.
But Jenny Pearce's path through the labyrinth of recent history suggests that the country's sole democratic feature lies in the fact that its authorities allow elections.
The cover lends a hint of what we suspect will follow: tanks rolling in to end the siege of the Palace of Justice in November 1985 when the occupying guerillas, 12 judges and many civilians were killed.
The word ‘Colombia’ walks across the top of the jacket in bright pink and blue collage letters, adding a note of surrealism to a work on the country whose history Gabriel Garcia Marquez claimed corresponded most closely to the magical realism of his writing.
We are taken through the political and social development of a country which the US regards as its gateway to South America — and we wind up in a situation little different from the past in which an elite group monopolized economic and political power.
The authorities continue their suppression of political dissent by utilizing the trained assassin: the sicario.
It is not uncommon to hear about the assassination of public figures in the streets of Bogota and even running in local elections can ensure a place on some death list.
And the emergence of the cocaine barons has helped political bribery to flourish, though the old elites and the new mafia share an uneasy alliance.
Written in a terse, academic style that at times obstructs the true horror of her depictions of bloodshed and rebellion, Pearce offers an invaluable source of information, full of clearly laid out sections and chronological charts.
It is a shame that our only access to the experiences of the Colombian people is via the odd journalistic collage, usually lifted from El Tiempo, one of the country's Liberal newspapers.
The book is certainly authoritative but may well daunt the uncommitted reader by its relentlessly hard-nosed factuality.
FILM
Sidewalk Stories directed by Charles Lane
Filmed on the streets of New York in midwinter on a very low budget, this is an unusual and original film.
Written by, directed by and starring the young black American film-maker Charles Lane, Sidewalk Stories is not only almost completely without dialogue, it's also shot in crisp black and white rather than the now-regulation colour.
The issue of homelessness is at the heart of the movie but Lane manages to integrate it within a storyline which could quite easily have walked out of a Charlie Chaplin film of 70 years ago.
He plays a street artist, just one of many downtrodden but not downhearted characters getting by as best they can amid the urban squalor.
Sharing his stretch of pavement with a juggler, a dancer and various other human flotsam, the Street Artist attempts the odd portrait for a paying customer but spends most of his time sitting around wistfully.
Then one night in an alleyway he witnesses a murder and finds himself lumbered with the dead man's child.
Our hero then has to cope not only with a lively two year old but also with his burgeoning infatuation for a woman quite a few rungs above him on the social ladder.
In the absence of speech — or even silent movies' traditional inter-titles — Lane succeeds in making the gently miming performances, the real locations and the expressive music soundtrack carry the burden of the film's meaning.
To like this a lot you probably need to be able to handle silent movies — though dialogue suddenly breaks out in the final scene, powerfully underlining the film's more serious side.
All in all, this is a bold and refreshing experiment and Lane is clearly a talent to watch.
Stanley and Iris directed by Martin Ritt
Life on the factory production line isn't exactly the most popular subject for film-makers.
Paul Schrader's Blue Collar in 1978 and Karel Reisz's Saturday Night and Sunday Morning in 1960 are probably the two most famous attempts to sincerely conjure the dull routines of the shop floor.
Based very loosely on the Pat Barker novel Union Street — so loosely in fact that the Robert De Niro character Stanley doesn't exist in the original — Stanley and Iris manages for most of its length to say a great deal about struggling along just above the poverty line.
In the fictional New England town of Laurel, cosily decrepit and big on checked shirts and white fences, Iris (Jane Fonda) works at a big bakery piping icing onto assembly-line cakes.
Stanley works in the factory canteen but then loses his job when his boss discovers he can't read — a revelation for which Iris is accidentally responsible.
From then on the film is a partially credible but increasingly fantastic documentation of the relationship between the two which develops as she teaches him to read during her spare time.
De Niro is always worth watching and here the mixture of confusion and hurt pride he brings to his character's plight is very convincing.
Fonda too delivers a persuasive, ‘lived-in’ blend of good-naturedness and harassed routine.
The problem is that the movie is so desperate to make itself into a positive romance, ideal mutual learning process and overall success story that finally it begins to resemble one of those correspondence-school ads on the back of US comics: get some knowledge, triple your income, rise rapidly in your chosen field.
With Stanley turning out to be, in the best Ben Franklin tradition, an inventor and mechanical genius on the side, things get much more than a little too easy.
Still, Stanley and Iris is well worth catching for the sincerity of its performances and the at least partial originality of its subject matter.
FILM
A Dry White Season directed by Euzhan Palcy
This cinema's best attempt yet to come to terms with South Africa.
A World Apart was brilliant in its way but tightly focussed on a white mother and daughter; Cry Freedom's black scenes were much less convincing than its white, and descended into an adventure yarn; while Mapantsula offered a portrait of a gangster without attempting to seize the big picture.
Like Cry Freedom, A Dry White Season shows a comfortable white middle-aged man gradually waking up to the vicious inhumanity of the apartheid system.
But it is altogether more rooted in the bitter experience of black people.
As the story unfolds in the immediate aftermath of the 1976 Soweto Uprising, we see how two families, one black and one white, are destroyed — and the black actors are all South Africans themselves rather than US imports.
For this we have to thank director Euzhan Palcy, since Andre Brink's original novel focusses almost entirely on the Afrikaner teacher, Benjamin du Toit.
Palcy is the first black woman to make it as a big-budget director in Hollywood.
This is only her second film — her first, Rue Cases Nègres, was a stunning portrait of life in the sugar plantations of her native Martinique (and would have been hard to beat as NI's Film of the Year for 1983 if we'd chosen one then).
Snapped up for hter obvious talent by Hollywood, Palcy held fast to her idea of making a movie about South Africa.
Her concession to the industry was to structure the story as a mild thriller, showing du Toit (an outstanding performance by Donald Sutherland, his best for years) delving ever deeper into the treatment of his black gardener's family by the security forces.
But the thriller element does no damage to the message and helps the story along for even the most committed viewer.
Another borrowing from mainstream is the courtroom scene at the centre of the film, which is carried by a virtuoso cameo from Marlon Brando as a wheezy, old and vastly corpulent liberal lawyer.
This is Brando's first film since 1980 and it's good that his old campaigning fire was still sufficiently there under the millions and the sloth to pull him into this.
A Dry White Season is all that we could ask of a Hollywood movie about South Africa.
It leads the unconverted and naive step by step into understanding — and then stares the brutality of apartheid straight in the face.
MUSIC
Simbomba by Dembo Konte and Kausu Kuyateh (Rogue)
If the West wants to appreciate the flawless, fastidiously formal pleasures of this kora playing from Mali, it'll have to unlearn its current ideas about ethnic or ‘world’ music.
For a decade now the developed world has been celebrating African music while altogether denying its otherness.
The West has simply ‘rediscovered’ in Africa (despite the diversity and complexity of that continent's cultures) fundamental values that we imagine were lost or repressed in the high noon of civilization and progress: values like ‘natural’well-being, spontaneity, conviviality, uninhibitedness, everything we long for and want to relearn in the 1980s.
Hence the success of the imbecilically cheerful Bhundu Boys and the triumph of pop megastars who've made a pilgrimage to the ‘roots’ of pop and humanity (Paul Simon, Peter Gabriel).
Africa is just serving as a mirror for the West's new ideologies.
But now check out Simbomba.
This isn't rootsy, unspoiled, primitive music at all.
It's learned, hieratic, almost classical music, made by players from an hereditary elite.
Nor should you think that this is a slice of ‘heritage’, or a statement of pride in cultural or racial roots: some of these pieces are traditional, but this music's still developing.
This kora music is a close mesh of string-cum-keyboard chords.
It's crystalline, and as beautiful as frosted glass.
It has the appeal of mathematics or diffraction patterns — pristine and almost ascetic.
There's none of the self-expression or euphoria that pop would like to find in Africa: more of a stilling and cleansing of consciousness.
Kora music like this is indifferent to the West's fashions, carries none of the messages we expect to hear.
It's unfamiliar, unfathomable and irresistible.
Straight Outta Compton by Niggers With Attitude (Priority/4th & Broadway)
Perhaps you've never heard NWA, but you've almost certainly heard of them.
This black hip hop crew, with their incendiary, backs-to-the-wall rhetoric (eg Fuck the Police) are surrounded by moral panic.
And it's not just the moral majority, or upwardly mobile blacks, who'll be offended.
NWA simply epitomize the problems that much hip hop poses for thinking pop fans and the serious press as well: the machismo, misogyny and zero-dimensional music are an affront to all ‘caring’ pop's values.
The press have two strategies for dealing with this affront.
Either play up the ‘positive’ aspect (scratch most rap hoodlums and you'll find obligingly civic-minded, church-going, Bill Cosby-admiring moralists); or simply deny the music's dangerous allure by rejecting it as ‘moronic’and ‘boring’.
But we should be trying to see how it simultaneously offends and appeals.
Hip hop is survivalist music.
Today the black ghetto's become a model for everybody's experience: the city's no longer a place of opportunity but a ‘hell’ to be survived.
Hip hop is the sound of threatened individuals asserting themselves against an uncaring world, taking on all comers and dispensing rough (social) justice or vengeance.
Hence NWA's fascination with gangs and gun law (their favourite word is ‘ruthless’).
But survivalism also demands that you conquer inner threats or weaknesses, harden yourself against feeling and femininity — NWA, for example, see all women as harpies and exploiters, and prefer sadistic/anal/oral sex to anything more involving.
This priapic, will-to-survival music can allow men an unsettling glimpse into the impoverished, tunnel-vision world of their own (usually safely repressed) masculinity.
NWA, though, aren't hard-edged or moronic enough to convey the horror of survivalism.
Apart from the white-cold rage, colossal bass recoil and steel-on-steel impacts of Dopeman, you get just warmed-over sampling, flippy-floppy beats and rather beer-bellied delinquency.
Hip hop can be an excursion into your own dark side.
But NWA are all ‘attitude’ and shock value — big sales and little else.
BOOKS
Agents of Repression by Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall (South End)
Paramilitary police operations and death squads directed against dissidents are usually associated with Third World regimes.
This book documents the use of these, and other repressive techniques, in the secret war that the US FBI waged against the American Indian Movement (AIM) and the Black Panthers during the 1960s and 1970s.
By 1971, when the official counter-subversion program COINTELPRO was ‘ended’, the wide range of tactics used, including assassination, heavily armed raids, falsification and fabrication of documents, misinformation as news, and tying up activists in endless trials, had succeeded in destroying the Black Panthers and other militant Black groups.
But the secret war, increasingly against AIM, continued under other names and even intensified under FBI direction.
In 1973, the US Army engaged in its first domestic operation since the Civil War when its forces, including armored cars, assisted heavily armed FBI agents in laying siege to the village of Wounded Knee.
This had been occupied by AIM members in support of the traditional Lakota (Sioux) of Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.
But Wounded Knee was not the end of the war against the Lakota.
Between 1973 and 1976, 69 AIM members and supporters died violently and 300 more were physically assaulted, sometimes shot.
The political murder rate, attributed primarily to the tribal police, was almost equivalent to that of Chile in the three years after the coup against Allende.
The authors end their book by calling on the US Left to start seriously organizing against the FBI and the apparatus of political repression that continues to operate in the US.
Given the increasing dissent in the US and recent revelations concerning new illicit actions against activists, it seems like good advice indeed.
Free is Cheaper by Ken Smith (John Ball)
This is one of those maverick ideas books that arrive out of nowhere and sleep on reviewers' shelves until someone notices them.
It certainly deserves to be noticed, being clearly if idiosyncratically written and full of fascinating polemic and historical titbits.
Ken Smith believes all goods and services should be available free of charge.
That might seem like the wackiest of wacky ideas but it becomes ever more fascinating as it is explored in a barrage of speculation, invective and anecdotes, all designed to prove that money, in a practical rather than puritanical sense, is the root of all evil.
In this tour through the modern world the way we run things comes to seem ever more absurd, a house of cards built upon endless bureaucracy — a paper chase that leaves us all working frantically to keep a worse quality of life.
The starting point is a question which Adam Smith, John Maynard Keynes or Milton Friedman would be hard pushed to answer: why does it take longer for a carpenter or bricklayeer to earn the price of a pound of meat or a housebrick than it did five centuries ago?
More topically Smith drives home the absurdity of the present British water industry installing meters in households and then setting up a huge bureaucracy to monitor them and gather payment — a move that will make water much more expensive (and thus more attractive to the private companies which will eventually provide it).
What Smith doesn't make clear is how we might get from the present destructive spiral to the moneyless system he advocates.
He sees the burgeoning Green awareness as a step towards it but at the moment it could be a step towards almost anything.
Nevertheless we need as many good ideas as we can get — especially ones that are so entertainingly expressed.
The Midas Touch by Anthony Sampson (Hodder & Stoughton)
This is about ‘Money, People and Power from West to East’, as the subtitle to the book explains.
It looks at the explosion of mobile, global money in the 1980s encouraged by the electronics communications revolution, and how it affects people's lives.
Fears in the 1970s — shared by the NI — of multinational corporations developing into international, all-powerful giants with loyalty to no country, now appear dated.
Many of the top new corporations in the world are Japanese.
They are firmly loyal to their country and government.
Others like Chevron have been gobbled up, still others pushed to near-bankruptcy like Texaco.
Even now British American Tobacco is desperately trying to fight off the predatory raid of James Goldsmith, Rothschild et al.
The declared aim of such finance pirates is to break up the giants, and sell them off bit by bit.
For the 1980s and 1990s, it is finance, not the corporation which is king.
We are given a narrow slice of history: the last ten years, complete with corporate raiders, the rise of the Japanese, the 1987 stock market crash, China, the East Asian economic miracle — together with an uncomfortably slight bow to the debt-ridden nations of Africa and Latin America.
Frankly the lack of a serious commitment to exploring the catastrophic drop in commodity prices which fuelled so much of the ‘junk money’ boom is a weakness.
The slim nature of the book, without the detailed and rich research which illuminated The Arms Bazaar or The Sovereign State of ITT is also a disappointment.
Sampson's usual strengths and weaknesses are on display.
He chooses to investigate the big issues.
His writing is a joy, combining the telling quote from finance megastars with anecdote to illustrate a substantial point.
And the complexities of economics are clearly and entertainingly explained.
It's an object lesson for all feature writers.
On the debit side, he frustratingly falls short of any overarching analysis.
Here is the social democrat refusing to condemn the absurdities he chronicles so well; or simply producing half-baked observations.
Humans, we are told, never tolerate for long the predatory and revolutionary power of money without constraining it.
Really?
There's good material in The Midas Touch, but it is certainly not a classic.
A Dry White Season
it is a dry white season
dark leaves don't last, their brief lives dry out
and with a broken heart they dive down gently headed for the earth
not even bleeding.
it is a dry white season brother,
only the trees know the pain as they still stand erect
dry like steel, their branches dry like wire,
indeed, it is a dry white season
but seasons come to pass
FILM
The Last Temptation of Christ directed by Martin Scorsese
Martin Scorsese's controversial film about the life of Christ has sparked protests by outraged Christian fundamentalists wherever it's been screened.
And after sitting through this challenging, exhilarating 160-minute movie you'll scratch your head in genuine wonderment as to what these people found so upsetting.
The Last Temptation of Christ is a visceral, swirling, passionate movie filmed in Morocco with the sights, sounds, smells and historical detail of biblical Palestine scrupulously recreated.
What it is not, however, is offensive, blasphemous or sacrilegious.
Based on a book of the same title by Greek writer Nikos Kazantzakis, the movie is a profoundly religious film about the seesaw battle between spirit and flesh which characterizes all human life.
But Scorsese's film owes more to Luis Bunuel's quizzical The Milky Way than to the lavish Hollywood epics of the past.
Jesus, played by Willem Dafoe, seems like the stereotyped Christ we've all come to recognize: lightly bearded, shoulder-length hair and boyish good looks.
The difference is the eyes: this Christ looks like he is pursued by demons.
He suffers seizure-like attacks, writhing on the ground and holding his head in pain as God invades his body.
He is a reluctant and uncertain saviour, riven by fear yet driven in his mission by a volcanic spiritual energy.
His disciples coalesce around him as he lurches towards the inevitable.
But even they are unclear where he will lead them next.
‘We need love to break the chain of evil,’ Jesus tells a crowd about to stone the prostitute Mary Magdalene (rising star Barbara Hershey is badly miscast and totally unconvincing).
Then after 40 days and nights in the desert Jesus abruptly changes his tune.
‘I believed in love,’ he tells his disciples, ‘now I believe in the axe.’
He then sets out to scourge the thronging temples of moneychangers and idolators.
When questioned later by Judas (played by Scorsese favourite Harvey Keitel) about his inconsistency Jesus confesses that ‘God only talks to me a little at a time’.
Christ finally tells Judas: ‘I have to die on the cross and I have to die willingly’.
But Judas is by now highly skeptical: ‘I'm worried he's going to change his mind again,’ he confides.
He doesn't.
But, in a dream sequence during the crucifixion, we do get a glimpse of what might have happened if he had.
Satan comes to Jesus on the cross in the guise of a guardian angel, convinces him he's not the Messiah and invites him to have a normal life on earth.
He marries Mary Magdalene and later Lazarus' sister, has children, and lives to a ripe old age as a carpenter.
Later in this interlude he meets Saul, who tells him it's irrelevant whether he lived or died: the point is that the myth continues.
‘The truth is created from what people need,’ Saul tells the spluttering Jesus.
‘You started it and you can't stop it.’
You don't have to be a Christian to see the truth in that.
And you don't have to be a Christian (or even religious) to appreciate this remarkable film by one of North America's most talented film-makers.
BOOKS
The Greenpeace Book of Antarctica by John May (Dorling Kindersley)
This large-format production is two books in one.
It is first an attractive, informative overview of the seventh continent and second a full account of Greenpeace's strategy for its conservation.
Exploitation of the region first depleted it of fur seals and whales; now the same fate threatens fish and krill.
Antarctica now has plastic rubbish washed ashore, toxic pesticides affecting bird life — not to mention the enormous hole appearing in its ozone layer.
Further, more local, threats are posed for the sake of a few years' supply of raw materials.
The world's remote ‘almost pristine’ wilderness is thus, like the whole planet, under assault.
But there is cause for real hope, as this book explains.
Outstanding colour photography, charts and maps provide valuable background material for those wishing to join the campaign.
MUSIC
Wiracocha by Rumillajta(Rumillajta)
The boom in Third World popular music has been dominated by African musicians, though Asian influences are beginning to break through (note the way modern Arab music is first reaching Western ears through the filter of the Yemenite Israeli Ofra Haza).
Despite flirtations with salsa, Latin American music hasn't penetrated as deep.
Except, that is, in solidarity circles — by which is meant those people active in supporting the various struggles of people from El Salvador to Chile against oppressive regimes.
Rumillajta have achieved a certain celebrity on this circuit — but they deserve to be heard more widely.
They play the traditional Indian music of the Bolivian highlands, dominated by the breathy wind instruments that are so redolent of the Andes.
In places, usually in its more reflective moments, this can be quite extraordinarily beautiful.
Not all the pieces have words, but those that do are a potent mixture of mysticism (Wiracocha was a pre-Inca deity thought to be the creator of all things) and revolutionary politics (El Condor vuelve, for example, sees the condor's flight wrapping ‘General Sandino’, ‘Che the Hurricane’ and Allende in a Pan-American revolutionary embrace).
The album is beautifully packaged, despite (or because of) Rumillajta's determination to make their record independently — it is funded entirely from their concert tours.
Any investigation of the heady altitudes of Andean music should begin right here.
Bonk by Big Pig(White/Mushroom)
No less than five of the seven members of this new Australian band contribute percussion, which should give you some idea of the general musical drift.
Guitar is notable for its complete absence and even keyboards are minimally used.
What remains is an infectious rhythm and a driving bass beat.
Yes, this is post-industrial noise in the genre of the completely unlistenable Test Department.
The lyrics unleash a gigantic primal scream at the urban alienation and despair of our industrial world.
We are urged to re-evaluate the work ethic and its paraphernalia, asked to be ‘punching holes in the walls of reality’.
So far so daunting.
But the whole has a surprisingly pleasant effect.
Post-new wave inflections swap seats with blues harmonica at one moment and then strange mechanical percussion the next.
And Money God, the stand-out among a number of excellent tracks, is a brilliant parody of the ‘prosperity doctrine’.
Energetic listening guaranteed.
The Amnesty International World Tour
Amnesty International's series of concerts to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the UN Declaration of Human Rights is a remarkable achievement.
Mounting a benefit concert for charity which involves enough big-name artists to guarantee both a sell-out and significant publicity: this is a difficult enough task.
But organizing a world tour that will take in places like Harare, Delhi and São Paulo as well as the normal rich-world rock centres is a major feat.
What's more, they have also constructed the show with exemplary care.
This is not just a showcase for any old star they could manage to drag along.
Instead it works as an artistic whole: these performers fit together.
New artists Youssou N'dour and Tracy Chapman contributed a vital freshness to the London evening: Chapman, admittedly, had much less impact than at the Mandela concert, mainly because she sang carbon copies of songs which are now heard anywhere and everywhere; but N'dour's intriguing vocal range and muezzin's inflections came over brilliantly in this company.
At the heart of the show, though, are three people with a significant track record of pursuing artistic quality rather than just commercial success.
Peter Gabriel's commitment to world music is well known: here the political elements in his work, usually understated, were pushed well forward so that you wound up as moved by his concern as by his skill.
Sting's set with a fascinatingly diverse band sounded as though he has moved into a different dimension from his Police days — to this reviewer at least, he was a revelation.
And while Bruce Springsteen doesn't have quite his pre-1985 exuberance, he is still a great live performer — even if he insisted here on choosing some of his weakest songs (Cadillac Ranch hardly seemed appropriate in this context).
For once there was no one you wished to see less of, even when standing for six hours.
And for once the finale — everyone coming together to sing Dylan's Chimes of Freedom — seemed not corny but exactly right.
THE RIGHT APPROACH
One of the nails in the coffin of social justice in Britain is the Education Reform Bill which is being imposed against the majority of education experts consulted.
Its details may be British.
But it is a ready-made blueprint for inequality just waiting to be copied by other reactionary governments.
Robin Richardson unveils the new education manifesto of the Right.
1.
We hold this truth to be self-evident that human beings are created unequal.
2.
There is amongst us inequality of talent, intelligence and virtue; of capacity to enjoy freedom and create wealth; and of the ability to rule, lead, organize and contribute to an ordered, harmonious and decent society.
3.
Grave threats are posed to our civilization by those who preach the pernicious gospel that inequality is neither right nor inevitable.
They include not only atheistic and communistic states on the international scene but also certain people within our own society.
Their ideas gain plausibility amongst the idle, the envious and the unlettered.
They must be vigorously suppressed.
4.
The country's education system has a vital role to play in hallowing, protecting and furthering inequality.
We therefore propose the 10-point plan which follows.
Its goal is to return the British education system to its historic and essential task, which is that of preparing the young to take up their rightful places in society as either leaders or led, and to accept, appreciate, and enjoy their inequality.
A Nine-point plan for educational reform
1.
National Curriculum
We will ensure that all schools teach the same basic subjects.
We propose 10 such subjects, to act as foundation stones for the society which we wish to build and maintain.
The subjects will, of course, be kept entirely separate from, and therefore uncontaminated, by each other .
2.
Testing
We will ensure that all children have their memories for each of the foundation subjects tested at the ages of seven, 11, 13 and 16.
The results of these tests will be published, so that inequalities of talent and memorizing ability are entirely plain.
This will also ensure that, from the earliest stages, children are groomed for competition.
3.
Local control
We will ensure that each school is controlled by a Board of Governors.
This Board will supervise the local introduction of the national curriculum, and the local publication of test results.
Its members will be drawn from groups sympathetic to the ideals and principles of inequality: in particular from the senior management of large-scale industry and commerce but also, of course, from local police forces.
4.
A note on terminology
We recognize that the term ‘local controllers’ may not have the friendly image which we wish to project.
Accordingly we propose that the local controllers and supervisors of schools should normally be referred to as ‘parents’.
5.
Controversy
We will ensure that, so far as possible, teachers avoid teaching about controversial subjects.
Most of the time the new national curriculum will itself prevent controversy arising.
But certain teachers may lack the competence and expertise to avoid controversy completely.
Such teachers will be expected to follow carefully the following guidelines:
(i) Sex:
The proper place for women is the home, and the education of girls must always bear this in mind.
Sexual activity, other than within marriage, is usually immoral, frequently deviant and invariably regrettable.
(ii) Religion:
Christianity is clearly superior to all other religions, or so-called religions.
(iii) Politics:
There is no place in schools for extremist political views, for example views which question the principles in this manifesto.
6.
Culture
We will ensure that British values are paramount.
The curriculum and ethos of our schools, the textbooks that are used, the displays, everything, must reflect and sustain pride in our nation and all things British.
Immigrants must be made very clear about this.
The term ‘education for racial equality’, incidentally, is highly inflammatory and implies an aggressive campaign designed to brainwash people: it must not be used.
7.
Removal of opposition
Our only remotely significant opponents are certain locally-elected politicians, aided and abetted by various unrepresentative members of the teaching force, and by a number of misguided education officers and politicized advisers.
We will ensure that their influence is severely curtailed and, if possible, removed.
We therefore intend a package of measures to achieve this, including delegation of financial decisions and appointment of teaching staff to local controllers (known as ‘parents’— see item 4 above), and central Government support for individual schools which have been particularly successful at promoting inequality.
This latter measure will be known as ‘opting out’.
8.
Ladders to success
We will ensure that a number of carefully selected children from poor homes, including perhaps even some children or grandchildren of immigrants, are allowed to succeed at school, and to go to university.
This will demonstrate to everyone that our educational system is fair and just, and will help generate gratitude, loyalty and affection.
9.
The Arts
We will ensure that access to literature, religion and the creative arts is limited to those few children who are capable of appreciating them, and whose parents can afford to pay the extra costs involved.
We will guard vigorously against the danger of allowing immature minds to ‘express’ themselves or to be ‘imaginative’, ‘playful’, ‘prophetic’or ‘satirical’.
10.
Complementary measures
We will ensure that our educational reforms are strengthened by other legislation which we are introducing to increase inequality — in particular, our measures to reduce public expenditure on health, housing and welfare benefits, and to curb the powers of trade unions.
Insofar as our educational reforms are not immediately successful we shall be happy, indeed keen, to introduce the following:
(i)
Compulsory military service, to complete the education of those who fail at school.
(ii)
Reduced taxes on alcohol, tranquilizers and burglar alarms.
(iii)
Humane psychiatric treatment for members of the teaching force who are unable to cope.
(iv)
A much enlarged police force.
Consultation
This draft manifesto has been issued for public consultation.
However, the closing date for the receipt of your comments has unfortunately passed.
Buying arms with borrowed money
Arms and debt
Around 20 per cent of Third World debt has been spent on arms.
The countries that spend the largest proportion of their incomes on weapons are usually the poorest: Ethiopia spends $13 per head each year on arms (compared with only $7 on health and education combined.)
Somalia spends $20 per head, Kenya $17 and Sudan $15.
High military spenders like Sudan, Mauritania, Peru and Vietnam were among the first countries to default on their debt.
Who sells?
The weapons go to poor countries, the money to rich ones.
Developed nations' exports accounted for $36.4 million of the $41.4 million arms trade in 1984.
Developing countries bought $32 million of it.
The Soviet Union is the major supplier to Sub-Saharan Africa where arms spending has risen 30 per cent and per capita GNP fallen by 4 per cent since 1970.
Every year the US loans Egypt $1.3 billion for military purposes — netting US banks $600 million a year interest, almost as much as Egypt receives in economic aid.
Who pays?
The arms trade increases Third World debt, which is a burden born by the poorest.
A quarter of Egypt's $40 billion debt has been spent on arms.
This country spends four times as much money importing weapons as it does on health.
Life expectancy is only 58 years and 25 per cent of the people have no access to clean water supplies.
Ethiopia spent at least two billion dollars on arms between 1981 and 1985.
It now has a total debt of $2.5 billion, its people have a life expectancy of just 43 years and six per cent of them have no access to clean water.
Source: Campaign Against the Arms Trade
JANUARY 1982
Santos Hernandez and his fellow campesino farmers were one of hundreds of Honduran co-operatives who seized land in 1981.
But this group was accompanied by NIjournalists and a BBC camera crew.
…
‘I feel like Christopher Columbus, coming into the land that is ours.’
Santos — fighting for the land
Did they managed to keep the land they had invaded?
Was the group still together?
We sent Honduras-based writer James Pickles to investigate.
‘We were fighting with Doña Elsa in Tegucigalpa right up to 1986.
In the end we won because I went to the state property register to get her details.
She had our land on a 10-year lease from the National Agrarian Institute — but she was six years behind with the rent.
She also owned two passenger buses, two other vehicles, and 15 different bits of land.’
Santos Hernández grins wryly.
He stands in the midst of a field of strong young rice on the rich land he and his compañeros wrested from the rancher, more by doggedness than force, in 1981.
Dark eyes twinkle below the brim of the ubiquitous Honduran baseball cap, his compact campesino frame twisting this way and that to survey his little kingdom.
The had a little land before.
In 1979 one of Honduras' meagre concessions to land reform had given Santos' group of 16 families a 14-hectare plot on a steep hillside.
The land lies on the lip of the plain of the Uluá River, between the cities of San Pedro Sula and El Progreso on the Caribbean coast.
But that fell far short of the five hectares of decent land needed to support each family.
So in 1981, they invaded the cattle ranch of Doña Elsa Castillo.
‘Here, if the campesinos don't occupy the land, they don't get it: it's a matter of pressure.,’ says Francisco Sánchez, leader of the National Campesino Union, to which the group belongs.
Eight years later, the group still has neither a title to the 32 hectares, nor a formal guarantee of its right to occupy: its tenure rests on a letter from the National Agrarian Institute which simply acknowledges its presence.
But at least it pays no rent and in practice it is secure so long as it farms the land and avoids bankruptcy.
The co-operative has had its share of problems.
Right at the start, one member split off, and managed to get separate INA recognition of an 11-hectare holding: a quarter of the occupied land.
Of the other 16 families who took part in the original occupation, just six are still involved.
But those leaving have been replaced and the land has always been fully used.
Such a high turnover is not unusual in Honduras' agrarian-reform settlements.
Many co-op members are ex-wage labourers from the banana or sugar plantations or cattle ranches.
‘It's not easy to change from having a regular wage to the uncertainty of the co-op,’ says Santos.
‘We eat when the crops grow.
When they don't, we go hungry.’
Nor have all the co-op's farming decisions worked out.
Apart from the small plots given to each member family for their house and garden, all the land is farmed collectively.
Monthly meetings (more often when necessary) thrash out policy decisions, and a three-person committee is charged with carrying them out.
In 1986 they put much of the land back under cattle, in a project promoted by the Government and the big cattle ranchers, who needed extra capacity for the rearing of young steers.
But they got their fingers burned and lost a lot of money.
Now they restrict cattle to the 14-hectare hillside plot which they've had since 1979 — and from which they used to scrape a living of maize and beans before they invaded the valley-bottom land at La Colorada.
Of the valley-floor fields, 17 hectares have been put back under rice as a cash crop, while four hectares each have been planted with maize and yucca (a starchy root crop) for their own consumption.
Their biggest setback was the flooding brought by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988.
They had sublet another 40 hectares because their 52 hectares of valley and mountain holdings still fall well short of their needs.
They put the new land under rice, financed with 40,000 lempiras ($15,000) at 17-per-cent interest from a bank.
The floods destroyed the crop completely and the debt is equivalent to four years' worth of rice crop.
But in spite of the setbacks, the basic story of the last seven years for these campesinos is one of hard-won progress.
They can now plough and harrow with machinery hired from the UNC.
They complain about the expense, but it is still better than the alternative: ‘Before, we worked the fields with pure lung power’.
The years since 1981 have seen a steady transformation in the campesinos' lives.
Some now have breeze-block houses with zinc roofs, instead of the mud huts they started with — and they've funded them out of their own savings.
And now there's electricity in the village, Santos is thinking of getting his house connected.
‘Then maybe I could get a fridge on hire purchase.’
On the wall of Santos' house hang his children's primary-school leaving certificates.
His daughter Marlen is the first child in the group to attend secondary school.
It's a considerable sacrifice for her parents, at 60 lempiras ($15) a year in transport and school fees — but a real breakthrough for a campesino child.
All in all, they have travelled a long way since that night when Santos led a nervous band of campesinos, complete with a BBC camera crew, onto Doña Elsa's cattle ranch.
And did the film crew make a difference?
Santos grins.
‘It didn't cause us any problems, and they gave us 1,200 lempiras ($300).
Also they had to film the invasion in the dark so they gave us two lamps.
‘They said the programme was going to go out all over the worldbut we never saw it — we haven't got a TV, you see.
Maybe the European Community could send us one, then we could watch it.’
He looks up, uncertain if he's being taken seriously.
‘That's a joke, you understand — we'd rather have money.’
Scandal!
Environmental groups should not get into bed with business — or should they?
Wayne Ellwood investigates.
The news swept the Canadian environmental movement last year like a toxic blast: Pollution Probe, Canada's oldest and best-known environmental group, had publicly endorsed a line of ‘green’ products created by the country's largest supermarket chain, Loblaws.
In return for giving Loblaws its official seal of approval, Probe was to receive a royalty on sales.
Worse still: Probe's erudite and respected Executive Director, Colin Isaacs, had also agreed to play environmental salesperson for Loblaws.
Canadians long used to seeing environmental campaigners arguing with corporate polluters were stunned to turn on their TV sets and see Isaacs rubbing shoulders with Loblaws' gnome-like marketing genius, David Nichols.
Surrounded by a small mountain of ‘green’ diapers — made with non-chlorine bleached paper and photo-sensitive plastic — Isaacs told viewers, ‘If you must use disposable diapers, then use this one’.
The union of environmentalist and marketing executive was both innovative and shocking.
Within Pollution Probe five staffers resigned in protest and Isaacs quit soon after, citing lack of Board support for his position.
Probe's liaison with the giant grocery chain — Loblaws has 30 per cent of Canadian supermarket sales — sparked an instant debate among environmentalists about what kind of relationship environmental groups should have with business.
The Pollution Probe staff quit for several reasons.
Gord Perks, then in charge of Waste Management at Probe, claims, ‘Staff were not consulted.
The decision to endorse Loblaws' ‘green’ products was made by Isaacs and a few board members.
Even today a small group makes most of the decisions.’
Many staff were embarrassed by the way the decision had been taken.
‘I literally found about our endorsement of used motor-oil from someone I was phoning to find out whether the stuff was OK,’ says the group's Education Programme Co-ordinator at the time, Dave Bruer.
‘When we asked to see test results so we could recommend the products with some confidence we were told that the data was confidential, between Colin Isaacs and Loblaws.’
Probe's Information Officer at the time, Vanessa Alexander, felt completely compromised by the Loblaws' deal.
‘In my view disposable products are not green,’ she says.
‘I could not in good conscience tell people to buy disposable diapers.’
Staff also felt great unease about a major environment group cozying up to big business; a significant minority of Probe's employees at the time were opposed to promoting products from any corporation.
‘Credibility is the environment movement's most important asset,’ explains activist and lawyer Steven Shrybman of the Canadian Environmental Law Association (CELA).
‘Our opinion isn't worth anything if people think it is influenced by self-interest.’
Gord Perks agrees: ‘It's not the role of a group like Probe to endorse specific products.
Instead we should be giving people information so they can make their own decisions’.
From Loblaws' point of view the deal was a bargain.
The company was able to display Probe's endorsement prominently in advertising and on the products themselves.
In return, Pollution Probe was to receive a royalty on sales — up to $75,000 maximum during the first year of the agreement.
The company actually sold five million dollars worth of ‘green’ products in Ontario alone during the first month.
Today Loblaws makes about half a million dollars a week on its 20 or so ‘green’ products — and sales are increasing.
The company's spokesman, Paddy Carson — a verbose Irishman with an impressive lay command of environmental issues — says that since the row over Probe's involvement, Loblaws has been deluged with letters of support from concerned consumers.
‘The criticism didn't do anything but boost sales,’ he admits.
The key player in Pollution Probe's decision to promote ‘green’ products is Colin Isaacs.
He saw the Loblaws' link as a chance to use ‘consumer power’ to make quick progress on environmental issues.
Like most activists, Isaacs is fed up with the sloth-like pace with which governments are taking on environmental concerns.
‘After a while you feel like you're banging your head against a brick wall,’ he says.
‘The problems are tremendous and time is short; we can't afford to wait while politicians figure out what to do.’
According to Isaacs the endorsement strategy has already begun to pay off.
He cites the proliferation of non-chlorine bleached paper products as a good example.
Both environmentalists and public health groups have long been worried about toxic discharges from paper mills using chlorine bleach.
Deadly dioxins are produced in the bleaching process.
When paper goods like diapers or sanitary napkins come in contact with the body, the poisons can migrate quickly through the skin and accumulate in fatty tissues.
Environmental groups have been lobbying for years about the issue.
But neither government or industry have shown much interest.
Now consumer pressure is forcing pulp and paper companies in Western Canada to think about reducing or eliminating the chlorine bleach part of the pulp process.
Brisk sales of Loblaws' non-chlorine bleach diapers and sanitary napkins have proven that eco-sensitive consumers will switch their buying habits in favour of the environment.
‘Companies that produce non-chlorine bleach paper products now have a competitive edge,’ Isaacs explains.
Even Isaac's harshest critics agree with his basic analysis: public concern over the environment should be used to put pressure on manufacturers through the marketplace.
‘Those opportunities do exist,’ says CELA's Shrybman.
‘The issue is how to exploit them.’
Julia Langer from Friends of the Earth (FOE) also believes environmental groups must use the market to educate the public, but fears that such groups could easily find their message compromised.
Langer admits that FOE first discussed the idea of endorsing products with Loblaws in the autumn of 1988.
‘We endorsed their baking soda because we believe it's a great alternative household cleaner.
When they approached us about other products and about doing a commercial, we said no.
That's when they went to Probe.’
The real danger in changing people's consumption patterns, is that ‘buying green’ will be seen as the ultimate solution to the environmental crisis.
Consumers, finally satisfied that they can ‘do something’, may seek no further than their shopping trolleys to help the planet.
But ‘green products’ on their own don't really touch the heart of the problem: at issue is the ideology of consumerism that pervades party politics of left, right and centre.
‘It's over-consumption that got us into this mess in the first place,’ says Julia Langer.
Over-consumption is a key concern for Colin Isaacs too.
But he argues that Canadians have one of the most consumer-orientated societies on earth.
‘We know we have to reduce consumption but we're going to get change more quickly if we do it step-by-step.
We're a nation of shoppers so let's use that shopping habit to achieve something right now.’
SCIENCE
No teaching this morning.
A compulsory, ‘in-service’ course on new technology for teachers.
He's suspicious.
What will new technology be able to do for history teachers?
He has a soft spot for the glamour of new technology.
What bothers him, though, is the science that lies behind it; he can't make head or tail of what he tries to read about it.
Electron orbits dandelion
Peter Stalker conducts a therapy group for Fred and anyone else who's tried and failed to understand ABriefHistoryofTime.
Some of you may have put this book down feeling slightly faint, wondering how you can be so stupid while the rest of the world is so clever.
Professor Stephen Hawking's popular guide to cosmology has sold more than a million copies in hardback around the world.
It is soon to appear in paperback (and will doubtless go ‘quadruple platinum’, or whatever) and is to be a major TV series.
No need to repeat too many of the painful details here.
The Cambridge professor's brain dances around such sub-atomic particles as leptons and anti-quarks and the possibility of infinitely curved space-time.
A high-speed intellectual roller-coaster ride quite likely to toss you out of the car at the turn of the next page — or at best have you clinging on by the fingernails.
Exhilarating stuff, but a lot of the excitement comes, I suspect, from the sense of sitting alongside someone who understands such ideas rather than really grasping them yourself.
Science has held out the promise of giving the answer to ‘life, the universe and everything’ ever since ancient Greeks like Aristotle pondered on whether the earth was round or flat.
Through Galileo and Newton in the seventeenth century and Einstein (and
Hawking) in our own age, the details have become increasingly refined.
And technologists have applied scientific theories with some spectacular results: generating everything from nuclear power to moon rockets to holographs of the Eiffel Tower on Rice Krispies packets.
So what does the baffled ‘non-scientist’ do if such awesome power seems beyond their grasp?
Well, keep awake for the few minutes and you might derive a little comfort from knowing what scientists can and (more important) cannot do.
The first thing to bear in mind is that science ultimately never explains anything at all.
It only describes what happens around us — which is frankly a lot less impressive.
The description may be more precise than you or I might offer but it is a description for all that.
You will have realized, for example, that if you crunch your car into your neighbour's gatepost at 20 miles an hour you will do much more damage than if you nudge it at 10.
An engineer will be more precise.
She (or he) will point out that if you double the speed you quadruple the impact.
Now keep asking ‘Why?’
Why?
1.
Because the energy of a moving body is proportional to the square of the velocity.
Why?
2.
Because it follows the equation: where e is the energy of the car's motion, v the velocity and m it's mass.
Why?
3.
Because this follows from the ‘Second law of motion’ discovered by Newton.
Aha!
So this is a ‘law’.
You may be tempted to stop asking questions in the face of such authority.
But in fact you have received no explanation at all.
The first answer repeats the original response in a more general way that would apply to other speeds too.
The second reiterates this in a slightly different language using symbols instead of words.
And the third tells you that it was Isaac Newton who wrote this equation down because it matched what happened every time he played billiards or threw apples around.
This and other scientific statements are so convincing (and get away with being called ‘laws’) because they appear to determine what will happen in the future.
But they don't.
All they do is describe what has happened in the past and guess that the pattern will repeat itself.
It is just possible things will be different next time.
You might try driving a car at a brick wall at a 100 miles an hour on the off chance of coming to no harm at all, but please make sure you have renewed your NI subscription first.
Technologists apply such scientific predictions to the construction of cars, or bricks or walls and will tell you how they interact.
But ask them why they interact in this way and they will eventually pass you on to a scientist who (no matter how many equations they might try to confuse you with) in the end can only say ‘Well, that's the way things are’.
In fact Newton's ‘laws’ are not universally applicable.
Change the scale of measurement and they become completely unreliable.
You could change the scale at which you look at the NI, for example.
To you it just looks like paper.
But a chemist, wondering how the rather fetching picture of myself (below) might be affected by being doused in nitric acid, would find it easier to understand the ensuing mess if she (or he) understood it as a collection of molecules of cellulose.
And a physicist looking even more closely would try to picture these molecules of tennis player as clouds of electrons whirling round nuclei.
Looked at more closely still the dissolved athlete would become even more inscrutable than usual and could only be described with a set of equations which guessed where his component particles might be.
At this level Newton's laws don't work at all, we have to talk in terms of ‘quantum mechanics’ which deals with all sorts of uncertainties and probabilities.
Try crashing an electron into a gatepost and you might find that it decides of its own accord to orbit round the nearest dandelion.
The scientific language which describes this strange world can seem very alien.
But it works the same way as ordinary language.
It starts out with a familiar idea and then builds on it, making neater analogies and finer distinctions.
So, if I asked you to describe paper to someone who had never seen it before, you might suggest they visualise it as a sort of hard, smooth ‘cloth’.
Similarly molecules you might envision as clusters of tiny tennis balls.
Electrons you could see as tiny planets orbiting round an even tinier sun.
Remember though that paper is not cloth or ping-pong balls or planets.
These are only descriptions.
In the end paper is paper; which unfortunately is a bit of philosophical dead-end.
As one of the founders of quantum mechanics Niels Bohr put it: ‘It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how nature is.
Physics concerns only what we can say about nature’.
You probably feel quite happy talking about ping-pong balls or planets.
But there are times when the analogies get stretched so far that the brain starts to lose contact with the original image.
The latest sub-atomic theories, for example, say that we are all made up of infinitely thin pieces of string which may exist in ten dimensions.
Now string you can imagine, even if‘infinitely thin’ doesn't really bear thinking about.
And three dimensional space is something we can all understand — or make it four if you add time.
But where are the other six?
Well, just as you know you can move your hand with four ‘degrees of freedom’ in four dimensions so objects, considered in certain ways, have ten degrees of freedom.
You won't intuitively understand such things.
Most scientists don't either, they just become familiar with manipulating their own abstract language as a useful way of organizing information.
Nobel Laureate Richard Feynman is reassuring on this point: ‘I think I can safely say that no-one understands quantum mechanics.
Do not keep saying to yourself ‘But how can it be like that?’ because you will get…into a blind alley from which no-one has yet escaped.’
All of this mind-bending ambiguity might be unnerving especially to the non-scientist.
But really you should celebrate such uncertainty because it helps undermine myths of scientific omniscience.
Newton's laws and many others which followed, spurred scientists into a vision of a universe that might eventually be described in its entirety.
So if we knew where any collection of molecules (like you) were now, and how they were moving, we might even use scientific laws to predict where you would go on your holidays and save you leafing through all those glossy brochures.
Such ‘determinism’ now seems antiquated (though echoes of omniscience can sometimes be heard in the wilder regions of computer-driven ‘artificial intelligence’systems).
The sub-atomic world becomes so strange and ‘unscientific’ that the some physicists like Fritjof Capra have been moved to consider the weird world of quarks and leptons in semi-mystical terms that combine the new physics with a holistic view of life in general.
Such an approach is dismissed as ‘rubbish’ by scientists like Hawking.
And while considering quantum mechanics from a Buddhist perspective can be very illuminating, there's certainly no need to do so — it's extraordinary enough on its own terms.
The idea of a scientifically ‘determined’ universe has been further undermined by one of the newest branches of mathematics: ‘Chaos’theory.
This might sound like an accurate description of your holiday planning and did indeed arise out of a closely related activity: weather forecasting.
Chaos theory has used high-speed computers to show how nature could create fantastic and beautiful objects, like snowflakes or leaves, from relatively simple repeated operations.
But it has also illustrated that our future world is not just difficult to predict in practice; it is also theoretically impossible.
This is because the smallest changes in one place can have dramatic ‘knock-on’ effects elsewhere.
So your turning a page of the NI magazine in Toronto, say, could so disturb the air as eventually to cause a hurricane in Melbourne (or vice-versa).
But you could never predict that this was going to happen.
This is not just because of the inordinate number of calculations involved.
The central problem is that you could never measure the original position of the page with sufficient accuracy.
In chaos terminology this is called: ‘sensitivity to original conditions’.
You might say you could measure its position to ten decimal places, but you could always then measure it to eleven and predict a completely different result; all the difference between a whirlwind which knocked down someone's house and a single molecule of oxygen disappearing up their nose.
It is ironic that while scientific exploration has been producing incredible and exciting pictures of the world around us the technology it has spawned has had some depressing results — from atomic bombs to chlorofluorocarbons.
But such destructiveness arises not from the sophistication of our technology but its crudity.
While we can tinker with the genetics of life or with atomic fission we cannot operate with the sensitivity of naturally occurring processes — which might give us cause to consider that technology in certain areas should simply not be pursued at all.
Exploration of nature, human, artistic or cosmological will undoubtedly continue.
And while there are scientific minds like those of Stephen Hawking many steps ahead of us we will always want to listen to their stories of exploration — even if we can only get glimpses of what they are trying to describe.
Stephen Hawking makes frequent references to what God might have been up to when designing the cosmos.
Maybe She's laughing right now at even his attempts to disentangle it all.
Fred, I know you think you will never understand such things as long as you live.
Well, maybe it is all a question of time.
If you could wait just that little bit longer all might be revealed…
WORK
Lunchbreak.
But Fred's never really known what to do with it.
Suspended animation between classes.
Trying to catch up — with work.
He'd be at a loss without work.
He tried it once.
It's not just the money.
You need a sense of purpose and belonging, too.
The philanthropist
Fred finds out how to do something beautiful.
Sheila Rowbotham goes with him.
Speed was imperative.
There's a pace when you're almost running yet still technically walking.
Fred had perfected it during his ten years at the school.
He was heading for a particular corner seat in the staff common room.
The eccentric shape of the room made a cranny, and here he could create the illusion of solitude.
The window caught the sun.
He could munch his tuna fish sandwich, lapse into reverie and cut out both the music of Soul II Soul wafting through the window and the endless, fragmented tales of classroom woes exchanged obsessively between the other staff.
He rounded the corner.
His seat was empty.
He sat down and closed his eyes.
‘Sorry!
I thought you were asleep!’
He was gazing at a pair of round glasses.
His heart sank.
It was Carol Andrews, the young revolutionary humanities teacher.
She thought of him as an aging hippy.
These sixties men were a joke.
All that personal politics stuff had left them tied up in knots.
The gloss of reconstructed masculinity, carefully polished through the 1970s, was now peeling off like old paint.
‘Heavy morning?’ she asked.
Irritation overtook guilt.
He winced at the insinuation that he was past it.
He found it difficult to respond with even formal politeness.
How could anyone ever manage to chat up Carol?
She was so fierce!
If only these young women would see how feminism could make them more womanly.
There'd been a beautiful poster in the early 1970s showing a pregnant woman in a flowing dress and headed ‘WOMAN POWER’.
He really must try to explain to Carol about the mixed consciousness-raising group he'd been in.
But it was so difficult to find the right moment.
‘This is Subhadra,’ Carol announced.
Around the corner came another small woman.
Her smile in greeting made her seem quite genuinely delighted to meet him.
Fred felt more amiable.
He started fussing about for seats.
The routine structure of his day suddenly faded.
He was alert, engaged.
‘She is going to speak to my class about women in India.
Want to bring in your lot?’
So he had been churlish to Carol after all.
She had invaded his cranny to do him a favour.
It was beginning to get rather crowded.
He stood up to take less space.
Towering above Carol and Subhadra he decided he was a clumsy, cumbersome giant.
He tried to shrink into his scholar's stoop.
‘Should we take a walk?’
Subhadra said unexpectedly.
Fred was filled with simple gratitude.
Had she sensed his unease?
As they got away from the school he straightened up.
There was another Fred, too — distinguished, in an informal kind of way.
Subhadra began speaking intensely, without preliminaries.
She reminded Fred of his former self — in the days before small talk.
He felt a touch of the animated earnestness that had carried him through so many meetings.
‘I've been working on the unionization of women in Kampur for several years now,’ she said.
Fred could hardly conceal his surprise.
He had never made any connection at all between Indian women and trade unions.
‘We've managed to organize an association of about forty thousand home workers, small vendors and contract workers, by combining a trade union approach with co-operatives.’
Fred glimpsed Carol wrinkling her face.
Would she tell Subhadra that this was all wrong?
He was amused.
Carol's Left Union had no place in its catechism for this kind of organization.
But on the other hand, anti-racism definitely did have a place.
Carol faced a dilemma.
This was going to be amusing.
He prepared to defend Subhadra.
But she carried on without him.
‘We talked to women in groups about their problems.
Some of the most enthusiastic were quite skilled workers.
We thought we might have a chance.
We suggested they form a co-op.
It took a bit of explaining.
They were puzzled about how workers could have their own kind of business.’
Carol was scowling by now and muttered ‘I'm not surprised’.
‘A charitable woman who had been active in the Nationalist movement gave us rooms in an old house and collected money from her friends.
We bought sewing machines.
When the modern one arrived, the one that could do fancy stitching, all the women gathered round, talking at once.
We missed half of what the instructor told us.
Even so we could increase our production speeds.
We bought better materials and began to do higher quality garments to a basic design of loose T shirts and floppy trousers.
We have contact now with Twin Trading.
I suppose you've heard of them?’
Fred hadn't but didn't want to admit it.
‘As a Third World women's co-op we fitted into their alternative trading.
Their outlets are not terrific, but it helped.
The women's confidence increased by leaps and bounds.
People in the area were really looking up to them.’
Carol had been gazing gloomily at the lake.
She asked if their earnings had improved.
Subhadra said they earned more or less the same.
But they were working longer hours.
She found the co-op and its meetings took up all her time.
‘What about the rest of your political work?’
Carol asked.
‘Here we go!’ thought Fred, bracing himself for rescue.
‘Well, the co-op is my political work,’ Subhadra replied firmly.
‘But it's politicizing so few women.
How could you give it such priority?’ demanded Carol.
‘I think it depends what you mean by politics,’ Fred observed confidently, feeling that here at last his experience was relevant.
Subhadra smiled graciously and turned to Carol.
‘We've had precisely the same argument in Kampur and in Bombay, in Delhi and in Madras.
When I was a member of the Revolutionary League's study circle I agreed with you.
We were working as Marxists in the textile union.
But there were few women involved.
As the textile factories closed, what were we meant to do?
Give up?’
For once Carol was at a loss.
This was an unfamiliar situation for her.
She would have to talk to one of the comrades, Ranjan.
‘Bourgeois philanthropy!’ she could hear his voice saying contemptuously.
But Subhadra's question troubled her.
Fred, typically, was lapping it up.
He'd be offering to sell the clothes to his friends next.
They were all trendy middle class types.
‘We set up a series of trade union and community centres,’ continued Subhadra.
‘We had those too!’
Fred felt a flash of recognition.
‘I know,’ grinned Subhadra.
‘Some of my best friends in Britain worked for them and were suddenly on the end of fax machines.
Let's sit down, shall we?’
Fred was struggling to think of ways he could help.
Perhaps Beth could sell the clothes, sort of feminist Tuppaware parties.
But he suppressed this suggestion.
Many of their rows had come from him volunteering Beth to do things.
Carol cast him a Cassandra-like look and asked Subhadra what problems they had encountered.
‘It's been time, really.
The men got resentful of the women working all hours in the co-op.
One woman was really severely beaten.
The co-op members went in a body and confronted him, but the problem was still there.
‘Then one of the women, Geeta, had an idea.
She met a woman from Bombay who told her they had a food co-op there to earn money.
She suggested we try and cook in turns and bring the smaller children to play together in the workshop.
There were two spare rooms there.’
‘That sounds like even more work to me,’ remarked Carol.
‘But how else can women earn?’
Subhadra was growing impatient.
‘Couldn't you force the state to do anything?’
Carol retorted.
Fred was now fully wound up for an argument.
‘We can't get the state to do enough here.
Couldn't the men do more?’
‘Well, that's always difficult,’ Subhadra replied.
‘Even I wondered sometimes whether we were being utopian.’
Subhadra smiled disarmingly at Carol.
Fred glimpsed the sophisticated politician effortlessly combine with the utopian.
‘But amazingly the process of setting up the co-op really did involve some of the men, and even the older boys.
They helped us to transport the food.’
She looked at her watch.
‘Good Lord!’
She was up in a flash.
‘I said I'd go and see some designers about doing a catalogue of our clothes.
I'd better go.’
‘I'll show you the quickest way,’ offered Carol.
‘Don't worry.
I'll be back by 2.30pm.
We can discuss all the co-op's problems with the class!
Perhaps they'll have some suggestions.’
Fred shook his head ruefully.
Three B never had suggestions.
Only grievances.
He sat pondering the ducks.
He wasn't used to all this political discussion.
He'd got into a rut.
There was no energy any more.
A sudden noise made him turn.
It was Subhadra, reaching into her bag.
‘I forgot.
Would you have a quick look at this?
I'd like to give a copy to the school library.’
He looked at the small yellow novel in his lap.
It was by someone called Rohini.
Funny she hadn't put in her last name.
The blurb said it was set in Bombay.
It was published by a feminist press called Sheba, and the title was To Do Something Beautiful.
He began to read…
‘I'll go and get him,’ Carol told a disgruntled Deputy Headteacher, alarmed that her staff were lapsing into truancy.
‘I expect he dozed off.’
She found a very strange Fred indeed.
There was a light in his eye when he looked up from reading.
‘It probably never occurred to you, Carol,’ he said, ‘that you…we all could do something beautiful.’
She led him back to school kindly.
She thought: ‘He won't last much longer in teaching’.
Fred's generation were going down like flies.
If he was lucky he might start a wine bar when he left.
Beth looked pretty competent.
Carol found herself wishing that Fred could make a go of something.
She prepared some challenging questions for Subhadra.
The only co-op Three B were ever likely to form, she thought to herself cynically, would be some kind of protection racket.
Simply…
A history of the apple
Apples have been with us since the dawn of time, in countless varieties of colour, shape and size.
But the late twentieth century is in danger of squandering its heritage.
1.
Prehistoric wildings 8,000 BC
Human beings have been munching apples since prehistoric times.
They spat out apple pips in neolithic Britain.
And 10,000 years ago they left apple remains to carbonize around their Swiss and Italian lakeside homes.
In Switzerland and in the regions adjoining the Caucasus mountains, ancient humans even appear to have dry-stored apple-halves for winter.
But these were wild crab apples, tiny wizened fruit which, in Ancient Britain, came to be known as ‘wildings’.
They had little in common with the apples we know today.
2.
Early ancestors 2,000 BC —
The exact origins of what we recognize as apples are rather obscure but they are generally thought to come from the Caucasus Mountains in Asia Minor, near where seventeenth-century historians located the Garden of Eden.
By 2,000 BC they had reached the eastern Mediterranean, probably carried by merchants and travellers down the prehistoric trade routes which crossed the Middle East.
From Palestine apples were taken to Egypt and cultivated in the Nile delta during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries BC, where they were regarded as a luxury.
Apples were also taken west to Greece and Italy, and Homer refers to them in The Odyssey, which was written between 900 and 800 BC.
3.
Roman roots 300 BC —
As apples spread around the world, different varieties emerged to cope with their new environments.
And the Greeks and Romans added to this range by deliberately breeding apples for taste and size.
Writers like Virgil, Cato and Pliny were able to list two dozen varieties of apple.
And a contemporary of theirs, Columella, describes and recommends distinct kinds like the Armerian, the Cestine and the Syrian, showing that apple-growers used the same system of naming as today — after the finder, some benefactor or notable person, or the place where the apple came from.
Apples became a favourite fruit for the Romans, and they were dried and served as a relish in winter or eaten sour in the summer as refreshment after arduous work.
The Roman armies carried apples across Europe, planting pips wherever they settled.
And this way apples marched northwards.
4.
Norman knowledge 1000 AD —
From the Romans the French learned great fruit-growing skills which were developed in the monasteries.
This knowledge — which included expert cider-making — was taken to Britain during the Norman Conquest in 1066, along with new varieties of cider and dessert apples.
Several kinds of apples still remained in Britain from Roman times, like the dessert apple, Decio — thought to have been introduced by the Roman general, Etio.
But most Roman varieties were unsuitable for the British climate and the Norman varieties rapidly took precedence.
After the Normans left, the British monks continued experimenting and developing new apples, and it is from these varieties that Western apples are largely descended.
5.
Mediaeval favourites 1200 —
Several kinds of apples became established in Britain during the thirteenth century.
The Old English Pearmain, recorded in 1204 and so named because of its pear-like shape, was the main dessert apple until well into the eighteenth century.
Its cooking partner was the Costard which was sold in the markets of Oxford from 1296 until the end of the seventeenth century and bequeathed us the word ‘costermonger’— meaning someone who hawks fruit and vegetables in the street.
But prosperity declined as the country was hit by successive droughts, the Black Death and the Wars of the Roses.
Fewer apples were produced and more were imported.
This went on until the sixteenth century when Henry VIII ordered his chief fruiterer, Richard Harris, to visit France and learn about apple cultivation.
Harris returned with a ‘great store of grafts’ including the famous Pippins, from which he grew the first ever modern-style orchard at Teynham in Kent.
6.
Settler treasure 1750 —
By the seventeenth century apples were so popular in Britain that the first settlers who sailed to Canada, Australia, the US, South Africa and Aotearoa/New Zaealand took apples and apple-pips with them, counting these among their most treasured possessions.
Captain Bligh of the Bounty took the first apples to Australia; Jan van Riebeeck, the founder of Cape Settlement, took them to South Africa and the Pilgrim Fathers who boarded the Mayflower carried them to America.
In North America the most famous apple-planter was John Chapman or ‘Johnny Appleseed’.
Born in 1774, he planted seedling nurseries from Pennsylvania in the east through Ohio into Indiana in the west.
The Indians regarded him as a medicine man and his apple-tree enthusiasm, odd clothing and religious devotion — he distributed religious tracts torn in parts for widespread circulation — started many folktales.
He was said, for example, to be so kind to God's creatures that he even slept with bears.
7.
American apples 1800 —
Many different varieties of apples emerged in the US and its apple industry was set in motion by Henderson Luelling — a fortune hunter who went west during the gold rush in a covered wagon full of soil and apple trees.
He was left behind by the rest of the wagon train because his vehicle was so cumbersome.
But he met a William Meek in Washington State and together they started planting orchards.
Apples were in great demand from the gold prospectors in the Western States.
And by the time local demand declined, a railway had been built enabling apples to be distributed across the entire North American continent.
Thus Washington State became the largest apple-producing area in the world.
8.
Modern Delicious 1850
About the same time in Iowa, a Quaker farmer called Jesse Hiatt discovered a sucker sprouting from the roots of a dead tree.
The shoot grew into an apple tree bearing a totally new apple which Hiatt named ‘Hawkeye’.
He sent it to a fruit show and on biting into one the judge exclaimed ‘delicious, delicious’.
In 1895 the apple was introduced to the trade as a ‘Delicious’ and became one of the most widely grown apples in the world.
9.
Granny Smith 1850 —
Another of the most famous modern apples was discovered in Australia by Maria Anne Smith.
The daughter of transported convicts, Maria was fiercely independent, rejecting both the criminal life of her parents and the bureaucratic hypocrisy of the colonial administration.
She worked as a midwife in the small township of Eastwood in New South Wales where she was known as ‘Granny Smith’ because she had delivered so many babies.
But as her husband's health declined she took on responsibility for maintaining the farm and orchard which was the family's main source of income.
One day in 1868 she found a small tree pushing its way through a pile of discarded fruit.
She transplanted it and before long was harvesting the world's first crop of green apples, soon to be famous all over the world.
When asked how the tree came about she said ‘Well, it's just like God to make something useful out of what we think is rubbish’— a comment which referred not only to the fruit but also to her own convict origins.
10 Uniformity rules 1950–
Apples are now grown all over the world from Himachal Pradesh in northern India to small luxury orchards throughout Africa.
Most are grown commercially and come from just half a dozen varieties — usually chosen for their red skin or because they travel well rather than because they taste good.
A plague of uniformity is sweeping the world, numbing the taste buds and reducing the gene pool.
While amateur gardeners in the UK have kept many old apple varieties alive, the US has lost forever most of the apples it had 100 years ago.
But consumers are starting to demand more variety.
We can't leave the responsibility of saving diversity in our apples — or any other food — up to the random selections of amateur gardeners.
We must insist on a world where natural diversity is valued and protected for the benefit of all.
Simply: History — the wolfish West
In the West we readily accept the idea of Third World debt and forget that our present wealth has been built on riches plundered by our colonizing ancestors.
NItakes a broader, historical look at debt and asks ‘Who owes what to whom?’
1.
Land lust
Pioneer European settlers used several methods to take land from indigenous people.
In Aotearoa the concept that land could be possessed was entirely foreign to Maori thinking.
This enabled settlers to buy land from them at ridiculously low prices.
In Australia, Canada, and the Americas, killing native peoples was the method usually favoured by settlers.
Later European governments got in on the act and set about invading and colonizing large chunks of the globe.
Vast territories were turned over to growing cash crops and extracting minerals for Western interests.
Today ex-colonies remain locked into these impoverishing patterns of land-use, and borrowing money is often their only way to survive.
2.
Raw riches
European colonizers also sought raw materials like gold, diamonds and timber.
King Sugar had accrued massive wealth in Europe which generated the scientific and technological innovations that lead to the industrial revolution.
As technology progressed the hunger for raw materials grew.
In 1885 seven European powers invaded Africa for their share of what King Leopold of Belgium described as ‘this magnificent African cake’.
Today many Third World countries remain dependent on selling their commodities to the West.
But the West has manufactured substitutes and commodity prices have crashed — making it increasingly hard for Third World countries to earn enough to repay their debts.
3.
Sweated labour
The colonists soon had plenty of land and a labour force was needed.
They devised a simple solution to this problem: the slave trade.
Around 12 million Africans were captured and transported to work the cotton fields and tobacco and sugar plantations of the Caribbean and North America.
Later in India and Africa, entire villages were rounded up and forced to work for minimal wages set by foreign officials.
Resistance was met by beatings, fines or imprisonment.
Unions were forbidden.
It can be argued that forced labour has not ceased but merely changed its form.
The fall in commodity prices means that Third World countries must produce more to earn the same amount.
This has to be spent on repaying debts to the rich world: the fear of no more loans keeps them in line.
High costs, low wages and merciless poverty are the price that Third World people pay.
4.
Sweet knowledge
In order to kill and enslave indigenous peoples, Europeans had to believe their victims were sub-human.
The history, culture and knowledge of these people were denigrated and the contributions they had made to European thought forgotten.
When the settlers of Canada and North America took Indian land, they conveniently ignored that the Indians had taught them how to cook local foods and prepare herbal medicines.
And when racism exploded in the eighteenth century — to justify slavery — it wiped out any acknowledgement of African achievements.
The history of mathematics — long held by the Classical Greeks to have originated from Ancient Egypt — was swept under the academic carpet and lost.
This ignorance continues today, reinforcing racism and giving an ideological justification for the ‘Third World debt’.
5.
Hungry buyers
European settlers got the best of both worlds.
Not only did they steal land, labour and raw materials from native peoples: they sold European goods to them as well.
In North America and Canada, they swapped iron pots, tools and guns with Indians for furs and food.
And later, they traded guns and other manufactured goods with rich Africans in exchange for slaves.
Third World markets provided outlets for manufactured products, enabling the growth of Western industry.
And developing countries continue to buy Western goods and services — often with Western loans — for ill-conceived development projects recommended by Western ‘experts’.
6.
Lovely money
Finally colonizing nations discovered more direct ways of profiting from Third World peoples: they simply demanded money from them.
The British introduced a system of taxation in Africa which forced the Africans to work for their colonizers simply to pay their taxes.
In the same way, the West continues to make large sums of money from Third World debt.
Loans frequently come straight back to us from the purchase of Western goods.
We buy Third World commodities for a song.
And we receive a steady income from interest on Third World debts.
So who owes what to whom?
Simply…nine ways to help save the planet
1.
Discourage packaging
Next time you are out shopping try this test; the less essential a product is, the more packaging it will have.
Compare, for example, a box of chocolates with eight layers of wrapping, to a bag of rice with only one.
Over-packaging adds about ten per cent to our weekly shopping bill.
It serves no real purpose and eventually we have to pay for it to be taken away.
It also uses up scarce resources; most plastic is made from oil and does not biodegrade.
As a first step you might refuse the plastic bags that are thrust upon you at the supermarket check-out and use boxes to carry home the food.
2.
Penalize pollution
The deadly pollution potential of many manufactured goods is now being recognized.
But we can all do our bit to eliminate polluting products from the market.
In a society dominated by consumerism, every buying choice we make is a political act — by choosing to buy environmentally-friendly cleaning fluids and powders, avoiding aerosols and using lead-free petrol, we are not only minimizing our own impact on the environment but also registering a protest.
This forces companies to see that there is a growing demand for genuinely ‘green’ goods.
But we should also try to find out what kinds of pollution a product causes during its manufacturing process.
Some items are harmless in themselves, but cause enormous environmental damage to make.
3.
Research raw materials
It is important to find out what raw materials a product uses.
How were they mined and where did they came from?
Did the table and chair in your home involve rainforest destruction?
If they are made of mahogany, the answer is ‘yes’.
We should only buy woods that have sustainable sources, look first for furniture in second-hand shops, and give away old household items to be sold by charities.
Aluminium cans are made from bauxite dug up in tropical forests.
They use the equivalent of half the can full of oil in their production.
The recycling of these is well established in Australia, Canada and the US, all of which re-use more than 50 per cent.
But in the UK more than 90 per cent of all aluminium cans are still thrown away — collect yours together and take them to a scrap-metal dealer.
4.
Eat local
Take one of your favourite cereals and count how many ingredients are listed on the packet.
The more there are, the more wasteful its production process has been.
The stabilizers, additives, colourings and flavourings in processed food are chemicals produced in factories.
Most have no nutritional value and many are harmful to our health; they are included to increase the shelf-life and ‘attractiveness’ of the product.
Likewise the pesticides and weedkillers used in large-scale crop-farming kill plants and wildlife and pollute the atmosphere.
The residues accumulate in our bodies and can cause cancer and birth defects.
Fresh food grown organically — without using chemicals — is better for your health.
It also tends to be grown locally so that less fuel is wasted on transporting it.
Organic food is still expensive — but the more we buy it, the cheaper and more widespread it will become.
5.
Avoid poisons
Every day there is another scare about some product damaging our health.
The easiest poisons to avoid are those designated as such.
Weedkillers and pesticides work their way up the food chain from plants, through insects and birds, into your family — which is a good reason to keep your garden organic.
Bleaches are among the most polluting of household cleaners.
As well as being a health risk, they carry on killing organisms in rivers long after they leave your home, so it is best to minimize the quantities used.
The environment-friendly bleaches now on sale are better than ordinary bleaches since they contain no chlorine — but the substitute, hydrogen peroxide, may still be harmful.
6.
Save energy
There is no hazard-free way of producing large quantities of energy, so we have to conserve it.
Insulating your loft, fitting double-glazing, making your doors draughtproof and switching off lights and fires when you don't need them save energy — and money too.
You can save up to 30 per cent of your heating costs by fitting a time-clock and a thermostat to your boiler.
Low energy-using fridges and washing machines have recently appeared on the market and are cheaper to run than ordinary ones.
Heat recycling pumps use little power themselves and improve heat distribution, reducing the amount of energy needed to heat the house.
Best of all, you can fit your home with solar panels (see Action, Page 25) that will supply at least some of your heating needs.
7.
Recycle waste
We produce more garbage today than ever before.
Recycling is better than disposal so before you throw anything away think how you could give it a second life.
Many supermarkets now have bottle-banks, but returnable bottles are better still because they save natural resources and energy — manufacturers need to be pressured into recognizing this.
Old fridges and cookers should be taken to second-hand shops or civic-amenity sites to be refurbished instead of dumped.
Organic household waste can be composted to make garden fertilizer.
And many motorists are still unaware that used sump oil from do-it-yourself oil changes can be recycled if returned to garages.
8.
Set standards
Don't be satisfied with buying something because it is described as ‘green’.
You need to know exactly what you are getting.
How will it affect the environment and you?
What is it made from?
You have the right to accurate, informative labeling of products so that you can make your own decisions about what to buy.
That means lobbying governments, supermarkets and manufacturers.
In West Germany shoppers look for a Blue Angel on the label before they purchase.
Then they know that the item conforms to a given set of environmental standards.
The scheme has recently been improved to include criteria for judging a product at all stages in its life, from how it was made, to its impact on the environment after it has been sold.
9.
Plant trees
Each of us consumes the equivalent of between one or two trees each year in paper-use alone.
The least we can do is plant a few trees in return.
Stick to native species to ensure the tree is suitable for the soil in your area.
As well as being aesthetically pleasing, trees absorb carbon dioxide which is thought to be making holes in the ozone layer.
They also harbour wildlife and help prevent soil erosion.
They will be in place long after you have gone, like guardians of the future.
SIMPLY — Two ways to plan a population programme
IN THEORY: START WITH THE POPULATION
IN PRACTICE: SIX STEPS TO COERCION
1.
Set up a target
Setting definite population targets often means that more wide-ranging efforts to improve health and wellbeing are neglected.
In INDONESIA 95% of women know about family planning, but less than 25% have ever heard of immunization or oral rehydration, both vital aids to preventing child deaths.
‘When you've got targets and incentives it just becomes a family planning programme and not much more than that’ Tricia Parker, Oxfam Bangladesh
‘Here the only things not lacking are contraceptives.
I have sent many letters reporting a shortage of supplies and the only thing they ever send are contraceptives’ Doctor, Dominican Republic
2.
Choose your weapon
Target-oriented programmes tend to concentrate on a small number of permanent or semi-permanent methods (sterilisation or IUD) to minimise dropout rates.
In CHINA, where 49% of contraceptors use the IUD, a new type of IUD has been introduced recently which cannot be removed by the woman.
It has to be extracted by a trained person with a metal hook.
‘It is clear that political-administrative elites and not the masses of acceptors are deciding on the technology to be used’ USAID Evaluation Report, 1979
‘Women always ask for a good contraceptive because they really need one.
But the family planning worker pushes only those which have a target’ UBINIG, Bangladesh, 1987
3.
Cut costs to the bone
Providing proper counselling and screening costs money.
When reduction of birth rates is the main aim, these ‘luxuries’ are often dispensed with.
A study in COLOMBIA found that an integrated service with proper medical back-up cost four times as much per person-year of protection as a straight female sterilisation drive and led to a wide-ranging cost-cutting exercise.
A subsequent, independent study found that 7% of women in COLOMBIA, 8% in INDIA and 11% in GHANA regretted being sterilised or felt unsure about it.
‘After-effects were not their business because the Government's overall aim was a restricted one — control of birth rates’ Joyce Pettigrew, anthropologist, India, 1984
4.
Educate!
Motivate!
Informing people of the availability of services is necessary.
But trying to persuade (‘educate’, ‘motivate’) them to use family planning demonstrates an unwillingness to understand why people have children in the first place.
This means that those underlying factors are unlikely ever to be tackled and people will come to distrust a government that disregards their needs.
‘The women said ‘If the children are small, their mortality is so high that we do not dare to stop childbirth’.
When we asked ‘Would you consider sterilization if no money was given?’, 13 out of 18 said ‘No’.’
UBINIG, Bangladesh, 1986
5.
Downplay the difficulties
Possible complications and side-effects are ignored or minimised in a target-oriented programme because it is more important to add to the numbers of acceptors than to help women make an informed choice about contraception.
In BANGLADESH and MEXICO, for example, people are often not told that sterilisation is permanent.
Recent US studies of the IUD warn that it should never be used on women who intend to have children because of the danger of permanent sterility.
‘We don't tell them of the major side effects for fear of losing them’ Field worker, Kenya
‘Clients were not adequately informed about the permanent nature of the operation in over 40% of the centres’ Joint World Bank, WHO, SIDA, Government review of sterilisation in Bangladesh, 1983
6.
Force as a last resort
When all else fails and people are still not coming forward in sufficient numbers to meet the targets, then persuasion escalates into coercion.
This generates further distrust and resistance which is, in turn, met with further coercion, culminating in gross abuses such as those during the 1975-to-1977 State of Emergency in INDIA.
In the last half of 1976 over 6.5 million people were sterilised — a rate four times that in any previous period.
‘Coercion?
Perhaps.
But coercion in a good cause’ Robert McNamara, ex-Director, World Bank
‘Overt violence or other potentially injurious coercion is not to be used before noninjurious coercion has been exhausted’ Bernard Berelson (ex-President of the Population Council) and Jonathan Lieberson
’ If you have the operation you will get a sari and money’
JULEKHA, FAMILY PLANNING WORKER, BANGLADESH
I had been working as a dai (midwife) for the Government since 1974, but I resigned when they stopped paying my salary and only paid me if I brought in patients to be sterilized.
Now I work for the Family Planning Association because they pay a salary as well as a bonus for each sterilisation.
I don't bring in people who want IUDs any more because I don't get paid for them now.
I have to motivate people by telling them ‘More children — more problem.
How much land do you have?
If you have more children you will not live well.’
Then I say: ‘If you have the sterilisation operation you will get a sari and money.’
I was told to promise them wheat as well.
But some of them were angry when they were not given the wheat.
They said they would not let my back into the village until I got them a ration card and some wheat.
But I have no power to do that.
So far I have referred 125 women and 15 men for family planning.
It is difficult to motivate men for vasectomy.
But in the poorest families both husband and wife have been sterilised to get the money and food.
Once 75 people were operated in one day.
It was during the floods in 1984 when lots of people lost their crops and there was no work for them.
They attracted the people by offering wheat and money.
Two of the patients were widows.
They didn't need the operation but they needed the food.
The health worker told me to keep quiet about it.
‘I did not agree, but she would not leave me alone’
RAHIMA, BANGLADESH
My husband is a day labourer.
I'm 18 years' old and we have two children.
A women from the Government told me: ‘You have two children.
You must have the operation.’
I did not agree, but she would not leave me alone.
She kept on promising wheat, sari, ration card.
Then she took me to the centre by saying that she had asked my husband and had given permission.
But actually he did not know.
When he came to the centre I was already inside the operating room.
Then they said I have to be operated because I am already ready and my name is on the list.
THE THEORY: START WITH THE PEOPLE
‘A woman who wants family planning can have it.
But we don't think it is a top priority.
We don't think poverty will end by ending the poor.’
Orlando Rizzo, Director of Health, Nicaragua
IN PRACTICE: 5 BILLION POPULATION PLANS
Every person is different and each has her or his optimal strategy for survival.
For some the best strategy is nine children; for others it may be one or two.
The only humane population programme is one that expands people's opportunities so that large families are no longer necessary for survival.
And that means understanding and respecting the reasons why people have children.
WHY PEOPLE HAVE CHILDREN
1.
LOW STATUS OF WOMEN:
Where husband and in-laws want many children, a wife may not dare to object.
2.
NEEDS OF TODAY:
Children help with work and provide status and love for their parents.
3.
FEAR OF TOMORROW:
Children are many parents' only source of security in old age.
4.
LACK OF CONTRACEPTION:
The family planning clinic may be too far away, the services too expensive or scarce, or even prohibited.
5.
FEAR OF INFERTILITY:
Where children are needed fear of infertility can lead to early, frequent childbearing.
6.
FEAR OF CHILDREN DYING:
In the Sahel a woman must have ten children to be 95% certain of a surviving adult son.
7.
CONTRACEPTIVE SIDE EFFECTS:
Unless these are clearly explained women may avoid contraception unless they are really desperate.
’ We always begin with the needs that the group identifies’
CIDHAL WORKERS, MEXICO
When we go to a new group we always begin with a meeting with the women to see what they want.
They might not know what they want to do; they might only feel they have a lot of problems.
Or they might decide they want to learn how to read, that they want information about birth control, or advice about getting rid of a caique (local boss).
We always begin with the needs that the group identifies and then discuss with them how these needs relate to what we call our four analytical cornerstones — four issues which represent the oppression and exploitation of women.
The first is the role of women as housewives and mothers and the devaluation of domestic work, how this creates a self-image of being someone who has to be provided for.
The second is women as workers.
Women workers do not receive a fair wage because their earnings are considered a complementary salary.
Yet we know that about 60 per cent of families in Latin America are maintained by women.
The third issue is sexuality: women being objects when it comes to their bodies.
They are not subjects in the decisions affecting their bodies.
They cannot make free decisions about motherhood or their sexual partnership with a man.
It is a situation of great humiliation for women when they realise they do not possess their bodies except in relation to a man who might give them something — either children or some economic advantage.
The fourth issue is women's lack of control in their own political process.
Women are still being manipulated.
They participate in large numbers in the political arena — they always have — but they do not define their own demands or decide on the direction of movement.
We believe that the analysis of these four cornerstones can help women transform themselves into subjects of their own reality.
For birth control it's no different.
We always start from the experiences of the women.
We realise, for instance, that there is no ‘ideal’ method of birth control and that people's decisions about it can change at any time.
The most important aspect of this work has been to give women the information they need to choose the method they prefer.
A woman who has access to this information can start to take decisions about motherhood and her own sexuality.
But the decision to become a mother is tied to many other factors, such as better salaries.
So motherhood is tied to economic conditions, to deeper changes.
One of our main problems is access to birth control methods.
Most of the materials are controlled by the Health Department.
And it is often a transnational company that determines which products are manufactured or available in Mexico.
For example, if a product has been prohibited in the US or Europe, you will find it in Mexico because the company has pressurised the Health Department into allowing its distribution here.
The difference between our approach and that of the Government is that the Government sees population growth as an evil force.
But we question whether this factor is the cause of our ‘underdevelopment’.
We see population growth as only one aspect of our reality.
But the Government is only interested in statistics and percentages.
We in CIDHAL, as feminists, are also concerned about the person.
We believe that women have their own needs and are capable of deciding what is best for them.
CIDHAL is a non-profit organisation founded in 1969 as a documentation centre for women.
In 1977 it reformed as a more practical campaigning organization and moved to Mexico City where it now works with low-income women.
TELL-TALE SIGNS…
Of course not all family planning programmes culminate in sterilisation at gunpoint.
But the tendency is built into the logic of every target-oriented programme.
If you concentrate on population first and people second, people will always tend to be sacrificed to the programme.
Periodically the abuses surface, there is an outcry — as there has been recently in BANGLADESH — and the system is tinkered with.
But the approach itself is never questioned, so the abuses simply resurface later in a new guise.
In INDIA, for instance, despite the sterilisation scandals which helped to bring down the Ghandi Administration in 1977, there are now new reports of widespread sterilisation abuse in Gujerat (using famine relief as an ‘incentive’) and Rajasthan (using promises of employment as an ‘incentive’ for tribal women).
Simply — linguistics
1.
Linguistics
Linguistics is the study of language.
It is not like grammar which defines how we should use words.
Linguistics looks at what we actually say and write and tries to explain why.
How can human beings in normal conversation makes sense of 5,000 words an hour of confusing, semi-organized information?
Even small children seem to manage it.
Indeed children seem to learn languages more easily than adults.
2.
Animal chatter
Human and animal communication are very different.
Animals can usually only ‘talk’ about things happening here and now — a bird will squawk when danger is imminent.
Some creatures can indicate in a very limited way things happening elsewhere: bees have half a dozen different aerial dances to indicate where to find nectar.
But nectar is all that bees can ‘talk’ about — of limited interest to the rest of us.
3.
Constant creativity
Human language is much more powerful — so much so that it has been suggested that the ability to speak is what really distinguishes people from animals.
We are able to explain and understand completely new ideas with relative ease.
You have probably used sentences today which have never before been used by the human race.
The sentence: ‘Algerian milk runs quickly up a drainpipe’ has almost certainly never appeared in print before (another NI first) but you know exactly what is meant.
4.
In the swim
We rarely reflect on such mysteries.
As the Chinese proverb has it: ‘The fish will be the last to discover the water’.
The Greek philosophers were among the first to grapple with language.
They asked how we linked words with objects.
Plato argued there must be an intrinsic connection between words and what they mean —.
This is understandable with onomatopoeic words like ‘crunch’ but less obvious for ‘tree’, say, which appears as baum, or arbre in other languages.
Aristotle held what is the common-sense belief today — that words are arbitrary choices which we link with objects or actions.
5.
The source of language
Hindu priests in the fourth and fifth centuries AD made remarkably detailed studies of their sacred texts — the Vedas.
But collecting and analyzing written and spoken information on language — what is now called linguistics — is said to have started with Sir William Jones in Calcutta in 1786.
He pointed out striking similarities between Sanskrit, Greek, Latin and the European languages like English and French.
The word for ‘seven’ is sapta in Sanskrit, hepta in Greek, and septem in Latin.
He suggested that these formed an ‘Indo-European’ language family which sprang from a common source — the original word was probably something like septem.
One can reconstruct the original language by looking for common words and then make a guess about where the language came from.
This original language does not seem to have had words for ‘vine’ or ‘palm-tree’so it probably did not start in the Mediterranean.
But it does have a word for ‘beech tree’.
This does not grow in Asia suggesting the language came from north-central Europe.
6.
Evolving interest
The first linguists concentrated on how languages changed over time — how Old English became Modern English, say.
The modern word ‘chin’, for example, used to be pronounced ‘kin’ in Old English and many other similar words have changed their pronunciation.
Words like ‘chicken’ and ‘cheese’were also once pronounced with a ‘k’.
So it was believed that a pronunciation change in one word would be followed by changes in all similar words — that there are laws of language evolution — and that is generally the case.
7.
Disappearing acts
There also a tendency for the ends of words to disappear.
In languages which sound melodious to English ears like Italian and Spanish this has already happened — many words have lost their final vowels.
We seem to resent this when it happens in English — when we leave the ‘t’ off the end of ‘hot’, for example, and replace it with a ‘glottal stop’(try saying ‘hot milk’three times quickly).
8.
Structural implications
Words in the 19th century were still viewed as individual items which could be stuck together like bricks to make up sentences.
This view was challenged in the 1930s by the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure.
Take the sentence ‘I read the magazine’.
The ‘I’, he would have argued, only means something in relation to all the other words that it is usually compared with — in this case the personal pronouns like ‘you’, ‘she’ or ‘it’.
Words, he said, are interdependent parts of the ‘structural’ system which makes up the language.
Similarly ‘magazine’ only means something in comparison with‘book’, say, or ‘notice’.
Meanings he argued are created by differences.
All linguistics since Saussure has been ‘structural’.
9.
The chameleons
You can sense the interdependence of words when they change their significance according to the words around them.
Thus ‘I look at the sun’ and ‘I sit in the sun’use the English word ‘sun’in two different ways.
Saussure compared language to a giant game of chess.
If you walk in on any game you assess the relative positions of all the pieces — regardless of how they got there.
Everything depends on difference between sounds and between words — not on the words themselves.
10.
The Indian trail
Linguistics in the US at this time was taking a different direction.
It was prompted by the need to document Native American languages which were distinctive and interesting but in danger of extinction.
Their uniqueness was exploited in World War II.
General Patton used to send his radio messages using Mohawk speakers at either end to confuse the Germans into thinking that Mohawk was a new code.
Documenting such unwritten languages was a hit-or-miss affair until in 1933 Leonard Bloomfield suggested more rigorous ‘scientific’ techniques for writing the grammars of unwritten languages.
His methods however were mostly to do with the syntax and vocabulary and sounds and had little to do with what the languages meant.
Linguistics became an abstract and dry subject of little interest to non-linguists.
11.
Chomsky's revolution
All this was changed by Noam Chomsky.
Since 1957 this US linguist (who is also a prominent political radical) has transformed the subject into a lively and controversial area.
His most striking proposition to the lay reader is that human beings are genetically programmed to learn certain kinds of language.
There is strong circumstantial evidence for this.
All human languages are remarkably similar — bearing in mind the almost limitless number of ways of combining words.
There are for examples only two main ways of constructing ‘relative’ clauses — like phrases linked by ‘which’.
In English we say ‘I read the magazine which you read’— French is constructed in a similar way.
The other approach, as in Hebrew, is equivalent to: ‘I read the magazine which you read it’.
Most languages have one or other of these forms — even though there are many other possibilities.
12.
Child prodigies
Also, children everywhere go through remarkably similar learning stages.
They start with one word, like ‘Daddy’ and then progress to two-word utterances like ‘Daddy come’.
To make this negative they will first say ‘Not Daddy come’ then ‘Daddy not come’until they finally hit the correct version ‘Daddy hasn't come’.
These steps could not have been imitated from adults since the last is the only version they are likely to have heard.
Some people argue that language learning is just part of a wider process of learning.
But there does appear to be something distinctive about language.
A child's capacity for abstract reasoning (for mathematics, say) increases through puberty while the ability to learn languages is declining.
An eight year-old who can beat a chess master is remarkable, though it would not be so remarkable if they were eighteen.
However if the 18 year old could pick up languages merely by exposure they would be considered a real prodigy.
13.
Universal grammar
Chomsky suggests that there is a ‘universal grammar’— a limited set of rules which all languages follow.
Each child is genetically equipped to cope with any of these rules but must discover from its surroundings which option its own language has taken.
They have to find out, for example, if their language drops the pronoun at the beginning of a sentence.
Little Nicaraguans learn that it is possible to say either ‘Yo soy nicaragúense’(I am Nicaraguan) or merely ‘Soy nicaragúense’(Am Nicaraguan).
Only the first construction is possible in English.
14.
Deeper than you think
Human speech is only the tip of the iceberg.
Take two statements: ‘Mary is eager to please’ and ‘Mary is easy to please’.
They are superficially similar but have very different underlying meanings — different people are doing the pleasing.
One of Chomksy's major technical contributions is a set of rules to describe the production of such utterances from their deeper meanings — a ‘generative grammar’.
Chomsky's philosophy is that linguistics should help illuminate the human mind.
‘How come,’ he asks, ‘that human beings whose contacts with the world are brief and personal and limited are nevertheless able to know as much as they do?’
You might take comfort from the fact that someone at least is astonished by the depth of your knowledge.
UTOPIA
the road to nowhere
The word ‘Utopia’ derives from ancient Greek and means ‘no place’or ‘nowhere’.
It is here, in Western culture, that dreams and schemes of the perfect society live.
At first Utopia hid in imaginary places or islands in a still-unknown world beyond the great oceans.
But slowly places lost their mystery.
The idea of progress took hold.
The brutality of industrial life appalled many people.
Utopia projected itself into the future instead.
Scientific discovery and the disillusionment of the twentieth century made the future look less interesting than the nature of time itself.
So, intellectually unfashionable but undaunted, the idea of Utopia abandoned the world altogether and was launched into space.
Here it still lives in the ‘fantasy’ titles on book shop shelves or in the movies, the subject of a growing body of feminist writing.
It has lost none of its imaginative power or ability to communicate ideas.
The world would be a less interesting, sadder place without it.
the island
Thomas More's Utopia(1516)
This book introduced the term to the English language.
The island of Utopia contains 54 semi-independent cities, but society is still largely governed by rural, agricultural life.
Its people move regularly between the countryside and the cities.
Everyone has a right to everything.
Vegetarian monks striving for holiness gladly take on most of the nasty work.
Only criminals may slaughter animals so that the population at large is not brutalized.
Intended as a critique of contemporary English society, Utopia has since been claimed as the work of ‘the first socialist’.
Thomas More went on to become Lord Chancellor of England and was executed for opposing the marriage of King Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn.
the future
William Morris' NewsfromNowhere(1889)
In 1888 Edward Bellamy, an American socialist, published a book called Looking Backward.
It portrayed Boston society in the year 2000, with the oppression and inequality of industrial capitalism long gone and with a military-industrial army working in huge monopolies rallying to the banner of nationalism.
It foresaw electric light, credit cards, shopping malls and electronic broadcasting.
It was hugely successful.
The English socialist William Morris was so appalled that he published News from Nowhere as a riposte to Bellamy.
It is set in England in the twenty-first century.
A revolution has taken place following a demonstration in Trafalgar Square in 1952.
There is no government and no private property.
People work because they want to.
Lyrical in tone, the book ends with a boat trip along the River Thames.
Bellamy was the more prescient; but he is almost forgotten, while the work of William Morris is still widely read today.
outer space
Ursula le Guin's TheDispossessed(1974)
Earth has been abandoned as a polluted desert.
Shevek lives on Anarres, a bleak moon of the much wealthier Urras.
The demands of survival have enforced a form of anarchism on Anarres.
Shevek is a brilliant physicist working on a Theory of Simultaneity.
It will break through the limitations of time and space.
He travels to Urras to pursue his researches, only to find that the ‘propertarians’ wish to exploit his theory to their own advantage.
He joins a general strike by those who have been dispossessed on Urras and tells them: ‘(on Anarres) we have nothing but our freedom.
We have nothing to give you but your own freedom’.
Later he tells a friend: ‘My ideas in my head aren't the only ones important to me.
My society is also an idea.
I was made by it.
An idea of freedom, of change, of human solidarity, an important idea’.
Simply…understanding mental illness
Everyone experiences emotional distress.
But we each experience it in our own way.
This is why what Western culture calls ‘mental illness’ is difficult to define.
And it is often made even harder to understand by the jargon of psychiatry: ‘schizophrenia’, ‘psychosis’ and the like.
Here is an NI guide to the different forms of mental distress — the better we understand them, the less we will have to fear.
MENTAL HEALTH
Western culture, for good or ill, separates the mind from the body.
Disorders of the body are left to medical science.
But there is as yet no equivalent science of the mind.
The ‘metaphor’ of mental illness is the best we can manage.
People who become ‘mentally ill’ develop psychological problems which affect their emotional moods and behaviour, and the way they communicate with other people.
Psychologists study mental life and behaviour; psychiatrists are doctors who specialize in treating disorders of the mind.
They make a distinction between ‘neurosis’ and ‘psychosis’.
Neurosis is the name given to the more common and less serious types of mental disorder, like anxiety.
Psychosis is when there is, at times, such severe distress that someone seems to lose touch with the familiar world altogether.
Schizophrenia, for example, is a psychosis.
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Schizophrenia does not mean ‘split personality’; that is only one very rare form that this mental illness can take.
There is no general agreement about schizophrenia's cause or cure, and some people even dispute that it exists.
Yet one in every 200 people are diagnosed as having a schizophrenic illness at some point in their lives.
The condition results in a dramatic disturbance of thought and feeling.
People start to experience the world very differently.
They may come to believe that their thoughts, feelings and actions are under the control of an external force (thought disorder).
They may experience visions, seeing, hearing or even smelling things that others can't (hallucinations).
They may be convinced of something for which there is no obvious justification — perhaps that they are being pursued by secret agents (delusions).
MANIC DEPRESSION
Periods of deep depression alternate with very excited behaviour (mania).
During a manic or ‘high’ phase people are often very active, unable to sleep; they may spend vast amounts of money and see or hear things others can't.
They may be irritable or talk so much they become incoherent.
While ‘low’ or depressed they may feel overwhelmed by despair, guilt and feelings of unworthiness.
They may become apathetic, unable to do even the simplest task.
ANXIETY
Imagine you are about to be attacked.
Your muscles tense in readiness for physical action.
Your heart beats faster to carry blood to where it's needed.
You breathe faster to get more energy.
You sweat to keep your body temperature down.
Your mouth becomes dry as your digestive system slows.
Once the danger is passed you shake as your muscles relax.
We have similar responses to a wide variety of experience, from talking to someone new at a party to taking an exam.
Some people feel anxiety very often and very intensely.
Sometimes a panic attack results: a pounding heart, sweating, chest pains, fast breathing and dizziness, combined with a fear of ‘going mad’ or out of control.
STRESS
A very ‘fashionable’ complaint in Western culture at present, stress is one of the few ‘acceptable’conditions we are free to admit to.
We are even expected to have it.
A ‘stressful’ job can be a status symbol.
Its symptoms can include the loss of your sense of humour.
But that doesn't make it any less serious or painful.
It resembles anxiety in many respects but suggests that the causes are more rational and external than irrational and internal.
To that extent, the present emphasis on stress may be an encouraging sign of a shift away from the ‘personal pathology’ of disorder.
BEREAVEMENT
Our reactions to the death of someone close to us are particular to us and to our relationship with them.
But many people experience a similar sense of shock and loss.
We may think we see the dead person walking down the street, or hear them calling our name.
Despair, depression and anxiety are extremely common.
We may surprise ourselves by feeling, say, anger and guilt towards the person we have lost.
Sometimes, particularly if we lack the formal rituals of grief, the healing of the bereavement process gets stuck.
We simply can't get back to living.
We may feel we are expected to ‘pull ourselves together’ too quickly — or we may be unable to react to the death at all, even by crying.
Grief can, and often does, transform people's lives.
ATTITUDES
The number of people who are so disabled by their distress that they have to be cared for in institutions is very small indeed.
The vast majority are cared for by their own families and friends, often at enormous emotional cost.
This is why the most critical thing for anyone who experiences distress is whether they are helped or hindered by friends, relatives and colleagues.
It can be as difficult for these people to adjust as it is for the individual in distress.
But it is vital that their attitude — and that of society as a whole — is supportive and not conditioned by fear.
Born to shop
When the going gets tough, the tough go shopping.
Doug Smith assesses the bubble behind the boom.
There it is on the car ahead of me.
The grand slogan of North American culture: ‘I owe, I owe, so off to work I go’.
Only in keeping with the bumper sticker, the driver isn't heading to work at all.
We are both pulling off into Polo Park, a large two-storey shopping mall which is our city's pleasure palace of conspicuous consumption.
We,(the other driver, my daughter and I) are joining the 200,000 other people who will come here this week to shop until we drop.
In air-conditioned comfort we cruise through this mall, passing a disorienting array of small boutiques selling pricey clothes, electronic gee-gaws and specialty foods.
We shuttle back and forth between the large department stores that anchor the mall.
The feeling is not unlike being forced through a futuristic abattoir, and I'll buy anything if they'll only let me out of here.
We are in the midst of a decade-long shopping spree.
In Canada retail sales have been growing by as much as eight per cent a year, even after inflation.
In the past 10 years Canadians have doubled the amount of money borrowed from banks to pay for consumer goods.
Three out of four adult North Americans have at least one credit card.
And the trend is international; since the early 1970s West German and Japanese families have doubled their household debt in relation to household income.
It is this willingness to buy anything, and our increasing ability to go into debt to do it, which is helping to power the so-called North American recovery.
Once upon a time it was the stark factory with its towering smokestack and ceaseless assembly line which signalled North American economic superiority.
But in the late 1980s it is the upscale shopping mall — relentlessly post-modern in design, surrounded by a sea of imported cars — which symbolizes our economy.
The creation of the ocean of consumer debt now helping to float our prosperity, is a marvel equal to what Mikhail Gorbachev is trying to achieve with perestroika.
Nor is the analogy as far out as it first appears.
Gorbachev's ‘new thinking’ is designed to tackle the flip side of the problem besetting North American economies.
The famous scenes of Russians standing in endless line-ups, result from Soviet industry's inability to produce consumer goods at a rate which begins to meet demand.
As we stroll through the mall we can see signs of the opposite problem.
Since our unplanned manufacturing system continually overproduces consumer products, we could be thrown into economic catastrophe by a lack of consumers.
In Russia customers queue for goods; in this fashionable men's clothing store, if we adopt the right perspective, we can see rows and rows of shirts queuing up in wait for someone willing to spend a day's wages on a monogrammed polo shirt.
When I was a boy — just 30 years ago — a store like this would have had a hard time surviving in this small mid-Western Canadian city.
There weren't, and still aren't, that many truly well-heeled people here.
And in the 1950s people did not buy things they could not afford — credit and debt were shameful things to be avoided.
My parents, children of the Depression, had a credit account at the city's major department store which they kept up to date every month.
To buy now and pay later wasn't just bad economics, it was next to sinfulness.
But the obvious success of this shopping mall speaks to the arrival of a truly ‘new thinking’ in North American society — buying on credit.
Of course one way to make sure there would always be a steady stream of customers in places like Polo Park would be to redistribute income so everyone could afford to shop here.
But that is an unimaginative solution: anyone can give money away.
It takes a truly inventive society to turn debt into an attractive — perhaps the ultimate — commodity.
And that is what we have done.
Debt, or the ability to attain it, has now come to be associated with power.
If you don't believe me, listen to what my bank has to say.
For this shopping trip is partially inspired by a letter I received today, outlining just what an economic Titan I am.
The letter acknowledges me as a mature and responsible individual, always paying my credit-card account on time.
The enclosed pamphlet continues to flatter me, explaining that since nobody ever promised me a rose garden, I went ahead and grew my own.
And for this reason I should move up to the company's Gold Card program.
This, I am assured, is not merely ‘the most comprehensive lifestyle and financial program one can apply for’(will I make the grade?) but is ‘most distinctive’ for the ‘philosophy it represents’.
And just what is that ‘philosophy’?
Why simply that ‘as an accomplished individual you have more stringent and exacting expectations’(a banker's way of saying he hopes I have more money than brains).
‘And these must be fulfilled’(a banker's way of saying what we did for Brazil we can do for you).
So, with my admittedly low-status credit card tucked into my wallet, why shouldn't we head off to Polo Park and fulfill some of my high-grade expectations.
The wonderful thing about a consumer culture is that the stores have everything you want — more miraculously they have things you did not even know you wanted: like a wall-sized television set.
If the boob tube is going to dominate your life, you might as well get one which dominates your living room as well.
Even more mysterious are the tiny sets with four inch screens — television for people who don't mind if they can't see the program.
Last fall in the wake of the meltdown in Wall Street I was in this very TV store, watching the noon news.
An investment analyst was explaining what was needed to turn the economy around.
‘A good dose of austerity.
We have been living beyond our means for too long and had better start tightening our belts.’
It seemed authoritative enough — particularly given the fact that with nearly 50 sets in the store tuned to the same channel, one could not escape the impression that the speaker was at least omnipresent, if not quite omniscient.
‘That's sure right,’ chimed the store manager in agreement.
‘Too many of these unions getting pay increases they don't deserve.’
Maybe.
But the same time as we were hearing that we should be cutting back, the news was also full of adverts.
The key to economic recovery, if my lesson in the television store means anything, is for workers to take home less money and buy more goods.
In the shopping mall you can see these employees, working alone for little more than the minimum wage, surrounded by some of the world's most sophisticated monitoring systems.
Little can be done without permission — the same security system which prevents light-fingered customers from making off with the goods, also trains an unblinking eye on the shop-worker.
The discipline of the elementary school classroom is enforced on people who as soon as they leave the store, are considered full members of society with the right to vote.
Small wonder our society is so schizophrenic — because the minute the clerk walks out of the store, she or he is immediately bombarded with messages which are in total contradiction to those they receive as employees.
There is no need for control, no need to save, one must express oneself to the fullest — and the way to do that is to shop.
There was a time when planned obsolescence was capitalism's dirty little secret — now it has become a selling point.
You can buy disposable cameras; use 'em once and chuck ‘em, don't worry about taking care of them — you can't take care of them.
There are products to help with every activity — the local sporting goods store has specialized equipment not just for sports like hockey and baseball but even 80-dollar pants designed for walking.
But the growth in consumer debt should not be simply seen and condemned as a complete descent into mindless consumerism.
The neo-conservative economic policies in vogue throughout the West for the past decade have served to redistribute income upwards, creating the infamous Yuppies with their taste for BMWs and white wines.
At the same time many working people have had their belts tightened for them as factories closed and unions accepted cutbacks.
For these people going into debt is not a way to finance newer extravagences but the only way to maintain a lifestyle they have been brought up to accept as theirs by right.
When the going gets tough, the tough allegedly go shopping, and into debt.
It is not surprising that so many North Americans feel they were born to shop.
Just as a Soviet worker is surrounded by calls to produce, all of our social messages urge us to buy.
Before we leave the mall with our senses battered, I drop my plastic card on a bookstore's check-out counter to buy a pop-up book for my daughter.
Grimly we think to ourselves ‘It had better be good’.
Having done our bit to fend off a recession we head home, masters of our fates.
Disposable workers
Modern methods of super-exploitation, tried and tested in the Third World, are coming home to industrialized countries.
Celia Mather looks South, then North, today.
For workers in the South being ‘disposable’ is nothing new.
In the 1970s, when declining profitability caused plant closures in the industrialized North, they constituted cheap labour for richer countries.
Third World governments, mainly in Asia and Latin America, established free trade zones employing thousands of young women workers to attract foreign capital investment.
From South Korea to Chile rules were changed, trade union rights were suppressed and casual work became the order of the day.
Sub-contracting became a useful tool for cost-cutting and avoiding responsibilities to the workforce.
In Indonesia, for example the US-owned oil company Caltex had some 10,000 people working for it by the beginning of the 1980s.
But the company did not want the hassle — or embarrassment — of dealing direct with its own low-paid work force.
Instead workers were employed by about 100 different sub-contractors.
These fly-by-night ‘bosses’ changed so frequently that workers would lose track of who was actually employing them.
But some things never changed: there was no holiday pay and if they went went sick they lost their jobs.
The workers tried to become employees of Caltex itself but without success.
The All Indonesia Labour Federation (FBSI), a tame ‘yellow’ union created by the Suharto regime, signed a collective labour agreement with Caltex, but only for the small elite of core workers.
Those employed by contractors were left out.
When the recession and falling prices hit the oil industry a few years later Caltex was able to ‘shake out’ the workforce with ease.
Suppression of unions also enabled Japanese textile firms in West Java to systematically take on ‘probationers’ for two years and then sack them just before they were entitled to become permanent staff.
Since the recession hit Indonesia, tens of thousands of textile and garment workers have lost their jobs, without compensation.
There are other bizarre examples.
James Hardie, an Australian-owned firm outside Jakarta employed ‘seasonal’ labourers to produce asbestos construction materials.
‘There is nothing seasonal’’ about this work!’the workers said.
‘What we have in Indonesia is a climate of hak pengusaha — where the right of the employer rules.’
Back in the industrialized countries of the North a reserve army of workers is lining up in dole queues, desperate for work.
Protective labour laws have been replaced by anti-union legislation.
The job market had changed dramatically.
It is now possible and often desirable for many companies to bring home Third World labour relations.
Now the threat to well-paid secure jobs in the industrialized countries comes less from cheap workers in the Third World than from ill-paid casual workers at home.
In 1971 only one in seven British jobs was part-time.
By 1984 the proportion had grown to almost one in five.
The ‘peripheral’ workforce as a whole now accounts for 34 per cent of those in employment — 8.1 million people.
This is a growth of 16 per cent between 1981 and 1985.
In the United States, economists calculate that those who work at home for outside contractors or involuntarily work part-time have doubled since 1980 to nearly 17 per cent of all workers.
If employees who voluntarily work part-time are included, there are 25 million ‘peripheral’ workers in the US, accounting for 25 per cent of the workforce.
Casual work is growing most rapidly in the service and retail sectors but even traditional manufacturing companies are catching on to the trend.
New labour relations are being introduced in industries where they were technologically or politically unthinkable a decade ago.
Car plants, such as Fiat in Turin, Italy, are famous for replacing male muscle with robots.
The other important but less visible change is that those who operate the robots and computers are part-time women workers.
Home-working has also seen a considerable upsurge — with women as its most thoroughly exploited victims.
Not only are they usually paid below the legal minimum — a study in 1984 showed three quarters of homeworkers in Britain were earning 1 or less an hour — but they also have to carry the overheads of heating and lighting.
Nor do they benefit from statutory benefits such as sickness or holiday pay, or health regulations — important for those working with hazardous materials such as adhesives.
Putting out work to these women, who are often from immigrant communities and are reluctant to complain, comes under the heading of ‘streamlining’ as far as their employers are concerned.
The US steel industry — with all its images of gigantic workforces of powerfully unionized white men — should, one would imagine, be impervious to the new trend.
Not so.
With plants closing down nationwide, management are imposing work practices in the plants they have kept open and are enforcing large pay-cuts.
If workers reject the cuts, as did ‘, 000 members of United Steelworkers of America Union at USX Corporation in August 1986, they can be sent home and re-hired under subcontractors with acute losses of pay, conditions and union rights.
Peter Reformat, a pipefitter for 10 years at USX Corporation's Gary works plant, was laid off and promptly hired again under a new employer.
He had earned US$13 an hour plus ample benefits under USX but under the sub-contractor he gets just US$5 an hour and no benefits.
New technology allows companies to decentralize, contract out and break up large factories which have unionized workforces.
Management then only has to make sure that the costs of co-ordination and quality control are outweighed by the savings in labour costs.
Smaller units, particularly individuals in their own homes, make it easier to avoid labour legislation.
They also remove at a stroke the central workplace the bedrock of strong trade union organization.
The threat of being hired and fired at will frightens off workers from unions.
‘Don't agitate.
You could be next for the chop,’ is the central theme.
It is, to be sure, an unprecedented attack by corporations and governments on trade unions.
And so far there can be doubt who is winning.
’ I have had about nine abortions’
NATASHA, USSR
The problem is that the pills are of very low quality and you have to pay maybe two rubles a month.
And they do not advertise contraception so many people don't know it's available.
People are very embarrassed talking about sex.
There is education for pregnant women about how to have a child, but not about how not to have a child.
It's a very big problem.
I have had about nine abortions, but that's exceptionally high.
Maybe I was supposed to have a lot of children.
Most women only have two or three abortions because they don't have much sex — perhaps just once a month.
They are so overworked, you see.
The men are tired too.
It's not because they can't have sex, it's because they don't want to.
Abortion is very easy.
You just go to the hospital for your pregnancy test and arrange a date for the abortion at the same time.
It's quite normal — more serious than having your tooth pulled out, but not much more.
They do the abortions in the mornings and the other operations in the afternoons and you can choose what kind of anaesthetic you want.
Normally people have two children.
Three is unusual.
And 99 per cent of women have jobs, even if they have children, because one salary is not enough to support the family.
Even with two children life is very hard.
You cease to be human.
You finish your work and you want to relax, but you can't, because you have to queue for tomatoes or meat and you can't find it in this shop, or that, and you have to walk around and spend hours on shopping, then cook and clean and wash clothes and look after the children.
In theory the government wants women to have more children, but in practice they discourage it because our living conditions are so terrible.
There are some privileges — families with eight or ten children get free kindergarten places — but that is nothing compared to the low salaries and high prices.
A woman has the right to stop work until her child is three and gets a third of her salary for the first 18 months.
Then she leaves her child with grandparents or at kindergarten.
Kindergarten's very cheap — only three or four rubles a month.
The problems come if the one near you is full and you have to travel miles to one with a vacancy.
The divorce rate is very high because women are more independent than in the West.
If your husband doesn't earn enough money and he doesn't help around the house, what is he for?
You get more support from a boyfriend than from a husband who doesn't help you with anything.
Last week I went to a fortune teller and she told me I would have another child even though I don't want to.
She's right.
I really don't want to.
NI readership survey
Dear reader,
The team of people from different countries which produces the New Internationalist meets each October to plan the next year's magazines.
This year we are asking a selected sample of readers to help us with this process.
You are one of the (lucky?) few.
We'd be very grateful if you'd let us know what you think of the magazine and the ways in which we might improve it.
I hope that you will be able to spare the time to complete this form.
I have also enclosed a FREEPOST envelope so you do not need a stamp to return it.
Thanks for your help.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely
Peter Stalker
Co-editor
NI readership survey 1989
For most answers all that we need is a tick in one of the boxes alongside the question numbers.
1.
MAGAZINE SIZE — would you like to see?
a)
More editorial pages
b)
More pages of advertising
c)
The number of pages as they are
2.
THEME ISSUES — would you like to see?
a)
More pages give to that month's theme
b)
More pages give to non-theme articles
c)
The balance kept as it is
3
Here are some statements about the NI.
Please tick the box which best expresses your opinion.
Agree strongly Agree No opinion Disagree Disagree strongly
a)
Generally I like the covers a)
b)
There should be more Third World coverage b)
c)
The NI should cover personal subjects like sex or lifestyles c)
d)
The editors are sometimes condescending in their tone d)
e)
It is important that the magazine has an attractive design e)
f)
The articles are too uniform and repetitive f)
g)
The NI gives a good overview of a subject g)
h)
The NI's promotional advertising is too slick and commercial h)
i)
I find reading the magazine a depressing experience i)
j)
I keep my copies of the NI for future reference j)
k)
The major articles are too short k)
l)
The NI is a hard-hitting magazine l)
m)
This is a publication which is easy to read m)
n)
The magazine is an inspiration n)
o)
The treatment of important subjects is too trivial o)
p)
The NI should give more coverage to basic development subjects like food or aid p)
q)
Good visuals and diagrams are the magazine's most distinctive feature q)
r)
The magazine is not controversial enough r)
s)
The NI's views are too biased and predictable s)
t)
There are not enough contributions from Third World writers t)
4
Which of the factors below, is the one which most strongly influences you to read an issue?
a)
A striking front cover
b)
The subject covered that month
c)
Contents page
d)
Regular features like country profile
e)
The time you have available
f)
Nothing in particular 
5
Please show what you think of each section of the magazine by ticking the appropriate box
Always Usually Sometimes Not usually Never
a)
Editor's letter
b)
Contents
c)
Letters page
d)
Letter from La Paz
e)
Keynote article
f)
Facts pages
g)
Simply
h)
Also worth reading
i)
Update
j)
Briefly
k)
Endpiece
l)
Reviews
m)
Country Profile
n)
Advertisements
6
The three best NIs in the last year were:
(please tick up to three)
a)
Sep Personal violence
b)
Oct The politics of greed
c)
Nov Debt
d)
Dec Soviet Union
e)
Jan Language
f)
Feb Mozambique
g)
Mar Peters wallchart
h)
Apr How to help children
i)
May The car
j)
Jun History of the world
k)
Jul Peru
l)
Aug Cancer
7
I'd most like the NI to produce issues on:
Please choose up to three of those suggested below
1)
Agribusiness
2)
Aid
3)
Animal rights
4)
Arms trade
5)
Christianity
7)
Cuba
8)
Democracy
9)
Environment
10)
Education
11)
Entertainment industry
12)
Ethics
13)
Freemasonry
14)
Green consumerism
15)
Health
16)
India
17)
Islam
18)
Kenya
19)
Media
20)
Multinationals
22)
New age politics
23)
Northern Ireland
24)
Pollution
25)
Psychiatry
26)
Racism
27)
Socialism
28)
Sport
29)
Stock market
30)
Style
31)
United Nations
32)
Vietnam
33)
Witchcraft
34)
Women
35)
World Bank
36)
Work
37)
World hunger
8
Of the following possible improvements to the NI which are the two you would most like us to make?
a)
Use colour photographs
b)
Have longer, more substantial articles
c)
Use recycled paper (even if this degrades picture reproduction)
d)
Introduce a more modern design
e)
Have longer and more detailed reviews
f)
Have more graphics and illustrated statistics
g)
Have more variety in article length
h)
None of these
9
Which, of these reasons, is the most important for getting the NI?
a)
It is concise and interesting to read
b)
It offers a radically different perspective on international issues
c)
It brings together good reference material
d)
It keeps me up to date on Third World and development subjects
e)
I want to support an idealistic publication
f)
It offers a simple introduction to many subjects
g)
It's a useful education tool to share with others
JUNE 1987
Sylvia is a black South African Schoolgirl who featured in the NI-produced TV documentary Girls Apart.
It can be dangerous for South Africans to appear in foreign TV programmes.
Chris Brazier phoned Sylvia to find out whether she still feels the risk was worthwhile — and what has happened to her since.
A funeral in Soweto.
A 16-year-old girl works herself into a frenzy of grief for a friend killed by right-wing vigilantes.
As the coffin is lowered into the earth, she talks to the dead girl directly, promising to consecrate herself to ‘the struggle’.
‘You were a soldier,’ she half-sings, half-moans.
‘You've made me a soldier.’
It was 1987 and the State of Emergency in South Africa was strangling the black opposition.
The NI was filming what proved to be the climax to our film Girls Apart, which contrasted the life and opinions of this black schoolgirl, Sylvia, with those of a 16-year-old Afrikaner schoolgirl.
Sylvia had just been detained because she was a student representative at school.
She had been tortured with electric shocks — as had every teenager I met who had been detained during the township unrest.
Ever since the Soweto Uprising in 1976, the security forces have considered school ‘leaders’ to be a threat.
Sylvia eventually managed to escape.
The police were driving her around Soweto, wanting her to identify key activists.
Seeing an open door she dived out and ran up the road.
Shots rang out after her but they missed.
When we met she was still afraid she might be rearrested.
A year or so later, after Girls Apart had been shown by the BBC and met with outraged protest by the South African Government, we heard a rumour that Sylvia had been killed.
A French aid worker returned from South Africa telling the Catholic agency who had sponsored our film that he had heard she was dead.
Panic set in — a teenage boy who had appeared in a film for US TV had been murdered just a couple of months before.
It was days before we managed to get in touch with Sylvia through a third party but luckily she was still fine.
I have since then stayed in as close touch as seems safe.
But when I phoned her (at a ‘safe’ house) for this article, it was the first time we'd spoken directly since the filming.
She sounded as ebullient and happy as ever.
One major change since we last met is that her mother and father (who also appeared in the film) have split up.
‘The family situation became so bad that we had to depart.
We left him.
That's when it started — we left in October ‘87.
He was having an affair somewhere and he'd had a child by her.
So we went to live with my aunt in Tembisa, a township in the East Rand.
It's about 50 kilometres from Soweto.
My mother doesn't like it so much — she likes Soweto better.
But it's fine for me because really I grew up in Tembisa and I still know many people there.’
But she still goes to school in Soweto — a journey of two-and-a-half hours each way by train and bus.
She says she has much more chance at this school of getting the qualifications she would need to become a social worker or a journalist (she feels there a lot of good black journalists around but not enough women).
The move to Tembisa did at least reduce her worry about being detained again by the police after her escape.
But this year she was again briefly detained.
If we printed details of the case it would make her identity too plain to the authorities but suffice it to say that she was detained with some others for celebrating a ‘banned person’— Nelson Mandela.
She says she is quite ready to serve a jail sentence even on such a petty charge.
She sees this, like almost everything else in her life now, as a political issue, as a small part of the struggle against apartheid.
I pointed out that when we last met she seemed to be becoming more political in her attitude almost before our eyes.
‘I became daily more spirited.
In 1987 they killed my friend and comrade, Sicelo Glomo, who appeared in a film like I did, in Children of Apartheid.
In some ways I was more reckless and exposed myself to danger because I felt we had to come out and prove that the Government was responsible for the deaths of all the students.
‘After the death of Sicelo I decided to meet with a lawyer and asked him to put down on record that I had taken part in a film.
So that if it happened that I died they would be able to make a campaign issue of it.
But nothing has happened.
I think the reason why is that I never actually told the community or my comrades about the film — if I had there would probably have been an informer somewhere.’
I wondered if she still felt that it had been worthwhile to appear in the film.
‘Yes, I was happy to make something that would let people outside know exactly what is happening in our country.’
Would she want to tell those people outside anything different about the situation in South Africa now?
‘No, what I feel now is that everything has come to the hands of the people.
Because our neighbour country of South-West Africa has already got its freedom.
So I feel that even the South African Government can see itself that it's over now.
It's only South Africa that's left for the people to get their freedom.
So I feel that our power has grown very much and that we are now hand in hand with the comrades in Namibia.
‘But the change won't come soon.
Not even in five years from now…’
SYRIA
Syria offers the world a grim face.
Its regime is synonomous with bureaucracy, inefficiency and corruption; its mukhabarat (secret police) is the most feared in the Arab world.
But behind this bleak image is a country of colour and immense cultural diversity.
Syria is the original ‘mosaic’ society.
Long contested by a series of rival empires — from Egyptians and Assyrians to the French and British — it has had borders redrawn and drawn again.
The result is that today's population contains not only Arabs, the majority, but Kurds, Turks and Armenians.
And there is a bewildering range of religious groups: Sunni and Shiite Muslims — the latter known as Alawites; Greek Orthodox and Maronite Christians; and Druze.
Syrians have a sense that their country is at the heart of the Middle East.
For centuries cities such as Damascus and Aleppo were at the hub of the regional economy.
Only when European imperialism penetrated the Middle East did they decline; today they retain an echo of their former status, with hugs suqs (markets) and mosques at the centre of the old cities.
The modern nation state has been shaped by the intervention of outside powers.
In 1916 Britain and France divided the Ottoman province of Syria between them — France receiving its northern regions and Britain taking Palestine.
The country was further dismembered when in 1926 France created ‘Lebanon’ from the area around Beirut.
After years of struggle against the French, in 1946 the Syrians secured independence but were soon engaged in a new conflict — with the state of Israel created on the ruins of neighbouring Palestine.
The conflict has since dominated Syrian politics.
In four wars with Israel Syria has been a loser.
A series of nationalist governments has sought help from abroad which they hoped would balance Western backing for Israel.
Today the Baathist regime of President Hafez a-Assad is the Soviet Union's closest ally in the Arab world.
The external threat has been Assad's biggest problem — and perhaps his own guarantee of survival.
In power since 1971, he is a remarkable survivor among Arab leaders, the more so for being an Alawi — one of only 10 per cent of the Syrian population.
Assad has maintained a ruthless one-party regime based on the army, which he has repeatedly used against domestic opposition and to intervene in Lebanon, where Syria maintains 30,000 troops — a crippling economic burden.
There is little sign of an alternative to Baathist rule.
As long as outside threats dominate Syrian affairs, the unsmiling President seems likely to remain firmly in control.
Taxing poverty
Popular myth has it that poor peasants and casual workers in the Third World do not pay tax.
John Tanner argues that this is far from the truth and it is other fish that slip the net.
Playing hide and seek with the tax collector is a popular game.
For many, paying taxes is at best a necessary evil, at worst a legal way for the Government to steal your money.
Tax is about as popular as a trip to the dentist or a dose of malaria.
From the rice levies of the Chinese Emperors to the Boston tea party, taxation has raised hackles.
Too often it has been used as a weapon of oppression.
In Hailie Selassie's Ethiopia, until the 1974 revolution, peasants paid up to three-quarters of their harvest in tax plus another tenth as a tithe to the Coptic Church.
Apart from such feudal anomalies most people in the South — the urban poor and the peasants in the countryside — appear hardly to be touched by taxes.
After all, few are burdened with having to complete annual income tax returns.
But, in reality taxation bites deeply into the their lives.
This is because the tax systems of the South are very different from those of the North.
Third World citizens pay less income tax, but there is heavy reliance on ‘indirect’ taxes — and these are the same whether you are rich or poor.
Third World taxes have grown out of the colonial experience.
From 1921, for instance, French colonies were expected to pay their way and build up a reserve.
But the imperial powers also imposed taxes to force local people into producing goods for sale.
‘Money taxes were introduced on numerous items — cattle, land, houses and people themselves’, writes Walter Rodney about Africa.
A ‘poll’ tax — a charge per person regardless of income — was often levied.
‘Money to pay taxes was got by growing cash crops or working on European farms or in the mines.’
Important as hut and poll taxes were to colonized people, the more lucrative source of revenue for the colonizers was taxing exports — raw materials and cash crops.
Today, these taxes are still levied by many Third World governments because they are straightforward to collect and hard to evade.
They are paid by a small number of people at export shipping centres on goods difficult to conceal.
Generally it's not worth the candle to try and dodge the revenue authorities.
Sales taxes are another form of indirect taxation popular in the South.
Frequently the sales tax is levied on the importer or the manufacturer because it is easier to collect at source.
But it means retailers' profit margins escape the tax net.
A World Bank study in 1986 found that four newly industrialized countries (Colombia, South Korea, Mexico and Thailand) obtained as much as 72 per cent of their revenue from indirect taxes.
While in five old industrial countries (Japan, Sweden, UK, US, and West Germany) indirect taxation amounted, on average, to only 23 per cent of the total tax.
‘Direct taxes in the Third World are levied on those who earn salaries.
But a lot of rather big business escapes,’ says Dr John Hills of the London School of Economics.
In Colombia, for example, a 20-year tax exemption was granted to the local Paz de Rio steel mill in 1954.
And in the 1960s the Government gave a tax holiday, which lasted 14 years, to the struggling automobile industry.
Such help to industry shrinks the tax base.
Third World elites, as a rule, get off lightly when it comes to paying tax — certainly in comparison with their counterparts in the developed world.
Industrial countries in 1980 took 33 per cent of their tax from incomes while least developed countries collected only 17 per cent from incomes, getting most of their revenue from trade and sales duties.
This system hits the Third World poor hardest.
The urban poor, who burn kerosene to cook, for example, suffer as the end users if their government puts a levy on imports of petroleum.
Sales taxes on basic items, including salt, clothing, tea or tobacco, also place a heavy burden on household budgets.
Sales taxes are usually ‘regressive’ because every customer must pay the same tax, regardless of their ability to pay.
A household survey in Kenya in 1974 found that tax was paid on 77 per cent of the income of the poorest rural group.
But the richest rural group, which could afford to save more, paid tax on only 14 per cent.
In most Sub-Saharan countries, including Liberia, Mali, Chad, Malawi and the Central African Republic, poll taxes have been levied.
Again such taxes discriminate against the poor because everyone must pay the same regardless of their actual wealth.
People who make their living in the informal sector are also required to pay all kinds of petty taxes, including business licenses, market charges and fees to government officials before permits can be issued.
In Sudan, for example, farmers wanting to sell their animals are charged Sudan 8 ($3.20) per head of cattle in markets run by local municipalities.
The charges are much higher than needed to run the markets because they are an important source of tax revenue.
Before peasant farmers or small time traders can bring their products to market they usually need to buy an official permit.
Taxi drivers and even rickshaw cyclists often face arrest if they have not paid for the correct license.
Such fees and charges force many people in the informal sector to operate illegally and run the risk of fines, imprisonment and harassment by the authority.
‘The revenue importance of such taxes is small and has been decreasing.
The administrative effort involved in collecting them should be devoted instead to improving enforcement of other taxes,’ argued a recent International Monetary Fund study.
For some time the powerful International Monetary Fund (IMF) and its little sister, the World Bank, have promoted ‘policy reform’ in the Third World, particularly in Africa; a key element is trying to reduce taxation.
The IMF view is that taxation is a burden because governments spend today money that would otherwise be invested by business and peasant families tomorrow, and without such private investment development will be held back.
The reformers go on to argue that taxes on farming, the main activity in the South, have distorted economies of the Third World.
‘There is great waste in public expenditure, especially in funding capital-intensive industry,’ claims the World Bank.
In Togo coffee farmers were paid in 1980 only a third of the export price for their crop, the Bank points out.
‘In Mali, cotton and groundnut farmers received half the border prices and in Cameroon and Ghana producers received less than half,’ it adds.
But not everyone accepts these arguments.
The private sector is not the only part of the economy to invest in the future, say critics of the IMF.
Third World governments build roads which help farmers to market their produce and schools which create a literate and numerate workforce.
They can provide extension services for farmers and invest in industries to process agricultural products.
The IMF is controlled by governments, such as the United States, Japan and Britain who claim that the ‘free market’ is the most efficient way of organizing economic life.
From that it follows that any tax, because it distorts the market, must be bad.
But to suggest that the tea plantations of Sri Lanka or the coffee farms of Togo should exclusively benefit from the export of their crop would be absurd.
If there is to be government somebody has to pay for it.
As it is, governments of developing countries collect far less tax in relation to their gross domestic product than do industrialized countries — 14 per cent compared with 36 per cent for the countries studied in the 1986 World Bank Report.
The debate about who should pay what tax in the underdeveloped world has moved centre stage.
Create the wrong fiscal package and a Third World country's chances of development go down the tube.
‘Tax reform’ is the slogan of the 1980s.
It is clearly unfair that so much tax in the Third World falls on the backs of those least able to pay.
Even the World Bank has proposed that in Latin America, where one per cent of the people own half the land, they should pay a heavy income tax.
But reform is not simple.
As Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi of India has pointed out the real practical problem is that the rich will evade very high rates of tax.
And once tax evasion becomes a habit it will continue even after lower tax rates are introduced.
But the rich will always be better at hiding from the tax collector than the poor.
However good its intentions, a revenue-starved government is one with its hands tied firmly behind its back, able only to gaze into the whirlpool of poverty in which most of its country's people flounder.
The truth about Tarot
There is a mistaken belief in the Anglo-Saxon world that Tarot cards originate in the occult and fortune telling.
The Tarot pack was invented in northern Italy in the fifteenth century and is widely used across the world today in ordinary card games.
It was not associated with the occult until the eighteenth century at the earliest.
Belief in the mystical powers of the pack spread across Europe from France with the nineteenth-century revival of interest in magic.
See Michael Dummett, Twelve Tarot Games, Duckworth 1980.
Wacky ways
Some of us remember the old days when the NI was gloriously unpredictable — one month a short story taking up the whole magazine, the next a cartoon issue and then a bit later a fold-out world map.
These days you are so efficient that the magazine even arrives on time!
And much though I appreciate your relentless exhumation of the world's injustices month by month, I find myself hankering after the wacky old days.
So thanks for the Peter's Atlas wallchart (NI 193).
It may have been designed to give you lot a rest but some of us readers needed a break too.
Scribble happy
It is easy for journalists to sit behind their word-processors and criticize what others are doing.
How often do they roll up their sleeves and get their hands dirty?
Your Mozambique issue (NI 192) epitomized this dichotomy between the scribblers and the doers.
Mozambique's plight is pitiful — as the magazine well illustrates.
In such a difficult situation mistakes are bound to be made.
What good does it do to knock foreign governments and aid agencies who are at least trying to help (Keynote and The new missionaries)?
What, I wonder, would the writers of these pieces do if they had they had to co-ordinate an aid programme for Mozambique?
And what course of action would the Mozambican journalists who criticize their government's policies (Political puzzles) take if they suddenly found themselves in the hot-seat of a country in chaos?
I understand that criticism and controversy make for more interesting articles.
But in the face of the devastating effects of South African aggression — is it really fair?
Geometrical vegetables
How does Arnold Jago (Letters NI 191) make the logical leap from Dr Dianne McGuiness's research-findings to his conclusion that a woman's place is in the home?
If men naturally enjoy mathematical stimuli more than social stimuli then I would have thought they were at least equally well equipped to deal with the socially isolating position of working at home — and possibly better equipped to deal with everyday geometrical shapes such as vegetables, kitchen sinks and washing machines.
Final solution
Maybe it is true that the differences between women and men are genetically determined as suggested by Arnold Jago (Letters NI 191)— and it does seem to be men who cause all the wars, poverty, oppression and are now causing the destruction of the planet — so perhaps Mr Jago would agree that there is no hope but to get rid of the lot of them.
I'm sure that sperm banks will keep the species going.
Food for thought
If a woman's place is in the home doing the cooking (Letters NI 191)— how come most of the top chefs in restaurants are men?
Easy talk
Peter Stalker's dismissive comments on Esperanto (Keynote NI 191) ignore two facts.
It is an auxiliary language so people speak it as equals — and it can be learned fluently in a couple of weeks.
It is also wrong to say that ‘Esperanto hasn't made it anywhere yet’.
There was a time when every major rail station in Europe had Esperanto signs and some Esperanto-speaking staff — while several European radio stations still give regular broadcasts in Esperanto.
This language was crippled by the nationalism it was designed to side-step.
Before the war when the League of Nations was set to endorse Esperanto, the French blocked it because they wanted French as the international language.
For more information contact The Esperanto Centre, 140 Holland Park Avenue, London W11, UK.
Elsewhere, see your phone book.
Sharp tongue
Regarding Language Lives (NI 192), here is a word from the dead.
Making passing references to the poor, the black and to women does not make one a radical or even a liberal.
Consider Billy Brace's letter (Letters) which says of Gaelic: ‘We rarely lament the loss of those languages now’.
What typical English imperial condescension.
Fel llawer o'm cyfodwyr mi ddysgais i Gymraeg ar lin fy mam.
Mae'r iaith yn hen and mae yn iaith fyw!
(Like so many of my fellows I learned Welsh on my mother's knee.
The language is old, but the language is alive.)
Strike out postman
If someone spoke of ‘letter-carrier’ to me (Language Lives NI 191) I wouldn't know what they were talking about.
I shall stick to the Scottish —‘postie’.
Cancer scandal
I read with interest and dismay Lori Heise's article on cigarette selling in Asia (Updates NI 190).
I was a pathologist in Zimbabwe from 1983 to 1985, and saw many tissue specimens of lung cancer.
A Ugandan pathologist studying African cancer trends was sceptical of Zimbabwe's high lung cancer figures compared with other African nations until he had checked our records for himself.
The difference is attributable to the low price and ready availability of cigarettes in Zimbabwe where tobacco is one of the main crops and a major foreign currency earner.
A Zimbabwean tobacco-farming friend who was tackled about the wider implications of his livelihood, claimed that ‘people are old enough to look after themselves’— a view which is quite unjustified in view of the tobacco industry's ugly marketing techniques.
Debt threat
In an otherwise superb issue on Debt (NI 189), you miss the opportunity to indicate that the increasing global reliance of capitalism on debt is a basis for internationalism.
Thus we should emphasize the point of Doug Smith's article Born to Shop — that the debt of North American working people ‘is not a way to finance newer extravagances but the only way to maintain a lifestyle’ in the face of wage cut-backs and unemployment.
How will banks and other financiers manage to collect three thousand billion dollars in outstanding US household loans over the 1990s?
Already many grass-roots activists in the US are attacking the biggest banks on issues as diverse as their continued business with South Africa, their indirect exploitation of the Third World's people and environment, their systematic refusal to grant home loans in inner-city neighborhoods and their close ties to union-busting corporations.
Our slogan in the next decade should be ‘Borrowers of the world, cartelize’.
Brutal facts
Your article on the Zambian food riots was accurate (NI 189): I have just returned from visiting friends who live on the Zambian Copperbelt and it was a shock to compare the well-provisioned tourist hotels with the half-empty shops in the city of Ndola.
Local people are facing shortages — or a complete dirth of basics like flour, potatoes, sugar, coffee and soap.
Available goods are so highly priced as to be out of reach for people on average incomes.
My brief visit certainly brought home to me the grim realities that lie behind the many statistics on Third World debt.
Now I know they are not just figures — but people involved in day to day struggles for life's necessities.
Dad deal
As a 43-year-old man who would like to marry and have a family, I feel for women who also long to have children.
However I could not become a sperm donor (Letters NI 189), especially if this would mean I would never know my child or the woman who bore it.
My father was always very distant with me — so that when he died I felt I hardly knew him.
It took me years to come to terms with this.
Knowing the effect this had on me I could never conceal myself from a child of mine.
However if any woman reading this is looking for marriage and parenthood, I would certainly be interested in corresponding with her.
I'm healthy, vigorous and like bush-walking.
Please write to: 35 Goodlet Street, Ashfield NSW 2131.
Indian riches
I was interested to see your list of Third World novels in the January issue (Language Lives NI 191).
But why so little from the Indian sub-continent?
Only Salman Rushdie who — no disrespect intended — is very much British-based.
Indian publishers produce more new titles in English than any other country after Britain and America.
A small British-based publisher has recently re-issued two modern classics in English translation — Pather Panchali by Bhibhutishan and Godaan by Premchand.
Both are published by the Lokamaya Press.
Soviet sexism
In response to the article on women in the Soviet Union (Silent Sisterhood NI 190), I found many of Ms Feldman's conclusions insulting.
Because she cannot find Soviet women marching for abortion on demand she concludes that there is no women's movement.
This shows an ethnocentric arrogance which ignores the thousands of Soviet women working for peace and to free Soviet Jews.
Women get together and discuss the lack of hot water and other domestic issues which also signals their awareness of sexism.
Such meetings are comparable to the consciousness-raising groups of the 1960s.
The attitudes ascribed to Soviet women in general could just as easily be observed among Western women.
Most of these consider feminism a dirty word and aspire to a happy and long-lasting marriage.
Economically this is still a rational choice.
If Soviet women choose to ignore men's dinner-time conversation it is not necessarily because they lack education: it may be that these women too have difficulty getting a word in and risk being verbally assaulted by men's sexism.
No hiding place
Well done for your article The Opium Habit by Debbie Taylor (NI 187).
Why are churches locked when there are thousands of homeless?
Write to your local vicar/ priest/ minister and remind him (sic) that the church should be a sanctuary for the oppressed.
The churches have incredible wealth and this doesn't belong to the Synod or the Parochial Church Councils; it belongs to the kid of 17 who is homeless and frightened.
We can all begin by writing a letter.
Passing the muck
Western countries are overflowing with dangerous waste — and their first thought is to dump it in the Third World.
Nigerian journalist Elizabeth Obadina tells a dirty story.
Uproar breaks out in Nigeria during 1988, when officials discover that an Italian ship has illegally dumped toxic waste at the small delta port of Koko.
Nigeria threatens to execute toxic waste dumpers; it seizes an innocent Italian ship berthed in Lagos; it recalls the Nigerian ambassador from Rome and sends the Italian ambassador packing.
Then it forces Italy to remove almost 4,000 tons of offending industrial wastes from Nigerian soil.
Within six weeks, mountains of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polluted earth and other waste have been evacuated.
But the story is too big to be kept quiet.
Media coverage generates public outrage, if incomplete understanding.
Villagers in Bendel State hide their television and radio sets on treetops because they fear that radioactivity will be transmitted via the electronic media.
Anger at the Nigerian Government is widespread.
Nigeria has led African countries in banning the importation of waste from industrialized countries.
This is on the grounds that there are no high-temperature incineration facilities in sub-Saharan Africa and no plans to build any.
The country has used its position as Africa's Big Brother — one in four Africans is Nigerian — to lean on states wavering towards accepting foreign waste.
Having campaigned from the moral high ground, the Nigerian Government is acutely embarrassed to be caught throwing stones from a glass house.
When pressed by journalists for an assurance that Koko is Nigeria's only dump, the irritated Minister for Works and Housing snaps, ‘I cannot confirm that Koko is the only dump.
Only a fool would do that, Nigeria being what it is.’
What he means is that Nigeria is notoriously difficult to police.
Corrupt border-officials collude with importers of dubious goods wanting to grease their way into the country.
And corruption is condoned by powerful grandees in government and business.
As one Nigerian journalist explains, most African leaders have their drinking water imported from Europe — so why should they bother about the danger that dumped waste might contaminate underground water?
There are also substantial financial attractions for a Third World country in becoming someone's dustbin.
Guinea-Bissau stood to gain 600 million dollars — twice its foreign debt — when it agreed to bury 15 million tons of Philadelphia's municipal ash.
It only cancelled the deal after the Organization of African Unity decided to increase action against dumping in 1988.
The West regularly sends shiploads of toxic waste to the Third World, and if countries decline to take it, the waste is frequently dumped anyway.
For example a ship called the Felicia left Philadelphia in August 1986 carrying a cargo of incinerator ash containing harmful metal residues.
It drifted the globe for just over two years looking for a port to discharge the ash, and even changed its name to the Pelicano in an attempt to escape detection.
Finally, weary of its enforced nomadism, it tipped its cargo overboard into the Indian ocean.
Industrial nations dump 20 billion tonnes of industrial wastes into the Indian Ocean annually, according to the East African Republic of Malagasy.
In Nigeria however, the discovery of the Koko dump led to the setting up of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency — a new initiative in environment policing.
To date this has acted against some of Nigeria's chief polluters — for example, it closed down a government-owned super-phosphate plant which was emitting dangerous levels of sulphur-dioxide.
But when it comes to the dumping of Western waste, Africa faces a problem.
While Western and developing countries apparently agree that they should prevent the ‘environmentally unsound disposal’ of hazardous waste, there is no consensus about what the term ‘hazardous’means.
Countries like Nigeria classify all waste as hazardous.
But Western countries generally disagree.
While Africa wants to prohibit totally the cross-border movement of wastes, the West seeks only to control it.
Altogether 33 countries approved a draft treaty, drawn up at Basel last March, which called for the toxic waste trade to be regulated instead of for a total ban.
Third World countries are especially worried about the dumping of nuclear waste.
So far the ‘Dumpwatch’ surveillance system, established in 1988 by the 16 members of the Economic Community of West African States, has limited this by implementing tough new anti-dumping laws — especially in Ghana, Nigeria and Côte d'Ivoire.
The danger is that American and European dumpers will bypass these states and head for poorer countries, where the lure of enormous pay-offs in hard currency could prove irresistible.
Disposing of toxic waste
Global problem
A company called Global Industrial Complex Limited — which has representatives in New York and Dhaka — has proposed shipping millions of tons of toxic waste from Europe and the US to Bangladesh.
The South African government has approved a project to build a plant capable of handling 500,000 tons of imported waste a year.
The government of the Bahamas has tentatively approved a plan to allow a US company — Summit Cement and Development Corporation — to burn 88,000 tons of hazardous wastes on Grand Bahama Island.
Home solution
The 3M company which makes floppy disks has saved around $300 million over a decade by halving the waste it produces — boosting its net income by around five per cent.
The USS Chemicals company in Ironton, Ohio has been saving around $100,000 in raw-material costs through reducing air emissions by 100,000 lbs per year.
Cutting waste also helps beat disposal costs — which is why the Borden Chemical Company in Fremond, California, reduced its toxic phenol wastes by 93 per cent3.
1 Greenpeace US, 1989. 2 Pollution Prevention Pays, MG Royston (Pergamon, 1979).
3 INFORM US report, 1985.
What you can do
Use fewer chemicals.
Limit the numbers of domestic chemicals you buy — like bleaches, pesticides and weedkillers.
Avoid buying foods packaged in non-biodegradable plastics and opt for recyclable containers.
Where possible keep containers and use them again.
Join a campaigning organization.
The International Toxic Waste Action Network is a global coalition of environmental, consumer and other citizen groups, representing millions of people worldwide.
Its aim is to end the international trade in toxic wastes, particularly the dumping of such wastes in Third World countries.
It has called for a global convention outlawing all toxic waste trade schemes — and it needs your support.
For more information about it contact Greenpeace (see Action, Page 6).
Work locally.
Find out what waste is being dumped near your home and campaign against it.
Death on delivery
James Bond never lived so luxuriously.
But Bond only had a license to kill — arms dealers have something much more lucrative, as Janice Turner discovered.
Joe is the arms trade's equivalent of a used car salesman.
He dresses in silk and his cufflinks, tiepins and chunky rings sparkle with diamonds set in gold.
He owns a string of companies and conglomerates in West Africa and has supplied arms to many of the countries in conflict across the continent, such as Chad, Uganda and Nigeria.
His office is in London's Mayfair district, where the cars are so big they take up two parking lots.
His suite is lined with tasteless burgundy leather panelling — even on the doors.
Lying across his slim burgundy briefcase is a copy of The Sun — the kind of newspaper that requires a reading age of 12.
Joe owns four Rolls Royces and two private jets.
He also bought a couple of helicopters for transport when he was attempting to win a seat to the Nigerian senate — in the days when Nigeria still had elections.
Aside from his London office he has property in several African capitals and a farm in the affluent south east of England.
Much of Joe's business involves supplying second-hand weapons or unmarked arms so that the manufacturing country is untraceable.
And rather than asking for commission from suppliers he often buys the weapons himself and sells them at a profit.
Joe likes to think he has a soft heart: when selling arms to guerilla groups with whom he sympathizes, a few bombs are thrown in free.
He appears to operate by phone as well through personal meetings in African and European capitals, and most of his weapons never see British shores.
He might buy them in one country and ship them to a warehouse in Rotterdam where they stay until he finds a buyer for them.
He sees nothing immoral in his business: if he didn't do it someone else would, he says.
But Joe and his methods of dealing are an exception rather than the norm in the arms-dealing world.
Most dealers — invariably male and calling themselves middlemen, consultants or businessmen — tend to keep their dealings quiet and work on a commission basis rather than actually buying the hardware themselves.
Mohammed is one.
Mohammed is Lebanese and in his mid 40s.
He lives with his wife and three children in London's wealthy Kensington district, works in a book-lined study and reads the Daily Telegraph and the Financial Times — both good for stock-market coverage.
‘I got into the arms trade as an idealist,’ he says, taking a long draw on his Rothmans cigarette.
‘After the coup that brought the Ba'athist government to power in Iraq, I was a consultant to the new regime.
They needed weapons badly so the Iraqis brought in a group of people including me.
We just went right through — Britain, France, Italy, Germany — we got arms from them all.’
Mohammed has expanded his trade into other Arab countries, notably Saudi Arabia, where business is booming for middlemen.
As with most arms dealers payola — commission or bribes — is the key to his living.
There would be no reason for Mohammed's existence if every minister and ministry were above board: arms dealers are used either because deals are shady — circumventing arms embargoes for example— or to allow government officials a healthy (illegal) cut.
‘There is no normal way to get into the arms trade’, says Mohammed.
‘It's all based on one's proximity to those in power.’
But usually a dealer has a contact at the top of the government tree.
Usually a deal is worth around $50 million.
It is initiated during a meeting between the ‘consultant’ and the minister at a five-star hotel.
The minister indicates the equipment wanted.
The dealer then approaches the arms manufacturers telling them that if they appoint him as their agent, he will get them a contract in return for a percentage of the value of the transaction, which could be as low as 3 per cent, or as high as 15 depending on how specialized is the equipment required.
Once an agreement has been reached and the minister has authorized it, an application is made to the government of the supplying country and, if approved, the transaction goes ahead.
When payment is made the dealer gets his commission, normally splitting it with his mentor and possibly an official in the defence ministry who refuses to rubber stamp the deal without an ‘incentive’.
‘It's not the arms sales that are secret — it's the figures involved,’ says Mohammed.
He claims that in a recent $20-billion arms deal between Britain and Saudi Arabia, a billion dollars ended up being shared by two senior Saudis.
The latest trend, however, is barter.
Now that many previously rich Arab states are virtually spent-up, oil has become a major method of paying for weapons.
Many big Western arms manufacturers have whole departments devoted to arranging barter deals.
Several African countries actually export food in exchange for arms.
The British establishment has become rather touchy of late about arms dealers, embarrassed by a series of press revelations about shady deals being done in London.
Britain has won third place in the arms-sales league table — behind the US and the Soviet Union — partly because the US Zionist lobby has prevented many sales to Arab states from Washington, which has forced the Arabs to go elsewhere.
But Mohammed says it is also because the rules governing arms sales in London are laxer than elsewhere.
If you ask an establishment figure these days about arms dealers they will tell you, ‘I'm sorry darling, but there really aren't any.’
Mohammed demurs.
‘I think the figure is around 2,000 operating in London — 300 of whom deal in more than $50 million a year.’
HEALTH
Illegal deals
Kidneys for sale
N.V Selvam is not shy about his profession.
His card reads:’ Kidney Agent.
Registered No. 978’.
Despite the card, what Selvam does is illegal.
Yet he boasts of having already arranged more than 70 kidney transplants, and maintaining a list of 50 donors awaiting their turn.
He even promises receipts.
Selvam is a leading figure in the thriving Indian trade in illegal kidneys.
In Bombay alone, it is estimated that up to $10 million a year may change hands as agents like Selvam match up impoverished donors, willing to exchange a kidney for cash, with wealthy patients who cannot obtain one by any other means.
About 37,500 people a year suffer from kidney failure in India.
The vast majority have little chance of getting proper treatment.
Dialysis is expensive and difficult because of the country's shortage of equipment.
To get a replacement kidney, patients must either find somebody willing to part with one of their's or get one transplanted from a donor who has just died.
But transplants from cadavers are illegal in all but two of India's 24 states.
And where they are legal, the operations require sophisticated equipment and highly-trained personnel to carry out the switch within 24 hours.
Even where these conditions are available, Indian law adds a further obstacle.
Unlike some countries, where a person may be declared clinically dead when the brain stops functioning, Indian doctors are only allowed to certify death when the heart has stopped beating.
The result is a big demand for donated kidneys — which agents have been quick to turn into lucrative trade.
Most prey on migrant workers and the poor, telling them they need only one kidney to live and offering to buy the other.
Willing donors’ names are added to the agent's list, together with details of blood group, which is used in prospecting for potential clients.
Commissions are paid to hospital employees and unscrupulous doctors in an effort to find a match.
Agents charge up to $7,000 per kidney, depending on the wealth of the patient and how badly the organ is needed.
Of this the donor receives less than $1,000 and may make as little as $250.
Doctors opposed to the trade are now calling for a change in the law to make transplants from dead bodies legal.
Other restraints must also be removed, they say, so that when a suitable kidney is available it can be removed and transferred to the needy patient without delay.
But there are fears that the trade could expand internationally — especially in view of the shortage of suitable kidneys for transplant in industrialized countries.
Even at the prices charged by the agents the operations are comparatively cheap in India.
Already a number of clients from Arab countries have had transplants arranged in Indian hospitals and Indian newspapers have reported cases of Indian donors being flown to Frankfurt and Los Angeles for the benefit of patients there.
HUMAN RIGHTS
Banana ban
Colombian killings
Boycott Colombian bananas.
That is the message from human rights and solidarity groups following a shocking independent report on the systematic assassination of banana workers in the country.
More than 150 workers have already been killed so far this year, according to a report by rural sociologist Jose Ramón Mauleon.
And none of the killers has been brought to justice.
The situation is worst in the Urabá area in the north of the country — and is said to have deteriorated since Amnesty International launched its human rights campaign for Colombia in April.
Those killed were members of trade unions in an area which, with a total of 10,000 troops, has become so highly militarized that there is one soldier for every two banana workers.
Meanwhile the Colombian banana industry — largely controlled by the multinationals United Brands, Del Monte and Standard Fruit — is booming.
Colombia is now the fourth biggest banana exporter in the world.
Certain trade union leaders have always been at risk in Colombia — a military state thinly disguised as a two-party democracy.
But the military has recently extended its brief to make all trade union leaders ‘fair game’.
Since this tactic came into operation in September 1987 all founding members of the banana trade union movement have been assassinated or subjected to assassination attempts.
There was nothing gradual, however, about what happened at Urabá on the night of March 4 this year.
Just nine days before local elections 29 people were assassinated.
Of these, 20 were banana workers and nine were left-wing politicians.
The workers, killed on the Honduras and La Negra plantations, all belonged to the political organization Frente Popular.
On the night of the killings a dozen armed masked men broke into the workers' dormitories.
One of the assassins had a list of names written on his hand and began to call them out.
A witness reports that after the shots one of the assassins shouted across, ‘Corporal, one of them is still alive’.
‘Finish him off,’ came the reply.
There are several other testimonies indicating army involvement.
The Colombian weekly Semana comments: ‘We cannot dismiss the fact that military personnel were members of a group of killers’.
And it adds that these ‘cleaning operations’ are being financed by the region's plantation owners.
There are also clear indications that although the assassinations may have been carried out by low-ranking army officers the orders came from the military high command.
The overall aim appears to be to stop the growth of left-wing political organizations strong enough to challenge both the power of the military and the appallingly low wages and living conditions of plantation workers.
The two main unions, Sintagro and Sintrabanano, are not to be cowed, however.
They responded to the killings by organizing a six-day stoppage, demanding the withdrawal of military personnel from plantations and requesting the presence of international observers at forthcoming local elections.
For more information contact the Colombia Solidarity Committee, Priory House, Latin American House, Kingsgate Place, Kilburn, London NW6 4TA.
ARMS
Dealing in death
UK bonanza
News has recently been leaked of Britain's biggest ever arms deal — possibly the biggest export deal of any kind the country has ever had.
Worth at least 10 billion ($16.5 billion), the equipment to be sold to Saudi Arabia includes:
About 50 Tornado aircraft, both the attack and defence versions.
Tornado is produced by a holding company Panavia, in turn owned by British Aerospace (42.5%) together with the West German Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm (42.5%) and Aeritalia of Italy (15%).
Fifty Hawk aircraft from British Aerospace.
Ninety helicopters from Westland.
Six minesweepers to be built by Vosper Thorneycroft at Southampton.
The building of two airbases by British Aerospace's recently acquired subsidiary, the Dutch construction firm Ballast Nedem.
Training and other support facilities.
All this comes on top of the 5 billion ($8 billion) Saudi deal for Tornadoes in 1985.
A major incentive to buy British rather than American was the reluctance of the US Congress to approve sales of advanced military equipment to Middle Eastern countries.
Lobbying by pro-Israeli support groups was blocking this.
The Saudis want all this equipment because they feel threatened from both sides — by Iran and by Israel.
Worried that they might have been dragged into the tanker war in the Gulf, they bought intermediate-range missiles from China in May.
China had, of course, supplied the same missiles to Iran.
Talk of a pre-emptive Israeli strike against the missiles meant the Saudis felt they needed stronger air defences to guard the missiles…and so the British arms sellers moved in.
As for the human rights record of Saudi Arabia, Amnesty reports the detention of political prisoners for long periods without trial — eleven have been incarcerated since 1979.
The kingdom also uses the amputation of limbs as a punishment, imposes the death penalty, and has frequently been accused of torturing prisoners.
This is in addition to its infamous repression of half the country's population — the women.
Whitehall is unmoved by such considerations; human rights violations are forgotten when perpetrated by a pro-Western government with ready cash.
EL SALVADOR
Model city
Repatriates start afresh
‘We are the alternative for the future of El Salvador’ reads a banner in Segundo Montes.
The town lies in North Morazn, one of the most turbulent areas of El Salvador.
It was created when 8,400 refugees returned from a 10-year exile in Honduras between November 1989 and February of this year.
They believe they have adopted a model that offers hope to all the poor of El Salvador.
Agricultural and industrial co-operatives are being set up to produce consumer goods for the community and sell the surplus.
Profits will be invested in social programmes: education, health care and nutrition.
Every family will be housed and have an individual plot of land.
The ‘repatriates’ all contribute to a Communal Development Bank.
They say they are looking for ‘a more just society’.
The communal strategy is aimed not just at poverty but at the constant military harassment they face; strength is sought through unity.
The Army has reacted to them with hostility.
It has imposed an economic blockade, requiring permits for supplies and cutting off essentials like construction materials, tools and fertilizer.
Those who protest have been arrested or threatened by the Army but the campaign for ‘free trade’ continues.
The economic blockade is accompanied by terror tactics.
The Army has destroyed crops, helicopters have bombed the surrounding areas and people have been tortured while under arrest.
Segundo Montes challenges the unjust social and economic system which lies at the heart of the conflict in El Salvador.
The Army sees it as subversive.
If it is crushed it will be a severe setback not just for the people of Segundo Montes but for other refugee communities seeking repatriation as well.
MULTINATIONALS
Cut
US giant tramples the grassroots
The multinational giant Procter & Gamble is being accused by Edward Kennedy and other senior US senators of practising corporate censorship.
The charges stem from P&G's David-and-Goliath dispute over TV adverts placed by Neighbor to Neighbor, a grassroots pressure group campaigning for a boycott of coffee from El Salvador.
The trouble started when Neighbor to Neighbor placed an advertisement on WHDH-TV, a Boston affiliate of CBS.
The advert, which cost the group $900 for two 30-second showings, urges consumers to boycott Folger's coffee, North America's best-selling brand.
Folger's buy some of their coffee from El Salvador and the advert claims that sale of Salvadorean beans leads to ‘misery, destruction and death’.
It says that wealthy coffee planters fund the right-wing death squads responsible for the disappearance and murder of tens of thousands of people in the Central American republic over the last 11 years.
Coffee makes up over half of El Salvador's exports, and a boycott is advocated by US opponents of the Bush Administration's policy of support for the Salvadorean government.
The ad, which ends with a gruesome image of an upside-down coffee cup pouring blood, provoked swift retaliation from P&G, Folger's parent company.
The day after the ad was shown, P&G announced it was indefinitely suspending all advertising on WHDH-TV for its entire range of products, including Pampers diapers, Crest toothpaste and Head and Shoulders shampoo.
The TV station estimates
P&G advertising revenue at about one million dollars a year.
Neighbor to Neighbor were delighted with the free publicity provoked by the row, but have been effectively frozen out of TV advertising — since P&G made its announcement, only one other TV station has run the advert.
‘In El Salvador, death squads silence their opposition violently’, says Neighbor to Neighbor director Fred Ross.
‘Here in the US Procter & Gamble is attempting to silence us using the power of the dollar.’
Despite the blow to his finances, WHDH-TV president Sy Yanoff refuses to back down.
‘To me, it was an issue of access,’ he explains.
The ad was narrated by actor Ed Asner, better known as Lou Grant in the TV series.
Asner is no stranger to arm-twisting from advertisers.
In 1982 the Lou Grant series was cancelled by its US producers after sponsors protested over Asner's political activities as President of the ‘Medical Aid for El Salvador’ campaign.
SOUTH AFRICA
Militant
Muslims join the fray
Militant Islam is now a fact in South Africa, as it is in so many other parts of the world.
But there it is dedicated to the struggle against apartheid.
Natal's Supreme Court recently sentenced Muhammed-Rafiq Rodan, the former news editor of Post Natal, to 15 years in prison for sabotage, including three bombings that injured 17 people.
He belonged to Umkhonto we Sizwe (‘Spear of the Nation’), the ANC's armed wing, and was closely linked to three militant Muslim groups.
Two young Muslim Indians blew themselves up in Johannesburg in
December with bombs intended for Establishment targets.
Both belonged to Umkhonto and one, Yusuf Akhalwaya, was a member of the militant Call of Islam group.
Islam is deeply rooted in the Cape.
The first Muslims arrived soon after the Dutch, sometimes as political prisoners from Indonesia.
Their treatment by the Dutch was harsh, and they remained segregated as the apartheid system developed.
The Muslim Judicial Council was formed in 1945, but sank into scholasticism.
The first prominent Muslim militant demanding social justice was Imam Abdullah Haron, who was arrested in 1969, interrogated for 123 days and died ‘while falling down steps’.
In 1981 the Qibla organization (named after the mosque niche which points to Mecca) was founded along pure Khomeini Fundamentalist lines, damning apartheid and resurrecting Haron as a hero.
The security police claimed that Qibla trained ‘assassins’ in Libya and received funding from the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Two of its leaders were arrested in 1989 and Qibla has now been broken by the security police.
Nevertheless South Africa's 650,000 Muslims have a strong influence, mainly through their militant youth movements.
The Muslim Youth Movement was formed in Durban in 1970 and has links with the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and the Jameat el Islami i n Pakistan.
It has 235 arkan (‘pillars’) who pledge a fixed amount monthly and 2,000 rufug (friends).
The Muslim Students Association, meanwhile, has around 3,000 members.
And militant youth has begun to influence its elders.
Muslim organizations welcome the release of Nelson Mandela, the unbanning of the ANC and the partial lifting of the State of Emergency, but all want the total dismantling of apartheid.
In October last year the Muslim Judicial Council received a letter from Mandela calling it ‘one of South Africa's most powerful organizations committed to the winning of human rights for all our peoples’.
South Africa's Muslims, rich in educational and managerial skills, now have for the first time a clear political objective of social justice.
TOBACCO
Choked
Thailand comes under US trade cosh
Thailand is locked in battle with the giants of the US cigarette trade.
They want access to Thailand's 11 million smokers and they're fighting with all the muscle available to them, according to Prakit Vateesatokit, of the Thai Anti-Smoking Campaign.
A tidy 34 billion cigarettes are sold every year in Thailand to 64 per cent of Thai males (but just six per cent of females) over the age of 20.
The Thai Tobacco Monopoly (TTM) is owned by the Ministry of Finance and has for years excluded foreign brands.
For years Thailand has tried, without success, to stem the flow of smuggled US cigarettes.
In an address to the recent Conference on Smoking and Health held in Western Australia, Vateesatokit said that smuggled cigarettes account for at least five per cent of sales.
In 1986 foreign manufacturers began an advertising blitz.
Press advertisements, billboards, kites, T-shirts, earrings, notebooks and chewing gum all began to bombard the country with foreign brand names — perfectly legal in itself.
So the TTM stepped up its own campaign, and the war began in earnest.
In 1988 the Thai Cabinet approved a package of smoking control measures, including a total ban on cigarette advertising.
The US Cigarette Export Association (USCEA) retaliated.
It filed a petition to the US Trade Representative in April 1989 alleging unfair trade practices by Thailand.
Under Section 301 of the 1974 Trade Act, it asked the US President to sanction retaliation if Thailand kept its doors closed.
In May 1989 the US Trade Representative announced an investigation.
There were protests from US anti-smoking groups.
Thai health groups were stunned.
The Bush Administration sent the whole issue off to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in December last year.
The US Trade Representative claims Thailand has violated GATT anti-protection trade regulations.
If GATT finds against Thailand, this could be used as further leverage in the continuing Section 301 action.
The US itself is, of course, one of the countries trying to lead the race to become the world's first smoke-free society.
AIDS
No joke
Women in Zambia take the lead
Wander through Lusaka's red-light district after nightfall, witness the scores of prostitutes working the streets, imagine the formidable health hazard in a region stricken by AIDS — and you can see why voluntary organizations are joining forces to combat this seedy trade.
Prompted by the Government's blind-eye approach to the sex trade, a pilot project aims to ‘discourage dark-corner behaviour among men and women to stop AIDS from spreading’, as project co-ordinator Alice Munalula explained.
‘Lack of employment for women and boredom for men emerged as the main reasons people indulge in prostitution.
We want to try to provide the alternatives: jobs for women and counselling for men.’
The World Health Organization and the Norwegian Agency for National Development are providing the initial financial backing, but
Munalula will need more than that to realize her ambition of extending the scheme to rural areas.
She is seeking funding for a range of projects from tailoring and knitting bazaars to poultry raising.
But the scheme has faced a barrage of public criticism.
Ruling out any co-operation from the church, Nella Sinoia of the Christian Council of Zambia asked: ‘Who is a prostitute?
Only the jobless or even married women and working girls who are doing it for money?’
How does one go about luring people away from a profession that is said to be non-existent?
Says one critic: ‘You cannot advertise shame,’ says one critic, ‘and you cannot walk up to a prostitute and say ‘Hey, you, walk off the streets and join other prostitutes in farming’.’
Others argue that sexism and cultural inhibitions will make the projects unworkable.
Typist Mary Kupenda says: ‘Such workplaces will be called brothels and men will flock there for a nice time’.
Undaunted, Manalula says that her skilled team of nurses and public-health personnel ‘aim to educate participants on issues such as contraceptives, public hygiene and moral support, apart from the material gains’.
Meanwhile, prostitution increases in rural areas, where unemployment has tripled and school drop-out rates for girls are soaring.
Interviews carried out for the project's research paper indicate that many prostitutes ‘just want to settle down and have a family’.
The current economic slump and the widespread fear of AIDS have made life even tougher for Lusaka's prostitutes.
They have taken to increasingly seductive gimmicks, to the point of thumbing down passing motorists.
One critic maintains that ‘unless the State provides more jobs, the volunteer projects won't stop the trade.
As for reforming males, it's just the joke of the year.’
DRUGS
Dopey silence
Drugs for guns
Why has the Reagan administration been so unusually quiet about drug trafficking from Latin America in recent months?
Is it because Nancy has been hospitalized or are smack and crack no longer regarded as social evils numbers one and two?
Not likely.
The official coyness has other causes.
There is substantial evidence that the Contras have helped finance their war by large-scale drug-trafficking to the US, although the Iran-Contra hearings conspicuously avoided any public probing into this can of worms.
Nor did the hearings committees publicly call on key witnesses who could provide first hand information on Contra drug-running, and the CIA's cooperation.
It is not as if Congress members knew nothing of this.
A CBS television program had revealed the link as early as April 1987.
Most interesting was an interview with Mark Tolliver, a freelance pilot and convicted drug smuggler.
He described how he had been contracted by the CIA to fly to Aguacate, a Contra base in Honduras with 28,000 pounds of military equipment.
After depositing its cargo of arms the plane was loaded up with 25,000 pounds of marijuana and flown to the US Air Force base at Homestead, South Florida.
Moreover, the plane Tolliver identified as flying has been confirmed as the same plane hired by the Reagan administration to fly ‘humanitarian’ supplies to the Contras.
The dates match too.
George Morales, another convicted cocaine smuggler, states that the CIA had exploited his indictment as a drug lord to extort from him planes, pilots and a $3 million cash donation to the Contras.
There is other substantial documentation, both from the CIA and the US Drug Enforcement Agency.
It shows how the Contras, aided by US government agents, financed their war against Nicaragua not only with official financial help from Capitol Hill but by trafficking narcotics through the US as well.
It is likely that all of this is common knowledge to US Congress members — a secondary twist to an increasingly complex and sordid tale.
DUMPING
Toxic trade
Poison soap
Poisoning Africans is all right, appears to be the message from the Irish Government.
It has given the go-ahead — and a $3 million grant — to a British company which plans to manufacture soap containing mercuric iodide for export to Africa, where it is used to lighten skin colour.
The soap can cause foetal damage, anaemia and kidney failure if too much is absorbed through the skin.
The EEC has banned the marketing of cosmetic products containing mercury in its own member states.
But production of such cosmetics for export remains perfectly legal.
And attempts by several African countries, including Zimbabwe, Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa (would you believe it?) to ban sales of these soaps do not seem to have done much to lessen its' widespread use.
Meanwhile, Irish politicians and development bodies such as Trocaire have attacked the Irish government for its' ‘morally reprehensible’ decision to grant aid to the W & E Products factory in Arklow, County Wicklow.
The company moved there from its' Manchester, UK base after allegations that it damaged workers health by exposing them to mercury were made on a BBC Newsnight progamme two years ago.
Claims against the company are still pending in the British courts.
But in spite of overwhelming evidence of the dangers the soaps pose, the Irish Industrial Development Authority is sticking to its' guns.
It argues that the company will bring jobs to an area blighted by unemployment.
A government official added: ‘We are not in the business of taking moral decisions for other countries’.
Ireland has always prided itself on its' concern for developing countries.
Dublin's support for such a poisonous export shows that this concern is not even skin deep.
SCIENCE
Churning out freaks
Mini cows
‘What is two feet tall, gives a gallon of milk a day and moos?’
The answer: the Mexican mini-cow, heralded by some as a pioneer ‘in a potential agricultural revolution’.
The tiny animal is the result of more than five generations of selective breeding — which began with the six-foot tall, 2,000 pound Indo-Brazilian zebu.
The mini cow produces three to four litres of milk a day — compared with six litres produced by a full-sized zebu — and survives on a tenth the grassland.
Some agricultural experts view the cattle primarily as a protein source for rural families who have little grazing land and cannot afford bought milk and meat.
But others are more sceptical.
They question just how long a freak cow, which so disproportionably produces huge quantities of milk, can be expected to live and how sickly it will be.
The quality of the milk is also questionable.
How much more sensible to redistribute the land more fairly so that poor families can keep normal, healthy-sized cows.
But that, it appears, would be a far more monstrous solution than anything that can be dreamed up in a laboratory.
POPULATION
Mortal coils
Baby ban in East Timor
‘Keep young!
Get sterilized!’
Birth control programmes can take many forms — but few can be more dishonestly motivated than Indonesia's current assault on the population of East Timor.
The World Bank-backed drive — which incidentally violates United Nations recognition of East Timor as an independent country — tells newlyweds that birth control (or better still, sterilization) is the key to health.
Fuelling this propaganda are free supplies of birth control pills, capsules and IUDs are given out to Timorese who are used to paying a small fortune just to consult a doctor.
Not surprisingly these devices are distributed with little or no instruction on correct use — thus increasing women's health problems.
And fear of being ‘treated’ with permanent sterilization keeps women from seeking medical help.
There are also doubts about the ‘check ups’ women are persuaded to have as these examinations are frequently followed by a miscarriage.
According to the Indonesian Human Rights organization TAPOL the Government's birth control and natal care programme is itself causing the high infant and maternal mortality rates which the authorities claim to be fighting.
But the Indonesian authorities are not only trying to control the rate at which the Timorese breed — they also want to dictate where they live.
The plan is to reduce the present 1,873 villages into 412, thereby tightening security and making the best land available for incoming Indonesian settlers.
TOURISM
A man's needs
Third World sexploitation
Feminists are not good news for Western sex tour club operators.
But such organizations generally prefer to keep a low profile as they peddle Third World prostitution — hoping to attract the attention only of potential customers.
Not so the Norwegian Scan Thai Travellers club which has decided to take its most active critics, the Kvinne Fronten (The Women's Front), to court.
It is not necessary to repeat what Kvinne Fronten says about Scan Thai.
The declarations of its founder Ivar Iarrasen in the club's brochure are clear enough.
He writes: ‘The Women's Front, and other equal rights fanatics chose to completely disregard…a small difference.
Men's deepest instincts are to admire and protect women.
To compete with women is totally against nature.
How can one discuss equal pay for equal work and disregard the fact that women have a gold mine of their own’’.’
The brochure goes on to plead that prostitution is just a natural part of Thailand's culture: ‘You have to pay from women in Bangkok — for one night, for one week or for your whole life.
In return they give you a lot of care and sex.’
In an attempt to defend his activities Iarreson says: ‘You might say that I sell sex, but the girls in Bangkok appreciate this.
If prostitution were to be stopped they would have to work on the rice fields on a starvation salary.’
But his interests appear to remain firmly with the purchasers' ‘needs’— and pockets — as he advises: ‘If you want to buy a girl from one of the escort firms it will cost you quite a lot.
The escort girls are for the rich man who does not want the bother of leaving his hotel-room if the need gets too strong.’
HEALTH
Hot dinners
Radiation alert
Why should milk from Holland be labelled 100 per cent Australian when sold to the Philippines?
And what are large quantities of Bulgarian jam, French and West German cheese and British chocolate doing on the supermarket shelves in Asia and Australasia?
These are questions asked by a small group of paediatricians and parents, Awareness Education, as they travel far and wide, visiting schools and county halls throughout Australia and Aotearoa.
Chernobyl — combined with inadequate import safety controls — is the simple answer.
Generally, imported foodstuffs undergo random testing.
But the inefficiency of this system is reflected in the number of contaminated foodstuffs reaching supermarket shelves in the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, Aotearoa and Australasia.
The Australian Health Authorities openly admit that they lack the person-power and financial resources to check for radioactive contamination every shipment that comes into the country.
If this is the case in Australia what kind of controls can be expected in the impoverished Philippines?
As a result, there has been a steady inflow of contaminated food since July 1986.
Currently levels of up to 100 Bequerel are allowed to pass unchecked while levels of up to 600 Bq can be imported but require a permit.
Now, one Bq represents one nuclear disintegration (or atomic explosion) per second.
During this disintegration, particles of energy are ejected that can smash into our body cells causing damage that can lead cancer mutations.
Radioactive elements remain in our bodies for a long time.
Caesium-137 for instance can stay in the body of a child for 30-50 days and in that of an adult for 70-100 days.
As a result just one Bq of Caesium-137, contained in one litre of milk, will undergo a tiny explosion every second; 60 explosions every minute, 3,600 explosions every hour or a total of three to seven million tiny atomic explosions in its stay in our bodies — any one of which can cause cell mutations which eventually lead to cancer or genetic damage.
But despite current theories that ingested radiation may be 20 times more cancer-forming than external radiation, the new limits have been set at up to three times higher than previously accepted.
And what is the ordinary consumer meant to do in face of such confusing and horrendous information?
‘Read the label’ is the first lesson from Awareness Education.
And if you must buy from Europe ask your supplier if they can guarantee the product.
ENERGY
Dam cheek
Home-made electrics in Sumatra
Most people look downwards as they negotiate the pot-holed road that leads into the village of Perteguhan in North Sumatra.
But if they do look up they will see a cat's-cradle of motley cables and wires that have a tale of initiative and rebellion to tell.
It goes like this: back in 1983 local people decided they were fed up with repeated Indonesian Government promises that the village would soon be connected to the national electricity grid.
So they blocked a local stream, the Lau Bunuk, and started building their own co-operative hydro-electric dam.
Six months into construction, officials from Sumatra Utara Provinces Electricity Board appeared and tried to halt the work.
And the Government declared the dam project illegal — in spite of its expressed faith in co-operative ventures.
The Perteguhan workforce was not to be put off.
They simply waited until the officials had gone and then carried on working.
Operating alternating weekly rotas the villagers laid over two miles of cable from the power source to their houses.
Within a year most of the 120 households in the village were connected into the network.
‘It was an example of gotong royong at its best,’ says postal worker Kongsi Barus.
Gotong royong means ‘working together’— an old Indonesian co-operative tradition.
There was full consultation between family heads at each stage of the project and only a handful of families, mostly shop-owners, opted to wait for the Government supply which reached Perteguhan 18 months later.
Most villagers still prefer their own home-made power.
For a start it is 40 per cent cheaper than electricity from the national grid.
It is also more reliable and better suited to their needs.
As most villagers work in the fields during the day, the supply need only be switched on between five in the evening and eight in the morning.
‘We have the best and cheapest electrical supply in Sumatra,’ said Barus.
‘As long as the stream is running, we will have power.
The Electricity Board is always having power cuts.’
CULTURE
Video truants
Skipping class in Ghana
A nation does not have to be affluent for its children to become video junkies.
In Ghana hundreds of new commercial video-viewing centres are luring youngsters away from their lessons by operating during school hours.
Some centres even allow youngsters to watch pornographic films.
Not surprisingly, this is causing concern amongst parents, teachers and some Government authorities.
The Ministry of Information estimates that there are now more than 200 video centres in Accra alone.
They can successfully compete with cinemas by charging one fifth of the admission price.
In rural areas where there are few cinemas the video centres are especially popular.
Truant children often use their bus or lunch money to get into the centres.
Or else they steal.
One thing is certain: they have no difficulty finding videos of their choice — they are advertised on virtually every street corner in Accra, even in the poorest areas.
The authorities have responded to complaints of increasing truancy with legislation apparently strict but in practice almost ineffective.
The Ministry of Information directed that the centres should operate only after 4 pm.
This was complied with initially but soon ignored.
Following further complaints from the public, the Christian Council, the Muslim Representative Council and women's movements, the ministry formed another committee last March to look into the problem.
This leads to tougher legislation.
Premises must now be licensed annually by the police.
The screen should be at least 24 inches wide.
There should be adequate ventilation, fire extinguishers, fixed seats and doors that open outwards.
And, most importantly, children under 18 should be accompanied by an adult.
The penalty for showing a pornographic film is ‘500’— oddly, the fine is expressed in pre-colonial currency, not cedis.
It sounds good but in reality none of the video centres is operating according to these regulations.
Supervision is difficult because it is easy to start up without registering.
Video films are also compact enough to be smuggled into the country without drawing the attention of customs officers.
ENVIRONMENT
Licence to kill
Polluted inferno
One of Brazil's biggest industrial areas has become an environmental time-bomb which could explode at any time.
Local people have already suffered appallingly from the dangers of the Cubatoa industrial park with its 23 major factories, attracted to the region by a government policy promising no pollution control.
Last year an estimated 800 people from the slums built around the factories were burned to death when a pipe passing under their homes started spewing gasoline.
The oil ignited and the wooden houses flared up like match-sticks.
The bodies of the victims were so badly burned they could not be counted.
But few lessons have been learned.
Today local people are still exposed to increasingly lethal quantities of pollution.
Every day the industrial park emits a ‘chemical soup’ of 236 tonnes of pollutants including sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide and various gaseous nitrogen compounds.
This produces rain 130 times more acidic than vinegar, not to mention 20 tonnes of solid unprocessed waste which is then dumped on nearby land or directly into rivers.
It also ensures that the city is permanently cloaked in a stinking cloud of smoke and dust.
The health risks are enormous.
Local physician Lia Giraldo da Silva Augusto says the mortality rate of young adults is as high as the infant mortality rate, which is 65 per 1,000.
Respiratory diseases are the main causes of death.
But other diseases directly linked to pollution have also been taking their toll, such as Leucopenia costadas which attacks white blood cells and can develop into anaemia or leukemia.
At the Cosipa metallurgical plant 1,000 out of 13,000 workers suffer from leucopenia.
And 23 per cent of the children in local schools have the disease.
But the greatest threat hanging over the inhabitants of Cubatoa is in the hills that overlook their polluted plain.
Acid rain has caused such severe erosion of the Sierra del Mar that the entire mountainside could slide down onto Cubatoa.
It is estimated that one heavy rainstorm could bring disaster.
Not only does this put the lives of Cubatoa's 100,000 inhabitants in immediate danger, but it also threatens to wipe out one of Brazil's main economic centres.
It would cut off electricity supplies to large parts of the South and cause flooding of polluted rivers and creeks which would then contaminate the entire region.
In response to warnings from several official bodies the Civil Defence of the State of Sao Paulo is working on a plan for mass evacuation plans in case of emergency.
But experts predict that a landslide would rupture chlorine tanks.
This would lead to a mixing of chemicals and cause explosions that together with flooding would make evacuation practically impossible.
WAR
Children under fire
Frontline disaster
Last year, 140,000 children died in Mozambique and Angola — victims of war and economic destabilization by South Africa.
If the situation does not improve, half the children born in the two countries will be dead or disabled before reaching the age of five.
That is the verdict of the United Nations Childrens' Fund (UNICEF).
According to spokesperson Richard Jolly: ‘It is the equivalent of one child dying every four minutes, or a primary school of 380 pupils being killed each day.
These findings are tragic, far worse than people realize.’
In its report ‘Children on the Frontline’ UNICEF shows that mortality rates in Angola and Mozambique are among the highest in the world because of underdevelopment compounded by the war and economic destabilization.
The two countries are fighting against South-African backed rebels: the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) and the Mozambique National Resistance group (MNR).
The report estimates that between $25 and $28 billion have been lost by Southern Africa Development Coordination Committee (SADCC) countries in the past six years as a result of destabilization, destruction of assets, enforced military expenditures, high transport costs and loss of output.
These figures are the equivalent of one year's total production in the the SADCC region and far exceed the region's total debt.
Although all SADCC member states have borne some burden, the economic damage and human casualties have been greatest in Angola and Mozambique.
In Mozambique, about 718 health clinics have been destroyed and health programmes set back.
To alleviate its people's plight, especially that of women and children, an appeal has been launched with the aim of getting the international community to donate $2-2.5 billion to the frontline states.
MULTINATIONALS
McDonald's world
Burger chain gang.
‘Boycott burgers’, urge activists in Manila protesting against McDonald's multinational fast-food giant which they claim has close ties with corrupt local officials.
‘Stop the barbarians,’ shout Italians as they oppose the opening of a new shop in a historic town; while in Sweden protesters express anti-US and anti-burger sentiment with smoke-bombs.
Wherever it goes McDonald's seems to raise hackles.
But that does not stop it growing.
It's golden arches now span shop doorways in 45 countries.
Every day it serves identical food to 19 million people and swallows $1.3 million profits.
McDonald's work practices have something of a uniform character too.
In Britain its workers are amongst the lowest paid.
More than 75 per cent are under 21, often working long hours on a part-time basis so that the company can keep profits high without having to pay sickness, holiday or other statutory benefits for its employees.
In Australia the company sacked workers nearing their 20th birthdays to avoid paying adult wages.
Young workers were expected to do unpaid extra work when business was slack.
Unions are taboo or outlawed.
In San Francisco McDonald's used lie detectors when asking applicants if they belonged to a union.
In Madrid workers who asked for union elections were sacked.
Not surprisingly the company boasts it knows of no unions in its British stores.
McDonald's does not skimp when it comes to advertising, however.
It spends more on one brand than any other company in the world.
What the ads don't say is that the food is as low on nutrition as it is high on unhealthy fats and additives.
EL SALVADOR
Oasis of hope
Peasants' return
Peasants who have returned to their lands in the heart of El Salvador's war zone are celebrating the first anniversary of a daring experiment.
Against all odds, the 530 peasants have managed to keep their co-operative alive at El Barillo near the Guazapo volcano.
Their achievement is seen as a sign of hope in a country where the seven-year civil war has forced half a million people into exile and a further half million to become refugees in their own land.
It is also an example of successful popular resistance to the armed forces.
For years the latter have terrorized local inhabitants in order to depopulate Guazapo — stronghold of the rebel FMLN guerillas in the early 1980s.
The army appeared to have achieved their aim with the notorious Operation Phoenix aerial bombardment campaign of January 1986 which drove out all civilians from the area.
Villagers from El Barillo ended up in a church-run refugee camp in Calle Real.
But five months later the peasants were back.
Today, although virtually cut off from the outside world and still subject to army harassment, the community remains determined to stay put.
‘In the city we were fish out of water,’ said one villager.
‘We were not born to live off charity in refugee camps.
We were born to work the land, this land where we were born and raised our children’
The peasants farm co-operatively and are together rebuilding their bombed-out village.
They are also building a school — this will take the place of the two large mango trees that currently serve the purpose.
Relations with the army are tense but not openly violent.
The army has tried instead to co-opt peasants into so-called ‘civil defence’ groups — without success.
The villagers remain suspicious of the military.
Each house has its bomb shelter and secret tutus or underground holes where families can hide when the army returns to using more violent means of coercion.
The authorities meanwhile are eager to avoid publicity about the success of the El Barillo repopulation.
They make it almost impossible for outsiders to get through army cordons and into the region.
A church worker involved in the repopulation movement explained why: ‘El Barillo is not only an island of activity in a deserted zone.
It is also an example of communal living and co-operative working that is a success.
In terms of ideology it is exactly what the FMLN has been fighting for these past seven years.
The army is scared stiff that the rest of the country will learn that it works.’
WORLD TRADE
Prices crisis
Poor aid rich
The biggest problem facing Third World economies now is the plunge in the prices of their export commodities.
In 1986 alone, primary commodity prices fell sharply by an average of nine per cent.
The average index of prices in 1986 was 25 per cent below the 1980 level, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
But that is not all.
In the meantime, the prices of goods the Third World imports from rich countries have continued to increase.
So, although the Third World gets less for its rubber, tin or copper, it still has to pay more for manufactured goods from the rich world.
To take this into account, economists measure ‘real commodity prices’— the Third World's export prices compared with the prices of manufactured goods.
On average, real commodity prices have fallen by 28 per cent between 1980 and 1986, according to UNCTAD data.
In the first half of 1987 the situation worsened further.
A report by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) shows that non-oil commodity prices in dollar terms reached their lowest level in the post-Second World War period during the first quarter of 1987.
It also predicts that real commodity prices will continue to weaken, with another average decline of 2 per cent projected for 1988.
According to an estimate by the London-based Economist magazine, the Third World lost $65 billion in 1985 alone because of its commodity price decline.
In 1986 the loss is estimated at more than $100 billion.
This loss is very serious.
It means the Third World is exporting more commodities in terms of quantity, but the money it earns from them is reduced and can buy fewer and fewer imported goods.
Among the worst hit Third World export commodities are: petroleum ($36 in January 1986 dropped to $18 by January 1987), palm oil ($644 in 1984 to $231 in 1986), tin ($12 in 1985 to $6.16 in 1986), cotton (63 cents to 26 cents in 1986), sugar (prices stuck at 5-6 cents although production costs are double this).
Plunging prices have caused extreme hardship for farmers and workers throughout the Third World.
Millions of workers have been sacked from plantations and mines because of their companies' losses; farmers cultivating export crops on their own have suffered severe cuts in living standards.
And governments have seen their own revenues dwindling, thus forcing them to reduce their subsidies and to cut health and other social programmes.
But what the Third World loses, the rich world gains.
The rich world can now buy more Third World commodities at very low prices.
This means they can enjoy a higher standard of living even though they themselves do not work harder to produce more.
The fall in Third World export prices has thus given a boost to the Gross National Product (GNP) of the rich countries, to the tune of something like $100 billion a year.
The poor are actually giving aid to the rich.
RESOURCES
Cook's boon
Alcoholic fuel
A creative Filipino chemist has invented a ‘wonder fuel’ named Siroca which she hopes will decrease her country's dependence on dwindling supplies of firewood.
Maria Carlita Rex Doran began developing the new fuel in 1980 following a government plea to scientists to devise new indigenous power sources to meet the country's severe energy shortage.
Research indicates that 72 per cent of the Philippines' population is dependent on wood and charcoal for fuel.
Siroca, however, is based on easily produced grain or ethyl alcohol (ethanol) combined with fatty essence such as coconut oil.
Although alcohol is widely used for motor fuel nobody has yet extensively developed liquid alcohol as an alternative source of cooking fuel.
Safety has been the main obstacle.
Liquid alcohol used to warm food can be toxic and improper handling can lead to an explosion.
But Doran's invention is safe as well as economical and pollution free.
The secret of its safety lies in one of its inert ingredients.
But the inventor is keeping quiet about which one for fear of piracy.
Because the technology is based on readily available material it can be produced anywhere, creating jobs outside industrial areas.
Doran aims to make the new fuel a cheap source of power that poor people in the countryside can easily afford.
CULTURE
Sex and westerns
Book bankruptcy
As book-shops are turned into grocery stores, Zambians' are heading for ‘intellectual bankruptcy’, says President Kenneth Kaunda.
The population is being fed a reading diet limited to sex, crime, westerns and other ‘rubbish’, he adds.
Due to its dire foreign exchange shortage — Zambia broke off relations with the IMF earlier this year — book-dealers can no longer afford to import less popular but better quality reading material.
As a result Zambians have to make do with ‘the left-overs of the book world, rather than its riches’.
Although half the country's population is under 20 the state of book-shops suggested ‘were are all over 90 and have lost our eyesight and are unable to read seriously’ added the president.
It is not the first time he has taken his countrymen and women to task for what he considers their cultural failings.
A decade ago, Kung Fu martial arts films were banned by Zambian cinemas after Kaunda attacked them for encouraging violence amongst youths.
Recently such films have made a comeback in the form of Ninja movies, based on the exploits of Japanese martial arts experts.
The popularity of these films has been blamed for the emergence of Ninja gangs in Lusaka suburbs who wear black masks, carry home-made swords, iron bars, clubs and sticks which they use during burglaries and muggings.
A report produced by the Kaunda Foundation suggests the formation of a national book development council along the lines of a programme recommended by the United Nations Educational and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
With adequate funding and proper policy the book industry could achieve self sufficiency and satisfy national demand, the report says.
CORRUPTION
Rogues gallery
Marcos art collection
Supposed old master paintings bought by Imelda Marcos, wife of the deposed President of the Philippines, with stolen government money have been hauled out of storage — and found to be fakes.
Fiction has it that Mrs Marcos was a grand art collector, acquiring beautiful paintings as a testament to her taste.
In fact she was a trickster who transferred billions from the national treasury to her personal bank account and then squandered the money on forgeries.
Most paintings she bought have been stolen so no-one knows which are valuable and which worthless.
A treasure hunt was launched in February 1986 by the new Philippine President, Corazon Aquino, who hoped to return some of the missing fortune to the 45 million Filipinos from whom it was swindled.
The search spanned three continents but it uncovered a pathetic bounty.
The first find was the old Masters collection of 75 paintings which art experts dismiss as bogus.
The second haul comprised
24 paintings found in France.
These have been in US custody since May awaiting White House approval to seek an indictment of the Marcoses.
(The couple are charged with using Philippine Government funds to buy art and US real estate, concocting elaborate schemes to conceal their ownership and trying to sell the assets and evade taxes.)
The largest and most valuable part of the would-be treasure trove has disappeared altogether.
No-one knows where the paintings are and the Philippine Government does not have the funds to continue the search.
Meanwhile, earlier this year in a separate investigation, the Italian Tax Police filed three sets of charges against a Florence art dealer called Mario Bellini, who helped Mrs Marcos acquire her art collection.
It is the first time anyone connected with the Marcos pictures has been criminally charged.
And the case springs from a fake painting which Mrs Marcos claimed was a Michelangelo and for which she apparently paid Bellini $3.5 million in 1983.
Far from celebrating Filipino cultural achievements, Mrs Marcos' taste leaned towards the Italian Renaissance.
She spent between 15 and 20 million dollars on her paintings in an attempt to mimic Western ‘high society’.
But the chances are that even if all the paintings were traced, the Philippine Government would never recoup even a fraction of the money spent on them, because she was so regularly duped.
ENVIRONMENT
Damming the Narmada
Indian dilemma
In mid-April 1987, the Indian Government passed a death sentence on the Narmada River by granting the states of Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat permission to build 3,000 major and minor dams.
Two giant reservoirs — the Sardar Sarovar in Gujarat and the Narmada Sagar in Madhya Pradesh — are each to hold more water than any others on the Indian sub-continent.
At stake is whether the scheme will create more wealth than it destroys.
The plethora of dams will uproot over a million people — including many tribals — and submerge about 850,000 acres of forest and 500,000 acres of cultivated land — almost as much as it will irrigate.
The dams are likely to increase the incidence of water-borne diseases and have a very short life-span due to the high siltation rate caused by widespread soil erosion.
Large tracts of land will be waterlogged and rendered saline, and innumerable species of wildlife destroyed forever.
Proponents argue that the dams will check floods, facilitate fisheries, provide water for industrial and domestic use and promote tourism.
But fears abound that the dams will actually increase floods or at least their effects, by destroying the protective surrounding forests.
The transformation of the river may well decimate the considerable fishery resources already available.
And disruptions to the special Hindi pilgrimmage called the parikrama, which is traditionally focused on the Narmada, will probably reduce tourism.
Moreover at the end of the day those who benefit from the scheme will be Gujarats more powerful farmers: the poor will be worse off than ever.
Whether the dams are built or not now depends on the success of environmentalists in pressurizing the World Bank into withdrawing credit for the projects.
Faced with global opposition to the scheme the Bank appears anxious.
Having pledged its support for the environment and the poor, there is mounting pressure for it to institutionalize some safeguards.
AUSTRALIA
Pacific peace
Anti-nuclear success
Australian support for nuclear armament is slowly weakening.
The conservatism which has held sway for several generations is increasingly giving way to a recognition of the aims and ideals of the peace movement — particularly successful in wooing ‘middle Australia’.
In the early 1980's two thirds of Australians wanted the country to have its own nuclear capability and a similar proportion wanted US communication bases on Australian soil.
Today these figures are only 22 per cent and 39 per cent respectively, whilst support for visits from nuclear-armed ships has dropped from 47 to 24 per cent.
There has been a comparable fall in support for increasing military defence spending and compulsory military service.
Some peace researchers connect these changes with improved relations between the US and the Soviet Union, and possibly even glasnost.
In July this year only six per cent of those surveyed considered the Soviet Union to be a threat to Australia's security, this figure being an all-time low.
Australia's youth are generally wary of the Australia-US alliance (ANZUS), although support from all age groups is high.
But the trend indicates that more Australians are questioning the country's role in the arms race: the alliance is receiving lower levels of unqualified support.
Much of the credit for the changed perception is due to the media and educational skill of the peace and anti-nuclear movement in Australia.
The Nuclear Disarmament Party may well be in tatters, but massive amounts of energy have continued to be expended through local networks.
Protest is no longer seen as being the preserve of the ‘lunatic fringe’; the nature of the nuclear threat is understood as something which affects everyone.
HUMAN RIGHTS
Mining misery
Namibian apartheid
‘We suffer apartheid here, apartheid reigns,’ says a miner at Tsumeb copper mine, one of Namibia's three largest mines where workers are living in conditions comparable to those in South Africa.
The mine is run by the Tsumeb Corporation Limited (TCL), owned and managed by the British company Consolidated Goldfields.
The latter company has an appalling record for its treatment of workers in South Africa and its behaviour in Namibia is little better.
Miners are recruited in the north of Namibia.
Earning a basic wage of around 30 cents an hour, they are forced to spend most of the year away from their families living in the very poor hostel accommodation provided.
Only hostel residents are allowed to enter here and there are no whites.
In hospitals there are separate rooms for people according to their colour and race.
And the transport provided by the mine is also segregated.
Workers say that at least one employee has been dismissed from his job without compensation because of illness caused by pollution from the smelter which also processes arsenic, cadmium and lead — well known to have adverse effects.
Evidence that the mine is polluting the local environment includes dying trees in the vicinity of the smelter, and a street of houses which has been abandoned by whites concerned at the risk of disease.
The houses are now occupied by black TCL employees who have no option of better housing.
Workers at Tsumeb have responded to the conditions by forming a branch of the Mineworkers' Union of Namibia.
The union movement is still new in the country, and members at Tsumeb and at mines in Kombat and Otjihase (also run by TCL in Namibia), were the first to embark on a major strike when they walked out in July 1987.
The strike was in support of demands for better pay and conditions following unsuccessful negotiations with TCL.
Although the company made a net profit of $10.5 million in 1987 it took a hard-line response over the strike: out of the 5000 who went out, 2000 workers were estimated to have been sacked.
MEDIA
Comic escape
Mexican fantasy
Any Tuesday morning you can find a crowd lined up outside Mario Lopez's little newspaper stand in the heart of Mexico City.
They are waiting for their hot-off-the-press copy of the weekly Vaquero or Cowboy magazine, a comic book that traces the adventures of North American cowboys and voluptuous Indian maidens, wrestlers, soccer players and truckdrivers.
Nationwide sales of Vaquero top one million a week.
Each ‘historieta’ or brief story is reportedly read by an average of seven people which means that about one third of the population reads them every week.
In contrast only two to four per cent Mexicans read books without pictures.
One left-wing newspaper has capitalized on the trend by running a Sunday supplement of underground comics under the label ‘hysterietas’— little hysterias.
The main purchasers of the genre are the poor.
Vaquero's creator offers this explanation: ‘In every Mexican there resides an idyllic feeling for the countryside his (sic) parents knew.
Vaquero offers the city-bound reader a few minutes to escape to a time and place that we are losing’.
Marketing also plays a part.
Each booklet can fit into a back pocket and is designed to be read in the 90 minutes it takes someone to get to work.
Comics have been a popular tradition in Mexico for centuries.
One thousand years ago the Mayans were cranking out codices not dissimilar to today's illustrations.
And in the 1790s Catholic missionaries circulated a book of calveras or skeletons as a grim warning to prospective converts.
Cigarette companies picked up the idea a hundred years later and included romances in each packet of cigarettes.
Every issue of the comics is flavoured with grisly details of human sacrifices, devil worship and serial murders.
‘Mexican comic books have always reflected our lowest instincts,’ confesses Alfonso Morales, curator of the Museum of Popular Culture in Mexico City.
‘They are the clearest portraits of our repressions.’
RACISM
Black backlash
Soviet killings
Despite the rigorously anti-racist official ideology in the Soviet Union, African students frequently complain about racial harassment.
In the past these accusations were dismissed as ‘Western-orchestrated propaganda’, but there has now been Soviet confirmation of a number of recent killings in the Ukrainian town of Kharkov during fights between Soviet youngsters and African students.
More than 13,000 Africans study in the Soviet Union (nearly 10 per cent of all foreign students), and many welcome confirmation of the killings as a sign that glasnost may end Soviet press silence on racism, and actively educate people about such matters.
There is currently a great absence of well-researched journalism about Africa, and many articles reflect the ignorance of the average Soviet citizen, posing such questions as ‘Do you have houses?’
‘What about cars?’
‘How do you live among crocodiles and snakes?’
The media has added another dimension to racism by accusing Africans of importing AIDS.
One Mozambican student recently complained on a youth television programme in Leningrad: ‘I am called SPID (AIDS) all over the place’.
Such slurs culminate in fights and African students are invariably found guilty by police.
Racism is strongest in the Central Asian Republics of Azerbaijan, Armenia and Tajikistan.
Four years ago, Ghanaian students studying in the Azerbaijan capital of Baku refused to return to the city after their summer holidays, because of hostility amongst the local population.
At the request of Ghana's Embassy, the Soviet authorities have stopped posting Ghanaian students to Azerbaijan.
FINANCE
Honest
Nigerian bank does good deal with the poor
The shining white paint of the one-storey building seems out of place in its surroundings in Ajegunle, a sprawling slum suburb on the outskirts of Lagos.
‘People's Bank of Nigeria’ proclaims the entrance — the first ‘poor people's bank’in the country.
‘I need 500 naira ($60) to buy equipment to complete a job I'm doing,’ says carpenter Mustapha Sanusi, jostling for a place in the queue for application forms.
A commercial bank had turned down his application for a loan because he could not provide collateral and besides, the money he needed was ‘too small’.
Providing loans without interest, the People's Bank is a grassroots financial institution owned by the Government and targeted at the poorest Nigerians who live below the poverty line.
For it is they who have borne the greater part of the burden of the economic Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) started by the Babangida military government in 1986.
The results have been currency devaluation (by 80 per cent) and inflation, with the minimum wage remaining at its pre-SAP level of 125 naira ($16) a month.
Against this backdrop, the People's Bank — which started in 1989 and now has branches in many of Nigeria's 21 states — is seen as a godsend for poor Nigerians.
Tai Solarin, an outspoken critic of the Government who has been appointed the Bank's Chairperson, is happy that ‘the Government has realized that structures operating in the country have not served the purpose of the ordinary people’.
Some critics question its sustainability and others view it as a sop to pacify the poor.
A major criticism of the scheme is that the maximum lending figure of $255 is too low to help many small-scale businesses.
Still, the sums being disbursed have clearly helped many and the Government hopes to extend the lending ceiling in coming years.
There have been few repayment defaults.
‘Poor people are more honest than the rich,’ asserts Bola Ajibola, Attorney General and Minister of Justice.
To obtain a loan, applicants must belong to a professional or trade group of 15 people.
The group passes on to the Bank names of members eligible for a loan.
It acts as an informal guarantor, as its other members will not receive any loans until the beneficiary pays back on schedule.
So far, the People's Bank has lent two million dollars to 9,000 artisans, small-scale farmers and businesspeople.
President Babangida is impressed with the Bank's success and has approved an extra $25 million for its activities.
The Bank plans to establish 170 new branches in 1990 alone.
Its success has attracted the attention of the African Development Bank, which plans to inject funds into it.
FOOD
Giant
Tanzania's monster cassava
Lukas Safarimoja stumbled on a strange cassava plant while hunting in the bush 36 years ago.
Now in his eighties, he is worried that he will die before fellow Tanzanians appreciate the enormity of his discovery.
‘This kind of cassava produces 20 times as much food as an ordinary one,’ Safarimoja says proudly.
Standing beside one of the giant tubers, its massive arms radiating out from a bulbous centre, he is dwarfed by its tallest limb.
For seven years, Safarimoja kept track of the cassava, transplanting it to various places as he lived a nomadic hunting life.
It was not until 1961, when he settled in a village, that he realized just how big it could grow.
One acre of Safarimoja's variety yields as much food as 15 acres of ordinary cassava, says village agricultural officer Kombo Ahmed.
Cassava is normally tolerant of a wide range of soil types, but this variety has proved even more drought resistant than usual.
The villagers of Visiga call Safarimoja ‘The Saviour’ because they credit his discovery with saving them from hunger.
‘It is imperative that the nation should undertake detailed research into this cassava.
It could mean a solution to the food shortages Tanzania always faces,’ says Ahmed.
Michael Mashelle, regional agriculture and livestock development officer, says that although his department knows about the giant cassava, it has no funds for research.
But Mashelle emphasizes the value of cassava to Tanzania and Africa as a whole, noting that it provides more than half the calorie needs of 200 million Africans.
The variety discovered by Safarimoja has been dubbed ‘mkukumkuku’—‘by force’— because its massive size makes it difficult to uproot.
This feature, Safarimoja says, helps prevent theft: even wart-hogs find making off with it a challenge.
HEALTH
Hope
New river blindness drug for West Africa
River blindness — known medically as onchocerciasis — is one of the most important causes of blindness in rural areas of West Africa.
It is transmitted by a blackfly which breeds in rivers and passes on minute parasitic worms from other infected humans.
These organisms can live for many years inside the body causing intense itching and other symptoms, including eventual blindness.
Because of the disease whole communities have had to leave fertile riverside villages and resettle in more arid areas.
The most effective way of combatting river blindness until fairly recently was by spraying the breeding grounds with insecticide, a process which will continue for several years yet.
But recently the news has been much better.
Tests of the drug ivermectin in Liberia have shown that not only does it stop the progress of the disease in infected individuals, it also reduces its rate of transmission.
Belgian-born Dr Michel Pacque, who first carried out tests of ivermectin with workers in a rubber plantation in Liberia over several years, is now taking up an appointment as consultant for Sight Savers (Royal Commonwealth Society for the Blind) in West Africa with the task of organizing regular supplies.
He will be based in Bamako, the capital of Mali.
Merck, the US pharmaceutical company which discovered that this drug — originally developed as a treatment for worms in animals — could have a beneficial effect in humans, has made it available in West Africa free of charge.
Dr Pacque's job will be to initiate and plan programmes for distributing ivermectin first in Mali, then in Guinea and Sierra Leone and later in other West African countries, including Nigeria.
He will be working with national governments and voluntary agencies in the region.
Most of the countries concerned will need a radically reorganized system for delivering primary health care.
Getting trained people to remote villages to administer the drug every year — often along tracks churned up by the rain — will be a formidable task.
But the potential rewards will be tremendous.
AID
Smokestack
Indians question the mega-projects
Aid helps the donor and the recipient.
So runs the conventional wisdom.
The recipient gets what it needs and the donor gets the jobs to provide it.
Whether India — traditionally the biggest recipient of British aid — gets what it needs depends upon which way you experience it.
Take as an example one of the largest projects, the Rihand power station in eastern India.
The supply of electricity is fundamental to economic growth.
Shortages can put a brake on development.
But things look different to Haraq, a tribal farmer who lost three acres of land to the smokestack.
‘The authorities will not give me a penny for my land’, he said.
He has no land deeds.
As many as 116 other people are in the same position.
Even some who do have deeds are still waiting for compensation.
Outside the site offices local people queue for jobs that were promised to each family.
The promises have remained just promises.
Many Indians criticize the highly centralized energy programme as inappropriate.
Rihand belongs to a cluster of 15 power stations which, when the lights are switched on, will have the highest concentration of power generation in the world.
Environmentalists are concerned that every day Rihand alone will deposit 10,000 tonnes of toxic ash into the environment.
Seepage into the local reservoir is already killing fish on which local livelihoods depend.
British companies are, in fact, the main beneficiaries of the aid programme.
Northern Engineering Industries, who are building Rihand, have received more aid than any other company — 47 million ($89 million) in subsidies.
In total 2,600 British companies have profited.
India's own highly capable power industry is suffering from slim order books when all around foreign companies, backed by aid, are erecting smokestacks.
‘The British have not bought a nail from India,’ said a former Indian civil servant.
‘Even stone chips — simple pebbles — for the water-treatment plant have been imported.’
For years to come India will be buying spare parts from abroad.
Environmentalist Darryl D'Monte is calling for big technology to be supplemented by smaller schemes.
Of course the country needs electricity.
But conservation measures could actually meet the shortfall in supply expected by planners.
Money could then be ploughed into smaller projects which create jobs, meet the needs of local people and conserve the environment.
GLOBAL WARMING
Oh America!
US stalls on greenhouse gases
At the summit of the Group of Seven (G7) most powerful industrial countries in Houston, the leaders called on developing countries to reduce the destruction of tropical forests.
But they were unable to commit themselves to cutting their own industries' emission of gases that threaten the world's climatic balance.
Annie Roncerel from the Brussels-based Climate Action Network pointed out that ‘Creating carbon sinks in developing countries through forestry programmes, without reducing carbon-dioxide emissions in their own countries at the same time, is the wrong signal from the G7 countries.
This means the G7 are not willing to make their economies environmentally sustainable.’
The harshest criticisms were aimed at US President George Bush — and not only from environmentalists.
In a pre-summit letter sent to other G7 leaders in June, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl had proposed internationally binding regulations with radical measures to limit greenhouse-gas emissions.
But at the summit Bush and US officials successfully scuttled these efforts.
At a post-summit press conference, Kohl noted ironically that the leaders rejected his proposals on global warming because ‘the situation is different in the United States’.
White House chief of staff John Sununu objected on the grounds that a reduction in gas emissions would freeze US economic growth.
He insisted that focussing on human activities to fight global warming was misguided because ‘96 per cent of carbon dioxide that flows into the atmosphere comes from natural sources’.
Environmentalists likened Sununu's statement to former President Reagan's 1980 remark that air pollution was caused by trees.
They dispute the economic argument, saying the economy would be strengthened by improving energy efficiency.
Many European countries have agreed on national gas-reduction targets, leaving the US isolated in its refusal to cut its emissions.
Jan Laurens Brinkhorst, environmental director for the European Community (EC), noted that the US produces 25 per cent of the world's carbon-dioxide emissions compared to 13 per cent from all 12 EC nations, which together have an economy about equal to the US in size.
As an example of US energy inefficiency, he said he had spent more time going to and from meetings during the Houston summit than in the meetings themselves.
AGRICULTURE
Small fry
Disaster à la carte as shrimp farms grow
A rather tasty crustacean seems to be at the bottom of turmoil in two geographically distant areas of the world.
Shrimp farming is creating unemployment and environmental havoc in both Bangladesh and Honduras.
Last year shrimps earned Bangladesh nearly $150 million in hard cash.
A relative late-comer in the international shrimp market, Bangladesh could compete because labour is comparatively cheap.
But the salination of 100,000 hectares of land has affected the fertility of adjoining holdings which were used for paddy farming, forcing thousands of poor farmers to sell or lease their ancestral land to shrimp industries.
Shrimp farmers dig canals to bring salt water to enclosed areas where shrimps are cultured.
This salinates the surrounding land, reducing its fertility and rendering it completely unfit for rice cultivation in a couple of years.
The rich shrimp cultivators then buy the farms at throwaway prices, creating widespread landlessness and unemployment (as shrimp farming requires fewer workers than rice).
A survey conducted by Chittagong University's Economics Department showed that the Satkhira region, which produced 40,000 tonnes of rice in 1976, yielded only 360 tonnes ten years later.
About 40 per cent of the 300,000 inhabitants have been driven off the land by the shrimp firms mainly in the direction of the overcrowded cities.
In Honduras, it is again the rich who are providing a friendly environment for the little creatures.
Apart from entrepreneurs, powerful members of the Honduran military and the ruling Nationalist party are large investors along with Ecuadorian and US multinational interests.
Potential consumers provide encouragement.
The US Agency for International Development has financed seven large shrimp-farm loans for over $6.5 million in the last three years.
Shrimp farming currently takes up 5,500 hectares and is projected to take up 15,000 hectares by 1995.
The mangrove forest in the region has already been reduced by half.
Red and black mangrove trees constitute the primary forest of barren southern Honduras.
They nurture organic matter, protect sea lands against erosion, provide habitat and food for marine life, and serve as a cattle forage crop.
Some mangrove lands have been cleared for shrimp projects that never operated.
‘The military invaded and cleared 280 hectares for shrimp tanks, then they ran out of money and abandoned the land,’ reported independent shrimp producer Gustavo Acosta Rodriguez of San Bernardo.
Local fisherpeople are not only being hustled out from what they consider to be community lands, but also being denied access to estuaries closed off by shrimp companies.
In addition the companies are being accused of fishing out shrimp larvae from the sea, creating an acute shortage for fisherpeople.
However public protests are also gathering momentum as people realize that shrimp farming seems to be a recipe for disaster.
UGANDA
Cattle contest
Conflict kills hundreds
Karamoja, Uganda's least developed and most isolated region, bordering Kenya and southern Sudan, is giving development experts a headache.
Despite millions of dollars being pumped into the area over ten years, the results are disappointing.
Heavily armed Karimojong warriors roam around freely, rustling cattle in neighbouring districts and across the border from where related tribes such as the Sudanese Toposa and the Kenyan Turkana enter Karamoja to settle cattle-rustling scores.
The Karimojong are semi-nomadic pastoralists whose economic, social and cultural life revolves around cattle.
Cows are used for dowries, religious rituals, traditional celebrations — and they are the cause of wars.
The traditional cattle raids have now turned into full-scale battles with machine-guns replacing spears.
Hundreds of people are killed.
It is easy to find arms in Karamoja.
After the soldiers of former dictator Idi Amin fled the barracks of the district capital Moroto in 1979, they left the Karimojong with a wide range of automatic weapons.
Most Ugandans refer to Karamoja as a separate country.
The region was neglected by the British colonialists and subsequent Ugandan governments.
However, when Karamoja experienced severe famine in 1979 and 1980, aid organizations streamed in to provide relief food.
The Karimojong happily accepted these unexpected free gifts but have not been too enthusiastic about development projects introduced after the famine.
Most were unrelated to the nomadic lifestyle of the Karimojong.
President Yoweri Museveni's government is the first to give serious thought to the Karimojong problem.
The deployment of the army finally seems to have restricted the movement of the Karimojong warriors.
Disarming them is still proving difficult.
Cross-border raids into Kenya last year caused a serious diplomatic conflict and nearly started a war between the two countries.
Last year the second phase of the massive Karamoja Development Project took off.
The project, financed by the European Community, is aimed at creating self-sufficiency in food and alternative employment opportunities.
Although they see it as a step in the right direction, people working in the area fear that it may take another generation before Karamoja cools down.
BRAZIL
Invasion
Threat of extinction faces Yanomami people
For several years now the Yanomami Indians of Brazil have been threatened with extinction.
Marauding gold miners (garimpeiros) sweep through their lands causing destruction and spreading diseases against which they have no resistance.
Time and again local politicians and those with business interests have used their influence to overturn or ignore court decrees to evacuate the 45,000 garimpeiros once and for all.
The miners were originally to be moved on 8 January 1990.
But the celebrations were short-lived.
The very next day the Justice Minister Saulos Ramos called the operation off, breaking a Federal Court decree.
The Government had capitulated to vested interests — the army, the garimpeiros and the Governor of Roraima who wanted to keep the miners' vote.
Instead the Government designated three areas of ‘National Forest’ as temporary bases to which the miners could be evacuated.
These were still within the larger Yanomami Park as defined by a 1985 decree, but outside the minimal 19 separate pockets ruled as Indian land in February 1989.
It now appears that the Government is moving them to only one area, on the Uraricaa River, probably to avoid further confrontation with the courts.
The Government claims that 10,000 miners have already been put on buses to their place of origin.
Observers confirm, however, that evacuation is progressing at a snail's pace.
The removals have been hampered by a serious lack of aeroplanes and helicopters.
The few craft of the disposal of the Government Indian Agency FUNAI have frequently broken down.
Some miners — the destitute or ill — are glad to leave and accept the free lift.
Others have resisted with a show of arms.
Some have gone on foot to Catroimani, in the heart of the Indian land.
Meanwhile the area of Roraima, where most of the Yanomami's territory is situated, remains in a state of confusion.
The police chief Tuma was taken to court by one judge for breaking an October 1989 decree to remove the miners, only to be let off by another a few weeks later.
What is certain is that the Yanomami are in a critical state, with imported diseases spreading to epidemic proportions in communities close to the miners.
Efforts to help them have been hampered by a crippling shortage of transport and medicine.
Up to 1,500 Indians may have died over the last two years as a result of the gold miners' presence on their land.
INDONESIA
Backstreet becaks
Ban threatens livelihood of drivers
There was a time when the humble pedicab driver was the symbol of the hard-working migrant who left the village for the bright lights of Jakarta.
Now this basic means of subsistence for between 50,000 and 100,000 urban migrants has been outlawed.
The city government has decided to clear the streets of the unsightly pedicab in the interests of humanity and prestige.
Drivers who continue trying to ply their trade are having their rickety three-wheeled becaks carried out to sea and dumped.
When times were bad the scrawny becak driver, in ragged shorts and felt cap, with his market gossip and homespun street philosophy, was often the first to express discontent.
Now, as the year-end deadline for removing the becaks from Jakarta's streets approaches, the city government is facing some stiff resistance.
In many cases the becak drivers have put up a fight to prevent their livelihood from being carted off.
Over 200 drivers took their protest to Parliament in mid-February.
Many are taking their trade away from the main thoroughfares and into the back streets where they take people to market and bring children back from school.
Why exactly the authorities wish to deprive so many thousand people of their bread and butter when the becak is cheap, pollution-free and makes up for the deficiencies in mass transit, is a mystery.
Jakarta's Governor Wiyogo Atmordarminto insists that to drive a becak is a degrading occupation, considering Indonesia's level of development.
He suggests alternatives — buses, the motorized three-wheeled baja, passenger-carrying motor scooters called ojeks — or walking.
The options for former drivers are bleak.
Neither returning to their villages nor joining the Government's resettlement scheme in the outer islands appeals.
On a good day a driver could make over $2.75; if he has a month of good days he earns more than a civil servant.
‘The majority of those who have had their becaks taken away have stayed here.
They cannot return to their villages, there is nothing to do there,’ says one driver.
Opposition to the ban has forced Governor Wiyogo to apologize publicly for the heavy-handed tactics of the authorities.
He has also hinted that the order came from above.
The phase-out has been brought forward, some believe to curb potential unrest prior to the 1992 elections.
Thousands of street vendors have also been banned from Jakarta, sparking further protests.
The debate highlights a dilemma for the Government.
After 25 years of economic growth it is anxious to show improvements in social well-being.
But as Population and Environment Minister Emil Salim points out, the city's population will approach 12 million by the end of the decade.
The ‘informal sector’ will be ‘an inevitable part of the city's development.’
A local newspaper has suggested that Indonesians tend to waver between extremes of toleration and banning, but give little thought to the middle ground — restricting becaks to well-defined areas of the city under supervision and control.
EASTERN EUROPE
Gloom
Pollution is poisoning the future
Two huge thermal power stations stand shoulder to shoulder on the edge of the charming university town of Pecs in southern Hungary.
Both burn polluting brown coal to produce electricity for this energy-hungry part of the country.
The main stack belches out clouds of black smoke.
The other emits next to nothing — an efficient Swiss filter has been fitted which removes most particles and dust.
Behind the dramatic and sudden political, economic and social shifts sweeping through Middle Europe looms a grim legacy of 40 years of resource exploitation and environmental neglect.
The region is scarred by ruined forests and watersheds eaten away by acid rain and other pollutants, rivers and lakes fouled almost beyond recovery, croplands contaminated with agricultural poisons, crumbling cities besieged by a virulent assortment of airborne chemicals.
‘Where does the destruction of our natural environment end?’ laments a member of Poland's Ecological Club.
‘We are killing our heritage and pillaging our children's future.’
The evidence can be seen all over the region:
The health of 2.6 million people in the Silesian Industrial Zone in south-west Poland is endangered by industrial filth.
The Vistula is so full of pollutants that its waters are unfit even for industrial use along 80 per cent of its total length.
In Hungary every 17th death and every 24th disability is attributed directly or indirectly to air pollution.
In the Czechoslovakian town of Bratislava, cancers have risen by a third, heart complaints by 40 per cent, infant mortality by two-thirds and miscarriages by half since 1970, thanks to deadly air pollutants from nearby industries.
In just one year, 1986, over 88,000 children and 63,000 adults in the Romanian town of Giurgiu were treated for lung diseases brought on by rampant air pollution.
Birth rates in Eastern Europe have stagnated for 30 years.
Hungary's population is actually falling by 7,000 a year, according to this year's State of the World Population Report from the United Nations Population Fund.
The low birth rates may be an expression of deep pessimism about the future, a pessimism brought on partly by polluted air and poisoned water, vanishing forests and crumbling towns.
With growing environmental problems and poor family-planning services, Eastern Europe's problems mirror those of the developing world.
Unless the region can clean up its act, there will be little chance of balancing its future development with the needs of its people.
TRADE
Taming tigers
US pressure on Newly Industrializing Countries
The trade war between the US and Asia's ‘Four Little Tigers’(South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore) is hotting up.
Doubts are being raised as to whether the formula of aggressive, ‘export-led’ economic growth they pioneered can be sustained.
Back in October 1987 a senior US Treasury official, David Mulford, quipped: ‘Tigers live in the jungle, and by the law of the jungle.
They are a shrinking population.’
Since then Washington has revoked the tariff-free entry of many goods from the Little Tigers and forced revaluations of both the South Korean and Taiwanese currencies.
Both these countries have also been required to bring down their own protective barriers on a wide range of goods, from computer software to cigarettes.
IBM, the US computer giant, is demanding royalties from South Korean and Taiwanese clonemakers.
Since the US is the main market for their goods, they have little choice but to pay up.
Two other US giants, Intel and Texas Instruments, have successfully sued Korean chipmakers Hyundai and Samsung respectively.
Exports to the US from both South Korea and Taiwan have slowed, while their imports from the US have grown sharply.
Meanwhile, pressures on the labour market have increased and wages have risen; wages in China are now one tenth of those in Taiwan.
There are believed to be anywhere between 50,000 and 100,000 migrant labourers from the Philippines, Indonesia and Thailand working illegally in Taiwan and helping to keep down wage levels.
South Korean dependence on Japanese technology, together with skill shortages, are severely restricting its ability to move into key areas of hi-tech production.
On top of this, the environmental time bomb that has been ticking away for years now seems ready to explode.
Dr Edgar Lin, Taiwan's leading environmentalist, estimates that at least 30 per cent of the annual rice crop is dangerously contaminated by heavy metals like mercury and cadmium.
The atmosphere of Seoul, the South
Korean capital, has one of the highest concentrations of sulphur dioxide anywhere in the world.
The Construction Ministry estimates that $5.3 billion will be needed over the next five years just to clean up the country's water supply.
One former senior official of the Korea Development Institute recently admitted: ‘Old formulas for keeping the economy on track, usually technocratic solutions developed in a political vacuum, are no longer appropriate.’
The Four Little Tigers have beaten the odds often enough in the past, but new ingredients will be needed to keep the successful formula working.
Red-tape, paperwork and bribe-hungry officials await peasant farmer Ramlal when he visits the city.
All he wants to do is register a village co-operative.
Can he do it?
Tony Vaux follows him through the comic-horror jungle of Third World bureaucracy — and corruption.
Ramlal stopped outside the temple and counted his money.
There was nothing to spare unless he used the rupee that he had been given for his own food.
The rest was essential for the task with which his friends had entrusted him.
He shook off his worn-out chapals by the door and went in.
A priest glanced up, assessing the wealth of the new arrival, and then continued on his way to consume yet another ritual meal of sweets and milk.
His naked skin gleamed like gold in the morning sun.
The deity was hidden in the deepest recesses of the temple.
Ramlal approached in fear, awed by the sounds of chanting and the peal of bells that rose above the endless mutter of devotees.
In front of the bejewelled image was a large box for offerings.
The ground was strewn with coins and notes.
He glanced at the face of the God, hoping for some sign of approval, but the lifeless eyes pierced him through.
As he stood in uncertainty, still clutching his rupee, the people pushed him aside in their hurry to buy a little favour with divinity.
When Ramlal emerged the sun has risen higher in the sky and the stones of the temple courtyard were already hot.
He put on his sandals and set out for the office of the babu who had the power to give his people what they wanted, or to refuse.
In the street a man was beating a pie-dog with a heavy stick, lashing at it with mindless energy as the animal cowered back helplessly against a mound of rubbish.
Why such fury?
The big town seemed full of anger.
Ramlal longed to complete his mission and get back to the peace of the village.
At the babu's office a horde of people rushed about clutching bits of paper in search of signatures and rubber stamps.
Quite often the form was outdated by the time it was finally authorized and the clerks would tell the luckless petitioner to start all over again.
The chaprassi spotted the newcomer and stood up, blocking the way to the offices within.
His manner was that of a tired toll-keeper.
He did not even state his demand but waited for the rupee to drop.
‘I want to see the respected Babu-sahib for Co-operatives,’ said Ramlal.
‘He is not here.’
‘His office is open.’
The chaprassi became annoyed.
He despised the rural ignoramuses who did not even know the system.
Did they not tell each other?
Ramlal was wondering what do do.
They had told him the chaprassi would want a bribe, but instructed him not to pay it.
‘When does it open?’ asked Ramlal.
‘I do not know.
You want to find out?’
‘Yes.’
‘Two rupees.’
‘For what?’
The chaprassi glared at him.
‘Get out of here.
There are many other people coming.
They can be ahead of you.’
‘I will wait here.’
Ramlal sat down on the steps but the chaprassi kicked him aside.
He stood in the dirt a few steps away, watching what would happen.
Sweat from his hand began to soften the crisp white document that had been drawn up after many long night-time meetings when they had all finally agreed to form a co-operative.
As he touched it Ramlal imagined the great gleaming motor-pump that they planned to set on the river bank to irrigate their fields.
Twenty thousand rupees it would cost, but the extension worker said the government would pay for it if they could register a co-operative.
The villagers were suspicious at first, waiting for the demand of a bribe or request for a chicken or a village girl, but in the end they decided to believe him.
He seemed to want to help them or else his plan was much deeper than they knew.
Encouraged by his enthusiasm the people of Deogarh had given every rupee and paisa they could find to raise the share capital for the co-operative.
Many families would eat nothing that day as they waited in hope for Ramlal to return.
There would be no new clothes for the children at Holi.
His own son was so ragged that he dared not go to school…
Anxiously Ramlal watched the procession of lethargic clerks climbing the steps to their offices.
Did they not feel the pressure of hopes raised, of hungry naked children waiting for them to move their pens?
Ramlal felt a cold shiver of despair.
He reached into his pocket.
There was still the rupee for his food, and another rupee given to him for the train journey back.
He took them out of his pocket.
Alerted by some sixth sense, the chaprassi watched.
Ramlal placed one rupee on the step.
The chaprassi shook his head.
In sudden anger Ramlal pressed the other coin onto the step with a harsh click and they lay there glinting like the harsh eyes of the temple God.
At a nod from the chaprassi, he hurried away into the corridors within.
The crowd swirled around him but he felt no fear, only a flush of anger that seemed to wipe out his normal senses.
He felt a strange exhilaration that he too could play the game of these city slickers, to repay evil for evil as the cruel features of the god had warned.
At the door of the Registrar's office was a long line of people ending at the desk where the Officer's clerk sat drinking tea and lording it over the supplicants.
He thumbed through the applications in a knowledgeable manner and made critical comments in imitation of his superiors.
Ramlal approached the desk.
‘I have come to register a co-operative.’
The clerk continued to sip tea, studying a row of figures on a piece of paper.
‘You have the money?’ he asked after some time.
‘Yes, the money to register the co-operative.’
‘The officer will require something.’
‘For what?’
‘Go away.
You can wait.’
‘How much?’
‘A hundred rupees, perhaps.’
‘But we have no money.’
‘For the co-operative you will get, if God is favourable, a lakh of (100,000) rupees from the Government.
You can afford to be generous.
You village people are too mean…’
‘I come from Deogarh.’
‘So?’
‘I have spoken to the MLA.
He said he would fix it for me — that we get the loan.
I spoke to him just now in his office.
He told me to go ahead quickly.’
Ramlal held his breath in amazement at the extraordinary lie that had suddenly entered his head.
Where had it come from?
The clerk sipped more tea.
He wanted time to weigh up the story, also to restrain his anger against the politicians.
Half of the bribes taken in that vast government office went back by devious and secret means to the politicians.
That was bad enough but quite often they also took bribes directly from the people.
It meant a loss of revenue to the clerks and the chaprassis but what really annoyed them was the loss of pride.
It undermined their control of the people.
‘Show me your application,’ said the clerk.
He scanned it carefully looking for faults, but it has been well prepared.
At that moment, when the fate of Ramlal's co-operative hung in the balance, the door of the inner office suddenly opened and a woman rushed out still in full flow against the Registrar.
She shouted at those waiting about how she had been unjustly treated.
Her sewing co-operative had been refused.
The babu said she paid the workers below the official minimum wage.
He said it was not a co-operative but a business.
But who does anything except to make money?
Is that not a co-operative?
Her husband was a friend of the Collector, she would make a complaint…
Taking advantage of the clerk's uncertainty, Ramlal pushed forward into the high-ceilinged room.
A fan turned idly in the roof, adding to the sense of quiet, protected calm.
The clerk called after him but he took no notice.
The room was huge and cool.
At a desk in the centre, surrounded by files tied with pink ribbons, sat the Registrar, on whom all hope depended.
‘Sit down.
What is it?’
‘I want to register an irrigation co-operative, sir.’
‘Show me the papers.’
The official studied them.
The fan overhead sliced through the air, like the chaff-cutter that Ramlal used on his farm at home.
‘These are all right.
Who helped you prepare them?’
‘A man called Mistry.’
‘He has done it well.
Take it.
I have signed.
Now you will have to go to the Bank and to the Tribal Development Office to get the loan.
They will delay you and ask for money.
Do not give them any.
If then they still do not help, bring all your people and let them stay in the office until it is done.
But I have not said this.
Where do you come from?’
‘I come from Deogarh.’
‘I know the place.
The home of God.’’
Not a bad name for a village.
I hope the God is happy with the water pump.’
The registrar laughed to himself and then looked up thoughtfully at the endlessly turning fan.
Judging the business to be done, Ramlal picked up the papers and went to the door.
He paused to pay his respects but the official was busy with his heap of files.
Ramlal stabbed his hand at the bell to summon the next petitioner.
The clerk glared angrily at him as he paused in the doorway.
The sunlight outside was blinding.
Ramlal strode past the chaprassi and out onto the streets.
He was glad to get away from the brooding perplexity of the honest official.
It clouded the sense of his own achievement, the sense that his own cunning had mastered the obstacles.
The temple bells were clanging to their climax as Ramlal hurried past the door, clutching his precious document, and laughing to himself at the thought that the God had got nothing from him at all.
But then whose achievement had it been?
A victory for chance?
Maybe it was the black humour of chance that the God represented.
And maybe when Ramlal came to town again he would not be so lucky.
Dodging the dues
Self-employed people have more leeway about how much tax they pay.
Juliet Kellner spoke to some people who pay less than they might — or none at all— and found out how they salve their consciences.
A woman I know works as a tax inspector.
I knew her for months before she admitted, in a low voice, what her job was — as if she were some sort of traitor to society.
Yet the tax system is there precisely for the public benefit.
Why should she feel bad — and her opponents feel justified in behaving anti-socially?
She sends her daughter to a private school where the headmaster is a pillar of the small-town citizenry.
People turn to him for mature counsel.
But when the tax inspector arrives to check his accounts, the head gets his secretary to put salt instead of sugar in the taxman's coffee.
What is it about paying tax that brings out such juvenile spitefulness even among the strenuously respectable?
Every year men and women spend expensive, tortuous hours with accountants figuring out financial euphemisms to fool the tax gatherers — finding ‘creative’ ways to ‘shelter’profits.
Tax-dodging is in line, it seems, with the spirit of the times.
Three ideas tend to be used to justify it: self-empowering, justice and security.
The urge to power is the most visible of the justifications.
Apparently the taxman had sat in the headmaster's special chair and this had triggered off the coffee-salting.
The head had gone to great lengths to buy his own school rather than work in the state sector precisely so that he could be king-pin with nobody telling him what to do.
But now his throne had been airily usurped by the taxman.
Another entrepreneur described the power struggle like this: ‘Some little civil servant turns up one day and wields all this power over you.
He or she sits there silently looking at your books and your business can succeed or fail depending on what they see.
‘It's easy for them, isn't it, with their salary index-linked, paid holidays and regular hours — civil servants go home for their supper at 4.30 in the afternoon…
Nobody rushes to my rescue shouting ‘overtime’ if I work half the night to keep the business going.
But there I am, waiting for them to give me the okay.’
Entrepreneurs feel they have earned their freedom, their power over their little kingdom, through their hard work and willingness to take risks — it's galling to have that freedom curtailed by someone they don't respect.
Not surprisingly, the temporary usurper of the throne is seen as a threat, an unworthy upstart, rather than as an understanding protector.
People go for being their own boss, usually, to feel free.
But though they are free of a controlling hierarchy, they find themselves also free of a protecting structure.
They stand alone — and fall alone.
That's accepted as a fair exchange most of the time.
‘But,’ said a self-employed woman, ‘when the tax form appears, you see that you are not so free after all.
You are expected to pay your whack to benefit society at large.
If you break the rules you are penalized.
‘That seems reasonable.
But no-one seems interested in the fact that you've almost certainly stinted yourself for years.
Nobody cares about the rules you've broken in relation to yourself.
Who takes into account the sleepless nights, the missed family time, the frayed marriages, the unending responsibility?
Who pays you back for that?’
This resentment, this sense of injustice that they have put in more than their fair share of time, energy and guts, was the most frequently struck note.
If you've put in more than your share, why can't you — fairly — take more out?
Mixed in with the plea for self-empowering was this justification by appeal to natural justice.
It isn't what I expected to find.
I had imagined go-it-alone people to be temperamentally independent-minded and even rebellious — and perhaps to feel a kind of robust roguishness at cheating the taxman on principle.
But that wasn't usually the case.
Rarely did tax-dodging come over as a matter of pitting wits against the authorities to win a joyful, if surreptitious, psychological dominance.
Putting salt in coffee hardly qualifies, after all, as a brilliant show of wit.
Mostly it came over as a matter of feeling hard done by — self-pity rather than bravado; or a habitual, weary tinkering to save a bit here and there.
Did they resent paying tax on principle?
Should taxes be abolished?
The answers were surprisingly unequivocal.
‘Of course we should pay tax,’ said one businessman, quite shocked.
‘Of course.
What about the hospitals, and the elderly?
It's just the amount I'm asked to put in that seems unreasonable.’
So the tax-avoiders and evaders, it seems, justify their actions by perceiving themselves as exploited by society, rather than as exploiters of it.
In some circumstances, of course, this perception is justified: if you are a boy in Tanzania selling peanuts in the street in order to survive, you may be perfectly correct in your perception that the policeman approaching you is going to blackmail you for not having a street seller's license, rather than to assist you in making an honest living.
In this case you are a genuine victim of society.
But not everyone is.
Sometimes, it seems, the sense of victimization hardens into habit.
There is a pattern of initial frankness followed by aggrieved resentment which can finally sink to a self-excusing cynicism.
‘You start off wanting to be fair about everything,’ said one man, ruefully.
‘But after a while you feel the pressure.
They're all ganging up on you, the banks, the tax people — and you've got to survive.
Have you any idea how many thousands of pounds I have to pay in employer contributions each month for my employees — out of a small business with a small profit?
It's ridiculous.’
Since no one else is going to look after your interests, you need to look after them yourself.
According to this view you can reach for security through self-help — individual action, or action in small groups of like-minded people — but not through reliance on big bureaucracies.
In such an atmosphere of public mistrust, questions must arise about the purpose of the tax system.
If taxes are not providing the education, health-care and national welfare services that the public wants, will the public be willing to go on paying for them?
The left-wing response is to press for more money to improve these services, make them more relevant to public needs; the right-wing response is to privatize further — and if the latter is the response you favour, then you have a wonderful excuse for withholding taxes:’ Why should I pay for services I don't use?’
It doesn't work that way though.
The better off may use some private systems from time-to-time but they are still supported by a network of public systems they can and do fall back on.
My elderly neighbour goes to a private doctor for her constant little ailments but if she were seriously sick the public system would take over hospital care and post-hospital home-care.
By cheating on their taxes the rich are not only exploiting the system themselves but increasing the pressure on those that can't afford alternatives
The pressure is felt on a personal as well as on a macro level.
A newly-divorced mother turned to a professional counsellor for help.
Finding enough cash to pay even for a handful of sessions wasn't easy but she reckoned the sessions worth every penny.
One day, though, sitting in the counsellor's sumptuous study she offered him a cheque instead of cash — and he replied with his customary charm and vigour, that she had to pay more if she paid by cheque.
Embarrassed, she paid by cash and wrestled with her conscience all the way home.
Was she colluding in his tax evading?
Perhaps she should have paid by cheque after all.
But if she had, he still wouldn't have been paying his tax — she would have.
Why should she pay two lots of tax?
Why should she, on her tiny, shaky income, be supporting him?
The fine talk in the sessions about love and understanding, give and take, began to wither on the vine.
The crunch is money — and I've never met a rich man or woman yet who didn't have wonderfully imaginative, sophisticated, ways to justify hoarding yet a little more and a little more.
Leaving the peasants in the dark
From multi-sectoral operational components to the cross-cultural implementation of paradigm shifts.
The ‘development community’ spouts a mind-numbing new vocabulary to obscure the disturbing — often unmanagable — reality it faces.
Tarzie Vittachi tries to shed some light.
Language has many paradoxical purposes.
It can be used to communicate and to discommunicate, to bring people nearer to one another and to separate them; to liberate human beings and to control them; to iron out differences and to make and establish differences; to clarify and mystify.
Politicians, accountants, television producers, newspaper editors and all such mandarins who have set themselves up as authorities with power to say yea or nay to us, to sift right from wrong, good from bad, lawful from criminal, and to decide what the rest of us may know and what we may not (‘All the News that's Fit to Print’) exploit this wondrous paradoxical nature of language with uncanny skill to attain and retain their hegemony over others.
The trick is to concoct words into a special language, a mystery, an abracadabra which they and only then can decode when and if they choose to do so.
Empires were built on this use of language.
Imperial governments created a new elite of natives and invested them with the power of their language of administration and justice.
This special class acted as their surrogates for over 400 years.
But they made a costly mistake in teaching their language to the hoipolloi.
Shakespeare foresaw the result.
Prospero rants at Caliban:
I pitied thee
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other: when thou did not, savage
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes
With words that made them known’
And Caliban, the quintessential colonial serf, spits back:
You taught me language; and my profit on it
Is, I know how to curse: The red plague rid you,
For learning me your language
Distancing oneself from others of the same species is a classic way of maintaining power.
The king in his moated castle, the Chief Executive Officer in his top-floor executive suite, the banker behind the marble half-wall, the bureaucrat skulking behind his secretary, and the high-priest in his cloistered cell, all learned the trick long ago.
Distance makes the heart go pit-a-pat with awe and wonder.
Crowns, robes, tridents, orbs, college ties and fraternity pins enhanced the power of those ‘entitled’ to wear them, in the eyes of those outside the circle.
But since humans are communicators by nature, a special distance-making language was essential if the mandarins were to maintain their power over the peasants.
The inheritors of the imperial mantle — United Nations bureaucrats and their camp followers in the ‘development community’, have learned to avoid the mistake of democratizing their language.
The very label they have given themselves —‘development community’— sets them apart from those whose life conditions they purport to ‘develop’.
The putative beneficiaries of the ministrations, the village and the slum dwellers and the destitute, are not members of the development community.
They are Calibans without the gift of language waiting with hands outstretched patiently, hopelessly, haplessly, for the boons of the new colonialism to drop into their laps, inshallah.
They are pigmyfied, made remote and alienated by language.
Here's a masterful example from an Indian specialist reporting on the meeting of a coven of developmentalists held at one of those resorts in Holland frequented by that happy breed:
The implementation of key targets as operational components of the new strategy — and hence also of the process of negotiation — may be conceived in the time frame of a decade but only in the form of a dynamic process, with different time frames for different components, and with an in-built and effective mechanism for review and reappraisal, leading to adjustments and correctives whenever the strategy is seen to deflect from the goals and objectives of development for which it was devised.
It should be in the form not of a ‘plan of action’ but rather of a manifesto, which provides the framework of a sustained commitment to, and implementation of, development goals and their operational components, and embodies institutional mechanisms for continuous negotiation, monitoring, appraisal, criticism and modification.
What on earth can that superb balderdash mean, especially to a villager in India or Tanzania even if it was translated into Hindi or Swahili?
It was not intended for the man or woman at the receiving end but for the author's fellow elitists.
The fact that none of them could decipher it matters not at all.
The intention was to mystify everybody, including the writer.
It was an exercise in total discommunication.
It marks and establishes the arcane authority of the (usually male) development expert much more profoundly and severely than his outer lineaments of specialness such as the belted safari suit he wears ‘in the field’ and the flap and epaulet-laden trench coat he sports at the conferences he attends with sickening frequency in the West.
He is playing the same game as missionaries who went to Asia to convert the ‘heathen Chinee’ and to Africa to redeem the ‘dark continent’from barbarism.
Civilizer was the verb the French colonialists used for their depredations in West Africa.
Each year, without fail, a new set of alienating words and phrases is put into currency.
One of the most infectious was ‘Third World’.
It was first used by Alfred Sauvy, a French demographer, in an article published in Le Monde in which he referred to two industrialized words, one capitalist, one communist, and a tiers monde which remains largely agricultural.
The developmentalists grabbed it and used it to make distance between the materially rich and poor nations so that very soon ‘Third World’ universally connoted poverty, overpopulation, disease, disorder, illiteracy, violent social upheavals and every imaginable human horror.
Tacitly interpolating a second world as a buffer between the first and third, served to emphasize the non-relationship between the rich and the poor.
But despite its distance-making intent and its stereotyping effects, the phrase Third World has an intrinsic value.
It fulfils the essential requirement of an expressive image, which is to illuminate brightly and quickly.
As soon as you hear a reference to Third World you know what it means even if some of its shades of meaning are deleterious to your grand hopes of creating One World out of its lunatic divisions and separatisms.
It is a bit of probably irreplaceable shorthand.
Because of its unhappy associations, the United Nations glossary eschews ‘Third World’, preferring circumlocutions such as Developing Countries and Less Developed Countries.
But these euphemisms never really fitted the bill.
So the Development Set invented ‘The South’ to denote an area of darkness out of which millions are trying to emerge into the light.
That verbal devise too has its problems.
For one thing, it is not easy for The South, with its rich and ancient cultural histories to conceded that the light is in The North.
(All the great religious teachers were born East of Suez!)
And, for another, The South is only a hemispherical reality.
It has no cultural or historical cohesion.
Asians know nothing about Africa and Africans know nothing about Asia.
They might well have done a thousand years ago, but the Imperial Age converted that horizontal relationship into a vertical one so that Sri Lankan schools still teach vertical history ‘Ceylon Under British Rule’ and Senegal continues its cultural obsession with France.
The failure of the North-South Dialogue showed The South that The North — by which they meant the West — did have a coherent distinctiveness: power, financial, technological and military power which it protected with a specialized technological language unintelligible to anyone outside its closed circle except the Brown and Black Sahibs in The South who had been educated and trained in The North.
The South as an image lives on, and has been given a new elixir with the appointment of Julius Nyerere as the head of the South Commission.
When the language of development with all its hollow echoes of Appropriate Technology and Basic Needs failed to make a dent in poverty, then the ‘paradigm shift’ raised its ugly head.
This piece of verbal jugglery was invented as a ready response to the increasingly common question as to why after so many billions and so many decades of effort by the experts and the international development set, the gap between the rich and poor was widening and the number of destitute people had increased to nearly a billion.
What was urgently needed, we were told, is a ‘paradigm shift’.
According to Webster and other worthy lexicographers, a paradigm is a model or an example of a work in its various inflections.
But according to the Development Set, what is needed is not equitable distribution of the material resources between and within nations — no siree, nothing so mundane as that.
What is needed is a different linguistic model.
To wit, a paradigm shift.
Nothing less would do.
If they have no rice why don't they eat a new paradigm? asked the developmentalists at their seminars as they loaded their plates at the restaurant buffets in their five-star hotels.
The paradigms wouldn't shift because they were firmly fixed in the determination of the ‘decision makers’ to continue wielding their power.
Then a new verbal mantra was put about by the IMF: Structural Adjustment.
That was the rich man's panacea for the litany of ills of the poor.
That is the way for the South to grow and pay off its debts to the banks of the North.
The poor must tighten their belts and if they had run out of notches, it was just too bad.
‘Must we starve our children to pay off our debts?’ pleaded Julius Nyerere.
But his words fell on unresponsive ears.
Money talks, but is deaf.
Adjustment has replaced Development in the glossary of the International set.
And the debate goes on, with UNICEF making a cri de coeur for Adjustment with a Human Face.
And the money bags of the IMF and the donor countries have cannily accepted this notion clapping with one hand, because their approval gives their own faces a human mask.
But it is all a matter of language.
Words which are meant to be symbols of reality take the place of what they stand for.
Mirages become water-holes.
Images parade as substance.
And the special language of the specialist is a substitute for thought.
So what are we to do?
Try once more to shift a paradigm?
Adjust our faces?
Wring our hands and bleat that the world is ‘interdependent’, ignoring the plain truth that interdependence without equity leads only to the deepening dependency of the weaker?
Demand a return to the North-South Dialogue, forgetting that a dialogue between a mendicant and a mandarin can result, at best, in condescending charity?
Shall we pick up sticks and stones and drive our rulers from their seats as Toussaint L'Ouverture did in Haiti 200 years ago and the Burmese and the Palestinians are now trying to do?
Or shall we seek comfort in the language of religion?
At least that promises a second innings, another chance for Caliban's redemption.
Why men hate women
‘…
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat; and she gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat…
’ And we all know what happened then — or do we?
Celia Kitzinger throws new light on an old story.
It almost certainly wasn't an apple in the Garden of Eden.
The Genesis story refers simply to ‘forbidden fruit’ and biblical scholars argue that a quince or a fig was more likely.
But in mediaeval woodcuts, on stained-glass windows and in classical Christian art, the apple symbolizes the first sin and Eve is portrayed as the first sinner.
Eve the temptress, created by a male deity, formed from the rib of Adam, later to cause the fall of ‘man’ from grace and innocence — this patriarchal myth of woman underpins Western culture.
In casting woman and serpent as evil-doers, Judaic writers overturned a powerful earlier tradition which associated both with wisdom and fertility.
In the ancient goddess religions, snakes were the special companions of women, symbols of sexuality, linked through the shedding of their skins — which was seen as a form of rebirth — with women's creative and reproductive powers.
Early Mediterranean statues and reliefs depict fecund goddesses with great nourishing breasts, generous hips and bellies ripe with pregnancy, often with serpents entwined sensuously about their bodies.
Appalled by this pagan tradition, the authors of Genesis converted the sensual, fertile goddess into a shameful sinner.
They covered her nakedness with an apron of figleaves, and punished her sexuality with pain and oppression: ‘In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee’.
The myth was used by early churchmen as a vehicle for expressing their horror and disgust at women's bodies: ‘What is the difference whether it is in a wife or in a mother, it is still Eve the temptress that we must beware of in any other woman1,’ wrote St Augustine in the late fourth century.
Projecting all guilt upon women, branding them as lustful allies of the Devil who wean men from God and lead them from the path of virtue, the Genesis story enshrines the myth of feminine evil as a justification for female oppression.
Terrifying hatred
The history of Western men's attitudes to women is a history of woman-hatred, often with terrifying consequences.
During the European witch hunts, thousands of women were tortured and murdered when woman-as-Eve was transformed into woman-as-witch.
The infamous Malleus Maleficarum — a document produced by two Dominican monks who were appointed by Pope Innocent VIII in 1484 to investigate and stamp out witchcraft — states that ‘all witchcraft comes from carnal lust, which is in women insatiable’.
The charges levelled against witches included every misogynistic sexual fantasy harboured by the monks and priests who officiated over the witch hunts: witches copulated with the devil, devoured new-born babies and rendered men impotent.
A whole chapter of Malleus is entitled: ‘How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile member’ 2.
Witches were also accused of using herbs to ease the pain of labour at a time when the Church held that pain in childbirth was the Lord's punishment for Eve's original sin.
The Inquisitors concluded: ‘Blessed be the Most High who has so far preserved the Male sex from so great a crime2.’
This virulent loathing of women's bodies continued during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in the West: any expression of sexual desire by women was considered filthy, corrupt, sinful and marked them as whores, the daughters of Eve.
Upper- and middle-class Victorian men relied on working-class female prostitutes to satisfy their sexual appetites, while demanding purity of their wives and inflicting upon them the impossibly sentimentalized and saintly ideal of the Virgin Mother.
Middle-class women and girls who expressed sexual feelings — with men or through masturbation — were often diagnosed as ‘morally insane’ and imprisoned in mental asylums.
Others were ‘cured’ through sexual surgery, including clitoridectomy or ‘female circumcision’, which doctors first practised on indigent American women and Black female slaves.
These same physicians continued a long tradition of viewing menstruation as dirty and dangerous, ‘the curse’ inflicted upon women because of Eve's sin.
The new professions of gynaecology and psychology denounced women's bodies and minds as seriously defective, and used ‘scientific’ discoveries to justify excluding women from higher education and from political life.
Woman's Bible
The first feminists struggled against ideas like these — often with remarkable humour.
Weary of quotations from the Bible being used to lend God's authority to the subjection of women, the leading US feminist Elizabeth Cady Stanton published The Woman's Bible in 1895, a caustic and entertaining commentary on the scriptural passages most favoured by misogynists.
As a comment on Eve's lofty nature she notes that the serpent ‘did not try to tempt her from the path of duty by brilliant jewels, rich dresses, worldly luxuries or pleasures, but with the promise of knowledge…and he found in the woman that intense thirst for knowledge that the simple pleasures of picking flowers and talking with Adam did not satisfy’.
Compared with Adam, she says, Eve appears to great advantage throughout the entire drama.
Few contemporary feminists would consider the Bible sufficiently central to our oppression to be worthy of this sort of attack.
Yet the underlying woman-hating motif of the Genesis story is reiterated throughout Western culture, permeating language, law, medicine, psychology, art and literature.
At last count the English language had ‘0 words (almost all derogatory) for a sexually promiscuous female and only 20 for a sexually promiscuous male (most of these complimentary).
Words associated with women are sexualized so that apparently equivalent terms acquire very different meanings.
A ‘master’ exercises authority whereas a ‘mistress’is the so-called kept woman.
The term ‘sir’ retains respect while ‘madam’refers to someone who keeps a brothel.
A ‘lord of all he surveys’ is quite different from a ‘lady of the streets’, and the meaning of ‘he's a professional’is generally understood differently from ‘she's a professional’.
Even the word ‘woman’ is used as a term of abuse.
Likewise, words available to describe female genitals —’ cunt’, ‘slit’, ‘crack’, ‘slot’— reflect centuries of sadistic male use.
Too often even modern obstetric medicine treats women's genitals with brutality.
A pregnant woman faces cold metal instruments being shoved carelessly into her by clumsy doctors.
She endures unnecessary episiotomies — the cutting of skin between anus and vagina — to speed delivery and is then sewn up again ‘tight as a virgin for your husband’.
Triumphant phallus
This hostility towards the female body is expressed through pornography — most sickeningly in ‘snuff’ movies in which the actress is literally murdered on screen.
In the pornographic portrayal of the sexual act women are overpowered and silenced, strapped helpless to tables, bound spreadeagled on beds, humiliated, degraded, gagged, handcuffed, beaten, assaulted with gun, knife, whip, penis.
The pornography of pregnancy — in which pregnant women are depicted as whores, huge bellies fetishized, cunts displayed for the camera — is the ultimate ‘triumph of the phallus over the death-dealing vagina’ 4.
Men frequently fear women's sexual power and feel justified in blaming them for acts of male violence.
A 12-year-old girl who was raped after visiting her attacker's bedsit for coffee, behaved ‘foolishly’ commented one British judge in 1988.
A few years earlier the judge observed of a 17-year-old girl who was raped by a motorist with whom she hitched a lift after being stranded following a party, that ‘the victim was guilty of a great deal of contributory negligence’ 1.
Another rapist was sentenced to only three months in prison because his five-year-old victim was, said the judge, ‘an unusually sexually promiscuous young lady.’
He added, ‘I do not put blame on the child exactly, but I do believe she was the aggressor5.’
Female sexuality causes men to lose self-control so that they cease to be responsible for their actions — or so runs the accepted wisdom.
And in the US one woman continues to be raped every three minutes, one wife battered every 18 seconds.
Roots of hatred
Why do men express such hatred of women?
Psychoanalysts suggest that men's gender identity is very fragile because, within typical child-rearing practices, girls can identify with their primary care-taker while boys have to separate themselves from their mother in order to achieve and assert their masculinity.
‘The whole process of becoming masculine is at risk in the little boy from the date of his birth on; his still-to-be-created masculinity is endangered by the primary, profound, primeval oneness with the mother6.’
It is only by setting woman apart as Other, by resisting intimacy with her, by treating her with contempt and aggression, that men assert their own independent and fragile masculinity.
And because men have distanced themselves from ‘the weaker sex’ over the ages, setting themselves up as superior, it must be unbearably humiliating to need and desire women so much.
Sex with women can re-evoke in men ‘the unqualified, boundless, helpless passion of infancy.
If he lets her, she can shatter his adult sense of power and control; she can bring out the soft, wild, naked baby in him’ 7.
In heterosexual intercourse men risk discovering in women an unsettling power which contradicts and undermines their own more obvious social, political and physical power.
No wonder male sexual desire is so desperately tormented and full of conflict.
Because women know men to be vulnerable and fragile, they are often tempted to excuse them as ‘just little boys’ who need to over-compensate for their sense of inadequacy or ‘womb-envy’with acts of spiteful misogyny.
Female nurturing is presented as the solution to male violence — as though women haven't been doing that for centuries.
Germaine Greer once commented that ‘women have very little idea of how much men hate them’.
For it is painful to confront the extent of men's hatred.
But only when both men and women acknowledge its existence, its extent and its pervasiveness, can we act to end it.
A few weeks ago, the Sun, a Murdoch newspaper in the UK with a circulation of over four million, ran a story about new words for sex.
‘Nobody,’ they reported, ‘bonks’any more.
The phrase is ‘porking’ or having a ‘pork’.
Younger girls who put it about a bit are called ‘piglets'.’
It comes as no surprise to find a tabloid newspaper defining women by reference to their sexual behaviour and presenting sex as a sort of urgent male need, a bit like going to the toilet.
But then I found in the same week in the relatively liberal UK magazine Time Out several references to women as ‘chicks’ and ‘broads’.
It was as if feminism had never happened.
Terms are used, like chicks, broads, birds, dolls, slags and tarts which mean that women are never simply ‘women’ but always to be defined according to their sexual appearance and their sexual availability.
I should have been prepared for the lack of change on this front.
In the 1970s when feminism first drew attention to sexist language it also argued that sexism was deeply rooted in our attitudes precisely because of the power of language to make sexist terms appear to describe permanent cultural values.
And in using these terms, we reinforce such attitudes and make them seem like something timelessly true about women.
There are endless terms which stereotype or dismiss women.
Words like ‘bitch’ and ‘shrew’imply that women are in some way transgressing their feminine role; such women are too strong and stroppy, not considerate and attentive in the way women are meant to be.
One would expect that the term ‘feminine’ would carry correspondingly positive associations.
But this is not always the case.
‘Feminine’ does often suggest positive (although limited) values like petite, delicate and caring as in ‘She makes a good nurse because she is very feminine’.
But it can also have extremely negative connotations, as in ‘She is a difficult person to work with; she is too feminine’.
Here feminine implies hysterical, illogical and unreasonable.
‘Masculine’ on the contrary never carries these negative implications; it simply implies strong, sometimes powerful and not effeminate.
Feminism's objections to sexist language have been much parodied.
The insistence that ‘person’ should be used rather than‘man’, has produced endless jokes about Manchester being renamed Personchester or Mr and Mrs Freeman renaming themselves Mr and Mrs Freeperson.
Such jokes obscure the fact that words which have negative connotations, or which seem to exclude women, tend to reinforce a sense of powerlessness.
‘Man’ and ‘mankind’are terms used interchangeably, supposedly to refer to the whole of humanity, as in ‘Mankind has fallen from grace’or ‘Man is the most intelligent of the animals’.
Yet feminists have pointed out the terms ‘mankind’ or man often imply only males.
To say, for example, that ‘Woman is the most intelligent of the animals’ is therefore interpreted as a definite political statement.
And when the term ‘man’, is applied to categories of work — chairman, foreman, spokesman — it becomes clear that although it is meant to imply both sexes, it very frequently implies exactly what it says, spokesman.
If the language itself assumes that men will fill these jobs, it becomes ‘natural’ for men to do so — and exceptional if women do.
And even women internalize the sense that it is inappropriate or especially difficult for them to do these things.
This example points to an underlying trend in the English language: to assume that male is the norm and to define women by reference to their sexuality.
The common use of man or mankind does also hide the fact that women have an experience and a history of their own.
A right-wing politician recently declared that ‘Rape is the only one of mankind's crimes which I have not been forced to commit’.
This does suggest that it is men are doing the raping.
But it still obscures the fact that it is women who are raped.
The statement implies that rape is a factor of humanity — an eternal problem for all humans — rather than a specific crime committed against women.
In the same way as taking the surname of the male in marriage tends to make tracing the female branches of the family more difficult, the use of the term man tends to make women's history disappear.
Where the English language does make specific references to the female, it often has derogatory implications.
All the male terms in the following list are relatively neutral and descriptive of a job or a position — master/mistress, host/hostess, fisherman/fishwife, prince/princess, bachelor/spinster.
The female categories on the contrary have negative, pejorative or just excessively feminine connotations.
‘Hostess’ and ‘mistress’, both imply certain kinds of sexual behaviour; ‘spinster’implies not only unmarried but unmarriageable.
Not all female/male oppositions have such connotations of course.
In the actor/actress pairing there are no particularly negative qualities attaching to the female term.
And in this respect, it is partially correct to think of language as rooted in particular social forms and reflecting the social conditions of various different occupations.
In our society, men historically have occupied the positions of power such as master and host.
The deviation of the feminine term from the profession into other meanings partly reflects the assumed impossibility that women should occupy these positions, and the ensuing implication that women only occupy head of household positions by virtue of selling sexual services to men, whereas in the acting profession women are much more ‘equal’.
However language does not just reflect the society in which we live, it also contributes to how we experience that reality and how much we contribute to keeping things as they are.
Language doesn't just change when social conditions change.
Even if women are legally entitled to equality, sexist language still activates and re-circulates deeply held beliefs about female inequality.
The idiomatic phrases, the stereotyped utterances, the patterns of speech themselves actively contribute to a world where women are the different sex, the defined sex.
What we have is an excess of definitions around the feminine whereas men are the undefined norm.
There is a school of thought (embodied by Dale Spender's book Man-Made Language) that says we can think of language itself as being ‘male’.
Dale Spender describes the tendency to refer to the male as the norm and women in pejorative terms as a ‘rule’ of language; she use the term ‘sexist syntax’to describe this.
She also uses studies of women's habits of speech to suggest that women use a slightly different language.
This is somewhat inaccurate.
The habit of treating man as the norm and the feminine as negative is not a syntactic rule.
Syntax refers to the rules of speech which underlie the production of grammatical utterances.
The differences between male and female connotations are really located at the level of semantics (that is the level of meaning) rather than at the level of syntax.
Thus it is perfectly grammatical to say ‘wife and man’ but not customary to do so.
‘Man and wife’ represents a habitual mode of speech which treats men as the norm and women as requiring definition.
The issue of whether women themselves actually use a different form of language to men is more complex.
There does seem to be a certain amount of evidence that men and women have different styles of speech in the English language.
The evidence for this is summarized by Jennifer Coates.
When men and women are talking together, for example, it seems that men interrupt more, talk more, swear more and use more imperatives; whereas women ask more questions and tend to use more polite forms of speech.
But these differences of style hardly constitute different languages.
Indeed men and women regularly cross from one style to another.
We have only to think of Margaret Thatcher's parliamentary delivery or interview behaviour to find a woman using characteristically male speech styles.
The differences between men and women seem to arise from factors such as women's hesitancy, women's role as cajoler and mediator for men, and men's social dominance and sense of themselves as more authoritative.
The patterns of speech are rooted in a society where men literally do have more power than women, and indeed power over women.
But as with the sexist idioms and assumptions we looked at earlier, the patterns of language do not just reflect inequality.
They also actively contribute to it.
Because language appears such a natural instrument with which we can describe reality, its terms and expressions seem to describe the way things are and will always be.
But the truth is that these patterns of speech belong to convention and habit.
And every time we use prejudicial terms, we actively re-circulate sexist ways of seeing the differences and relations between the sexes.
I hope therefore that however much the cards seem to be stacked against us, feminists will keep on about language.
For every time someone talks about ‘piglets’, ‘slags’ and ‘chicks’, the task of achieving equality for women is that much harder.
Do what they say, say what they want
Some women are said to be ‘dangerous’ if they act as many men do all the time.
They are locked away indefinitely, without trial or treatment, in a cruel, forgotten corner of ‘care’.
Prue Stevenson talks to some of them.
‘I'm not mad.
I've just been bad.
I've been angry.
An angry woman.
I've spent all my life from the age of eight in institutions.
I've always been in trouble…
All the reports I had done to do with my mental state have all said that I'm not crazy, and yet I was diagnosed as a psychopath and bunged in Broadmoor.
In a medical book, the psychopath is cold-blooded, premeditated, uncaring, manipulative.
I'm none of them.
I care.
I care very much about people.
It was myself I didn't care about…
I needed help.
I needed something.
Broadmoor was what they gave me.’
Toni, aged 25, spent three and a half years in Broadmoor.
Like Rampton, Moss Side and Park Lane, Broadmoor is a maximum-security mental hospital housing the people said to be the most dangerous in the UK.
To be sent to one of these ‘special’ hospitals you must be seen as a danger either to others or yourself.
You must be diagnosed as suffering from mental illness, mental impairment or — the loosest and most controversial diagnosis of all — psychopathic disorder.
A third of the women in the ‘specials’ are diagnosed as suffering from a psychopathic disorder, compared with less than a quarter of the men.
This suggests that the predominantly male, white judiciary and psychiatrists who make the decisions use a different set of standards for women and men.
Aggression, sleeping rough, unstable sexual relationships, heavy drinking, fighting, loud and lewd behaviour, the actions that you see men performing every day on our city streets, can all go against women when decisions are being taken about where they should be sent.
While some patients in the special hospitals are dangerous, the majority are not.
The specials look like prisons — high walls, barbed wire, electronic doors and large bunches of keys.
Male nurses wear prison-officer uniforms.
The special hospitals, however, still insist that they are not prisons but hospitals.
Talking to women who have been there, or face the possibility of being sent there, you find that the fear of being put in the specials is far greater than the fear of imprisonment.
‘You hear of the specials, but you think ‘that can't happen to me.
I know I'm bad.
But I'm not that bad.’
And then you realize that they mean it and you think ‘My God!
If they send me to Rampton, what does that make me?’’
Jo, now aged 26, spent six and a half years in Rampton.
Sylvia, currently in Moss Side, is not untypical of the women in special hospitals today.
She is 24 and has been in prison or special hospital for the past five and a half years.
She was physically and sexually assaulted from an early age.
She could not settle at school, ran away from home on several occasions and spent most of her time alone.
She sniffed glue and abused drugs and alcohol.
She spent time on two occasions in psychiatric hospital.
Twice, aged 15 and 16, she was remanded to prison for a series of offences including setting fire to rubbish bins, attempted theft, criminal damage (slashing car tyres) and making hoax telephone calls to the fire brigade.
In 1984, when she was 18, she was arrested, convicted of assault and sentenced to two years in prison.
Most of her sentence was spent in the psychiatric unit in Holloway Prison.
She mutilated herself, damaged her cell, showed violence towards staff and set fire to her bedding.
She spent many hours locked up alone in her cell.
She cannot read or write.
She had no outside contact or support.
Six months before she was due to be released she was assessed for admission to a special hospital, at the request of the prison psychiatrist; two months later she was transferred to Moss Side hospital.
She is still there now, four years later.
Like all other patients in her situation she does not know when she will get out.
Life for women in special hospitals is harsh, mundane, stereotyped, sexist and racist — despite the best efforts of some of those who work there.
Without ordinary social contact the women quickly become institutionalized.
They complain that they receive little by way of treatment.
Many won't talk to psychiatrists or psychologists, who are predominantly men.
They are frequently put in seclusion because they have mutilated themselves — a cruel and inappropriate response to terrible acts of self-harm.
‘As far as I was concerned they didn't do nothing to help me.’ says one former patient.
‘I hardly ever saw a doctor.
It wasn't because of any treatment that I got out of Rampton.
It was because I behaved.
I did what they wanted.
I used to put on that I'd accepted it, but I didn't really.
You can't let it show, can you?
I used to say what they wanted to hear.
I used to make out that I'd changed.
But I hadn't.
It was all a false pretence.
Do what they say, say what they want, just to get out.’
The scent of victory
Flies storm the food.
Houses stink of rotting waste.
Children are ill.
Finally the women of Buntong Tiga can stand it no longer— they take matters into their own hands.
Mary Bala reports.
‘Why don't you take care of the child?
She's always sick,’ Samy shouts above the baby's screams.
His wife, Meena, shoots an anguished glance at the infant and yells back.
‘I do take care of her.
It must be these damned flies.
You are a municipal worker, you should do something about them.’
Samy slaps her across the face and storms out, criticizing her for suggesting actions that could cost him his job.
Domestic disputes like this happen every day between the 1,000 squatters who live in Buntong Tiga, Malaysia.
They have been living here for seven years but now they are being inundated by refuse.
The residents complain to the city council that gave them the land — and discover that it has now designated the area as a garbage dump.
At first people suffer silently, afraid that protest will mean eviction or sackings.
But whenever the women meet, their talk always returns to the increasing menace of flies, the unbearable stench and the deteriorating health of their children.
Finally, a small group visits Poopathy — the most educated woman in the area.
She agrees to go the city council and lodge a complaint.
There is no response.
She approaches politicians who promise action, but months pass and nothing happens.
Meanwhile, the dump grows bigger and higher: there are plastic containers filled with decaying food, hundreds of plastic bottles, factory rejects including drugs.
Even amputated limbs are found in this smoky mountain.
It is a time bomb waiting to explode.
The city council has cheated them.
Politicians have failed them.
In despair the women approach a local consumers' organization — the Education and Research Association for Consumers (ERA)— which takes their complaint seriously.
The ERA is conscious that change can only come from the residents themselves, and it begins to organize the women.
After a series of discussions, a committee is elected.
Poopathy is chosen to liaise between the women and ERA, and the group draws up a plan of action.
A press conference is held and articles about the dump begin appearing in local newspapers.
Then the women draw up a petition and go from house to house explaining the problem and collecting signatures.
The campaign is beset by problems.
Politicians make threats, and some husbands forbid their wives to be involved.
The consumer group encourages the women to continue.
And shortly afterwards the television carries a special report about them in all the four main languages — Malay, Chinese, Tamil and English.
Buoyed by the media coverage, the women decide to picket the dump.
More than 150 women and children gather there.
They shout, sing and hold their placards high, demanding the right to a clean, safe, healthy environment.
They picket from dawn till dusk, organizing themselves in shifts.
Then the women and children blockade the dump to stop the city council's garbage lorries from entering.
The press and television focus on the blockade; public sympathy is aroused.
The city council, health officers and politicians begin to react.
The deputy president of the city council, Datuk Haji Umar Abu, visits the site with his entourage and assures residents that the council will stop dumping rubbish in the area.
He agrees to cover the garbage with sand and to spray the area with chemicals to kill the flies and mosquitoes.
He even suggests turning the area into a recreational park.
The women are overjoyed.
Their hard work has paid off.
They giggle as their men rush forward in front of the TV camera to ask the deputy president questions.
As usual men want to claim the glory.
But the women know that they themselves made the changes happen.
Through their own efforts they have created a happier, healthier environment for their children.
And because of this they are empowered.
Worth reading on…
MADNESS
The work of Dorothy Rowe is clear, beautifully written and much more satisfying (though longer) than most of the DIY mental health guides.
Try her Beyond Fear (Fontana/Collins 1987).
On the issues, there's a vacuum where a genuinely ‘global’(i.e. not specifically Western and medical) perspective should be.
Sudhir Kakar's fascinating Shamans, Mystics and Doctors (Mandala Books 1982) shows how the vacuum can be filled.
The medical authority is Julian Leff Psychiatry Around the Globe (Gaskell/Royal College of Psychiatrists 1988).
But read Suman Fernando's Race and Culture in Psychiatry (Tavistock/Routledge 1988) immediately afterwards.
For compulsive readers, two classics still retain their power today.
Michel Foucault's Madness and Civilization (Tavistock/Routledge 1967) is intriguing, Eurocentric and almost understandable.
Franz Fanon's The Wretched of the Earth (Penguin 1967) is the best book ever likely to be written about the impact of colonial domination on human feeling.
ZIMBABWE
Zimbabwe's contradictions run deep.
While First Street in the capital, Harare, throngs with teenagers trying to look American, most rural Zimbabweans are still proud to be peasants.
Ten years after the end of Rhodesia, business magazines call Zimbabwe ‘Independent Africa's brightest hope’.
They are paying tribute to Prime Minister Robert Mugabe's policy of reconciliation, which had forestalled the kind of ‘white flight’ from the commercial sector that helped cripple the modernizing economies of African countries in the 1960s.
The price of this pragmatism has been to disappoint those who expected radical changes after Independence.
Zimbabwe's Rhodesian inheritance persists in its barely-changed colonial pattern of land ownership, with the best land used for private commercial farming and cattle grazing.
Farmworkers' conditions are still, on the whole, degrading.
The resettlement programme for peasant families lags far behind its targets.
Some blame the 1979 Lancaster House Agreement for tying the Government's hands.
Others say there is no political will for real land reform, since the leadership's aim is to keep the previous system intact and in working order, not to break it up.
However Zimbabwe has managed to produce huge surpluses of maize, in non-drought years, with a much higher proportion than before grown by peasant farmers encouraged by good prices and improved roads.
There is much to celebrate: thousands of rural clinics have been built, and programmes established to spread information about hygiene and sanitation.
Secondary education has been extended throughout the rural areas, and though it is expensive (about Z$300 or US$??? per year per child), most parents still pay up: the only expanding job sector is teaching.
Zimbabwean pop music has now hit the Western scene, and those who know regard contemporary Shona sculpture as among the world's finest.
Since the much-welcomed United Agreement, signed in 1987 between Robert Mugabe's ZANU and Joshua Nkomo's ZAPU, the atmosphere in hard-pressed Matabeleland has been peaceful, and the South African-backed MNR (Mozambique National Resistance) have been pushed back into Mozambique.
Below the surface, however, are severe tensions.
Having waited patiently to see the fruits of Independence, people are now asking how their ‘daytime socialist’ leader can afford to drive brand-new imported cars while ‘shortage of foreign exchange’prevents purchase of spare parts for the run-down buses.
In Zimbabwe everyone knows a thousand songs; songs about work, liberation, faith, love, drought and about struggle.
Zimbabwe has to juggle the conflicting demands of democracy and livelihood for its peasants with the foreign-exchange addiction of its ‘modern’ economy.