

INTRODUCTION
The Which?
Book of Plumbing and Central Heating is intended for the home owner who would like to carry out the majority of plumbing jobs in the home but lacks the necessary knowledge and experience.
It is not intended as a guide to the relative merits of competing products — Which? magazine, with its comparative testing reports, fills that role — but rather as a guide to the tools, materials and techniques needed for home plumbing and to the various plumbing jobs around the home, including the installation of central heating.
Plumbing undoubtedly involves a number of skills, but with the disappearance of lead as an important plumbing material and the introduction of easy-to-use materials and do-it-yourself ‘kits’ for plumbing fittings, it has become a lot easier and more within the reach of the moderately competent amateur.
The growth of mail-order suppliers (particularly for central heating) and of do-it-yourself ‘superstores’ has made buying a less daunting task — no longer need the amateur feel embarrassed about not knowing exactly what he or she is looking for.
Plumbing can be physically hard work.
Although many tasks need a degree of precision rather than one of brawn, there are also many (such as undoing reluctant nuts, making large holes in walls, removing old plumbing fittings, lifting floorboards and so on) where strength and not minding getting dirty are important.
The book is divided into three sections.
Part One (Chapters 1 to 6) looks at the tools needed for plumbing and then at the various pipes and fittings used for the majority of jobs.
Then the four main systems within a house — cold water supply, hot water supply, wastes and drains and rainwater disposal — are dealt with in turn.
The jobs necessary to maintain or replace the important parts of these systems are all covered, many with step-by-step illustrated guides.
The second part of the book looks room-by-room at some of the plumbing jobs you might want to do: in the kitchen, in the bathroom, in other rooms and, finally, outside in the garden.
Again, there are step-by-step drawings in addition to the main text.
The third part of the book covers the selection, design and installation of a smallbore central heating system.
While not pretending to be a comprehensive guide to all the aspects of central heating, this section should enable you to save considerable sums by installing your own central heating in all but the most complicated of cases.
To find out more about the different makes of plumbing fittings, you really need to get hold of the manufacturers' catalogues.
Not only do these give details of the various products but they also often have information about how and where the products are to be used as well as tips and hints on plumbing design and techniques.
Addresses are on page 156.
In general, brand names have been excluded from the text, except where products are unique or where instructions are specific to a particular manufacturer's product.
Rules and Regulations
In many ways, Britain is unique in allowing householders to carry out plumbing (and electrical) repairs and alterations in their own houses.
In many other countries, one or other (or both) of these is against the law.
However, there are many rules and regulations in Britain which it is advisable to follow — indeed, you are breaking the law if you don't follow some of them.
The main rules and regulations which affect the home plumber are:
Water authority bye-laws
Gas Safety Regulations
Building Regulations
Wiring Regulations.
Water bye-laws
The water industry in Britain is divided up into a number of autonomous water companies and councils (Chapter 3 gives details) and each is responsible for producing its own water bye-laws.
Although there are some fairly minor local variations (because of the quality of the local water, for example), most water companies base their bye-laws on a set of ‘Model Water Bye-laws’, so there is a degree of consistency across the country.
Copies of water bye-laws are available (usually free) from your local water company.
The purpose of water bye-laws (made under the Water Acts) is to prevent ‘waste, undue consumption, misuse or contamination’ of water.
The kinds of thing which the bye-laws cover are: pipes and pipe fittings, taps, valves, storage cisterns, hot water equipment, bathroom equipment and flushing cisterns.
The bye-laws specify how and where such equipment may be connected to the household plumbing system and the types of fitting and system allowed.
A particular concern is back-siphonage — the contamination of the mains supply with dirty water or water from a storage cistern being drawn back into it — and many of the bye-laws are designed to prevent this.
You are obliged by law to inform your local water company in writing at least five working days before making certain alterations or additions to your plumbing system; there would be stiff penalties if you were to be convicted of a contravention of the water bye-laws.
An Inspector from the local water company may well visit your house if you intend making extensive alterations or additions and may be able to help you by spotting any bad practice or likely contravention of the bye-laws.
Many plumbing fittings for use in the home are approved by the Water Research Centre under its voluntary scheme — look for this approval (or a British Standard Kitemark or an approval mark to a relevant EC Directive) when buying.
The Model Water Bye-laws were extensively revised in 1986 and new local bye-laws, based on the Model, were introduced in January 1989.
The main changes are:
allowing for the first time storage-type unvented hot water systems, which are common in North America and on the Continent (see Chapter 4); unvented sealed-type central heating systems are already allowed
forbidding the use of capillary fittings containing lead-based solder on pipes supplying drinking water (see Chapter 2) n changing the size of flushing cisterns used with WCs (to come into effect in a few years' time — see Chapter 8)
prohibiting the connection of garden hosepipes to taps unless there are back-siphonage protection devices installed at the taps (see Chapter 10)
introducing new requirements for ballvalves, cisterns and frost protection (see Chapter 3).
Building Regulations
Although Building Regulations are mainly concerned with the construction of houses — and proposed changes in construction — there are ways in which they affect the home plumber, too.
The relevant requirements (which have the force of law) are to do with drainage and ventilation of rooms containing WCs.
The Building Regulations themselves do not make for easy reading, but there are various guides designed to explain them and the DoE now produce a Manual to the Building Regulations.
The Regulations are presently the responsibility of Building Control Officers within local authorities and it is to them that you should apply if you want to do any work which might be affected by the Regulations.
New Building Regulations were introduced in 1985.
The Regulations themselves set out only the main performance criteria with the technical detail set out in supporting documents.
Scotland and Northern Ireland have their own Building Regulations.
Gas Safety Regulations
By far the most important provision of the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations for the home plumber is that it is illegal for anyone to carry out any work in relation to a gas fitting who is not ‘competent’ to do so.
In practice, this means that you would be extremely unwise to attempt your own gas fitting.
Although many of the techniques are similar to those needed for cold and hot water plumbing, the consequences of making a mistake are potentially much more serious and if you are found out, you could be heavily fined.
Qualified gas fitters are on the register of CORGI (Confederation for the Registration of Gas Installers).
Wiring Regulations
Except in Scotland (where electrical wiring is part of the Scottish Building Regulations), there are no legal restrictions on anyone carrying out his or her own electrical repairs and alterations.
However, local Electricity Boards have the right to inspect and test any electrical work they think may be unsafe and also to refuse a supply.
The electricians' 'bible' is the IEE Wiring Regulations (full title Regulations for Electrical Installations), produced by the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
The current edition (first published in 1981) is the fifteenth, which has some significant changes over the previous (fourteenth) edition.
As with Building Regulations, changes in the Wiring Regulations are not retrospective and are intended for new installations, but substantial additions or alterations to a house's wiring may mean making changes to an existing installation.
Electrical work should, in general, be left to someone who has the knowledge and confidence to carry it out and who can follow the Wiring Regulations.
If that doesn't sound like you, use a qualified electrician who is a member of the Electrical Contractors Association (ECA) or on the roll of NICEIC (National Inspection Council for Electrical Installation Contracting).
Problem checklist
The Index at the back of the book will direct you to the details, but if you are only aware of a symptom, this checklist may help you to diagnose the plumbing problem.
?
Basin or sink not clearing
The most likely reason is a blocked waste pipe.
Usually, a plunger will clear it (page 74), unless the pipe is frozen (page 40).
Also check gullies and drains to make sure they are not blocked.
?
Cistern slow to fill
If the WC cistern takes a long time to fill, it is possible that a high-pressure type of ballvalve has been fitted instead of a low-pressure type (page 38) or that there is dirt in the valve orifice.
Change or clean the ballvalve.
?
Gutters dripping
Unless the gutter has split or cracked, it is most likely that either the gutter (or downpipe) is blocked and needs clearing (page 78) or that a bracket has given way and the gutter is sagging.
Replace the bracket or repair the gutter.
?
Hot water too hot
Check whether an immersion heater thermostat is defective.
If the water temperature doesn't change when the thermostat is adjusted, it should be replaced (page 53).
Overhot water is a characteristic of ‘gravity’(i.e. non-pumped) hot water circuits.
Consider fitting a thermostatic valve (page 51) or upgrading to fully-pumped operation (see Part Three), which will also improve heat-up time.
?
Leaky cistern
Many old galvanised cisterns will have rusted sufficiently for the water to be leaking through and showing damp patches on the ceiling.
The best thing to do is to replace the cistern completely (page 43).
?
Living room warm enough, rest of house too cold
If the room thermostat is in the living room and there is additional heating in there (an open fire or gas fire, perhaps), the central heating is turning off too early.
Try repositioning the thermostat in another room (page 154).
?
Noisy cistern filling
This often happens where old-fashioned ballvalves have been fitted.
Replace with the correct type of modern ballvalve (page 39).
Note that silencer tubes are no longer allowed.
?
Noises in pipes
Creaks and squeaks in plumbing pipes can be caused by hot water or central heating pipes expanding as they heat up.
Find the source of the noise and slip some foam insulation underneath.
Louder banging is likely to be water ‘hamruer’, caused by water being shut off too quickly when a tap or valve is closed.
It can usually be prevented by replacing tap washers (page 32) or changing the type of ballvalve used on cisterns (page 38) or closing down stopvalves.
Noise may also be caused by scale in direct hot water systems (page 48) or from a faulty boiler (seek professional advice).
?
Overflow dripping
There are several reasons why an overflow pipe may be dripping or giving a steady stream of water.
Check the following:
punctured float (page 39)
float arm needs bending down
float arm catching on cistern
faulty ballvalve
dirt or grit in the ballvalve.
If the ballvalve is faulty it is likely that either the washer has worn or that the seating needs replacing (page 46).
?
Pipe joint leaking
Leaks at compression joints (page 23) can usually be cured by tightening the nuts (make sure the pipe hasn't pulled out of the sealing ring); curing a leak in soldered capillary joints and solvent-welded joints in plastic pipes is more difficult and usually involves draining and remaking the joint (pages 22 and 28).
?
Radiators cold at bottom
This indicates a build-up of sludge due to corrosion.
Turn off the heating and drain the system (page 154) before removing the radiator to take it outside for a thorough flushing out with a hosepipe.
Refill using corrosion inhibitor (page l55).
?
Radiators cold at the top
This means either that air has got into the system or that corrosion is causing hydrogen gas to collect.
Either can be got rid of by bleeding the radiator at the air vent (page 154), but if this needs doing frequently, find the cause of the air getting in or the corrosion and cure.
?
Radiator leaking
Most likely caused by corrosion of radiator.
Small cracks can be repaired with a leak sealant put into the feed-and-expansion cistern or with epoxy resin filler after draining down, but if damage is serious the radiator will have to be replaced (page 150).
Cleanse the system and add corrosion proofer.
?
Rest of house warm enough, living room too cold
Try balancing the radiator first (see page 155).
If this doesn't work, there is insufficient radiator area for the living room — perhaps the system was designed assuming there would be an extra heater in there.
Try replacing the existing radiator with a larger one (double panel rather than single or one of large area) and perhaps adding double glazing to the windows.
An additional radiator may be necessary.
?
Shower too weak
Unless the holes in the shower rose are blocked, a weak shower is usually caused by insufficient ‘head’ of water.
Cure this by fitting a shower booster pump or raising the cold water cistern (page 107).
?
Smell from drains
If the drains are blocked they will undoubtedly smell, but there will be other symptoms of the blockage as well.
A smell near the property boundary is likely to be a blocked interceptor trap which is allowing dirty water to get to the main sewer but is creating sludge in the bottom of the inspection chamber.
Unblock the trap (page 75).
?
Stopcock won't turn off
Stopcocks tend to get seized up if not turned off occasionally.
Apply penetrating oil to the spindle and gentle heat (boiling water) to free them.
To prevent it happening again, turn the stopcock on and off at least once a year and close it half a turn from fully open.
?
Tap cover won't unscrew
Apply gentle heat (boiling water) and a spanner or gripping wrench protected by a cloth to turn the ‘self-clean’ cover (page 32).
?
Tap doesn't work
Unless the mains water supply has failed and the cold water cistern emptied, the cause of a tap not working is either a frozen pipe (page 40) or an airlock in the pipe (page 50).
With hot taps, it could be scale — see Water slow.
?
Tap dripping
The most usual reason for a tap to be dripping from the spout is a worn tap washer.
In extreme cases, the seat may be worn.
See pages 31 and 32 for replacing a washer and recutting a seat.
If a tap is dripping from the top when turned on the cause is probably failed packing or a failed O-ring seal.
Also page 32.
?
Tap head won't come off
First check that you have removed any holding screw — they are sometimes hidden under plastic discs; if the head still won't come off, unscrew the cover and place pieces of wood underneath it and close the tap (page 31).
?
Tap stiff
The most likely cause of a stiff tap is that the packing is too tight — unless the tap spindle is bent.
Remove and replace (page 32).
Taps should not need force to turn them off — if they do the washer needs replacing or the seat needs recutting/replacing.
?
Water dirty
Most likely caused by dirt and debris in the cold water cistern.
Turn off the water, drain down and bale out the cistern to give it a good clean.
Fit an airtight cover or a ‘Bye-law 30’ kit-see page 45.
?
Water slow
If the water coming out of taps (mainly hot ones) slows over a period of time, the problem is likely to be scale in the pipes — especially if you have a direct hot water system (see page 48).
Replace badly furred-up pipes (or get a specialist firm in to descale the system) and consider changing to an indirect system and/or installing a water softener (page 42).
?
WC blocked
Usually the blockage will be in the trap of the WC itself and can be removed by plunging (page 75).
?
WC won't flush
If a low-level WC cistern refuses to flush, the problem could either be a broken link, a failed washer, or too low a water level.
With a high-level cistern, the likely problem is dirt.
See page 105.
Dual-flush cisterns (page 103) may have an additional washer which needs to be replaced.
CHAPTER ONE THE PLUMBING TOOLKIT
Many of the tools used in plumbing are also used in other types of work around the house.
Spanners, for example, are used in car maintenance; hacksaws in metalwork, screwdrivers in electrical work and so on .
If you are going to take plumbing seriously, however, it's not a bad idea to keep a separate set of tools in their own tool box — so they are always there for plumbing jobs when you need them and you don't find them covered with oil and grease.
For completeness, the remainder of this chapter is devoted to an A to Z list of plumbing tools, materials and equipment that you are likely to need for the majority of jobs around the house.
Some of the more specialist equipment can be hired: see the notes about hiring towards the end of the chapter.
The ways in which the various tools are used are described here or in the various chapters throughout the book — cutting and bending pipe, for example, in Chapter 2; the correct way to use an immersion heater spanner in Chapter 4.
Remember that, as with tools for any kind of job, there are good tools and not-so-good tools and if you buy poor quality tools, they may let you down at a vital time.
This doesn't mean that you have to spend a fortune on tools, but beware of cheap spanners and screwdrivers which may not be strong enough for the job or of cheap hammers which may lose their heads.
Buying the right quality of tool isn't, on its own, enough.
The tools have to be looked after which means, in particular, preventing them from rusting (a thin smearing of oil does the trick); tools with cutting edges should be kept sharp with their blades protected against damage.
Never misuse tools: nuts, for example, are meant to be undone and done up with proper spanners.
Using pliers or one of the various gripping wrenches will not do the tool much good (they're usually meant for something else) and will probably make a mess of the nut.
Equally, gripping wrenches (such as Stillsons) are intended for iron pipes and fittings.
If used on copper, they will chew it up.
An A to Z of tools
Adjustable spanners
Many plumbing fittings have nuts on from different manufacturers — even them — compression joints, for ex-between fittings for the same size of ample.
Unfortunately, there is little pipe — so you would need quite a standardisation between nut sizes large selection of open-ended spanners to cope with all the nuts you might find.
For this reason, the easiest way to undo and do up nuts is with adjustable spanners.
Girder-pattern adjustable spanner
Crescent-pattern adjustable spanner
There are three main types: auto-pattern, girder-pattern and crescent-pattern.
Auto-pattern adjustables (used on cars) and girder-pattern spanners have slightly different mechanisms, but both suffer from the same disadvantage as far as plumbing is concerned, which is that they are difficult to use on a pipe close to a wall.
The better choice here is a crescent-pattern spanner which has angled jaws so that it can be reversed in tight corners.
Since two spanners are invariably needed for tightening or loosening a joint, the best solution is probably to have two different designs.
Bath/basin spanner
Getting at the nuts which hold the taps in place under baths (or basins) is often awkward.
Here a bath/basin spanner (also called a crowsfoot spanner) is needed — it comes in two sizes.
If the nut is really tight, a metal bar can be used to increase the twisting force on the spanner, but there is a considerable risk of cracking ceramic basins by doing this; try the gentle application of heat to loosen the nut first.
Basin wrench
Another type of bath/basin spanner — called a basin wrench — has two sizes of serrated jaw.
The head is joined to the handle with an adjustable joint so the tool is good for getting into almost inaccessible corners.
The good grip and long handle also enable it to move most nuts that other tools won't budge.
Bending spring
The type of copper pipe most commonly used in plumbing is not easy to bend by hand.
Not only is it quite tough, but the pipe will distort as you bend it.
A bending spring is slid down inside the pipe for support as it is bent across the knee.
Bending springs have a loop on one end (so that they can be pulled out of the pipe afterwards) and come in different sizes for different pipe diameters.
They can be hired.
Bending machines
If you have a lot of pipe to bend or if you want to bend stainless steel or 28mm copper pipe (both too tough to bend by hand), the best answer is to hire a bending machine.
These machines usually cope with two or three different sizes of pipe.
Bending machine
Blowlamp
For soldered capillary fittings, a blowlamp is necessary.
Modern gas blowlamps are cleaner and safer to use than the old-fashioned paraffin type and, for most jobs, the type which is fitted on to a disposable cartridge is perfectly adequate.
An alternative is a blowtorch connected by a hose to a cylinder of gas.
This is more expensive to buy, but the torch part is lighter to handle than a blowlamp and you don't have to worry so much about running out of gas halfway through a job.
Although you have to cart the cylinder around with you, there is a bonus in that a blowtorch can be used upside down to get under a pipe which is being fitted in situ; turning a cartridge-fed blowlamp upside down can cause problems as it will flare.
A blowlamp (or blowtorch) is also useful where a nut seems impossible to dislodge from its fitting, due usually to dried-up jointing compound.
Heat will sometimes free it.
Don't, however, use a blowlamp for unfreezing pipes or nuts close to ceramic basins or pressed steel or  plastic baths: a hairdrier (or variable-heat hot-air gun on its low setting) may be more appropriate.
Hot-air guns can also be used for making soldered capillary joints: special reflector nozzles are available for most brands to spread the heat around the pipe.
The electrically-operated Antex Pipemaster is another tool which makes soldering joints safer and easier.
But when Which? tested it in 1988, the ‘safety’ stand got very hot in use and had no handle.
Always have a fire extinguisher handy when working with a blowlamp.
Failing that, a wet towel can smother an accidental fire.
You can get (non-asbestos) mats to protect woodwork.
Blowtorch and gas cylinder
Cold chisels
To run pipes through walls can mean making medium or large holes in them.
An electric drill fitted with a masonry drill bit can be used to make a start, but sooner or later, you may have to resort to a cold chisel and large ‘club’ hammer.
Core drill
The ideal tool for making large holes in walls is a core drill, which is rather like a hole saw with tungsten carbide-tipped teeth.
Available for hire in a choice of sizes, a core drill will take out a ‘plug’ of masonry with little damage to the wall.
It needs a heavy-duty hammer drill to drive it.
Electric drill
Drills
An electric drill is essential for plumbing work: there are a lot of holes that need to be made in walls either to pass pipes through or to secure pipe clips or to support fittings such as basins, central heating boilers and so on— and making these is much easier with an electric drill fitted with a masonry drill bit.
Choose one with two speeds (or variable speed) and hammer action.
A hand drill has its uses, too: making holes in tanks, for example, is sometimes a job best done at low speed — see hole cutters.
Files
Half-round
Round (rat tail)
Files are used in plumbing principally for getting rid of burs on the ends of cut pipes and for making the pipe ends square.
The two most useful types are a small round rat tail file and a second-cut half-round file.
Small hand drill
Floorboard lifter
When you need to get at the space under floorboards, some kind of tool for lifting the floorboard is essential.
Good choices include a bolster chisel, a car tyre lever or a broad jemmy.
If the tool is too narrow, it will damage the floorboard.
Floorboard saw
When a floorboard is difficult to lift or when you only want to take up a short piece, a floorboard saw is helpful.
It might be necessary to lever up the floorboard while it is being cut and if the floorboards are tongue-and-grooved, some tongues need to be cut off.
The best tool for this is a circular saw set so that the blade only just protrudes beneath the floorboards — beware of electric cables below!
Flux
This is needed for making soldered capillary joints.
It is essential to use flux approved by the fittings manufacturer.
Some fluxes, especially ‘self-cleaning’ ones, are highly corrosive and even a small amount left inside the pipe can cause corrosion problems — particularly in central heating systems.
Footprints
Sometimes called ‘pipe tongs’, this tool (named after its original manufacturer) is one of the army of gripping wrenches used for gripping and turning round objects such as iron pipes (but not copper).
Freezing kits
When you are doing small jobs, such as inserting a tee junction into a pipe, you may be able to do this without draining the whole system down.
A pipe-freezing kit makes two plugs of ice either side of the joint so that you can cut through the pipes.
They can be hired: make sure you have enough freezing ‘gas’.
The Drayton Drain Easy kit consists of a stopper which fits into the cold feed pipe outlet of a cistern and a plug which fits over the end of the open vent pipe to allow, say, a radiator to be removed from a central heating system without draining down the whole central heating system, which could well mean losing all your corrosion inhibitor.
Hexagon keys
A range of hexagon (Allen) keys is useful: small ones for jobs like removing grub screws on mixer taps; large ones for installing radiators.
Hole cutters
Tank cutter
Hole saw
Sheet metal punch
When making connections to water cisterns for taking pipes or ballvalves, the size of hole you need is somewhat more than can be coped with using a conventional drill bit.
There are various types of hole cutter for making medium to large holes.
A tank cutter has an adjustable arm which scribes the hole and is best used with a carpenter's brace.
A hole saw looks like a hacksaw blade curled into a circle and fits on to a twist drill (typically 6mm) and can be used with an electric drill.
You need a different size of hole saw for each size of hole: you can buy multiple hole saws which have ‘nests’ of different sizes.
A sheet metal punch is drawn through by being tightened with an Allen key.
It makes a very neat hole, but you need a different punch for each size.
The tedious way to make a large circular hole is to mark the size of the circle, drill lots of tiny holes around it and file the circle smooth.
Sometimes, this is the only answer if the hole has to be a particular size not covered by the other cutters you've got.
Immersion heater spanner
Electric immersion heaters fit into a large screwed boss on the top or side of a hot water cylinder.
They are provided with an extremely large nut (58mm or 2¼ in), which needs an extremely large spanner to tighten it up — even the largest adjustable won't cope with this.
You can hire the correct immersion heater spanner, but their cheapness probably makes buying one a better answer.
Jointing compound
When making fittings where the seal depends on the screwthreads, a jointing compound will be needed.
You will find it sold under various brand names.
It is used in conjunction with hemp on galvanised iron pipes designed for use with water.
Care should be taken to avoid getting jointing compound inside pipes.
See also PTFE tape.
Measuring tape
Flexible steel tape
It is helpful to have both a rigid rule — a lm wooden or steel rule, say and a flexible steel tape for measuring pipe runs and so on.
You will have to decide whether you are happier working in metric or imperial units; it's probably best to have a steel rule graduated in both and the longest you can have — 5m or 16ft is a useful length.
Open-ended spanners
These can be useful for compression joints, provided they are the right size.
You will need one spanner for the nut and another one to prevent the fitting turning.
Adjustable spanners are generally more useful.
Universal plumbing spanners are available with all the sizes you need and including angled basin-nut jaws.
Pipe cutters
A pipe cutter is the quickest tool for cutting copper pipe in the neatest way.
Not only does it not create metal filings and a sharp burr on the outside of the pipe (as does a hacksaw), but it also gives a neat square finish to the end of the pipe.
Most pipe cutters have a tapered reamer on the end (or in the middle) which must be used after cutting the pipe to remove the slight burr on the inside.
All pipes (and fittings) should be smooth on the inside.
For pipes close to walls, look for Pipeslice rotating cutters.
Pliers
In addition to the various gripping wrenches, a pair of general-purpose pliers is always useful.
Choose the electrician's type with rubber handles — they're more comfortable and easier to grip.
A pair of pincers is useful for removing floorboard nails.
Plunger
If you have serious drain or waste blockage problems, you may need to use specialist equipment or to call in a specialist drain clearing firm.
But the common-or-garden sink plunger should be part of any plumber's tool kit — or the household emergency kit.
PTFE tape
Used for wrapping around the threads of screwed fittings, PTFE tape is an alternative to jointing compound and hemp.
It comes in a roll rather like sticking plaster and is simply wrapped round the threads in a clockwise spiral, following the direction of the thread in several layers.
Radiator key
Also known as a bleed key, this small tool is essential for letting air out of radiators.
Buy a sturdy brass one alloy ones can twist and break.
Saws
Hacksaw
Junior hacksaw
Although pipe cutters are generally more useful for cutting new copper pipe, a hacksaw is useful for waste pipe and for cutting through old pipe — especially if it is tough or against a wall.
A junior hacksaw is useful in confined spaces and generally makes a cleaner cut, though it can be hard work to use.
Padsaw
General-purpose saw
The other types of saw which are useful are a padsaw, which can be fitted with a hacksaw blade (it cuts on the pull stroke) and is useful where space is limited, and a general-purpose saw which will cut through metal as well as wood.
Screwdrivers
You probably have a reasonable selection of screwdrivers already.
The ones you need for plumbing include a small one for tiny grub screws (on taps, for example), a medium-size one (100m, say) for screws on WC cisterns and a large one for screwing into walls.
You may also need a cross-head screwdriver for some fittings: choose a Phillips type which will fit all crosshead screws.
Self-grip wrench
Also known as ‘Molegrips’, this tool can be locked on to whatever it is gripping, thus giving you an extra pair of hands.
The latest design has slightly curved jaws, so can be used more effectively on pipes.
It can also be used on stiff nuts.
Solder
You will need a supply of solder for end-feed fittings and it can sometimes help with solder-ring (Yorkshire) fittings as well.
You will also need flux for making soldered joints.
Note that capillary joints use ordinary electrician's solder; plumber's solder is only used for ‘wiping’ lead joints — a job probably best left to a plumber.
Capillary fittings are now made with non-lead (tin/silver) solder: see Chapter 2.
Spanners
The only types of spanner you are not likely to need in plumbing are ring spanners and socket spanners.
You will need adjustable spanners, open-ended spanners and gripping wrenches.
Stillsons
The largest — and possibly the most useful — of the gripping wrenches, Stillsons are designed for gripping round pipes.
They should not be used for turning nuts which are to be used again.
Nor should they be used on copper pipe as they will damage and distort it.
But when it comes to removing old steel pipe from a galvanised hot water tank, the largest pair of Stillsons you can get your hands on may be needed.
Have two pairs in your toolkit-8in and 14in.
If you need a larger pair (24in, say), hire them for the day.
Small and large Stillsons
Tallow
Tallow is used by plumbers as a flux when ‘wiping’ joints in lead pipe.
Tap reseating tool
This is a special tool used for recutting washer seats on taps and valves.
It can be hired.
Vice
A vice is a useful but not essential piece of equipment.
It helps for holding pipes when making joints or for holding fittings which you are dismantling.
Vices with pipe jaws are less likely to distort copper pipe: a pipe vice can usually be hired.
Waterpump pliers
Also known as gland nut or slip-joint pliers, these pliers, unlike other gripping wrenches, are useful for turning nuts as the serrations will grip the nut safely.
Waterpump pliers can be set to different jaw openings.
Wire brush
Cleanliness is important when making a pipe joint and the first stage with elderly pipes may be to remove rust, old paint and congealed jointing compound.
A stiff wire brush is
For giving a copper pipe and the inside of the fitting a final clean vital with a soldered fitting — wire wool is the easiest thing to use.
You can, however, get circular de-burring tools which achieve the same effect.
Workbench
A flat working surface is always a help.
A portable bench incorporating its own vice is particularly useful.
Hiring tools and equipment
The amount of money worth spending on tools for plumbing really depends on how much work you intend to do.
It is certainly better to have your own tools wherever possible — at least those necessary to cope with emergencies.
Where tools and equipment are too bulky to store or too expensive to buy for occasional use, the answer is to go to one of the many hire shops.
You will normally be asked to pay a deposit for tools and equipment (often in the form of a cheque which is returned to you when you-return the goods).
You will almost certainly be asked to provide some kind of identification when you go to the hire shop — and don't be surprised if you have your photograph taken!
Make sure that the tools and equipment are clean and in good working order.
If you're not sure how to use something — a pipe-bending machine, say — don't be afraid to ask the hire shop to give you a demonstration.
You will have to pay for ‘consumable’ materials, such as butane gas canisters, carbon dioxide cylinders (for pipe freezing kits) and so on.
You may also have to pay an extra charge if you take equipment back with more damage than when you took it out (make sure any damage is recorded when you pick up the goods) and if the equipment is so dirty that it requires cleaning.
Hiring by the week is usually a little less than twice the cost of hiring by the day.
Unless you are certain that you will finish the job in 24 hours, go for hiring by the week.
Things can and do go wrong and you don't want to pressurise yourself because you have to get the equipment back to the hire shop.
Most hire firms will, however, extend the period of hire, unless the equipment has been promised to someone else.
Buying plumbing goods
There are two main places to buy pipes, fittings and other plumbing supplies.
One is a plumbers' merchant which specialises in plumbing goods.
Although originally intended for the trade, most of these now sell quite happily to the home handyman.
The advantage of plumbers' merchants is that they stock some of the more unusual fittings and will often be able to give you advice.
Their disadvantage is that the less exotic goods like fittings are rarely on display so you will need to know what you are after.
The other main place is one of the DIY superstores.
These now have an excellent range of pipes and plumbing fittings and are well laid out so that you can see exactly what you need.
Many components are sold in kits, so you can, for example, buy all the fittings necessary for installing a basin or a complete waste pack for a modern sink.
DIY superstores tend to be a little cheaper for plumbing goods, but you will be lucky to get any advice and you may not find unusual fittings.
Plumbing goods are also sold by builders' merchants and by hardware and do-it-yourself shops.
These last two usually have a very limited range and can be quite expensive.
The other type of shop to look out for is one described as a ‘bathroom centre’ or ‘kitchen specialist’.
Often these have a good range of plumbing supplies and some are, in fact, plumbers' merchants in disguise.
Another method of buying plumbing goods is by mail order — from suppliers of central heating equipment, for example.
These firms advertise in do-it-yourself magazines and Exchange and Mart.
Many plumbing fittings are cheaper if bought in quantity: 10, 20 or 50 capillary elbows, for example.
CHAPTER TWO PIPES AND FITTINGS
Copper pipe
In domestic plumbing, two different types of pipe are used: one to carry the hot and cold water to the fitting; the other to carry the dirty water away to the soil and waste pipes.
This chapter concentrates on the water supply: for more about wastes and drains, see Chapter 5.
In this country, lead pipe was traditionally used for the water system (the word ‘plumbing’ derives from the Latin word for lead), but this has now largely been replaced by copper, and an increasing number of houses have a copper plumbing system.
Some houses, particularly those built in the 1930s and before, still have a predominantly lead system.
The other main type of water pipe found is galvanised iron ‘barrel’ piping which is recognisable by its screwed ends.
This type of pipe has also been widely used ungalvanised in gas plumbing, but modern installations use copper.
Another type of pipe found in some houses is stainless steel.
This was used when the price of copper went up.
It has the advantage that it does not cause corrosion to galvanised cisterns, but is now more expensive than copper and harder to bend and to join.
Capillary fittings need special flux.
Recently, plastic pipe has become available for home plumbing for both hot and cold water pipes.
The great advantages of copper pipe over the old-fashioned lead piping are that it is light in weight, relatively cheap and easy to work with.
This has meant that domestic plumbing has been brought within the reach of the competent handyman.
One disadvantage of copper pipe is that it can cause the loss of the zinc coating from galvanised pipes and water cisterns.
Copper pipe is sold in lengths, typically of 2m or 3m, though you can buy shorter or longer (up to 6m) lengths from plumbers' merchants.
Three common sizes are used for domestic plumbing — l5mm, 22mm and 28mm, all known as ‘smallbore’.
Plumbers refer to these as ‘fifteen mil’, ‘twenty-two mil’ and ‘twenty-eight mil’, but are equally likely to call them by the names of the premetrication pipes they replaced: ½in, ¾in and lin.
Copper pipe — actual sizes
Mathematicians among you will notice that these are, in fact, not exact equivalents.
When copper pipe was metricated, the method of measuring it changed.
Under the old system the inside diameter was measured; metric pipe is measured by its outside diameter.
So old ½in (exact metric equivalent 12.7mm) is in fact the same size as new 15mm, the difference being the thickness of the copper tubing.
The same is not so true of 22mm to ¾in and 28mm to lin where the pipe size has changed slightly as well and you may need to use special types of adaptor fitting.
Old ½in and new 15mm pipe compared
Cutting copper pipe
Smallbore copper pipe can be cut with a hacksaw or with a pipe cutter.
A hacksaw (or junior hacksaw) needs to be fitted with a fine blade (coarse teeth will get jammed) and great care must be taken to keep the cut square.
A line around the pipe will help: use a piece of paper to draw it.
A burr is left on the outside of the pipe: this needs to be removed with a flat file, while a round file is used to clean up the inside.
The burr will prevent a proper fitting being made and can also cut your fingers.
A hacksaw may be the only possible tool to cut existing pipe which is installed against a wall; however, the disadvantages of a hacksaw are that it produces fine copper filings (and care must be taken not to get these into the pipes) and that it will tend to flatten the pipe slightly — particularly if this is held in a vice.
See page 25.
The hardened wheel of a pipe cutter will give a much neater cut: the adjusting handle is progressively tightened as the cutter is rotated around the pipe.
The cut should also be square, but a burr will be left on the inside which must be removed with the reamer attached to the pipe cutter.
A Pipeslice cutter is designed for use where a pipe is close to a wall.
Diagrammatic layout of hot and cold water pipes in typical house showing where the different sizes of pipe are used
Bending copper pipe
Bending a pipe may be necessary when you want the pipe to go round another fitting or to fit through an oblique hole in a wall or ceiling.
For turning right-angled bends, a better result is usually obtained using an elbow or slow bend (see page 24).
Where you want to bend a short length of pipe, it may be better to use a length of hand-bendable flexible pipe.
Flexible copper pipes are supplied with plain ends, with solder ring fittings or with tap connectors.
Copper pipe should not be bent without support to prevent it distorting.
A bending spring can be used for bending 15mm and, if you are feeling strong, 22mm copper pipe.
The spring should be cleaned before inserting it into the pipe and a long piece of string attached to the loop on the bending spring.
The spring can then be pushed or pulled to where you want to bend the pipe and then pulled out afterwards.
The way to bend the pipe is to pull it across your knee, taking care not to ‘crinkle’ its inner surface as this will trap the spring; protect your knee with some cloth wrapped around the pipe.
Getting the spring out is easier if the pipe is slightly over-bent and then pulled back.
If part of the spring is out of the end of the pipe, twisting it (with a screwdriver through the loop) can help remove it.
See page 25.
Important: where the bend in the pipe needs to be near the end, bend the pipe before cutting it.
If you have a lot of copper pipe to bend, hire a bending machine.
This tool will also be necessary for bending 28mm pipe.
The pipe is placed in the machine with a former fitted over it and the handle is then rotated to make the bend.
The job is made easier if the bending machine is mounted on its own stand or in a vice and if some light oil is used on the formers.
Bending machines are quick and easy to use and can give more accurate bends than springs.
Joining copper pipe
Two main types of joint are used for joining lengths of copper pipe together: the capillary joint and the compression joint.
Both are available in a wide range of different forms including straight pipe couplers, elbows, tees, reducers, tank connectors and tap connectors (see page 24 for fittings, page 26 for joints).
Plastic and brass push-fit joints can also be used on copper pipe.
Capillary joints
These get their name from the fact that solder is made to flow along the tiny gap between the copper fitting and the pipe by capillary action.
Two types are available: end-feed, where you add your own solder and solder-ring (or ‘Yorkshire’), where it comes as part of the fitting.
End-feed fittings are cheaper, but solder-ring fittings are easier to use and more widely available.
Even when using solder-ring fittings it is as well to have some spare solder
Capillary fittings are now sold with solder based on copper or silver rather than lead.
These meet the requirements of the new water byelaws for pipes supplying water used for drinking or cooking.
The two big advantages of capillary fittings are that they are considerably cheaper than compression fittings and much neater in appearance.
You would probably want to use them where the fitting will show.
Once made, capillary fittings cannot be adjusted; this can cause problems if you are putting in a number of elbows.
To make a solder-ring capillary fitting, the ends of the pipe must first be cut square, deburred and thoroughly cleaned with wire wool.
The inside of the fitting should be brushed out with a special wire brush and rubbed with wire wool.
Don't touch with your fingers after it is cleaned.
Then smear a thin film of flux over the pipe and the inside of the capillary fitting (very soon after  cleaning) and assemble the two together.
Apply flux with your fingers or a rag-covered stick.
Flux can be mildly irritating so avoid getting it into cuts or grazes.
Then apply heat with a blowlamp, playing the flame gently all round the fitting and adjacent pipe — use a protective mat if working near wooden floorboards which could catch fire.
When a bright ring of solder appears at the end of the fitting, the joint is made.
If the metal discolours or the flux turns black, you are overheating the joint.
Use a mirror if you can't see the back of the fitting.
Note that heat will travel along the fitting, so it is usually best to make both ends at the same time — otherwise soldering the second may unsolder the first, unless it is covered with a damp cloth.
End-feed capillary fitting
Solder-ring capillary fitting
When the joint is made, leave it to cool and wipe a damp cloth over the joint to remove any residual flux.
If left, this will turn green and will ‘bleed’ through any paint.
End-feed capillary fittings are made in a similar way: when the fitting has been heated, the blowlamp is removed and solder ‘touched’ to the exposed end.
If the correct temperature has been reached, it will flow into the joint.
If a capillary joint leaks, you may be able to feed in more solder (after draining the system).
If this doesn't work, replace the joint.
Compression fitting
Compression fittings These get their name from the fact that the seal is made by compressing a soft brass or copper ring (called an ‘olive’) between the fitting and the pipe.
Compression fittings are made in both brass and gunmetal.
The main advantage of compression joints is that they make complicated pipe runs much easier since the joints can all be assembled, tightened, slackened off again and the pipe rotated in the joint to get the position right before the nuts are all re-tightened.
Although capillary fittings can be ‘dry assembled’ and the position of pipes marked, they can't be adjusted in this way after installation.
Compression fittings can also be dismantled if you want to add to the plumbing system or replace a length of pipe at a later date.
It's a good idea to have some spare olives — note that the design varies slightly from one brand to another and that some olives can be fitted only one way round.
Note also that you will need a special adaptor compression fitting when joining 22mm pipe to existing ¾in pipe.
To make a compression fitting, the pipe is prepared in the same way as for a capillary fitting, though it doesn't have to be so scrupulously clean.
The fitting is assembled by putting the nut over the pipe first, followed by the olive and then the fitting.
When making compression joints in vertical pipes, clothes pegs will prevent the nuts and olives sliding down.
To make the joint, the nut is screwed on to the fitting using one spanner to turn the nut and another to hold the body of the fitting, making sure the pipe is pushed fully home against the ‘stop’.
This can be difficult in a confined space.
It is important that compression fittings aren't tightened too much or the olive will be distorted and the joint will leak.
Experience will tell you how hard they have to be tightened: generally 1¼ turns after they are hand-tight is sufficient for 15mm fittings (1 turn for 22mm).
A little oil or petroleum jelly on the thread will help.
Don't worry if your compression joints leak slightly at first— this happens to professional plumbers too.
Just give the nuts a tweak.
Push-fit fittings
With brass Spring ‘O’ fittings, the pipe is simply pushed into the fitting: the seal is made by a rubber ‘O’ring and the pipe held in place by a stainless steel retaining ring.
The fittings are more expensive than compression fittings, but are unobtrusive and allow the pipe to be rotated in the fitting.
If required, the pipe can be removed from the fitting.
Plastic push-fit fittings can also be used for joining copper pipe see Joining plastic pipe for details.
Supporting copper pipe
Although it is possible to install a plumbing system without any supports for the pipes, this is not good practice.
The pipes should be supported regularly with plastic pipe clips: for l5mm pipe this means every 1.2m (4ft) for horizontal runs and every 1.8m (6ft) for vertical runs (corresponding figures for 22mm pipe are 1.8m and 2.4m/6ft and 8ft).
Pipe clips come in different sizes depending on the size of pipe to be supported and are connected to the wall with a single screw (often round-head) passed through the centre and screwed into a wall plug.
Space should be left at the end of pipe runs for slight expansion.
Pipe fittings for copper and plastic pipe
The majority of fittings shown on this page are available in both capillary and compression versions for copper pipe.
means equivalent fitting available in brass push-fit
means equivalent fitting available in plastic push-fit — can be used on copper
means equivalent fitting available in plastic solvent-weld — CPVC plastic pipe only
a Straight coupler
For joining two pipes of the same size together.
Slip connectors (usually compression) have no internal stops and can easily be inserted into existing pipe runs 
b Reducer
For joining pipes of different diameters — either imperial to metric (adaptor) or, say, 22mm to 15mm.
c Iron coupler
For connecting copper (or plastic) pipe to screwed fittings.
Both female iron (illustrated here) and male iron available.
d Straight tank connector
For connecting pipe to water cisterns.
Has back nut and available mainly as compression fitting 
e Straight tap connector
Also known as ‘swivel’ connector and used for connecting pipe to screwed ‘tail’of tap.
Has fibre or rubber washer.
f Drain connector
Straight connector fitted with draincock to allow the system to be emptied.
Usually compression.
A similar fitting, called an air vent plug is fitted with an air vent for central heating systems.
g Stop end
For blanking off a piece of pipe which is no longer being used.
h Elbow
For turning a 90° corner.
135° elbows (or ‘obtuse’ bends) are also available, usually capillary.
J Elbow, iron one end
For connecting copper pipe to screwed pipe or fittings.
Both male (illustrated) and female available.
k Slow bend
For 90° corners where resistance needs to be kept low or to reduce noise.
Range of end fittings available.
I Bent tap connector
Also known as bent swivel connector and used in same way as straight tap connector (e), but allows connection at right angles.
m Wallplate elbow
Special connector designed to connect pipework to fittings with male screw threads — such as a bib tap.
Has holes to secure to wall.
Usually compression.
n Bent tank connector
As straight tank connector (d), but allows connection to be made with pipe running at right angles.
Usually compression.
o Equal tee
Tee connector with all three branches for equal sizes of pipe.
p Reducing tee
Used when one of the branch pipes (to a central heating radiator, for example) doesn't need to be as large as the main pipe.
Available with either part of the T reduced.
Tee-fittings with two branches reduced also available.
q Wallplate tee
Similar to wallplate elbow (m), this has one iron connection (male or female) and a securing backplate.
r Offset tee
Combines a tee fitting with an elbow in one of the branches.
s Sweep tee
Used for reducing resistance to water flow.
Must be fitted so that sweep is in direction of water flow.
Available in different designs — one branch reduced, for example.
t Corner tee
For connecting three pipes in, say, the corner of a room.
Available with branches equal or reduced.
Cutting copper pipe
Using a hacksaw
Mounting the pipe in a vice makes it easier to cut, but be careful not to crush it.
A piece of dowel inside will support it 
Wrap a piece of paper around the pipe to act as a guide and cut through using gentle strokes.
Let the saw do the work 
Use a flat file (or the flat side of a half-round file) to clean up the burr on the outside of the pipe so that the pipe will enter the fitting 
Use a round rat tail or half-round file for the burr on the inside — all pipes should be smooth on the inside.
Clean as below
Using pipe cutters
Place the pipe in the pipe cutters with the cutting wheel on your pencil mark.
Tighten the wheel down until it touches the pipe 
Rotate the cutter once around the pipe and tighten the wheel a little more.
Continue like this until you have cut through 
Use the reamer on the end of the pipe cutter to remove the burr on the inside of the pipe.
This should need only a few turns 
Clean up the ends of the pipe to remove grease and dirt.
If using capillary fittings, clean the surface with wire wool
Bending copper pipe
Using a bending spring
Attach a suitable length of string to the spring and push it into the pipe, twisting It slightly.
Position it centrally 
Cover the pipe with a piece of cloth and bend it across your knee.
Slightly overbend it and bend back to the correct angle 
Remove the spring by twisting the end clockwise with a screwdriver.
Alternatively, pull it out with the piece of string
Flexible pipe
This type of pipe can be bent by hand without any trouble.
Try to get the correct shape early on too much flexing will split it 
Bending copper pipe
With a bending machine
Mark carefully where the pipe is to be bent: do not attempt to make more than one bend at a time without checking 
Position the pipe correctly on the curved former of the bending machine, making sure you have selected the right size 
Place the straight former over the pipe with the pipe positioned as shown.
The concave side of the former should fit the pipe 
Move the lever so that the wheel runs along the back of the straight former.
When the pipe is bent, open the levers
Joining copper pipe
Making a capillary joint
Clean up the ends of the cut pipe thoroughly with wire wool.
If the metal is not brightly clean, the joint won't make 
Smear flux lightly over the ends of the pipe and the inside of the fitting.
Do this with your fingers or a rag-covered stick 
Push the pipes into the fitting making sure that they are properly home.
Do this fairly soon after applying the flux 
Apply heat to the fitting (make sure nothing flammable is around) until a bright ring of solder appears
Making a compression fitting
File the ends of the pipe so that they fit, push on the nut and follow with the olive.
Smear a little Vaseline on the threads 
Push the pipe into the fitting until it meets the internal stop.
Prepare the other pipe in the same way and push it in 
The nuts should first be done up by hand.
Make sure that the pipes stay firmly in the fitting and that the threads are not crossed 
Use two spanners to tighten: one on the nut and the other on the fitting.
If the joint leaks, tighten a little more 
Making a tee fitting
To cut into an existing pipe for a tee, the amount to be removed (b) is the fitting length less twice the insertion distance (a)
Cut out the length ‘b’, and remove any copper filings left in the pipe.
If there's room, use a pipe cutter 
Fitting the tee involves some manoeuvring of the two pipes this may mean removing some of the pipes from their clips 
Fix the new pipe and tighten the nuts, being careful not to distort the pipes.
A capillary fitting could also be used
Joining plastic pipe
CPVC (Hunter Genova)
Cut the pipe end square using a fine-toothed saw or a pipe cutter.
Remove burrs and rough edges with a knife or file 
Check that pipe fits into fitting; clean ends of pipe and inside surfaces of fittings using special solvent cleaner 
Brush solvent-weld cement liberally on the pipe and sparingly on the fitting.
Work in a well-ventilated space 
Push the pipe quickly into the fitting, twisting slightly.
Do not remove excess cement.
Leave for at least an hour
Polybutylene (Acorn/Polycell)
Cut the pipe with a hacksaw or secateur-type cutters; trim rough edges with a sharp knife.
(For copper pipe use a pipe cutter)
The inside of polybutylene pipe is supported with a stainless steel insert.
Push it in to a depth of 25mm (not needed with copper)
Smear the pipe and the inside of the fitting with special silicone lubricant.
Watch out for the internal grab ring — it's sharp!
Push the pipe into place with a slight twisting motion.
This requires a degree of force particularly with copper pipe 
Plastic pipe
Although plastic pipe has been widely used for wastes and drains, until recently it has not been suitable for hot water.
The reason is that hot water causes the pipes to expand to a greater extent than copper and at higher temperatures it can soften slightly and consequently ‘sag’ between supports.
This is still a problem with modern plastic plumbing pipe, but one that can be overcome if the pipe is well supported and space is left for expansion.
Several types of plastic pipe are available, including rigid cream-coloured CPVC (Hunter Genova), semi-flexible, dark brown polybutylene (Acorn/Polycell) and white cross-linked polyethylene (Speedpex).
Plastic pipe can be used for hot and cold supplies and for central heating systems — provided the first length of pipe connected to the boiler is copper.
It is available in both 15mm and 22mm (and other sizes) in 3m lengths and can be joined easily to existing copper pipe.
Both polybutylene and cross-linked polyethylene are also available in 50m and 100m rolls.
Rigid CPVC pipe is joined by solvent welding.
The two semi-flexible pipes can be joined either with plastic push-fit fittings or with brass compression fittings.
Apart from its ease of use, plastic pipe has the advantage of not being so susceptible to frost damage and not causing corrosion with galvanised water pipes and tanks.
Solvent-weld fitting
Cutting plastic pipe
Plastic pipe can be cut easily with a hacksaw.
The burr that is left can be removed with a file or sharp cutting knife.
Rigid CPVC pipe can also be cut with a pipe cutter, and polybutylene and cross-linked polyethylene with a special secateur-type pipe cutter.
Bending plastic pipe
Rigid CPVC pipe cannot be bent, though it is somewhat more flexible than copper.
Semi-flexible pipe can easily be taken round a 90 corner in a gentle curve: special brackets are available to help with this.
Joining plastic pipe
The wide range of fittings available for rigid CPVC pipe are connected to the pipe by solvent-welding.
This involves cleaning the ends of the pipe with solvent cleaner and brushing on solvent-weld cement.
The pipe is then twisted into the fitting and left for at least an hour while the cement ‘melts’ the surface of the pipe and the fitting, fusing them together.
The solvent-weld cement gives off powerful fumes and should not be used in a confined space.
The joint must be made quickly and, if the pipe is a hot water one, be left for four hours.
Polybutylene joints are easier to make as the push-fit fittings are supplied with ‘O'-ring seals.
All that is needed is a smear of silicone lubricant over the end of the pipe and the inside of the fitting.
After a stainless steel insert has been pushed into the end of the pipe, the pipe can then be pushed into the fitting with a slight twisting motion.
This requires a little force and might be awkward in tight corners.
The rather few fittings available are fairly expensive.
Acorn fittings allow the pipe to be rotated in the fitting.
Push-fit Acorn fitting
John Guest's white Speedfit pushfit fittings for use with Speedpex need only a clean pipe end, which is simply pushed into the fitting.
Disconnection is equally easy, requiring just the grey collar to be pulled back.
Supporting plastic pipe
The intervals at which plastic pipe should be supported depends on the temperature of the water that the pipe will carry, but generally speaking the supports should be positioned at least every 0.5m for horizontal runs and lm for vertical runs.
Space should be left at the ends of the pipe runs for the pipe to expand.
Plastic pipe should not be installed near hot appliances such as cookers.
Note that when using plastic pipe the electrical earth connection will be lost.
The Wiring Regulations require that all metal pipe and exposed metal fittings are connected to the main earth terminal, which necessitates running separate earth wires wherever plastic pipe has been fitted.
Where copper pipe has been replaced by plastic or a plastic fitting used to join copper pipe, an earth wire must be fitted across the plastic.
Push-fit Speedfit fitting
Lead pipe
If your house was built before the Second World War it may still have lead piping.
Lead piping has two main disadvantages: it is often very small bore, so does not allow a good waterflow, and the amateur will find it difficult to extend the system.
Where lead pipe is used for the rising main, it may also contaminate the drinking water — particularly in a soft water area — but there is not much you can do about this since the supply pipe into the house is also likely to be lead and this is difficult and expensive to replace.
The installation of lead pipe is now prohibited.
The best thing to do with lead piping is to rip it all out and replace it with copper or plastic.
If using copper, replace galvanised water cisterns and tanks; if using plastic, ensure metal fittings in bathrooms and kitchens (sinks, baths and taps) are electrically bonded to earth.
If you do remove all the existing lead plumbing inside the house, you will be left with a screwed connection on the main stopcock to connect to.
Old stopcocks were not made to a standard size and it may take some searching in plumbers’ merchants to find something that will enable you to connect new copper pipe.
There is a fitting (sold for joining washing machine hoses) which has internal and external screwthreads: the external threads are both ¾in BSP (British Standard Pipe); the internal thread is ½in BSP at one end and ⅝in BSP at the other.
This may do the trick, but if you are unable to find a fitting of the correct size, you would be best advised to get a plumber in to fit a new stopcock which will involve turning off the water at the water company's stopcock outside your house.
Repairs to damaged lead pipe can be made with a special type of compression fitting — much easier than ‘wiping’ a lead joint.
Iron barrel pipe
Although galvanised iron pipe is not used in modern plumbing, you may find some connected to old-fashioned hot water tanks.
It is possible to buy the screwed connectors to join lengths of this pipe together, but a thread needs to be cut on the pipe itself, which means having special thread-cutting equipment.
The threads are known as ‘gas’ or BSP (British Standard Pipe) threads: those on pipes are referred to as male while the internal threads on fittings are known as female.
Many fittings have tapered threads for a better seal.
The traditional way of sealing threaded pipe joints is with hemp and jointing compound.
This is wound round the threads in a clockwise direction so that it is forced in as the joint is tightened.
Although it is possible to make connections to iron pipe, it is normally considered advisable to replace it with copper or plastic when a new copper hot water cylinder and plastic water cistern are installed.
Mini-trunking for covering pipes
Lead pipe connector (Kontite)
Hiding pipes
All pipe materials can be painted: copper can be polished up to a fine shine if you like the ship's engine room effect.
Alternatively, pipework can be covered up, either with home-made boxing made from plywood or with one of the proprietary products.
These include mini-trunking, similar to that used for electric cables, and additional skirting boards and architraves (in plastic or hardwood) which have a space behind them for running pipes.
If there is room, fit pipe insulation to both hot and cold water pipes before covering them up.
Where pipes pass through walls and floors, a pipe sleeve should be fitted to protect the pipe and to make the junction look neater.
Space should always be allowed for the expansion of hot water pipes.
In solid floors, pipes can be laid in an underfloor duct (not embedded in concrete); note that all pipes and joints should be accessible and, where exposed to cold temperatures, well insulated.
Additional skirting board
Underfloor duct (Tufcon)
Taps and valves
Taps and valves are used to control the flow of water through pipes, either to turn it off completely or to reduce it.
Taps are fitted at the ends of pipes; valves are fitted somewhere in the pipe run.
Types of tap
There are many different designs of tap available and the one you choose will depend on the job you want it to do and the design you like.
Older taps are likely to be the rising spindle kind (see drawing), but these have been widely replaced with shrouded-head taps with non-rising spindles.
Many modern taps have ceramic discs, which do not need rewashering and require only ½ or ¼ of a turn to operate.
Single taps
Most single hot (red) and cold (blue) taps are pillar-mounted with a threaded portion passing through a hole in the sink, bath, basin or bidet and secured by a backnut underneath.
The threaded portion is ½in BSP (sink, basin and bidet taps) or ¾in BSP (baths); sink taps are taller to allow room for a bucket underneath.
Bib taps (often used for garden taps) screw directly into a special fitting, such as a wallplate elbow.
Many kitchen sinks are fitted with Supataps, which can be rewashered without turning off the water.
These are no longer made, but replacement washers are still available.
Mixer taps
There are three main types of mixer tap: sink mixers, bath mixers and basin/bidet mixers.
Sink mixers have divided flow so that the hot and cold water do not mix until they have left the tap.
This is important where the cold supply comes directly from the mains (as it usually does in a kitchen) and the hot water comes from the storage cistern.
They can be either one-hole or two-hole depending on the fitting details for your sink.
The standard fitting distance for the inlets on sink mixers is 178mm (7in).
Most bath and basin mixers also have two inlets and one outlet, but the two flows are allowed to mix freely.
The difference between a bath mixer and a basin mixer is the spacing of the two inlets: ‘81mm (7½in) apart for baths; 102mm (4in) or 210mm (8 ¼in) for basins.
One-hole mixers are also available for basins and bidets.
Bath/shower mixers have a connection for a shower hose and a diverter so that flow can be directed to the shower (see Chapter 8).
Three-hole mixers have a third connection for a pop-up waste control and/or the spout.
Most mixer taps have screwed BSP connections: some one-hole mixers have plain copper tube — usually 15mm, but sometimes 12mm.
Most mixer taps simply use the hot and cold knobs to control flow and temperature, but some modern one-hole mixers have just a single lever which does both.
Rising spindle tap with cross-head as the tap is opened the whole spindle moves
Problems with taps
Taps and valves are essential parts of the plumbing system.
It is important that they are kept in good working order so that water does not leak from the system and so that you can turn the water off when you want to.:
Non-rising spindle tap with shrouded head.
The spindle lifts the washer assembly
The most common thing that goes wrong with taps is that they leak either because the gland or packing has failed (a leak from the top when the tap is open) or because the washer has worn (a leak from the spout when the tap is closed).
Packing can usually be replaced without the need to turn the water off, but this will require the removal of the tap head and the ‘easyclean’ cover.
Old-type cross heads can be difficult to get off even after the grub screw has been removed.
If a gentle tap with a hammer doesn't work, open the tap fully, unscrew the easyclean cover, pack two pieces of wood underneath it and tighten the tap head down.
Removing the easyclean cover can be very easy or very difficult.
Always protect it with cloth if it needs a spanner or wrench to shift it.
Boiling water or heat can help to shift a stubborn cover.
Traditional packing can be replaced with wool smeared with petroleum jelly; some modern nonrising spindle taps have rubber (or neoprene)‘O'-ring seals which are easily replaced.
When mixer taps leak at the base of the swivel nozzle, the washer or ‘O'-ring there needs replacing.
The spout usually unscrews or lifts off easily, but special circlip pliers may be needed.
Lubricate the washer (or ‘O'-ring) with silicone grease.
The method of replacing a washer depends on the design of tap.
Always keep spare tap washers handy and replace the washers regularly — no tap should need to be turned off with force.
Sometimes it may be necessary to replace both the washer and the jumper — particularly if they can't be separated.
Except with Supataps, replacing tap washers may mean turning the water off and draining the cistern.
Do this by tying up the ball valve (so the kitchen tap still operates) and opening the cold taps even if it is a hot tap which is being rewashered.
Tap washers come in different sizes and different designs (hemispherical ones, for example, are often used on mains pressure taps).
If a washer has a brand name on it, make sure that the smooth side comes into contact with the seating.
If the valve seat of a tap has gone, it can be recut or, more simply, a nylon replacement seat can be inserted.
Replacement seats cannot be fitted to Supataps.
Tap conversion kits
Many existing taps with cross-head handles can be made to look like new ones with shrouded heads.
Some tap conversion kits simply replace the existing handle with a new one; others replace the spindle assembly and may well provide a replacement nylon seat.
Rewashering a tap
Rising spindle and shrouded-head taps
With most taps you will have to unscrew the ‘easyclean’ cover.
If you have to use a spanner on this, protect it well with cloth 
The tops of shrouded head taps can often be removed only by undoing the screw hidden under the coloured disc in the head 
Remove the main nut holding the head gear in place.
Use a second spanner (and cloth) to prevent the tap turning 
Lift out the jumper (if not fixed) and take off the washer, removing any nuts first.
Fit the new washer and reassemble
Supataps
There is no need to turn off the water supply when rewashering a Supatap.
Simply unscrew the nut and turn the tap on fully 
When the tap reaches its fullest extent it will come off (and probably fall in the sink) and the water will stop flowing 
Unless the anti-splash device falls out of its own accord, tap the nozzle on a hard surface to remove it 
Use a screwdriver to separate the washer/jumper unit from the anti-splash device and replace it with a new one.
Reassemble tap
Repairing a leaking tap
Tightening the gland nut will sometimes stop a leak.
If not, unscrew it and remove the packing with a penknife 
The tap will be sealed either with Vaseline-covered wool or with a rubber ‘O'-ring seal.
These should be replaced 
If the valve seat is damaged, it can be recut using a special tool.
This fits into the body of the tap and is turned to grind the seat 
Alternatively, a replacement nylon seat can be fitted which is placed firmly on the old seat and a new washer and jumper fitted 
Replacing a tap
How taps are fitted
A basin pillar tap is sealed to the basin surface with non-setting mastic or a supplied gasket and a plastic washer underneath 
A sink pillar tap usually has a plastic washer (or rubber gasket) above the sink and a ‘top-hat’ washer underneath 
With a mixer tap, each supply has its own connection.
Single-hole mixers may have plain pipes for the connections 
This type of (Bib) tap is easy to connect: it simply screws into a wallplate elbow (use PTFE tape for sealing the threads)
Replacement
Turn off the water for the section you are working on and open the taps to drain the pipes.
In the kitchen, drain at the draincock 
Use a bath/basin spanner to undo the nut on the tap connector.
This may need extra leverage, but don't overdo it 
Undo the backnut, with a second person or piece of wedged wood stopping the tap turning.
Use gentle heat if necessary 
Remove the old tap from the basin or sink and scrape away any old dried jointing compound from the surface.
Don't scratch it 
Fit the new tap using a plastic washer and ‘top-hat’ washer if necessary.
Tighten the backnut supporting the tap as before 
Check the position of the new tap ‘tail’.
If too short, use a tap adaptor.
Fit the tap connector, not forgetting the washer 
If replacing the old length of pipe, use flexible corrugated copper tube connector which makes working much easier
Tap conversion kits
One way of improving the look of old taps is to fit a tap conversion kit in place of the tap spindle or the handle 
Types of valve
Valves are fitted in the hot and cold water supplies so that the water can be cut off from the whole system or from individual branches.
The more valves you fit in a system, the easier it will be to carry out maintenance or replacement.
Never fit valves to safety vent pipes.
There are four main types of valve: stop valves, gate valves, servicing valves and drain valves.
Stopvalves
This type of valve is fitted where the water is at mains pressure, so is the type fitted as the main stopcock in the rising main.
In operation it is similar to the normal type of tap: the water flows up through an orifice which can be closed by a jumper with a washer screwed down on to it.
Stopvalves are stamped with arrows showing which way round they should be fitted and are usually supplied with compression fittings.
They have to have water authority approval for use on mains water pipes.
As well as in the rising main, stopvalves are typically fitted in the branch pipe to an electric shower, on the pipe leading to a garden tap, on pipes leading to a washing machine or dishwasher and on the pipes to a water softener.
A garden tap may also need a double-check valve — see page 122.
Gatevalves
Unlike stopvalves, gatevalves only slightly restrict the flow when the valve is opened, so are fitted typically to the cold supply pipes leading from the cold water cistern where the water pressure is lower.
They differ in operation: the control mechanism is a type of solid portcullis (or ‘gate’) which is screwed down across the flow of water.
When the gate is raised, the water can flow freely.
Gatevalves are usually fitted with wheel handles rather than cross-head handles and must be kept fully open to avoid airlocks.
They can be fitted either way round and are usually supplied with compression fittings.:
Stopvalve
Gatevalve
If the cold supplies from your cold water cistern aren't fitted with gatevalves, this is reasonably easy to do as it requires only cutting out a short length of pipe.
To save draining the cistern, make a bung from polyethylene sheeting and cloth and hold it against the outlet.
Turning on the taps should cause this to seal the opening.
Alternatively, use a solid stopper.
Servicing valves
It is a requirement of the water bye-laws that servicing valves be fitted on the pipes leading to float-operated valves (ballvalves)— on cold water or WC cisterns, for example.
See page 39.
Most servicing valves have an internal ball with a hole through it, so that just a quarter of a turn is needed to move the valve from fully open to fully closed.
Operation is either by a circular knob or with a screwdriver fitted into a slot.
Some servicing valves (sold for installing a washing machine) are incorporated into a tee fitting and have a lever to operate.
Mains stopcock and draincock
It is a good idea to fit servicing valves before all taps so that they can be rewashered without the need to drain down the whole pipe (and, possibly, the whole cistern).
Drainvalves
Unlike the other three types of valve, a drainvalve (or draincock) is usually kept closed and opened only when the system is to be emptied of water.
Drainvalves are generally fitted in the rising main just above the main stopcock and in the cold supply pipe to the hot water cylinder at the point where it enters the cylinder.
They are also fitted at the lowest point of a central heating system (and on downloops and, perhaps, next to the boiler) and, usually, just before a garden tap.
A drainvalve has a nozzle for a hose pipe to be fitted.
Good quality draincocks have a gland which prevents water leaking around the top of the fitting when it is open.
Problems with valves
Gland packing can need replacing on valves (same procedure as for taps), but washers rarely need replacing.
But the main problem with valves, especially stopvalves, is that they stick open.
It is a good idea to open and close valves every so often to make sure that they don't get gummed up.
If they do jam, keep applying penetrating oil until they are free.
Do not apply undue force: this may damage the valve.
After freeing a stopvalve, open it fully and then close it ¼ to ½ a turn.
This won't significantly affect the water flow, but should prevent it sticking in the future.
This is not necessary with gatevalves or balltype servicing valves.
CHAPTER THREE THE COLD WATER SYSTEM
The supply of water in England and Wales is the responsibility of private companies appointed by the government under the Water Act 1989.
Ten of these are the successors to the regional water authorities and they also provide sewerage services.
The remaining 29 companies, which were in existence before privatisation of the water authorities, serve particular localities and are responsible for water supply only.
In Scotland, water is supplied by 12 water councils.
Water is normally paid for via the water rates, but the water industry is looking at the feasibility of water metering in the future.
Cold water supply
The water arrives at your house via the water mains which runs down your road.
Each house will have its own branch service pipe which will be fitted with a stopvalve, referred to as the water company stopcock usually just outside the boundary of the property.
This valve is generally situated under a small metal cover — in towns, it is possible to see a whole row of these stretching down the pavement; in rural areas, it may be more difficult to find.
This stopcock may need a special key to turn it on and off.
Normally, unless you have one of these keys, you would have to call the water company's engineers if you wanted the mains turned off for any reason — perhaps to work on the mains stopcock inside the house.
From the water company stopcock, the service pipe runs underground (buried at least 750mm down for protection against frost) and enters the house.
It is usually protected from damage by being run inside a drain pipe, and rises slightly to avoid air bubbles.
After entering the house the service pipe usually terminates in the householder's main stopcock, which is where the house supply starts.
It is worth noting that the householder is responsible for the service pipe as well as for the domestic distribution system.
Service pipes can run the length of the house and may need insulating against frost damage where exposed.
At one time, the water mains and service pipes were made from galvanised iron or lead and were also used for providing an electrical earth connection to the house.
Lead and iron were superseded first by copper, which is more resistant to corrosion, and, more recently, by plastic.
Because of the increasing use of plastic (which does not conduct electricity), water mains are no longer used to supply an earth connection and Electricity Boards supply a separate earthing terminal within the house for the consumer to use.
The mains stopcock
In many houses, the mains stopcock is situated under the kitchen sink.
The reason for this is simple: at least one tap must always be supplied directly from the mains for drinking purposes and this is usually the cold tap in the kitchen.
Sometimes, there is a separate ‘drinking water’ tap.
The stopcock isn't always here: in older properties, it might be underneath a floorboard just inside the front door, in a cupboard, in the garage, or there may be no householder's stopcock at all.
It is important that you know where the stopcock is and how to turn it off.
In emergencies, such as a burst pipe or major leak, turning off the stopcock should be the first thing you do even if it has no immediate effect.
Stopcocks, like all valves, are turned off (closed) by turning the handle clockwise; they are opened by turning them anticlockwise.
It is a good idea to turn the main stopcock off and on once or twice each year to keep its mechanism free and not wait for an emergency to discover that it has jammed open.
The drawing on the opposite page shows a mains stopcock with a draincock fitted above.
Cold water plumbing
From the householder's main stopcock, the water is taken by the rising main.
In most houses, with what is called an indirect cold water supply, the rising main goes directly to a cold water cistern, typically situated in the loft; in others, with a direct cold water supply, the supply for taps and fittings within the house is taken from the rising main itself.
Indirect systems
In an indirect system, the only connection to the rising main usually permitted is the obligatory one going to a drinking water tap in the kitchen (though some existing houses may have other connections — for a WC, for example).
Since the drinking supply is often the only cold water supply in the kitchen, you are, however, allowed to take other connections off this branch — for supplying an outside tap or for plumbing in a washing machine.
But note that you must use fittings and valves which comply with the water byelaws and that if the cold supply is connected up to a washing machine from the rising main, this will be at mains pressure while the hot supply (if there is one) will be at a lower pressure.
See Chapter 7 for details.
The other connection that you might want to make to the rising main is one for an instantaneous gas water heater or electric shower, which need mains pressure, or one of the devices which alter the quality of the water — a softener, conditioner or filter, say.
The rising main passes up inside the house all the way to the large water tank in the loft.
It is more correct to refer to this as a cistern, since a ‘tank’ is, strictly, closed on all sides and under pressure whilst a cistern is open at the top.
The cold water cistern acts as a store of water and feeds the remainder of the house.
Indirect cold water supply — all old taps, except kitchen cold tap and garden tap, are fed from the cistern, as is the feed to the hot water cylinder
The cold water cistern
The rising main is connected to the cold water cistern by means of a ballvalve: a valve which operates by the action of a metal (or plastic) ball floating on the surface of the water which will close the valve when the level of water is sufficient, and open it when the level falls.
Cold water cisterns are also fitted with an overflow pipe (more correctly called a ‘warning’ pipe) which sticks out of the house through the eaves; the tell-tale drips or steady stream will tell you when something is wrong.
Note that this ballvalve (unlike other ballvalves in the house) must be a high-pressure one since it is connected to the mains.
The cold water cistern should be fitted with a lid to keep out light and insects but should not be airtight.
As the cistern supplies the remainder of the house, there will usually be two main feeds: one for the cold taps (not the kitchen) and WCs and one for the hot water system.
These feeds can usually be seen as separate pipes leading from the cistern; sometimes there may be extra feeds fitted for a shower or bidet.
It is important that all feed pipes from the cold water cistern are fitted with valves so that each of the different water circuits can be isolated and worked on without the need to drain the entire system.
Cold water feeds are usually fitted with gatevalves near to the cistern; the one for the cold feed to the hot water  system is generally fitted near to the hot water cylinder.
To ensure an adequate flow of water, feed pipes should generally be 22mm.
Direct plumbing — all cold taps fed from rising main In this example, a cistern feeds the hot water cylinder
The reason for having separate feeds is one of safety.
If a shower (other than the instantaneous type fitted to the rising main) is connected to a tap or shower fitting fed from a single pipe leading from the cold water cistern, flushing the WC or turning on another cold water tap can starve the shower of cold water, making it uncomfortably hot.
Cold water cisterns need to be quite large to cope with the demands of an average house in the event of a mains failure — the normal recommended size is 230 litres (50 gallons) actual capacity, which is around 320 litres (70 gallons) nominal capacity (filled to the brim).
If an existing cistern is too small, a second cistern can be installed alongside joined by two 28mm pipes at low level.
Direct systems
In a direct system, all the cold water pipes and WCs are connected directly to the rising main.
There may, however, be a feed-and-expansion cistern if central heating has been installed and, sometimes, a cistern for the hot water cylinder.
Different methods for supplying the hot water may be needed with a direct plumbing system: these include gas ‘multi-point’ heaters and combination boilers.
For more details, see Chapter 4.
Which system is best?
Although direct plumbing systems are less complicated and cheaper to install, most water companies have preferred indirect systems and many have allowed only this sort.
From the water companies' point of view, the advantage of indirect systems is that they reduce the effects on the mains of heavy demand (first thing in the morning, for example) and that they keep most of the householder's water system separate from the mains supply.
This makes it very difficult for the mains to be contaminated by dirty water (from a bath, say) being sucked back up the mains — a phenomenon known as back siphonage.
Water companies are very concerned about maintaining the quality of their water and many of the bye-laws deal with the prevention of back-siphonage.
This is one of the reasons why only approved fittings may be used.
From the householder's point of view, indirect systems have advantages.
The cold water cistern provides a reserve of water in case the mains should be cut off for any reason, and because the system (apart from the rising main) operates at a lower pressure it is quieter.
But indirect systems have drawbacks, too — notably that there may be insufficient ‘head’ to provide a decent shower and that the cistern and pipework in the loft space are prone to freezing.
Both these can be overcome with an unvented hot water system — see page 57.
Head
The flow of water from any fitting, such as a tap, is related to the water pressure in the pipe leading to it.
This is measured as the ‘head’ or the vertical distance from the fitting to the level of water in the cistern.
Because some of this pressure is lost by the water having to pass along pipes, round corners and through fittings, the normal convention is to measure the head to the bottom of the cistern.
Water metering
Most water companies offer the choice of having a water meter installed so that you pay for the water you actually use rather than pay water rates based on the rateable value of your house.
The companies publish information leaflets which give a rough guide to whether you are likely to benefit from having a meter and will tell you whether one is possible for your house.
You have to pay an installation charge for the meter and then a quarterly standing charge plus an amount for each cubic metre (1,000 litres/220 gallons) used.
The chances are that you will save money with a water meter especially if you live in a house with a high rateable value — and should repay the costs of installation within two years.
This period can be reduced if you are allowed to install the water meter yourself.
It is fitted just above the main stopcock.
Cisterns and ballvalves
In most installations, the cold water storage cistern and its ballvalve are the heart of the cold water supply.
There are other cisterns in the house — the feed-and-expansion cistern for the central heating system and individual ones for WCs, for example.
Cisterns
There are three main types of cold water cistern: galvanised iron, rigid plastic and flexible plastic.
Galvanised iron cisterns are the traditional type.
They are extremely heavy and expensive and eventually suffer from corrosion — particularly when used with copper pipe.
If old galvanised cisterns are badly corroded, they should be replaced with a cistern made from one of the other materials.
Rigid plastic cisterns (polypropylene) have the advantage that they are the same size as the galvanised cisterns they replace.
Their main disadvantages are that they are affected by jointing compound and that they may not fit through the loft hatch.
A typical 230 litre cistern, for example, measures 1070mm × 660mm × 585mm though a wide variety of sizes is available.
Although it's less convenient, you could put in two smaller cisterns linked together with two 28mm pipes (fitted 50mm up from the base) rather than one large one.
If your present cistern is too small, a second one can be added.
The connections should be arranged so that the ballvalve is connected to one cistern and the cold feeds to the other so that the water doesn't become stagnant.
Flexible plastic cisterns are circular and are particularly useful — they can be squashed enough to be squeezed through the loft hatch.
On the other hand, they provide no support for the pipework which can cause the cistern to split or make the plumbing noisy if the pipes are not adequately supported in some other way.
Jointing compound must not be used with these either.
All new and replacement cisterns have to meet Water Bye-law 30, which has specific requirements for insulation, ventilation, a tight-fitting lid and the various connections.
To comply, cisterns are sold with Byelaw 30 ‘kits’— see page 45 for details.
Ballvalves
A ballvalve controls the flow of water into a cistern.
The mechanism is operated by a metal or plastic ball or float which floats on the surface of the water: as the water level rises, the valve is closed, shutting off the supply.
It is important that any ballvalve is the appropriate design for the water pressure.
For mains pressure (for example, the cold water cistern connected to the rising main), use a high-pressure ballvalve; for other cisterns which are fed from the cistern (such as a WC), use a low-pressure design.
Check whether WCs are connected to the rising main before fitting a new ballvalve.
There are three main types of ballvalve: piston, diaphragm and equilibrium (not widely available).
Piston ballvalves are the simplest.
The Croydon design used a vertical falling piston against a nozzle and is now obsolete.
The Portsmouth design has been and still is commonly used in houses.
Here, the float arm closes a horizontal piston, fitted with a washer against the valve seating.
It is noisy in operation, so silencer tubes were fitted to many Portsmouth valves to reduce noise these fit into the inlet and discharge water below the water level in the  cistern.
The installation of silencer tubes is no longer allowed.
Ballvalves
Diaphragm ballvalves were developed to overcome the noise of ordinary piston types.
With this type of valve (of which the Garston or BRS valve is the best known), there is no moving piston — rather a rubber diaphragm which closes over a nylon seating with the last movement of the float arm.
This type is available in either brass or plastic, and often sold as ‘quiet’ ballvalves.
Equilibrium ballvalves were developed to overcome problems of water hammer caused by ballvalves shutting off too quickly.
In this type, the flow of water is actuated only by P the movement of the float arm — the valve cannot be forced open by the pressure of water in the mains pipe.
Once open, the valve is balanced by equal water pressure on the two sides of the piston.
All domestic ballvalves are fitted with screwed inlets (usually ½in BSP) to take a tap connector.
Unless used on ‘Byelaw 30’ cisterns and fitted with a downturn in the operating lever (so the float can easily be adjusted), piston-type ballvalves are no longer allowed on cold water cisterns unless they are fitted with a double-check valve.
All new ballvalves should be provided with a servicing valve on the inlet pipe.
Faults with cisterns
Sediment at the bottom should be cleaned out regularly — after draining the cistern.
Galvanised iron cisterns suffer from corrosion, and when this is serious they should be replaced with a plastic cistern.
Faults with ballvalves
The two main things that go wrong are that the ball corrodes or that the valve itself starts leaking.
A corroded ball can ‘pinhole’ and start filling with water, which will increase the level of water in the cistern.
A temporary solution is to enlarge the pinhole, empty out the water and tie a plastic bag over the ball.
It should however be replaced as soon as possible.
Leaks can happen because dirt or grit has got into the valve or because the valve washer is worn.
This will mean dismantling the valve and extracting the washer (see page 46).
Be careful when doing this not to damage the piston.
Before re-assembling the valve give it a good clean and smear petroleum jelly on the piston and on the threads of the cap holding the washer, so that if necessary it can be undone more easily in the future.
It is worth checking the operation of all ballvalves regularly, particularly the one in the feed-and-expansion cistern.
Because this is not used very often it may be stuck in the closed position over an empty cistern if the contents have evaporated.
If the level of water in a cistern is too high or too low, it can be adjusted by bending the float arm (if it is metal).
Take care when doing this not to put any strain on the valve itself.
Modern types of ballvalve come with a much easier method of adjustment.
More about cold water plumbing
Frost protection
All cold water pipes, from the point where the service pipe enters the house, should be lagged with pipe insulation.
The most important ones are often the most inaccessible: under the floorboards near to airbricks and up in the loft space near to the eaves.
Modern pre-formed pipe lagging in a range of sizes is generally more efficient and easier to apply than previous types and is relatively inexpensive.
Felt or glass-fibre wrap is still probably the best type of insulation for valves and compression fittings where preformed insulation won't fit.
Cold water cisterns themselves should also be lagged (see page 44): put insulation on the top of the cistern but not underneath, so that some heat comes up from the house to keep the chill off the cistern.
When insulating the loft floor, bring the ends of the blanket up against the sides of the cistern to give continuity.
Where a pipe is very exposed — in an outside WC, for example— a small heater will keep the chill off the pipes.
Electric frost protection tapes incorporating a low wattage heater, could be wrapped round pipes.
They need no special wiring and may be thermostatically controlled to come on at 3°C.
An outside cistern could be kept from freezing by hanging a light bulb near it and leaving it on all the time.
If a pipe has frozen, it can be thawed out with a hairdrier or by wrapping towels soaked in hot water around it.
You will know which pipe is frozen because the tap at the end of it will no longer be working.
Somewhere, there will be a plug of ice stopping the flow.
Open the tap and work backwards along the pipe, warming it up until the water flows again.
Lag the pipe to prevent it happening again.
If you do have the misfortune to have a burst pipe, the most important thing is not to panic.
Always turn off the water at the mains stopcock first (or tie up the ballvalve) and turn on all taps (provided the sink and basin wastes aren't frozen up!) and then attempt to trace the position of the burst.
Use a torch to find your way around — the electrical fittings may be unsafe if wrap-round water has been pouring through them.
Often, with copper pipe, frost will have ‘blown’ a compression joint, forcing the pipe out of the fitting.
This is easily remedied, but a new olive may be required.
More of a problem is where water has frozen inside a pipe and split the pipe.
The answer here is to cut out the offending piece of pipe and to insert a new piece.
There are several special fittings for doing this, including a short length of pipe and push-fit brass or plastic fittings.
As a temporary measure (especially useful with burst lead pipe), there are resin filler products which can be applied to the pipe to stem the flow of water, some of which will withstand mains pressure almost immediately.
Some need to be used in conjunction with tape or bandage.
A temporary repair can also be made very quickly with a burst pipe clamp.
Low wattage frost protection
Pipe insulation
Repairing burst pipe
Electrical bonding
Although mains water pipes are no longer used as the source of a house's electrical earthing, it is still necessary to make sure that all metal pipes inside the house are connected to the earthing point provided by electricity boards as part of their supply.
There are three main points where an earth connection has to be made.
First the main water service pipe (and, incidentally, the main gas service pipe) has to be earthed (with 6mm 2 or 10mm 2 cable) as soon as possible after it enters the house.
Second, an earthing ‘bridge’ must be applied across plastic pipe or fittings inserted into water pipes anywhere in the house.
Third, all accessible metal pipework must be earthed wherever it is within reach of a sink, basin, bath or other water source.
This means running an earth wire (4mm 2, or 2.5mm 2 if run in conduit) from the main earthing point and linking it to the hot and cold pipes, the taps and any metal fittings such as metal sinks.
The few electrical fittings which are allowed in bathrooms, such as heated towel rails, will already have their own earth connections.
Connections must be made with a proper earthing clamp with a label: ‘SAFETY ELECTRICAL CONNECTION — DO NOT REMOVE’.
Earthing the mains water pipe
Draining the cold water system
There will be occasions when you want to drain down the cold water system.
(For details on how to drain down the central heating system, see Chapter 13.)
There may be two drain taps in an indirect system: one positioned just above the mains stopcock and one on the feed to the hot water cylinder.
The first is not a lot of use in an indirect system, since once the mains stopcock has been turned off, most of the water left in the rising main can be drained out from the kitchen tap.
There will be a little left in the last bit of pipe, but you only want to remove it if you are working on this length of pipe.
The other is more useful and is, in fact, the only way of draining the hot water cylinder.
The cold water cistern is drained by shutting off the mains stopcock (or, if fitted, the servicing valve) and then opening the bath and basin cold taps.
If you just want to work on the length of pipe between the cistern and the taps, shut the gatevalve first (if there is one) opening the taps will drain the pipe.
If the mains stopcock won't shut (and there is no servicing valve), the water supply to the cistern can be stopped by tying up the ballvalve.
The simplest method of doing this is to remove the lid of the cistern (if it has one), laying a length of wood across the cistern and tying a piece of string to the ballvalve arm so that it is held closed.
(If you ever have to do this, leave the piece of wood with its string attached next to the cistern so that it can be used again.)
This is usually a better solution for draining the cistern as it leaves a cold supply at the kitchen sink.
Corrosion and dezincification
If two different metals, such as copper and zinc (galvanised cisterns are zinc coated), are in the same system corrosion will occur.
With copper pipework, a small amount of the copper will be dissolved in the water (especially if copper filings are left in the system) and this copper will be deposited on the galvanised surface.
Each little bit of copper and the zinc with which it is in contact act like a small battery: minute electrical currents are produced, with the water acting as the connection between the copper and zinc to complete the ‘circuit’.
This current results in small amounts of the zinc being dissolved — the zinc (galvanised) coating becomes porous and the water comes into contact with the steel underneath, which will start to corrode.
Tying up the ballvalve to drain the cistern
The traditional way to prevent corrosion is to suspend a ‘sacrificial’ magnesium anode in the cistern; the best solution with a corroded cold water cistern is to replace it with a new plastic one.
In some areas, there will be a reaction between chemicals that occur naturally in the water and the metal used in some brass fittings.
This reaction — known as dezincification — dissolves the zinc from the brass (brass is an alloy of zinc and copper), leaving them as porous copper, which can then disintegrate.
The effect of dezincification can be avoided by using gunmetal or special inhibited brass fittings.
Your local water company will be able to tell you whether your area requires any of these measures.
Water softening
Most people are aware of the difference between ‘hard’ water, which contains dissolved minerals, and ‘soft’water which doesn't.
Not only do they taste different, but they are very different in their performance when it comes to washing.
The minerals in hard water combine with soap to form a ‘scum’ which can leave a ring around baths and basins.
It's only when all the minerals have been ‘mopped up’ by the soap that it can form a lather.
Some of the dissolved minerals are ‘temporary’ hardeners and will be removed if the water is heated above 70°C, but this will give rise to fur or scale, not just in kettles but in other hidden parts of the hot water system.
More permanent hardness can be removed in one of two ways.
The first is simply to add a softener, such as‘Calgon’, to the washing machine at the same time as adding detergent, although many detergents contain softeners these days.
The second is to install a water softener into the cold water supply.
A water softener must be fitted after the supply to the drinking water so that this is left providing hard water for drinking.
A water softener works on the principle of ‘ion exchange’.
It will need regenerating every so often.
This simply involves the addition of some household salt either manually or automatically.
Left fitting a water softener Right.
a water conditioner is fitted just above the stopcock in the rising main
Fitting the water softener is a matter of breaking into the rising main and ‘teeing’ one pipe off to the softener and another from it; a third pipe connecting the two tees contains a by-pass valve which is shut when the water softener is in use and open when it is not.
Servicing valves should be fitted in both the inlet and outlet pipes of the softener so that it can be removed or isolated for maintenance without the need to turn off the mains water supply.
The softener will need to be connected to a waste and overflow pipe leading to the drains and will require its own electrical connection from a fused connection unit for the clock.
Many water companies require a non-return valve to be fitted in the inlet pipe to the softener and, where the pressure is very high, a pressure reducer in the rising main.
Other water treatment
There are three other devices you might want to fit: a water conditioner, a scale reducer or a water filter.
A water conditioner is fitted to the rising main just above the mains stopcock.
It does not affect the chemical composition of the water, but rather affects water condition (typically by a magnetic field) so that the magnesium and calcium ions are no longer precipitated.
A scale reducer contains polyphosphate crystals which modify the hardness salts so that they do not form scale.
It is usually fitted on branch pipes leading to electric showers or gas multi-point heaters (or combination boilers) and has two isolating valves.
A water filter is fitted to the branch pipe supplying the sink and connected to a separate tap.
‘Kits’ are available with self-cutting valves, which can be fitted without turning off the water supply.
Lifting floorboards
Lifting floorboards isn't always easy.
If they are tongued-and-grooved, the tongue wilt have to be cut off at least one floorboard: a floorboard saw or circular saw can be used for this.
Just to be safe, turn off the electricity and remove the fuses for the downstairs lighting Circuit and the upstairs ring main while you do this on the first floor — these cables are under the floorboards.
Floorboards tend to be fitted in long lengths and taking up a whole length is an unnecessary bore.
To cut through a floorboard to give a short piece to raise, it must first be lifted up from its neighbours.
If you don't do this, the adjacent floorboards will be damaged even if you use a floorboard saw.
A good tool for lifting floorboards is a wide bolster chisel.
Make the cut through the floorboard as near as possible to the middle of a joist.
The nails indicate the joist positions and you should aim to cut as close to the nails as possible without damaging the saw teeth, leaving the nails securing the piece you are not removing.
Once the floorboard piece has beer cut through and removed, you will be able to see whether any electric cables and/or central heating pipes are likely to cause trouble when you come to put the floorboards back down again.
If there are no electric cables, you can replace the fuses without worry.
It is a good idea to paint floorboards to mark the position of pipes and cables.
Replacing the cold water system
You may want to replace the cold water system either to convert a direct system into an indirect one or to replace old lead piping (or a rusting galvanised cistern) with more modern copper or plastic.
Installing a new water system is not a difficult job, but it takes time.
You can also be without a water supply while you do it.
The trick is to get as much of the system installed as you can alongside the existing system so that you can change over all in one go.
The two main jobs are replacing the rising main and installing a new cold water cistern together with new pipes leading to the various fittings around the house.
Replacing the rising main
If you have a lead rising main, it may well be that you can see it only at the mains stopcock, after which it disappears into the wall to re-emerge in the loft covered with sacking on its way to the cold water cistern.
The first decision is where to site the new rising main.
There are two considerations: first, it must be positioned so that it can be connected easily to the existing stopcock and to the branch which feeds the drinking water tap in the kitchen; second, it must be positioned so that it will not be subject to frost damage.
You will also want to place it so that it is not unsightly.
Generally, it will be best to run it up the corner of the kitchen which coincides with the corner of a room upstairs.
Which corner you choose may also depend on where you want to position the cold water cistern.
Although it is no problem running pipes within the loft, it is a good idea to keep all pipe runs as short as possible.
Since you are not connecting up at this stage, the rising main can be installed at a leisurely pace.
Use 15mm copper (or plastic) pipe in as long lengths as you can carry home.
All connections in the pipe must be accessible so the fewer there are, the easier it is to cover up the pipework.
Wherever copper pipework is to show, try to use capillary fittings as they are much neater.
Downstairs pipework The first piece of pipework will need a tee for the branch pipe to the kitchen tap which may itself need tees for pipes to a garden tap and washing machine.
Fit these pipes as you go, including the necessary servicing valves.
Passing through the ceiling You will need to make a hole in the kitchen ceiling and the floorboards above for the rising main to pass through.
Take up the carpet upstairs and lift the relevant floorboard to see where and how the hole should be made.
You will now be able to see the type of ceiling which is fitted below the joists — either plasterboard or lath-and-plaster.
Make a small hole through the ceiling next to a joist with a bradawl, leaving it in place while you go downstairs and transfer the position (and width) of the joist on to the ceiling downstairs with pencil marks.
This will now tell you where to make the hole without attempting to drill through a joist.
Treat the upstairs ceiling (loft floor) in a similar way to make the hole to pass up the pipe.
Once you are in the loft, it is better to use compression or push-fit fittings since they allow for some adjustment later and the fire risk of using a blowlamp is avoided.
Connecting up When the new rising main is in place (together with a new cistern and the pipes leading from it, if you are doing this), you can connect up to the mains stopcock and to the cold water cistern.
You may need a special connector to join to an old mains stopcock (see page 29): fit a drainvalve immediately above this.
The connection to the cistern ballvalve is made with a ½in tap connector: fit a servicing valve just before this.
Flush through the pipe before making the final connections and fit insulation to all exposed pipes afterwards.
You can leave buried lead pipe in place.
Any that is exposed can be taken out and sold for scrap.
Installing a new cistern
The step-by-step guide opposite gives the main stages in installing a cold water cistern.
Water supply
If you're simply replacing the old cistern — and not putting in a new system alongside the old you will be without water for some considerable time while the job is done.
Make sure there are sufficient buckets, bowls and jugs for cooking, drinking, washing and WC flushing.
Working in the loft
Working in the loft is unpleasant and somewhat hazardous.
Wear old clothes — and a simple face mask — if the loft is very dirty.
Make sure there is adequate light (take a wander light up if there is no loft light) and use boards to stand on to avoid crashing through the ceiling.
Gardener's knee pads are a good idea: kneeling on joists can be very uncomfortable.
Removing the old cistern
Getting the old cistern out can sometimes be a problem — particularly if it's been there for some time.
The first difficulty (after baling out the bottom 50mm of water) is removing the old pipe connections.
Old galvanised iron rising main and cold feed pipes can usually be removed with Stillsons; a metal overflow pipe may be so rusted that the only answer is to cut it off.
Lead pipes are easy to cut through with a hacksaw.
Taking out the old cistern itself can be even more difficult since they were usually put in place as the house was built, so will not go through the loft hatch.
If you're desperate to get rid of it, use a general-purpose saw to cut it in small sections (very hard and dirty work!) so that it can be passed down through the loft hatch; otherwise leave it in an unused corner of the loft.
If you are cutting it up, work on a large plastic sheet to catch all the filth from inside.
Platform
A plastic cistern must be well supported: 230 litres of water weighs a lot and the cistern should be placed over an internal loadbearing wall for extra support.
A proper timber platform is necessary for a plastic cistern.
Positioning
The cistern must be positioned away from draughts and dirty locations and must be accessible for maintenance (at least 350mm clearance above).
Pipe runs in the loft should be kept to a minimum.
Making holes
Holes need to be made for all the connections: ballvalve, cold water feeds and overflow pipe.
These will probably all be slightly different sizes (typically the holes needed for ballvalves are 21mm, tank connectors 30mm and overflow pipes 25mm) and it is important to use the correct size of holesaw or tank cutter to make them.
Make sure that the holes themselves are smooth by using a file and/or trimming knife to finish them off.
The position of the hole for the ballvalve stem may be dictated by a backplate or specially strengthened section near the top of the cistern.
Holes also need to be made in the lid for the vent pipe grommet and screened breather.
If you're putting in new pipework, it might be easier to make all the holes before the cistern is taken up to the loft; with a replacement cistern, it is important to make the holes in the correct position to take the existing pipes.
The holes for the cold feeds must be at least 30mm above the base of the cistern to prevent any dirt or debris in the bottom of the cistern being taken down the pipes.
Make the hole for the supply to the hot water cylinder higher than the cold supply — so that if the water fails, the hot runs out first.
The overflow pipe (which should be 22mm in diameter) should be positioned such that the top is at least 20mm below the discharge from the ballvalve and the bottom is at least 25mm above the waterline.
Fitting the connectors
If you're installing a new cistern, you can fit the connectors before taking the cistern up to the loft.
The ballvalve stem may have both metal and plastic washers each side (plastic closest to the cistern): the tank connectors for the cold feeds and overflow pipes have plastic washers only.
Do not use jointing compound on plastic cisterns — it can soften and crack them.
To prevent damage, unscrew the ball from the end of the float arm.
Connecting up
The connections to the cistern are straightforward: the ballvalve is connected via a tap connector, which has a small fibre or rubber washer to make the seal (a bent tap connector is often best for this job); the cold feeds are connected to the tank connectors with compression joints and must fall gently away from the cistern to avoid airlocks; the overflow pipe can be copper or plastic (with a plastic tank connector) and should be installed with a fall of at least 1 in 10 from the cistern.
The overflow connection should have a filter to keep out insects and an internal dip tube to prevent icy draughts.
The overflow itself should discharge in an obvious place where it cannot be ignored.
Don't forget to fit a servicing valve just before the ballvalve and gatevalves to all the cold water feeds: these are connected after a short run of pipe except for the feed to the hot water cylinder, where the gatevalve is usually fitted in the airing cupboard near to the cylinder.
Fitting gatevalves means that new pipes to fittings around the house can be installed after the cold water cistern is in place and connected up.
Once the servicing valve is fitted the water can be turned back on.
It sometimes helps, once the ball  valve has been fitted, to run a little water into the bottom of the cistern (below the outlet points) so as to anchor the cistern in position while you work on it.
Clean it out first.
The vent pipe from the hot water cylinder (22mm) should rise at least 400mm above the water level in the cistern before turning down over the cistern.
It should pass through a grommet in the cover and terminate about 50mm above the water level.
Filling and testing
Before filling the cistern, it should be cleaned thoroughly and sterilised with a dilute bleach solution (or use Milton).
Check carefully for leaks as the cistern is filled and adjust the float arm so the water level is 50mm below the overflow level.
Pipe support
When installed, the pipes must not put any strain on the tank (particularly a flexible plastic one).
Clip them securely to the joists and to the cistern platform; this will also reduce noise from the system.
Label all gatevalves so you know which is which in an emergency.
Insulation
The cistern will need to be fitted with a rigid, close-fitting and securely fixed cover which.
excludes light and insects but which is not airtight.
In practice, this can be achieved with a screened breather fitted in the cover.
The cistern must also be well insulated (as will all pipes, including the open vent).
Bye-law 30 kits
These have all the ‘extras’ necessary for a cistern to meet the requirements of the water bye-laws.
A typical kit includes:
a cover
an insulating jacket
a screened breather
a vent pipe grommet
an overflow pipe connector with insect filter and internal dip tube
a metal ballvalve support plate.
Installing a new cold water cistern
The three main types of cistern: galvanised iron top rigid plastic bottom flexible plastic right 
Make a secure platform to support the new cistern (full weight 237kg).
Use 22mm chipboard or plywood 
Make correctly sized and positioned holes in the cistern for the ballvalve, the overflow pipe and the cold water outlets 
Connect the ballvalve to the cistern with its two nuts and washers and fit a tap connector for the rising main connection 
Fit tank connectors for the cold feeds (fit plastic washers both sides) and connect a short length of pipe leading to a gatevalve 
The vent pipe from the hot water cylinder is fitted over the top of the cistern and passes through the grommet in the lid 
Fit the overflow pipe using a suitable connector and take the sloping pipe out through the eaves at a suitable point.
After cleaning and testing, fit the insulating jacket around the sides and over the top.
Don't insulate the loft floor underneath 
Rewashering a ballvalve
A Portsmouth ballvalve has retaining caps to hold in both the piston and, usually, the washer inside the piston 
After turning off the water, use pliers to extract the split pin.
Flatten the open ends, pull the pin out and remove the float arm 
Unscrew the end cap and use a screwdriver to lever out the piston assembly.
Catch it before it falls in the water 
Unscrew the end cap using pliers and remove the washer.
Clean up the valve parts and reassemble with a new washer
Repairing a burst pipe
Turn off the water and mark the section of pipe to be cut out, taking the length from the connector 
Cut the pipe and clean up the ends of pipe inside and out.
Be careful that no copper filings are left inside the pipe 
Slide the slip connector over the ends of the pipe and centre it.
Don't use jointing compound unless recommended 
Tighten the compression joints using a spanner at either end.
Turn the water on again and check for leaks
Running new pipes
All connections to the cold water cistern should start with a gatevalve so that the new section can be isolated if necessary 
Always run pipes with a fall away from the cistern and make sure that they are well supported with pipe clips 
If you have to cut a notch in a joist to run a pipe, cut it in the middle of the floorboard and leave a little room for expansion 
Where pipes turn corners with elbows or bends, don't put them hard up against a wall.
They need room to expand 
CHAPTER FOUR THE HOT WATER SYSTEM
Direct hot water system
In the majority of houses there are two different types of hot water: one which is in continuous circulation around the radiators of the central heating system, and one which comes out of the hot water taps in the bathroom and kitchen.
The second type is the subject of this chapter — it is often known as the domestic hot water system.
There are many different ways of heating the domestic hot water.
Broadly, they break down into two main types: one where the water is heated and stored hot in a hot water cylinder or tank; the other where cold water is heated instantaneously as it is drawn off.
Storage systems
There are three main kinds of hot water storage heating system: in the first two, the water is heated directly or indirectly by some kind of boiler; in the third, it is heated by an electric immersion heater.
Direct boiler systems
In a direct boiler system, the copper hot water cylinder (or, in older installations, galvanised hot water tank) is supplied with water from the cold water storage cistern; the water then passes down to a heating boiler, back boiler (behind a fire) or gas circulator to be heated before returning to the hot water cylinder.
A pipe leading from the top of the cylinder or tank then takes the hot water to the rest of the house.
The pipe bringing the water from the boiler (the flow) is connected near the top of the cylinder; the pipe taking water back to the boiler to be heated (the return) is connected near the bottom.
(In a galvanised tank, both pipes are connected to the bottom, the flow continuing up inside the tank to discharge near the top.)
The whole system usually depends on gravity — which means the cold water storage cistern must be above the highest point of the hot water cylinder (usually the hot water draw-off), and the hot water cylinder must  be above the boiler so that the heavier (cooler) water falls and the lighter (heated) water rises through the various connecting pipes.
If boiler and hot water cylinder are on the same level, a pump has to be installed into the system.
Sometimes, a safety valve may be fitted into the boiler flow pipe; a draincock is always fitted in the return.
A vent pipe must be fitted to the top of the cylinder to terminate over the cold water cistern and the hot water draw-off is taken from this above the level of the top of the cylinder.
Pipe sizing is important, too.
The cold feed to the cylinder and the vent pipe must be at least 22mm in diameter; it is best if the hot water distribution pipes are 22mm as well— at least as far as the connection to the branch pipe for the bath.
The pipes leading to and from the boiler are usually 28mm (or even 35mm).
Indirect hot water system (gravity-fed)
Direct hot water systems all suffer from one major drawback, which i– the formation of scale in the boiler pipes and in the cylinder, particularly in hard water areas — see below.
They are no longer installed.
Indirect boiler systems
The difference between a direct hot water cylinder and an indirect one is that the latter has a heat exchanger, often in the form of a coiled pipe, which takes the hot water from the boiler and passes its heat to the domestic hot water in the cylinder, the two never mixing.
The water in the coil, now cooler, is passed back to the boiler.
The flow connection will be towards the top of the cylinder and the return connection towards the bottom.
With older, annular-type heaters, the tappings can be on opposite sides of the cylinder.
Draincocks must be provided for both circuits.
This type of system requires two cold water cisterns: the normal one which supplies the cold feed to the hot water cylinder (the ‘secondary’ circuit); the other a feed-and-expansion cistern for supplying the ‘primary’boiler circuit.
Each has a vent pipe from its respective circuit.
Often, of course, the primary circuit will be part of a central heating system.
In older systems, this will usually be a gravity-fed circuit separate from the pumped central heating circuit, but in modern systems it will be a pumped circuit which operates together with the central  heating.
See also Chapter 11.
The level of water in a feed-and-expansion cistern should be low enough to allow the water to expand as it gets hot without overflowing.
The vent pipe is often wrongly called an expansion pipe: its purpose is to allow any air and steam to escape safely (the expansion actually takes place up the cold feed pipe).
In addition to the traditional vented system, it is now permissible to have an unvented hot water storage system, which does away with the cold water cistern altogether and has other advantages (see page 58 for details); sealed central heating systems (which do away with the feed-and-expansion cistern) have been legal for some time.
Immersion heaters
Another way to heat water is to have an electric immersion heater which fits into a ‘boss’ on the hot water cylinder.
The immersion heater can be mounted vertically or horizontally (depending on the design of the cylinder); it may be possible to fit two heaters or a dual-element heater so that you can choose whether to heat the whole cylinder (for a bath) or just the top part (for washing up and hand washing).
A timer can be fitted to an immersion heater so that it comes on at specified times of the day.
If the cylinder is well insulated, advantage can be taken of the cheaper Economy 7 tariff.
The water is heated at night and, if not used, stays hot during the day.
You need a special electricity meter for this.
Immersion heaters can be fitted instead of or as well as a boiler to heat the water.
A common arrangement is to have both so that the immersion can be used as a back up and in summer when the boiler is off.
Where electric heating is the only source of hot water, an alternative to a hot water cylinder is an electric water heater, wall-mounted or fitted in a cupboard.
Scale
Water naturally contains dissolved chemicals: the more it has, the harder it is.
Apart from the problems of washing in this hard water (soap will not lather), when the water is heated, the dissolved chemicals are ‘precipitated’ out as insoluble carbonates; the higher the temperature, the more the salts that are precipitated.
This effect is familiar as the ‘furring’ inside kettles.
Fur or scale is bad enough in kettles but can have a disastrous effect on the insides of pipes and boilers in direct systems.
Not only is it a bad conductor of heat — so putting up running costs — but the fur can reduce the effective internal diameter of a pipe and can eventually lead leaking, immersion heaters burning out, and noises in the water heating system.
Scale formation can be prevented in direct boiler systems by fitting a water softener, water conditioner or scale reducer (see page 42) or by keeping the water temperature below 60°C.
The best way of preventing scale, however, is to replace the cylinder with an indirect one where the same water is circulated round and round the ‘primary’ circuit (the one which passes through the boiler) which, once it has given up its chemical salts, is in effect softened so that no more will be deposited.
Instantaneous systems
Most people are familiar with the ‘Ascot’ type of gas instantaneous single-point water heater fitted in the kitchen for supplying hot water to the sink.
This method of heating has the advantage of being more economical as no heat is wasted keeping water hot and none is lost in the pipes between the hot water cylinder and the hot tap.
It is not unusual to have a sink water heater even where the rest of the house is supplied from a hot water storage cylinder.
In addition to this type of gas water heater, there are electric instantaneous water heaters for providing hot water for showers.
Both gas and electric instantaneous heaters are used for supplying water at a single point.
For supplying hot water for a whole house, a gas multi-point heater can be used.
This operates on the same principle as a single-point instantaneous heater, but is more powerful and can be linked to several outlets.
It can be connected to the rising t– main and is often fitted in houses with direct cold water systems to provide the hot water.
It can be used to provide the hot water supply for a washing machine, which is not the case for a single point heater.
A combination boiler combines the functions of a central heating boiler and a multi-point water heater.
Immersion heater (with indirect cylinder)
The main disadvantages of an instantaneous water heater compared with storage systems is that the flow of water is often slower and, in the winter when the water in the mains is colder, the hot water will be less hot.
They also suffer from scale formation in hard water areas.
On the other hand, hot water is always available with this type of heater.
Designing hot water systems
A system which uses only an immersion heater to provide the hot water is the easiest to design and install.
The important points to remember are that pipe runs from the hot water cylinder should be kept as short and as direct as possible to avoid heat loss — and a long wait at the tap before hot water arrives.
The maximum recommended length for these-uninsulated ‘dead legs’ is 12m. (39ft): it is better to insulate all hot water pipes wherever possible.
Pipes must be installed with a fall away from the take-off point (in the vent pipe above the cylinder) to prevent airlocks forming.
Instantaneous water heaters do not pose many design problems either.
The important things here are that a gas water heater may require its own flue (usually a ‘balanced flue’— see Chapter 11) and that an electric water heater will require its own electric circuit (see Chapter 8).
Single-point instantaneous heaters will be fitted as near as possible to the sink or basin that they serve: multi-point heaters can usually be positioned so that pipe runs can be kept to a minimum.
This assumes that the bathroom is next to or above the kitchen (as is usually the case); if running hot water to another room (a bedroom, say) will create a very long pipe run, it might be simpler to install a separate instantaneous or small storage heater.
All instantaneous heaters are run from the rising main.
It's when you come to systems which run from some kind of boiler that the design needs more consideration.
The main points to think — about are the positioning of the boiler and hot water cylinder, the sizes and running of pipes, the types to be used and the avoidance of airlocks.
You will probably also want to fit some kind of thermostatic control.
Positioning
The positioning of the boiler may well be the first consideration.
If it is a boiler that is also to be used for central heating, the best position will probably be in the kitchen on an outside wall.
Some existing ‘boilers’ used for hot water heating will, however, be back boilers which are situated behind gas or solid fuel fires in the main living room, which may mean significantly long — and inefficient — pipe runs.
The hot water-cylinder should certainly be as near as possible to the boiler — preferably vertically above it — and to the taps it serves.
With a back boiler, this could mean putting the hot water cylinder in a bedroom airing cupboard.
Pipes and fittings
The correct sizing of pipes is important for hot water systems — particularly for the pipes between the boiler and hot water cylinder in a gravity system.
To reduce pressure lost in going around corners, pipes should be bent or fitted with slow bends rather than elbow fittings.
No valves should be fitted to obstruct the cold feed pipe to or the open vent pipe from the boiler — apart from a draincock at the lowest point of the system.
No valves should be fitted in the vent pipe leading to the cold water storage cistern, but it helps for maintenance if servicing valves are fitted in the hot water pipes.
Airlocks
An ‘airlock’ occurs when air gets into a pipe and prevents the flow of water.
The flow from the tap stops — and there may be hissing or bubbling noises as well.
Airlocks happen in hot water systems for a number of reasons.
It maybe that the pipework does not slope — gently away from the vent pipe which can cause air to collect at the highest point of the pipe.
It may be that the cold pipe to the hot water cylinder is too small and cannot fill the cylinder fast enough when the bath tap is being run, with the result that the water level in the vent pipe falls and allows air into the system.
Another possible cause is that the cold water cistern is too small or that the ballvalve supplying the cistern is blocked or slow in operation.
Partly closed valves (or the use of stopvalves) can also cause airlocks.
Whatever the cause of an airlock, a temporary cure can usually be effected by connecting a hose pipe from the kitchen cold tap (under mains pressure) to the tap which is not running and turning both on.
The water being driven along the hot pipes should get rid of the bubble of air.
In practice, running a hose pipe all the way from the kitchen sink to (say) the bath hot tap (to say nothing of the problem of connecting it at both ends) may not be practicable and you should first try using the nearest cold tap in the same way.
An alternative method is to attach an electric drill water pump attachment to the tap.
If a design problem is the cause of the airlock, this procedure will have to be repeated every time, so it will be better to find the cause and remedy it by fitting bigger pipes or a bigger cistern (or a second cistern alongside the first — see Chapter 3), or by repositioning the pipes so that they have the correct fall.
Thermostatic control
An immersion heater has the simplest type of thermostatic control fitted in the centre of the heater and adjustable by the user.
A solid-fuel boiler, whether a separate boiler, an Aga-type cooker/ hot water boiler or a back boiler, is the most difficult to control and will heat the water to some extent all the time that the fire is lit.
The hot water cylinder is, in fact, used as the ‘heat sink’ for many solid fuel boiler systems allowing somewhere for excess heat to be dissipated (sometimes a bathroom towel rail is used for the same purpose).
Great care should be taken before attempting to drain the water out of this type of system — the boiler must be let out first.
Systems which operate on the type of boiler which can be turned on or off (gas-fired or oil-fired) can have one of a number of controls fitted.
A boiler has its own thermostat to control the water temperature.
In addition, a cylinder thermostat can be strapped to the cylinder either to turn the boiler off or to operate a valve which shuts off the flow from the boiler to the cylinder when the stored water is hot enough.
In a pumped system, the thermostat may also switch off the pump.
Where the water is heated by pumped circulation operating in conjunction with a central heating system, the valve may be a three-way one which will divert the water either to the hot water cylinder or to the central heating radiators or, sometimes, to both see Chapter 11.
Another type of hot water control is a non-electric thermostatic valve fitted into the return pipe from the cylinder to the boiler.
This can be adjusted to close off the flow when the temperature is sufficient.
All these measures will save fuel and many thermostats can also be used in conjunction with a programmer to bring the hot water heating on only at certain times of the day.
Hot water cylinders
A hot water cylinder is traditionally put in a cupboard which also serves for airing clothes.
In many modern central heating systems, the airing cupboard may also be the place where much of the control gear is situated since this is convenient for access and for arranging the pipework.
The standard size for a hot water cylinder is 900mm (36in) high and 450mm (18in) diameter.
This gives a capacity of around 120 litres (26 gallons) which should be sufficient for one full bath.
The next most common size is the same diameter but 1050mm (42in) high, with a capacity of 140 litres (31 gallons).
lf you go to a specialist shop, such as a plumbers' merchant or central heating specialist, you will be able to find other sizes.
A tall thin cylinder (300mm × 1600mm, for example) is particularly useful when replacing an old galvanised hot water tank which has a cupboard built to fit it.
Look for cylinders made to BSl566.
Installing a hot water cylinder
The most likely reason for fitting a new copper hot water cylinder is that you want to replace an existing galvanised hot water tank.
If you simply want to change a direct cylinder to an indirect one or to fit a cylinder with an immersion heater boss, there are ways of adapting an existing direct cylinder — see Upgrading cylinders (page 52).
If you are replacing one copper cylinder with another, you may find one with the connections in the same place.
(Stepby-step drawings are on page 54.)
First buy all the fittings you need.
The job will take some hours and you will be without hot water while you are doing it, so you need to have everything to hand before starting.
The old tank can usually be drained from the draincock at the boiler or gas circulator (after turning this off): make sure that the gatevalve on the cold water supply to the hot water tank is closed before you do this.
If there is no gatevalve in this supply, the cold water cistern will have to be drained: turn off the supply or tie up the ballvalve (so that there is still a supply to the kitchen tap) and open the upstairs cold water taps.
It would be a good opportunity to fit a gatevalve to this supply and, if the supply pipe is made from lead, to replace it with copper or plastic.
The most difficult part of getting out a galvanised hot water tank is likely to be disconnecting the pipes leading to and from the boiler particularly if they have been there for some time.
The largest pair of Stillsons may shift the nuts, but you may have to resort to cutting through the pipes.
There will be some water and debris in the bottom of the hot water tank — so make sure that buckets and cloths are to hand to catch the mess.
Once the old tank has been removed, you can install the pipework for the new cylinder.
The pipes you are likely to need are:
22mm cold feed from the cold water cistern
28mm pipes leading to and from the boiler for gravity circulation, or 22mm if connected to the pumped circuit for pumped circulation
22mm vent pipe leading up to and over the cold water storage cistern
22mm hot water supply pipe leading off the vent pipe and going first to the bath hot tap
Although the positioning of the pipes and the fittings needed will depend on the exact position of the cylinder and its connections, it will usually be easier to get the pipes in before the cylinder is installed.
If space is very tight, use flexible copper pipe or plastic pipe for some if not all of the  final fittings.
See also Chapter 13.
The fittings provided on most cylinders are 1in male BSP for the boiler connections and 1in (or ¾in) female BSP for the cold inlet and hot outlet.
These should all be fitted with parallel-threaded (not tapered) iron-to-copper fittings so that the copper pipes can be connected directly.
The threads of the male iron parts of these fittings should all be wrapped with PTFE tape to ensure a watertight seal.
The cold inlet at the bottom of the cylinder can be fitted with a male iron to copper elbow containing a draincock.
The cylinder itself should be positioned on a flat rigid surface: if the floorboards in the airing cupboard are at all uneven or if you need space for access to pipes, it is a good idea to mount it on a small platform.
Compression or union capillary fittings should be used for the final connections to the cylinder so that it can be easily removed for maintenance.
Any tappings that aren't being used on the cylinder can be fitted with screwed blanks.
Lastly, fit an immersion heater and an insulating jacket (if required).
Before filling the cylinder, open the hot water taps to avoid airlocks forming and then fill slowly, checking for leaks.
If the primary circuit is also part of a central heating circuit, this will also need filling and some of the radiators may need bleeding afterwards to let out air.
Upgrading cylinders
Direct cylinders can be converted simply to indirect ones using a cylinder conversion kit.
There are two types: one uses the immersion heater boss for both the primary flow and return; the other requires the making of two holes in the side of the  cylinder into which a coil can be positioned.
The second involves more work but it means that an immersion heater can also be fitted, provided the coil is carefully positioned — see drawings on page 54.
The kit for doing the job comes with the necessary fittings so that the job of ‘winding’ the coil into one hole and out of the other after removing the pipes from the boiler should take only 15 minutes.
Fitting a new immersion heater boss to a cylinder is a longer job.
There are different designs of flange for fitting to cylinders, depending on where the flange is to be fitted.
The ‘Essex’ flanges are specially constructed in sections, plus two rubber jointing washers, enabling them to be inserted and fixed from outside the cylinder.
If fitting a horizontal heater, remember that it should neither be positioned below the level of the cold water inlet nor interfere with any indirect coil inside the cylinder.
Don't fit an immersion heater boss to an indirect self-priming cylinder.
The hole for the flange can be made with a large tank cutter or by drilling a circle of small holes and using a padsaw to connect them up, preventing the disc falling into the cylinder.
The hole will need to be filed smooth and all copper filings washed out of the cylinder before the flange is fitted.
All the jobs above require the cylinder to be at least partly drained.
It might be easier to remove it altogether.
Types of cylinder
When looking in a shop or through a manufacturer's or mail-order catalogue for hot water cylinders, you will find several different types.
Special cylinders are needed for unvented systems.
See page 58
Direct
This type of cylinder is designed for direct boiler systems, so has two tappings to take fittings for the pipes to and from the boiler but no internal heating coil.
Existing direct cylinders can be upgraded to indirect — see below.
Indirect
This also has two tappings, but these will be connected internally to a heating coil — see drawing on page 49.
Both indirect and direct cylinders are usually fitted with a 2¼in BSP boss for a vertical or horizontal immersion heater.
High-recovery cylinders heat up in half the time so can be smaller in size   
‘Primatic’ self-venting cylinder
Combination cylinder (direct)
Pre-insulated
These cylinders are already covered with-a layer of insulating foam which does away with the need for adding a jacket.
Generally the extra cost for this type is around the same as for adding your own jacket — but the insulation won't fall off.
Combination
Sometimes referred to as a ‘packaged plumbing’ unit, a combination cylinder has its own cold water storage cistern fitted on top of the cylinder This arrangement can be used where there is no room for a separate cold water storage cistern in a flat or a house with a flat roof.
Combination cylinders come in different sizes and are available for both direct and indirect boiler heating systems the indirect version may have two cold water cisterns, one to feed the cylinder and the other as a feed-and-expansion cistern for the central heating system
Self-venting
This type of cylinder (also called ‘Primatic’) does not require a feedand-expansion cistern for the primary circuit to the boiler.
Instead, the mechanism inside the cylinder allows the ‘primary’ circuit to be filled up from the cold water supply to the hot water cylinder When it is full, a large air bubble prevents the two mixing — provided the water in the boiler circuit is never allowed to boil.
Self-venting cylinders cannot be used with corrosion inhibitors and are seldom installed these days
Packaged
If you are installing central heating, you can buy pre-insulated cylinders with various central heating components (such as the pump, motorised valve, thermostat and programmer) already pre-plumbed and pre-wired in place.
Economy 7
An Economy 7 cylinder is a large capacity (typically 210 litres) pre-insulated cylinder fitted with two horizontal immersion heaters.
The heater at the bottom is wired so that it will operate on the cheaper tariff at night to heat up the whole cylinder; the heater at the top can be used during the day (on full-rate tariff) for ‘topping up’ when necessary  
Economy 7 cylinder
Immersion heaters
An immersion heater works like the element in an electric kettle.
There are three different arrangements for fitting immersion heaters:
a single heater, fitted vertically or horizontally
two heaters fitted horizontally
a dual element heater fitted vertically.
With two heaters or a dual element heater, it is possible to keep a small amount of water hot — enough for hand washing and washing up whilst a single heater will heat the whole cylinder.
Immersion heaters are generally rated at 3kW and come in different lengths to suit different sizes of cylinder: don't attempt to economise by fitting a shorter vertically mounted one than you need — it will heat only the water above it.
The thermostat, which fits between the element loops, is usually sold separately — so make sure you have got one.
Fitting an immersion heater
The plumbing involved in fitting an immersion heater is relatively minor, provided the cylinder already has an appropriate boss — see left.
If the cylinder is already installed, you need only to drain it, unscrew any blanking cap (or old immersion if you're replacing) and screw the new one in place using the washer supplied.
You don't need to drain the whole system — just enough so that water doesn't come out of the immersion heater boss.
You will, however, need an immersion heater spanner for this job (see page 17).
The major part of the job is electrical and if you're not confident about tackling this, get a qualified electrician to do it for you.
To comply with the IEE Wiring Regulations, an immersion heater must have its own electric circuit run from a spare fuseway at the consumer unit, though there are many houses where the supply for the immersion heater has been taken off the upstairs ring circuit.
The new circuit needs to be run in 2.5mm 2 twin-and-earth cable with a 15A (or 20A) fuse or circuit breaker at the consumer unit.
The cable is run to a double-pole switch (or fused connection unit) from which a length of 15A (1.5mm 2) heat resisting three-core flex is run to the connections on the immersion heater.
Special double-pole switches are made; if the switch can be reached from the bath or the shower, it must be the pull-cord kind.
Two immersion heaters (or a dual-element heater) generally need two flexes.
Ideally, these are taken from an Economy 7 controller, which automatically brings on the lower (or longer) element at night and provides for a short ‘topup’ during the day with the upper (or shorter) element.
There are also special timers for single-element immersion heaters.
Some incorporate the necessary double-pole switch; others are simple timers and are fitted between the double-pole switch and the flex to the immersion heater.
Adjusting the heater thermostat
The thermostat of an immersion heater can usually be adjusted by turning off the double-pole switch and removing the heater cover.
There is a small slot in the centre of the thermostat which is marked in °C and which can be adjusted with a screwdriver.
A temperature of 60°C (140°F) is usually recommended for domestic hot water, and will prevent scale formation in hard water areas.
The setting is more precise with horizontal heaters; you may need to experiment with vertical heaters.
Replacing a hot water cylinder
Whichever type of cylinder is being replaced, the first step is to drain down — either at the cylinder or at the boiler (or both)
The old pipes to the cylinder will have to be disconnected.
This may require force if galvanised iron pipe has been used 
The pipes are fitted to the screwed tappings or inlets on the new cylinder.
Use flexible copper or plastic pipe if space is limited 
If necessary, insulate the cylinder by fitting a separate jacket, but it is much better to use a pre-insulated cylinder
Fitting an immersion heater
Choose the type of heater which is best for the type of cylinder (or buy heater and cylinder at the same time)
Fit the immersion heater with its washer and insert it into the screwed boss.
PTFE tape should not be needed 
In order to tighten the immersion heater a special spanner is required.
These can be hired but are inexpensive to buy 
After installing the necessary electrical circuit, connect up the heat-resistant flex to the terminals on the heater
Upgrading a cylinder
Converting direct to indirect
One type of conversion kit fits into the immersion heater boss.
It is tightened with an immersion heater spanner (Micraversion)
Another type requires the drilling of two holes (using the template supplied) and the ‘winding in’ of a copper coil (Sidewinder)
Cylinder thermostat
To fit a cylinder thermostat to a pre-insulated cylinder, cut away the insulation to get metal-to-metal contact
Immersion heater timer
An immersion heater timer is wired in place between the double-pole switch and the immersion heater 
A new hot water system
If you are thinking about installing a completely new hot water system there are several considerations:
how much hot water do you need?
is the hot water system to be part of a central heating system?
are there existing flues and/or outside walls to take balanced flues?
do you want a conventional ‘vented’ system or a modern unvented system?
How much hot water?
Any hot water system must meet the requirements of the whole house.
Primarily, this is to supply the kitchen sink, bathroom basin and bath plus whatever appliances, such as washing machines, are connected to the hot water supply.
The major factor is likely to be the number of baths taken which will vary with the size and age of the family.
Reckon each bath at around 60 litres to give you an idea of the amount of hot water storage that is needed.
It's worth remembering that showers use much less hot water (see Chapter 8).
The size of the house may also influence the decision — in a very large house, the length of hot water pipe runs could be unacceptably large for a single system and a combination of storage and instantaneous systems may be necessary.
Hot water and central heating
Few people would think seriously about installing a central heating system these days without also using it to provide domestic hot water.
If you're thinking of putting in central heating, the type of system you should install will depend on more factors than the hot water requirements.
See Chapter 11 for more details.
Many existing systems which don't already heat the hot water can be adapted to do so, but if yours can't (an early warm air system, say) or if you're installing one of the few types of system that doesn't also heat the hot water (such as electric storage radiators), you will have to choose the hot water system.
The best and cheapest solutions to providing domestic hot water not connected to central heating systems are likely to be an Economy 7 hot water cylinder or, if you have gas laid on, a gas circulator used with an indirect cylinder.
Single gas instantaneous water heaters have their place alongside a storage system; the main problem with relying on a gas multi-point heater to provide all the house's hot water is the low flow rate which means baths take a long time to fill.
Flues
If you use a fuel-burning boiler or water heater to provide your water heating, this must be fitted with a proper flue to take away the products of combustion.
For many boilers, this can be a normal chimney, provided that there is a sufficient supply of fresh air into the room for the fuel to burn.
For gas multi-points and many wall-hung boilers, a balanced flue is used: this is a twopart duct which allows fresh air in and exhaust gases to escape.
Note that a single-point gas water heater in a bathroom must be fitted with a balanced flue: a good idea for others, too.
Many old gas water heaters do not have proper flues and are dangerous — get the Gas Board to check any you are worried about.
Vented or unvented?
An unvented hot water storage system has many advantages over the normal vented system.
See page 58 for details.
Heating by gas
Central heating boilers
These are covered in detail in Chapter 11.
Suffice it to say here that all modern central heating boilers can provide domestic hot water via an indirect hot water cylinder or, with a combination boiler, instantaneously.
Back boilers
It is unlikely these days that you would want a new back boiler to provide all your central heating needs, but you may well want to replace one which provides domestic hot water.
Gas circulators
A gas circulator is the answer where central heating is provided by a gas warm air system and the only other method of heating the domestic hot water is an electric immersion.
To save installing a new Economy 7 hot water cylinder, the existing cylinder can be converted to direct or (better still) indirect operation by a wall-mounted gas circulator.
In effect, this is a small boiler which will run more cheaply than an electric one and will reduce dependence on a single fuel.
A back-fitting gas circulator would also be a good choice for replacing an elderly solid fuel back boiler behind a new gas fire.
A back-fitting gas circulator
Gas storage water heaters
These are rather like a water heater and storage cylinder in one.
The mass of water (typically 90 litres) is heated quickly to a pre-set temperature (60°C) and is maintained at this level.
Several sizes are available.
Gas instantaneous heaters
One of the advantages of using an instantaneous gas water heater is that it is much more efficient than using a gas central heating boiler to heat the water in a storage cistern particularly in the summer.
Any gas appliance is more efficient when operating at full load, which is not the case with most central heating boilers when providing only hot water heating.
A typical gas instantaneous water heater will give a temperature rise of 50°C with a flow rate of around 6.5 litres/minute — so if it is taking water from the mains at 10°C, it will raise the temperature to 60°C.
The temperature and flow are usually interdependent-the greater the flow rate, the lower the resultant temperature and vice versa— though some models are thermostatically controlled to give a particular temperature whatever the flow rate.
This compares with 18 litres a minute or more from a storage system.
The majority of gas heaters will require a conventional flue or a balanced (‘room-sealed’) flue: in bathrooms, only balanced flues may be used.
The pressure ‘head’ normally needed for operating an instantaneous water heater, typically 10m or 15psi (pounds per square inch), means that they have to be connected to the mains.
Note that it is illegal for persons who are not ‘competent’ to install gas appliances.
Although you can do all the water plumbing side yourself, the gas fitting should be left to a qualified gas fitter who is on the register of the Confederation for the Registration of Gas Installers.
Gas storage water heater
Gas multi-point water heater
Heating by electricity
Electric storage water heaters
A small ‘open-outlet’ electric storage heater can usefully be positioned over or under the kitchen sink as it will provide sufficient water for washing up.
If it is mounted over the sink, a normal swivelling outlet spout is used.
For under-sink installation it is essential to use the purpose-designed hot tap supplied by the heater manufacturer.
When the tap is turned on, cold water (usually from the mains) is allowed into the bottom of the heater, thus forcing hot water out of the top and out of the nozzle outlet or the hot tap.
A anti-drip device inside the heater prevents a nozzle dripping as the water expands in heating.
Typical sizes are 7 and 15 litres with 1kW or 3kW loading; some models have adjustable thermostatic controls.
Unvented undersink electric water heaters (typically 10 litres/ 3kW) use normal taps and can feed more than one outlet.
Larger electric storage heaters will heat 91 or 136 litres (20 or 30 gallons) and replace a conventional hot water storage cylinder.
They need to be fed from (and vented to) a cold water storage cistern unless they have their own integral cold water cistern.
See also Economy 7 cylinders on page 52.
Electric storage water heater
Electric instantaneous heaters
Small, 3kW to 6kW, instantaneous electric water heaters, similar to the type used for electric showers, can be used over a sink or basin.
You may also find instantaneous water heaters, rated at 9kW or more, which can feed more than one outlet — ideal for use in a loft conversion, say.
Solar water heating
Harnessing the natural radiant energy of the sun seems an obvious way to cut down on ever-increasing fuel bills.
Unfortunately, the majority of energy used in homes is for space heating (heating the rooms and the people) and this is mostly needed in the winter when there is not sufficient sunshine in this country for solar energy to be feasible.
Solar heating does come into its own for the fairly specialised use of heating water for swimming pools and can make a contribution to heating the domestic hot water.
So far, the costs of having a solar heating system installed have outweighed the likely savings in fuel bills, but if you can install a system yourself, you should save money.
On average, the amount of solar radiation falling on each square metre of the United Kingdom is from 800kWh a year in Scotland to 1,100 kWh a year in the south west of England.
A solar collector area of around 4m 2 to 5m 2 is usually considered the optimum.
How it works
A solar heating system consists of three main components: the solar panel, a feed-and-expansion cistern (which must be positioned at the highest point of the system) and the solar cylinder.
Water from the cylinder passes through the solar panel where it is heated by the sun's rays.
This is rather like a radiator working in reverse (in fact, a radiator could be used as a solar panel).
The water then passes to a coil in the indirect solar cylinder, and is then pumped back to the bottom of the solar panel.
The supply from the cold water cistern to the normal hot water cylinder passes through the solar cylinder where it is pre-heated before being further heated in the main hot water cylinder if necessary.
In the summer, the solar system should provide all the heat necessary; at other times of the year, some ‘topping-up’ will be necessary and, in the winter, precautions have to be taken not only to prevent the solar part of the system freezing (antifreeze is usually added to the water in this part of the system) but also to prevent the whole system working in reverse which would mean that the domestic hot water cylinder was heating the solar collector!
The solar collector
In order for a solar panel (or solar collector) to work efficiently, it must be well insulated which means putting insulation material behind it and a glass cover in front.
The panel itself usually consists of a number of metal pipes bonded to a metal plate, the whole of the collector surface being painted matt black.
The glass surface needs to be kept clean — a regular hose-down is all that is required (not always easy on the roof)— and the collector box should be weatherproof.
Controlling solar heating
The main controls fitted to a solar water heating system are temperature sensors, fitted to the water outlet from the solar panel and to the pre-heat cylinder.
The sensors control the pump — allowing water to be pumped around the system only when the temperature at the solar panel is higher than the temperature in the cylinder.
To prevent back-circulation, a non-return valve should be fitted into the pipe connected to the bottom of the solar panel.
Installing solar heating
As you can see, much of the solar heating involves conventional plumbing.
The main difficulty will be in installing the solar collector itself.
The best position for this is at an angle of 45° facing south, but this will be dictated by the pitch of your roof and if the ridge runs north/ south, site the collector on the east side to get the benefit of the early morning sun.
Unvented hot water systems
One of the reasons why Continental and American water fittings such as taps and showers cannot be used in this country is that they are designed for use with high-pressure hot and cold water supplies.
In this country, water supplies within a house are at low pressure with the water being supplied from the cold water storage cistern.
Hot water storage systems are ‘vented’ to allow any steam to escape if the system overheats and the cistern accommodates expansion of the water as it is heated.
When new water bye-laws (based on the revised model water bye-laws) came into force in 1989, ‘unvented’ hot water systems were allowed here with the result that many more foreign fittings will become available.
Unvented hot water systems are now covered by the requirements of the Building Regulations as well as the water bye-laws.
How the system works
In an unvented system, all the household's water — hot and cold — is supplied directly from the mains.
So there is no main cold water cistern in the loft (though a feed-and-expansion cistern may be needed for a central heating system).
To allow the hot water to expand as it heats up, an expansion vessel is fitted (together with an expansion relief valve in case the vessel should fail), and to provide protection against overheating three levels of safety must be built in — thermostat, energy cut-out and temperature/ pressure relief valve.
The drawing shows the main components:
Line strainer to remove any dirt or other particles which could affect the operation of any of the valves in the system
Pressure-reducing valve to ensure that the actual pressure in the system does not exceed a safe level (typically ⅓ Of the test pressure of the hot water cylinder)
Non-return valve (check valve) to prevent hot water returning to mix with the cold water in the mains
Expansion vessel to provide room for the water in the system to expand as it heats up
Expansion relief valve — to allow expanding water to escape in the event of failure of the expansion vessel.
Connected to the drains via a tundish and must discharge in a safe and visible place
Hot water cylinder must be a special design (steel or copper) to cope with the pressure and normally comes with all the necessary safety devices
Thermostat is the first level of safety.
Set to operate at around 60°C to 65°C
Energy cut-out is the second level of safety and is set to operate at 85°C to 90°C to turn off the boiler or other source of heat
Temperature/pressure relief valve is the third level of safety and will discharge water (through a second tundish into a safe and visible place) if the temperature of the water reaches 95°C.
What are the advantages?
Apart from being able to use a wider range of taps and fittings (including ‘aerated’ taps), the main advantages of an unvented system are:
no cold cisterns and pipes in the loft to freeze and take up space
no noise from cistern filling
drinking water at all cold taps
high and equal pressure at all outlets (giving decent showers)
no restriction on the placing of the hot water cylinder.
Installing unvented systems
Despite the fact that unvented hot water cylinders often come with all the components pre-fitted to the hot water cylinder, the Building Regulations require the use of an ‘Approved Installer’— which means someone who has been on a proper training course.
More of a worry than the installation is the future maintenance of an unvented system.
It is vital that the system is regularly maintained to ensure safe operation — and it would be a disaster if someone were to ‘bodge’ a repair if, for example, one of the two relief valves had discharged water.
CHAPTER FIVE HOUSE DRAINAGE
Until now we have been concerned with how water gets into and is distributed around the house, sometimes being heated on the way.
In this chapter, it is the turn of the other part of the system: the part which removes dirty water.
This side of domestic plumbing divides into three sections:
Traps which are fitted to basins, sinks, baths and WCs to prevent foul air from the drains entering the house
Pipes to carry the dirty water out of the house
Drains to carry the dirty water underground to the main sewer, septic tank or cesspool.
Unlike fresh water plumbing, which is covered by the water bye-laws, the drainage system is covered by Building Regulations, which are administered by the Building Control Officer at your local authority and you must provide details of material alterations or additions that you propose to make to the drainage system of your house.
It is important to recognise that there are three different types of dirty water.
First is waste water, which comes from washing; second is soil water which is the discharge from WCs, and third (the subject of Chapter 6) is rainwater landing on the roof or the ground.
Drainage systems
Two-pipe drainage system
At one time, two-pipe house drainage systems were designed to keep waste water and soil water completely separate until they entered the underground drains and to prevent ‘drain air’ entering the house: in Victorian times this was thought to be responsible for all manner of ills.
Modern single-stack drainage systems allow them to mix above ground, though there are stringent design requirements to ensure that the drains do not pose any risk to health.
Single-stack drainage system
Two-pipe system
In the old type of drainage system, one pipe — the waste pipe — took the dirty water from sinks, basins and baths, and a second, larger, pipe the soil pipe — took the discharge water from WCs.
The soil pipe was connected directly into the drains and was open to the air at the top, well above the eaves of the house.
The wastes from bathroom equipment discharged into a ‘hopper head’ connected to the waste pipe which in turn discharged into an open gully.
The waste from kitchen sinks also discharged into an open gully frequently the same one as the waste pipe.
Downstairs WCs were connected directly to the drains.
Hopper heads are generally considered unsanitary as they are not self-cleaning (and can get coated with dried soap) and the smell from them could enter the bathroom through an open window.
Although this type of system was replaced by the single-stack system around 1960, there are still many houses with the old arrangement.
Single-stack systems
In modern systems, there is only one pipe, to which all the upstairs wastes are connected.
This pipe, called the discharge pipe, soil pipe or soil stack, runs vertically down to connect directly to the drains; the top of it is open to the air at least 900mm above the top of any opening windows which are within 3m of the stack, unless a relief valve is fitted to the top of the stack (see drawing).
Originally this type of system had the soil stack running down the outside of the house (as with two-pipe systems); in many houses built since 1976, the soil stack has been placed inside the house structure.
Downstairs wastes (from the kitchen sink, for example) can be taken out to a gully as in the older system, except that they must discharge below the level of the grid on the top of the gully, which means using a back-inlet gully or one with a hole cut in the grid.
Soil pipes from downstairs WCs may be connected to the main soil stack of a single-stack system, but it is often better to connect them directly to the underground drains.
Single-stack systems are much neater than two-pipe systems and use less pipework.
On the other hand, they require careful design to make them work properly and, for this reason, there are strict rules about where and how connections can be made and the size and type of fittings which may be used.
They are easiest to design where all the basins, baths, sinks and WCs in a house are close together and/or directly above one another so that pipe runs to the stack can be kept short.
Traps
The traps which are connected to all sinks, basins, baths and WCs (and, incidentally, all wastes from equipment such as washing machines and dishwashers) serve the very important purpose of preventing smells and bacteria from the drains getting into the house.
They also stop insects crawling up the waste pipes.
A trap is a specially-shaped piece of pipe in which water remains to make a seal after the basin, sink or whatever has emptied.
With WCs, the trap is an integral part of the pan (see page 103); with basins etc., it is connected separately.
The traditional trap fitted to basins was the ‘U'-bend which was created by bending lead pipe coming out of the plug hole into a U shape before taking it out through the wall.
A screwed access plug or ‘eye’ in the bottom of the U made it possible to empty the trap of debris if it got blocked.
There were also bottle-type traps made from brass, often chromium-plated.
Nowadays, the U-bend type of trap is known as a P-trap and is invariably made from plastic, as are all the components of a modern waste system.
There are many designs of trap as a look at any manufacturer's catalogue will show.
As well as the P-trap, the three other common types are: the S-trap, which has an extra bend in it for when the final outlet is vertical rather than horizontal; the running trap, a P-trap with horizontal inlet and outlet; and the bottle trap which has a top entry and side outlet with a baffle inside to keep the bottle full.
Plastic P-traps and S-traps come apart for cleaning: the bottom of a bottle trap unscrews.
Some versions of traps have a capped connector on the side, for connecting an overflow assembly, which can be unscrewed for cleaning.
This is the best type of trap to fit where space is limited — with the floor immediately underneath a bath trap, say.
Note that it is possible to use one trap for more than one waste outlet (with a two-bowl sink, for example).
The trap must be fitted to the outlet closest to the drains.
In general, P-traps and S-traps are the best type to fit; bottle traps, although compact and neat, can't always cope with large water flows and block more easily.
They should not be used with waste disposers.
Depth of seal
Traps come in different sizes for different diameters of waste pipe, and also in shallow and deep-seal versions.
The depth of seal is the vertical distance between the normal water level in the trap and the level at which air can get through the trap (see drawing).
For most domestic applications, a 75mm (3in) seal is required; shallow traps (38mm to 50mm or l½in to 2in) should be used only on two-pipe systems where there is limited space — under a bath or shower tray, for instance.
With the possible exception of shower trays, deep-seal traps should always be used on single-stack systems: if necessary, the floor will have to be cut away to accommodate them.
Using a vent pipe to prevent siphonage
It is very important that the water remains in traps — and, in fact, the Building Regulations are contravened if it doesn't.
Apart from evaporation (unlikely except in an unoccupied house in hot weather), the main problem is that water can be ‘siphoned’ or sucked out of traps if the system has not been designed properly to avoid pipes running ‘full’and thus causing suction at the trap.
This is more often a problem with ‘funnel'-shaped basins rather than flat-bottomed baths and sinks and will be worse when there is a vertical drop of branch pipe between the trap and the stack.
One way of preventing siphonage is to fit a vent pipe — a separate pipe, connected after the trap, leading to the stack — or to have an anti-siphon valve connected into the wastepipe (see drawing).
There are also resealing or ‘antisiphon’ traps which may have to be fitted on extra-long waste pipes connected to a single-stack drainage system.
Gullies need to have traps, too, thus providing a second seal between the underground drains and the house.
As with WCs, the trap in a gully is built in.
Fitting a new trap
If for any reason the existing trap on a basin, sink or bath needs replacing, it is best to replace the waste pipe at the same time if it is lead, although traps are available which can be connected to materials other than plastic.
The trap is simply screwed on to the bottom of the plug hole fitting (waste outlet), which will have a 1¼in or 1½in BSP screwed thread.
Most traps come with ‘universal’ fittings which will take different materials and makes of waste pipe.
There are two common types of fitting: one where the waste pipe is simply pushed into the outlet of the trap; the second where a plastic ‘compression’ joint — using a rubber or plastic washer to make the seal is incorporated into the outlet of the trap.
Anti-siphon trap, centre drawing shows what happens when trap is subject to siphonage from the waste pipe
Some traps have inlets which are adjustable in length and others have special washing machine connections, though a washing machine waste is usually fitted into a trapped stand pipe (see page 95).
Kits are sold these days which contain the trap and also the lengths of pipes you need for fitting wastes to basins, baths, sinks, washing machines, etc.
It is important that the waste pipe falls away from the outlet of the waste.
The outlet of a P-trap or bottle trap is angled slightly downwards to allow for this.
An anti-siphon valve (here one made by Hunter) can be solvent-welded or pushfitted into a ring-seal socket on the pipe to be ventilated.
The valve, which must be fitted vertically, comes in two sizes and the internal diaphragm will prevent loss of water from the trap seal by self-siphonage (from the pipe running full) or induced siphonage (from other pipes running full and creating a vacuum)
Waste and soil pipes
The branch pipes leading from individual pieces of equipment, and the main soil stack, are at the heart of the drainage system.
Making alterations and additions to the waste side of a two-stack system is relatively simple: the new branch waste pipe simply needs to be taken out through the wall and angled down into the nearest hopper head or gully.
Connections to the soil pipe are more difficult as it will almost certainly be made of cast iron — see page 66.
Before describing the ways in which pipes can and cannot be joined to soil stacks, it is necessary to have a look at the different materials used in waste plumbing.
Materials
The branch waste pipes leading from basins, baths and sinks were traditionally made from lead though copper was sometimes used.
These have both been replaced by plastic: polypropylene, which uses push-fit connections, and ABS (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene), which is joined by solvent welding.
These are usually available in white or grey in three sizes: 32mm (1¼in), 40mm (1½in) and 50mm (2in); you may also find polypropylene in brown or black.
22mm (¾in) polypropylene is also available and used for overflow pipes for cold water and WC cisterns.
The traditional material for the main soil pipes in drainage systems was cast iron, which is not only heavy but likely to fracture.
Hopper heads were often ornate affairs, with perhaps a crest or other decoration on them — this type may still be found second-hand.
It is still possible to buy new cast iron fittings for wastes: some have special couplings utilising a rubber gasket to join two lengths of pipe together which does away with the need for traditional sockets and spigot connections, where one pipe fits into the end–another with caulking compound to make the seal.
Cast iron pipes have now been replaced by uPVC, joined by push-fit connectors or solvent-welding.
The standard size for soil stacks is 110mm which is equivalent to the old 4in cast iron waste.
Joining waste pipes
There is a range of waste pipe fittings similar to those used for fresh water plumbing, except that elbows and tees are often slightly more than a right angle (91½° to 92½°) to make sure that the pipes fall properly.
You can also get flexible corrugated waste pipe, which is useful for connecting between a trap outlet and the pipe passing through the wall.
And you may find adjustable soil and drain elbows, useful for awkward angles.
Solvent-weld joints are made in a similar way to that described for plastic (uPVC) water pipe in Chapter 2.
Where the alignment of pipe is important, the pipes and fitting should be assembled ‘dry’ and pencil marks made.
For illustrations of this and other methods, see page 67.
Note that some push-fit joints must be fitted into a solvent-weld system to allow for expansion.
Push-fit or ring seal joints are simple to make.
The pipe is cut to length and chamfered at about 45° (so that it will enter the fitting more easily) and lubricated with special silicone lubricant before being pushed into the fitting.
A pencil mark should be made on the pipe around the mouth of the fitting after the pipe has been pushed fully home so that the pipe can then be withdrawn about 10mm from the fitting on installation.
This allows for expansion in the pipe which can be significant when hot water runs through the waste or when the pipe is in direct sunshine.
Push-fit waste connector
Solvent-weld waste connector
Compression joints are not the same as those used for copper pipe though they work on a similar principle.
Here the sealing ‘olive’ is made from rubber or plastic; the ‘nut’should be tightened up by hand, not with any kind of spanner.
This type of joint does not allow for any expansion and a ring seal joint should be fitted every 1.8m (6ft) to allow for this.
Waste pipes should be well supported — every 500mm for horizontal runs of 32mm pipe and every 1.2m for vertical ones.
Special clips are available.
Note that there is not total standardisation between manufacturers and not all pipes and fittings are compatible.
In practice, this means it is best to stick to one brand.
Compression joint waste connector
Connections to the soil stack
The drawing shows the main design points for a single-stack system and the connections which may be made Detailed requirements are given in BS5572: Code of Practice for Sanitary Pipework.
1
The vent cowl or griddle must be at least 900 mm (3ft) above the top of any opening window (including dormer windows in the roof) which are within 3m of the stack
2
The stack itself should be straight for its main length and offsets are allowed only above the topmost connection
3
The waste from basins will normally be 32mm up to a maximum length of 1.7m (5ft 6in) with a slope of 1¼° to 1½°.
The slope depends on the length (see opposite).
A 700mm length, for example, can be fitted at a slope of up to 5°.
For lengths longer than 1 .7m, use 40mm pipe up to a maximum of 3m.
For very long lengths use additional venting or a self-sealing trap
4
Pipe supports should be fitted at the correct intervals — usually 1.8m for 110mm pipe
5
WC connections should be swept in the direction of flow with a minimum radius of sweep of 50mm (to the inside of the bend)
6
No other connection should normally be made within 200mm of the WC connection For bath wastes, use an offset connection or a special collar boss on soil manifold
7
Bath and shower wastes should be 40mm with a slope of 1° to 5° for lengths up to 3m.
For lengths over 3m and up to 4m, use 50mm pipe.
The waste from one pipe should not be able to flow into another
8
Avoid using Combined wastes wherever possible: each fitting should preferably be connected separately to the stack
9
Unless taken separately to a gully, sink wastes are the same size as bath/shower wastes.
If a waste disposal unit is fitted to a kitchen sink, it should have its own 40mm waste, taken directly to the soil stack with a minimum slope of 7½° and as short a run as possible.
Do not use bottle traps for waste disposers
10
The lowest connection to the stack should be at least 450mm above the bottom of the drain.
Ground-floor wastes can be taken into back-inlet gullies and ground-floor soil pipes directly into the drains
11
The bend at the bottom of the pipe (underground) should have a radius of at least 200mm.
This prevents the bottom of the stack blocking up.
Connections to a single stack drainage system (see text)
Connectors and collars
In order to connect 32mm, 40mm or 50mm waste pipe to an existing uPVC soil stack, a hole must be cut and a boss connected to it.
This can be a ‘strap-on’ boss or a self-locking boss, which is solvent welded to the stack.
With either type, you may find a 50mm socket, into which a suitably-sized boss connector or adaptor is welded to take a solvent-welded or push-fit pipe, or a push-fit or compression fitting which takes a branch pipe directly so needs to be the correct size.
If there is an existing fitting with a spare 50mm boss socket, this can be drilled out and fitted with a boss connector of the appropriate size.
The new hole can be made with a holesaw or by drilling several holes, removing the disc produced and filing the hole smooth.
If necessary, use a padsaw to free the disc, but be careful not to lose it down the stack.
When fitting wastes to a new stack, a bossed pipe or branch is incorporated into the soil stock.
These come with single or multiple (usually 2 or 4) boss sockets which will be 50mm size to take boss connectors as above.
Alternatively, some sockets may be 32mm or 40mm to take branch pipes directly.
There are special collar bosses or soil manifolds which enable a WC connection and a bath connection to be made at the same point on the soil stack.
This saves the sometimes awkward task of fitting an offset in the bath waste (which may involve running the pipe below the floorboards) to ensure that it is not connected within 200mm of the WC soil pipe.
Calculating the maximum length of basin wastes
Drainage layout
Soil manifolds fit into the soil stack underneath the WC swept connection  and have an annular (ring-shaped) cavity into which the bath water discharges.
The water enters the stack from the bottom of the cavity, merging with the WC discharge which is thus prevented from coming into contact with the smaller diameter bath waste entry.
It is very important that soil and waste pipes have expansion joints between fixed points: check the manufacturer's instructions.
Warning: when working on the soil stack, make sure that no-one inside the house empties a basin or flushes the WC.
Connecting into cast iron stacks
This is a much more difficult job than connecting into uPVC stack — sand is possibly a job that you would want to leave to a plumber.
Joining into a cast iron soil pipe will mean cutting a length out of the stack (with a hacksaw or angle grinder) to fit a new length of pipe with a branch connection.
Modern sleeved couplings avoid the need to dismantle the whole stack.
Connections must follow the rules shown on page 64.
Often there will not be room to connect a downstairs WC soil pipe with the correct fall and a new soil pipe will be needed running directly to the drains.
You will probably have to do a bit of hunting around in order to find the fittings for making connections to cast-iron stacks: if local merchants don't have what you need, contact a specialist firm.
Cast iron coupler (Glynwed Timesaver)
Two ways of connecting WC and bath wastes
Waste and soil fittings
Waste fittings
Soil fittings
The manufacturers of waste and soil fittings produce excellent catalogues with details of their various fittings and give advice and information on jointing methods and ways to design the system.
There are many different types of fitting.
The main ones are:
Sockets for joining two lengths of pipe together: both push-fit and solvent-weld available.
Some types have one plain end to take a second connector
Elbows for taking pipes around corners.
Angles of 90° and 135° are available as well as adjustable and access elbows.
Also 91¼° and 92½° bends for joining horizontal pipes to vertical pipes to give a fall to the horizontal length
Tees available mainly in 92½° and 135° Tees are usually swept and should be fitted so that the sweep goes with the direction of flow from the branch into the main pipe.
Some branch pipe connectors (for soil pipes) have removable access covers for cleaning
Connectors are available in various types including reducers for connecting different diameters of pipe, and fittings for connecting to copper pipe and screwed outlets
WC connectors come in various patterns.
The Multikwik connector (see Chapter 7) provides the most versatile method of connecting a WC pan to the soil branch pipe.
Clips for all sizes of pipe
Joining waste pipe
Solvent-welding
Cut the pipe square with a fine-toothed saw, using paper as a guide, and remove all rough edges with fine glass paper 
Push the pipe into the fitting and mark the amount that is inside with a pencil.
Clean the pipe surface with solvent 
Apply solvent cement to the surface of the pipe and to the inside of the fitting (which should also be clean)
Push the pipe into the fitting, twisting it slightly, and clean off excess cement.
Leave for 24 hours before use
Push-fit (ring-seal) joint
Cut the pipe square as above and form a 45 chamfer on the end o' the pipe using a file or special tool.
The chamfer should be even 
Remove all burrs of plastic and r smooth the ends of the pipe with glass paper and apply silicone lubricant to the pipe 
Check that the rubber seal in the fitting is in place and secure in its seating, ensuring that the groove is clean 
Push the pipe into the fitting squarely until it goes no further.
Mark the pipe with a pencil and withdraw it about 10mm
Compression joint
Cut the pipe as before and smooth the ends.
The end of the pipe does not need to be chamfered for this type of joint 
Most brands of compression waste fitting will accommodate different types of pipe with slightly different diameters 
Unscrew the locking ring and position on the pipe followed by the sealing ring (make sure this is the correct way round)
Apply liquid soap to the pipe and push it into the fitting.
Tighten the nut up by hand — do not use a spanner 
Connecting to the soil stack
Connecting to the pipe
To connect into an existing stack a hole must be drilled (not within 200mm of the WC connection).
A hole saw can be used for this 
Alternatively, drill a circle of holes and remove the disc made.
The two centre holes allow a retaining wire to be fitted 
Smooth off the hole and fit the appropriate strap-on or self-locking boss.
Most bosses are solvent-welded in place 
The pipe can now be connected into the boss, with a suitable connector if required by solvent-welding or with a ring seal joint
Connecting to a boss shoulder
Where there is an existing unused boss socket, this can be drilled out using a hole saw 
The pipe is connected using a boss connector solvent-welded in place with the pipe a push-fit or solvent-weld in the connector 
Remove the rough edges from the hole and use solvent cleaner before applying solvent-weld cement to both surfaces 
Push the connector firmly into the boss shoulder making sure it is aligned properly and remove surplus cement
Taking pipe round corners
Two of the different angles of bend that are available: 90° and 135° shown is an offset elbow
A 92½° (or 91½7degree;) bend ensures that a horizontal pipe falls away where it is connected to a vertical section of pipe
Flexible waste pipe is useful for making the connection between a trap and the pipe passing through the wall
Adjustable soil pipe connectors can be varied to give an angle of up to 25°.
Useful for connecting WC waste pipes 
The drains
Typical single house drainage
Communal drains
Where drains are connected to the public sewer, they can either be single, where each house has its own connection, or communal, where each house is joined to one big pipe which goes to the sewer.
Communal drains save time and money when several houses are being built together, but there can be a problem sorting out whose responsibility it is when something goes wrong.
Gullies
All gullies, whether they take waste water from upstairs fittings (via a hopper head) or waste from kitchen sinks, must have traps to prevent smells coming up from the underground drains.
In modern systems, pipes leading into gullies must be below the level of the grid but above the level of water in the trap.
This is to ensure that the gully does not get blocked by leaves and other debris and also so that the action of the water gushing into the gully is to clean it.
This can be achieved by passing the pipe through a hole cut in the grid, but a special type of gully, which includes the waste pipe connection as part of the gully, will also meet this requirement.
These are known as back-inlet gullies.
Existing gullies can be modified by fitting a wire mesh over them with a hole cut to take the waste pipe.
From the gully a pipe leads to an inspection chamber which may also have the soil stack connected to it.
Pipe discharging over gully
Back inlet gully
Manhole cover
Inspection chambers
With underground drains, it is very important that access should be available in case the drains ever get blocked.
This is usually achieved by having an inspection chamber — fitted with a manhole cover — wherever a connection is made to the drain, wherever there is a junction between drains or wherever the drain itself changes direction or gradient.
Drains should ideally be laid in straight lines between inspection chambers and should always fall away from the house with the correct gradient to ensure that the flow through the pipe is fast enough to ensure solid matter is carried along.
Recommended minimum gradients for drains are 1 in 80 or 1 in 40, depending on the likely peak flow rate.
The layout of the drains can usually be discovered by pouring water down various sinks, WCs, etc and  seeing which inspection chamber it comes into.
The local authority may also have a plan of your drains.
The inspection chamber is normally rectangular with cement-rendered brick-built sides.
Originally, rendering was on the inside, but this can flake off and block the drain, so rendering (if used) is now put on the outside.
At the base of the chamber is a half channel, often consisting of half a piece of drain pipe with half channels coming in from branch drains.
Between the channels, all of which will be ‘swept’ in the direction of flow, the chamber is built up with concrete benching so that any splashes are directed back into the channels.
The top of the inspection chamber has a metal frame into which the manhole cover fits.
This usually just rests in place (it's rather heavy), but where inspection chambers are inside a house (unusual except where an extension has been built on), the manhole is screwed down and has to be specially sealed.
In modern drainage systems, an inspection chamber may not be necessary at all junctions and bends: a rodding point may be provided instead.
This is a length of pipe, with a gentle bend in it, which leads up to the surface where it is fitted with a removable cover.
If the drains get blocked, this cover can be removed and drain rods pushed down the rodding point to clear them.
In older systems, the inspection chamber nearest the boundary of the concrete inspection chamber property may be fitted with an interceptor trap through which the water will normally flow: a rodding arm is fitted with a stopper which can be used to unblock this length of drain.
The purpose of this trap was to keep sewer gases (and rats) out of the household drains, but modern drain systems don't need this extra trap.
This type of inspection chamber may also be fitted with a ventilator with a hinged mica flap — the idea of which was to let fresh air into the drains but not let foul air out.
In practice, many got blocked or damaged and some will have been removed though their use is still mandatory in some areas.
Your local authority will be able to advise you on the requirements for fresh-air ventilators.
Concrete inspection chamber
Rodding points at bend and junction
Inspection chamber with interceptor trap
Drain materials
Old drains systems were constructed from 2ft lengths of glazed clay pipe.
Originally these were jointed with a gasket of tarred hemp between the ‘spigot’(male end) of one pipe and the ‘socket’(female end) of the next one.
Although providing a degree of flexibility to cope with ground settlement, this type of joint tended to leak and a cement filling was added to it with the whole pipe laid on a bed of concrete carried up the sides.
This method had the problem that ground movements could cause fracture of the fragile pipe.
Modern drain design utilises materials and joints which are more flexible, laid on a non-rigid ‘bed’.
Drain materials
Clay pipes are still used but they are not usually glazed.
Joints tend to be of the rubber ‘O'-ring type fitted between the spigot on the end of one length of pipe and the socket on the next.
Plain-ended pipes are joined with a plastic sleeve which slips over both ends of pipe and uses rubber sealing rings to make the joint.
The main problem with this type of pipe is that it is difficult to cut to length accurately.
Although it is made in relatively short lengths, the traditional way to cut clay pipe is with a hammer and chisel, which takes a bit of practice.
Filling the pipe with sand will help to prevent it breaking in the wrong place.
If you own one (or can hire one), an angle grinder would make a neater job.
Pitch fibre pipes are made from waste paper and other fibres soaked in pitch.
When used for drains, this type of pipe usually has a plain end and is jointed with a plastic sleeve containing sealing rings.
These are often known as ‘snap’ rings as they will suddenly and obviously snap into place as the pipe is pushed into the sleeve.
This type of joint will allow a certain degree of misalignment when the pipe is laid.
Pitch fibre pipes are no longer used for new installations.
Plastic pipes are the most common these days in new underground drainage systems.
The uPVC pipes can be joined in the same way as uPVC waste and soil pipes — that is by solvent-welding or by ring seal (push-fit) joints — but it's better to use push-fit joints for flexibility.
A range of fittings is available including ready-made inspection chamber bases, rodding points, gullies and fittings to join uPVC to other materials.
Pipes in uPVC come in long lengths (typically 3m or 6m) but can be cut very easily.
The standard size for plastic drain piping is 110mm, though larger sizes (160mm, for example) are also widely available.
Smaller sizes of drain pipe (82mm, for example) can be used where the drain will carry only waste (and not soil) water.
Laying new drains
Whether you are replacing an existing faulty drain or laying a new one, perhaps to lead from an extension, the major part of the job will be excavating the trench.
Since the work is covered by Building Regulations, you will need to inform your local authority; they may well tell you the type of trench necessary, the ways the drains have to be laid in them depending on local soil conditions and the material to be used for the drains.
As with any type of building work requiring Building Regulations approval, the Building Control Officer will want to inspect the work at various stages as well as approving the plans.
He or she will almost certainly want to test the drain to make sure it is watertight when the job is finished.
Polypropylene inspection chamber
The maximum depth of the trench will be at the point where it enters the main sewer; otherwise the trenches will need to be deep enough to allow for a fall of the required gradient away from the house.
If this is not possible because the drain is too long or the land falls the wrong way, the pipe used for the drain will have to be larger and laid with a gentler slope.
The trench must be about 500mm wide with 100mm added to the depth for any bedding material which the Building Control Officer may insist on.
The usual bedding material is coarse aggregate (gravel).
Unless you have some experience in cutting clay pipes (or can arrange the layout so that no cutting is necessary), it is probably best to stick with the easier-to-use uPVC.
The manufacturers' catalogues provide information on the range of fittings (gullies and so on) that are available and should provide instructions on how to join and lay pipes.
To join a new length of pipe into an existing inspection chamber, you will have to break a hole in the wall of the chamber and chop away at the benching so that a new half channel can be laid to join up with the main channel.
The benching will need to be made good with new mortar (benching is designed to have a slope of 1 in 6) and the walls of the inspection chamber repaired with small pieces of brick mortared in place.
The mortar mix should be between 1:1 and 1:3 (cement:sand).
Putting in a new inspection chamber will involve digging quite a large hole in the ground — and supporting the sides of it while the chamber is being built to prevent them caving in.
The brick sides of the chamber and the concrete benching should all be laid on a firm bed of concrete at least 100mm thick.
If the new inspection chamber is to be positioned over an existing clay drain, the difficulty is likely to be cutting into the existing drain.
The job of installing a new inspection chamber may be made easier if a pre-cast concrete inspection chamber or one of the modern glass reinforced plastic inspection chambers is used.
Check with your local authority that these are allowed.
When a Building Control Officer tests a drain, he or she will carry out either an air test or a water test.
In an air test, stoppers are used to block off the ends of the drain and air is blown into the drain to see whether it can hold the pressure.
In a water test, the drain is also stoppered and then filled with water to see whether this can be retained.
You could carry out your own water test.
The drain should not be covered over by backfilling the trench until the test has been completed.
Backfilling consists of putting in a layer of aggregate followed by layers of earth, tamping down each layer before shovelling on the next.
Some settlement is likely to take place over a period after the trench has been filled, but this can be filled in at a later stage.
Building over drains
When planning a new extension to your house, it is more than likely that the best position for it will be right on top of the existing drains manhole covers.
Once again, the most important person to talk to will be the local Building Control Officer.
He or she may say that the existing inspection chamber should be closed up and a new one installed outside the extension.
Alternatively, he or she may suggest that the inspection chamber is left in operation, fitted with an airtight cover bolted or screwed down so that it can be removed if necessary.
Special recessed covers are available which allow you to fit a permanent floor covering.
Building over drains
Sewers, cesspools and septic tanks
The majority of houses are connected to the public sewer and this is certainly the best way to dispose of household waste and soil water.
In some rural properties, however, the cost of joining the house to the public sewer may seem prohibitive, but you should balance this against the continuing cost of having a Septic tank cesspool or septic tank emptied.
Cesspools are simply lined holes in the ground which act as reservoirs for sewage until they are emptied by the local authority.
A 2.25 cu m (500 gallon) cesspool could fill up in as little as a week with a family of four living in the house; a 18 cu m cesspool would last for at least a month and is the minimum size recommended.
Originally, cesspools were built from brick rendered with concrete on the outside.
This was followed by construction from a series of concrete rings, 6ft in diameter, mortared together; more recently, cesspools have been made from glass fibre (glass reinforced plastic, GRP).
Sceptic tank
Cesspool
Septic tanks are more like miniature sewage works and rely on the action of bacteria to break down the sewage into harmless liquid and sludge.
Usually, two chambers are needed: the first where the bacteriological action takes place and the second where the resultant liquid is filtered before being dispersed through the subsoil via land drains or disposed of into a ditch or stream.
It is very important that the flow into and out of the septic tank takes place below the level in the tank so that the scum on the surface is not disturbed.
Special ‘dip-pipes’ ensure this.
Some GRP tanks have three chambers.
A well-constructed septic tank should need little maintenance apart from emptying once a year, but it is important that not too much disinfectant, bleach or detergent is used in the house — otherwise, the bacteriological action could be affected and the tank stop working.
Laying drains
The trench will need to be around 500mm wide and 600 to 700mm deep — allowing for 100mm of bedding material 
Put down the gravel fill layer (if required) and tamp down.
The slope of the gravel should be shallower than required 
Position the next pipe and push it into the joint.
Use a spirit level and gauge board to lay the pipe at the correct angle 
Where the new waste/soil pipe passes through the house walls, fit a lintel over it.
Use a long radius bend to the drains 
Break a hole into the existing inspection chamber and chop away the benching.
Bed new pipe in mortar over the channel
Follow the manufacturer's instructions for making the pipe joints; make good the sides of the chamber and the benching 
To test the drain, fit a vertical length of pipe plus pipe stoppers and fill with water.
Check after 30 minutes for leaks 
After the Building Control Officer has tested the drains, the trench can be backfilled.
Use gravel (or aggregate) for the first layer
Unblocking sinks and drains
A plastic sink trap is easy to undo by hand.
Place a bucket underneath and poke wire about inside to remove blockages 
Soil and waste pipes often have access doors which allow lengths of the pipe to be cleared.
Stand to one side when opening 
If a gully is overflowing, try to unblock the grid using a length of stick to clean it out and rinse the gully clean 
The rodding arm of an interceptor trap needs to be used only when it is the final length of the drains which are blocked
Clearing blocked sinks, WCs and drains
The symptom of a blocked sink (or basin or bath) is fairly obvious: the dirty water refuses to empty out.
Usually, but not always, this will be the result of a clogged trap or of grease built up on the inside of the waste branch pipe and is relatively easy to deal with.
Blocked WCs and drains are a different proposition and care should be taken when working; also make sure you disinfect rubber gloves (essential to use them) and equipment afterwards.
If a WC is blocked, the problem could be a blocked soil pipe.
These usually have access doors to enable drain rods to be inserted.
Be careful when taking the door off.
The first signs of a blocked drain are likely to be overflowing gullies or manhole covers or a blocked downstairs WC.
To find where the blockage is (unless it is simply the gully itself which is blocked), you will have to lift the inspection chamber manhole covers starting at the house and working outwards.
The covers may have rusted badly and the handles broken off, in which case the best tool to lift them is a garden spade inserted under the rim, followed by a stout length of wood.
It may be necessary to clean round the cover first.
Take the opportunity to clean out the channel the cover fits in and to fill it with grease.
Not only will this help to make the cover easier to lift next time, but it will also improve the seal.
(Also rinse out all the inspection chambers with a garden hose once the blockage is cleared.)
As you work along the chambers, you should find one that is empty, which will tell you that the blockage is between that one and the previous full one.
If they are all full, the blockage is between the last inspection chamber and the main sewer.
Check with neighbours that they haven't got the same problem something could be wrong with the main sewer-before attempting to unblock your own drains.
It may be that there is no actual overflowing, but rather a strong smell of drains — particularly by the front gate.
This could quite likely be due to a blockage in the final inspection chamber — particularly if it is fitted with an interceptor trap.
The rodding arm plugs for these quite often fall out and block the trap, which means that the chamber will empty to the level of the rodding arm, but the sludge which is left will cause the smell.
Although you should be able to clear most blockages yourself, there are some — a tree root growing into a cracked drain for instance— which require specialist help.
Likewise, if you find you will need specialist equipment, even though this is easy to hire, you may prefer to leave the whole job to a specialist firm.
Blocked sinks
The first thing to try with a blocked sink, bath or basin is a pressure device.
The simplest — and often the most effective — is the sink plunger.
This is held over the blocked plug hole and worked up and down several times to force water down the waste pipe.
Plungers require 75mm (3in) or so of water in the sink to make them work.
There are various hand pumps which work on the same principle.
When using a plunger, ensure that it seals well on to the surface (smearing petroleum jelly on to the rubber surface helps) and that you don't simply pump the water up the overflow pipe and back into the sink — hold a wet cloth tightly over the overflow while using one.
If a plunger doesn't work, you may have to remove the trap or the cleaning eye of the trap.
On modern waste systems this is relatively easy, but on old-fashioned systems it may be anything from difficult to impossible — and care needs to be taken not to crack a ceramic basin when unscrewing a tight cleaning eye.
Some plastic traps and other fittings (such as elbows) have a plug which you can remove to poke around inside.
Put a large bucket underneath the trap to catch the contents of the sink — and remember not to pour this away until the trap has been refitted!
If neither of these methods works, it is likely that fat or grease is blocking the branch waste pipe further along.
The answer here is to use some kind of plumber's snake — a length of flat or helically-wound spring steel with a brass knob or a steel spring on the end which can be inserted into the waste pipe and rotated.
The snake is used to move the blockage nearer to the drains until the passage is cleared.
Plumber's snakes can be hired, though might be a tool worth owning — you may be able to improvise something from a length of net curtain wire with a hook at the end.
A bent metal coat hanger may work for blockages close to the trap but, unlike plumber's snakes and curtain wire, it will not go round bends.
There are also chemical drain clearers.
Many of these are based on caustic soda and require care in use and protective clothing, gloves and goggles.
They are not as effective as mechanical methods and should not be used where the waste is fully blocked: the result could be a basin full of aggressive chemical.
Chemical clearers can, however, be used when the main blockage has been partially cleared to give the system a good clean and flush out.
It is a good idea to keep sink and basin wastes clear by occasionally pouring some washing soda down the plug hole and by being careful not to put fat, vegetable matter, tea leaves or rice down the sink.
Blocked WCs
If a WC is blocked, a large sink plunger may work (don't use one with a metal flange which could damage the pan), provided it has a long handle; alternatively, use a length of drain rod fitted with a rubber disc.
Blocked drains
Once you have found the blockage (see opposite), you will need a drain clearing set (this can be hired) consisting of rods which are screwed together with a choice of accessories to fit on the end.
These include plungers, wormscrews (for boring into a blockage and pulling it out), and scrapers for removing sludge and silt and either pushing it down the drain or pulling it back into the inspection chamber on which you are working.
You select which device you want, put it on the end of the drain rods and push them down the drain or the rodding point.
Finding the hole in a blocked inspection chamber is not always easy: the way to do it is to find the bottom channel and to push the rod along this until it goes down the drain.
Finding the rodding arm in an inspection chamber fitted with an interceptor trap is particularly difficult.
Not only do you have to find it, but you may have to knock out the retaining plug.
For next time, attach a piece of wire to the retaining plug and nail it to the sides of the inspection chamber (with a wire staple) near to the top so that you can simply pull it out.
It is possible that a piece of slate or glass has been cemented over the rodding arm.
Smash this to get the drain rod in.
It may help to twist drain rods when pushing them down the drain.
Do this in a clockwise direction, not anticlockwise or they will unscrew and you could have a length of drain rod stuck down the drain — as well as the original blockage!
Draining equipment
You may also come across larger versions of plumber's snakes sold for clearing drains, including electrically-powered ones.
These work well, but it is probably better to hire drain clearing equipment rather than buying it — so your choice will depend very much on what the local hire shop has available.
Unblocking an interceptor trap
Unblocking sinks
CHAPTER SIX RAIN WATER DISPOSAL
The arrangements for getting rid of rainwater are often skimped by builders who will put in the cheapest possible system — and not always install it properly.
In time this will lead to the development of faults.
Faults can range from the merely inconvenient, when water spills out of sagging or blocked gutters on to unsuspecting people underneath, to the more serious problem of penetrating damp, where peeling decorations and damp patches inside the house can often be traced to a leaking gutter or downpipe outside.
So it's important that you know about your rainwater disposal system — so that you can either put it in good repair and keep it that way or safely replace an old system with a modern plastic one which will work properly.
Parts of a rain water system
The system explained
After the rain has fallen on the roof, it runs down into gutters under the eaves.
The ends of any roofing felt overlap into the gutter, and the gutters generally run at a slight slope to the downpipe which carries the water away.
The individual lengths of gutter are connected with joints and are secured with brackets.
At the end of straight lengths, there will either be a stop end, an elbow (to take the gutter around a corner) or a stop end outlet to connect to the downpipe.
Mid-run connections to the downpipe are known as running outlets.
With both types there often needs to be an offset (or swan neck), to connect the outlet to the top of the downpipe, so that this can be positioned against the wall.
In older systems, downpipes may lead into hoppers (or rainwater heads) which are connected to a single downpipe discharging via a shoe over a gully.
As with waste systems, having the discharge over the gully can be a nuisance if the gully grid gets blocked with leaves.
All modern systems must have the discharge below the grid.
In some areas, the downpipes lead to trapped gullies, which in turn take the water to the inspection chambers connected to the main drain leading to the sewer (see Chapter 5 for details).
In many areas, the volume  of rainwater would often lead to problems as the main sewer could not cope, so here the downpipes are connected to a drainshoe: this is connected directly to a separate drainage system.
The third choice is for each house (or pair of houses) to have its own soakaway — this is simply a hole in the ground filled with bricks or rubble, into which the rainwater is taken and out of which it will slowly disperse.
Soakaways can cause problems if they have not been designed properly or are not big enough.
If you build an extension, a soakaway will often be required.
Materials
Some early rainwater systems were made from lead but there are few of these left.
Cast iron superseded lead as the main material used for gutters and downpipes but cast iron systems are now likely to be showing signs of leaking at the joints between lengths of guttering or at the joints in downpipes.
The material itself may also have broken or be rusting.
Although it is possible to buy spare parts for cast iron guttering and to repair or replace leaks at joints (and even to repair split or corroded sections), there comes a point when it might be better to replace the whole system.
Another material used was asbestos cement.
This is similar in size and shape to cast iron systems and jointed in the same way.
Galvanised steel guttering has also been used.
The most common material for new houses and as a replacement for cast iron is uPVC — a type of plastic.
This is considerably cheaper and lighter than cast iron and the different makes (although not always compatible with each other) are all simple to join.
Grey and black are the most common colours for plastic guttering, though some brands are available in brown, green or white.
You could, of course, paint it any colour you wanted, but painting is not necessary for protection.
Roofing felt overlapping into gutter
Most plastic guttering is smooth, but some brands are ribbed inside, which improves the rigidity and allows some water to flow even when leaves are blocking the gutter.
The main disadvantage of plastic as a guttering material is that it can't take the weight of a ladder; but it is risky leaning a ladder even against cast iron so if you need to support the top of the ladder away from a house wall, it is much better to use a ladder stand-off.
Another material used for guttering is aluminium, which is sometimes joined with silicone or butyl-based sealants and sometimes put up in long lengths by the supplier.
Aluminium guttering is available with a choice of coloured coatings.
There are three main shapes for gutters used in rainwater systems: round, square and ‘ogee’.
Round guttering is shaped like half (or slightly less than half) of a circle and is used with circular downpipes.
Square guttering is used with rectangular downpipes.
Ogee guttering (common in cast iron systems, but also available in uPVC and aluminium) has an S-shaped front, and is usually fitted with round downpipes.
Other moulded shapes are available.
Some manufacturers make ‘deepflow’ gutters for large houses.
Gutter brackets: top rafter brackets for cast iron; bottom plastic fascia bracket, rise-and-fall bracket
Gutter profiles: from the top ribbed, half-round, square, moulded, ogee
Repairing gutters and downpipes
Cast iron systems should be regularly painted (gloss paint outside, bitumastic paint inside) to prevent corrosion, and all gutters should be given a good clean out every autumn to get rid of leaves, dirt, moss and tennis balls.
Remove all debris with a trowel and don't push it into the downpipe.
A wire ‘balloon’ should be fitted into the top of each downpipe to prevent birds nesting and to keep out leaves and other debris.
Eventually, though, old cast iron systems will need repair.
Repairing gutters is not a job for the fainthearted since it involves working up a ladder for quite a long time.
A hired platform tower makes the work safer, but if you have any doubts about your ability to work at heights, it would be better to call in a guttering contractor to do the job for you.
Also note that cast iron guttering is very heavy and can cause injury or damage if it falls.
Repairing leaks in gutters
Cast iron gutter lengths have a ‘socket’ on one end, inside which sits the non-socket (or ‘spigot’) end of the next length.
The joint is made with putty or mastic and a gutter bolt holds the two lengths together.
If putty is used (as was common on older systems), this will dry out in time and the joint may leak.
In order to separate the joint, the gutter bolt must first be removed.
If it can't be unscrewed (it may well have rusted solid), cut through the bolt with a junior hacksaw flush with the bottom of the gutter.
Next remove all the old putty from both parts of the joint and give the metal surfaces a good rub down with a wire brush and, if necessary, abrasive paper before applying two coats of bitumastic paint.
To reassemble the joint, use a non-setting mastic rather than putty and apply it liberally to the socket.
Fit a new gutter bolt and tighten it up.
This will cause some mastic to squeeze out: scrape this away from both the top and the bottom.
The joints between plastic gutters can leak too — usually because dirt or grit has got between the gutter and the seal or because the seal itself has perished.
Separating the two parts is considerably easier than with cast iron.
Clean out the joint and, if necessary, replace the seal: you will probably have to take a sample of a joint along to your merchant in order to find a matching replacement.
Mastic sealant can also be used to seal gutter joints.
Repairing sagging gutters
If a gutter is sagging and allowing water to spill out, it is likely that one of the supporting brackets has broken or bent.
A new bracket can be fitted fairly easily but new galvanised or alloy screws should be used.
Make sure the fascia board is sound, and check the joints at the ends of the sagging length — they may well need renewing.
Rise-and-fall brackets (see page 77) provide a method of adjustment for sagging gutters.
Repairing broken gutters and downpipes
The best material for repairing splits and cracks in cast iron gutters and downpipes is the kind of resin filler used for repairing cars.
The area around the crack should be thoroughly cleaned and the two-part resin filler applied after it has been mixed up in accordance with the instructions.
Slightly overfill so that the surface can be rubbed down smooth once the filler has set.
After rubbing down, apply bitumastic paint inside and outside.
Larger holes or splits may need reinforcing with glass fibre bandage.
Clearing blockages
If there is a blockage somewhere in the downpipe, water will spill out of the gutter.
Sometimes the blockage may be visible from the top of the downpipe and can be hoicked out from the top with a length of stiff wire — try a straightened-out coat hanger.
Often, directing the flow of water from a garden hosepipe into the top — or bottom — of a downpipe or an open hopper will clear the blockage; leave the hosepipe running for a while to give the system a good flush out.
If all these measures fail, it may be necessary to use a pole with a rag securely tied on to it or clearing rods similar to those used for clearing drains.
Remember to put something at the bottom of the downpipe if it discharges over an open gully in order to catch whatever is blocking it, or else you might block the gully or the drains further along.
Repairing leaks in downpipes
If a downpipe is damaged, it may be necessary to remove it from the wall and to replace (or repair) lengths and remake the joints.
Getting an old cast iron downpipe off the wall is not easy and there is a fair chance that if it didn't need replacing when you started, it will by the time you've removed it.
The downpipe brackets are held in place with pipe nails hammered into wooden blocks in the walls, which you will need to lever out.
You may also need to apply heat to the pipe in order to separate the joint.
Put in new wall plugs and screw the brackets in place.
It may well be worth trying to gum up the joint with a mastic sealant or self-adhesive bitumastic flashing rather than going to all the trouble of dismantling the system: use the sealant on the joints even if you do dismantle and reassemble them.
Repairing leaks in cast iron gutters
Remove the old gutter bolt.
This may have to be sawn off with a junior hacksaw if it has rusted in place 
Scrape off all the old putty from inside the gutter and clean both ends with a wire brush.
Apply bitumastic paint 
Use non-setting mastic to make the new joint.
Apply liberally to the inside of the gutter and reposition the second length 
Tighten up the gutter bolt using a screwdriver and spanner until it is tight.
Remove excess mastic with a putty knife
Repairing cracks in cast iron gutters and downpipes
Before starting the repair, remove all debris and loose rust and rub down with a wire brush and abrasive paper 
For large cracks in gutters, use glassfibre bandage to reinforce the repair — this is ‘buttered’ with resin filler from the outside 
When the bandage has set, fill the crack with resin filler using a flexible filling knife.
Rub down when set, and paint 
For downpipes, glassfibre bandage can be wrapped around the split and more resin filler applied if necessary
Maintaining gutters
Remove debris from the inside of gutters with a trowel at least once a year.
Don't push it down the downpipe 
If downpipes get blocked you could try pushing down a pole with a rag tied to the end.
Alternatively, use drain rods 
A wire balloon should be fitted into the top of each downpipe to prevent birds nesting and debris getting down the pipe 
After cleaning out gutters (or fitting new gutters), test them by pouring water into them (or use a hosepipe)
Installing a new rainwater system
The principles of installing a rainwater system are the same whatever the material, but the components you use and the methods for joining them together will vary both with the material and, for plastic systems, with the brand you use.
The job breaks down into seven parts: designing the system, removing the old guttering and downpipes, repainting the fascia boards (this will almost certainly be necessary), fixing the new guttering, fixing the new downpipes, connecting to the drains or soakaway and testing the system.
Designing the system
The amount of rainwater (also known as surface water) with which the gutters have to cope depends on the area of the roof from which the water is collected and, of course, on the amount of rain likely to fall on it.
In this country, the figure generally taken for designing rainwater systems is a maximum rainfall of 75mm (3in) a day.
To calculate the size of gutter needed to cope with this amount of rain, allowance has to be made for the fact that the wind will tend to drive more rain on to the roof than would simply fall on the ca flat plan area.
The formula used to calculate the ‘effective’ area for each section of roof is:(A + ½B) × C where A is the horizontal span of the slope, B the height of the ridge above the eaves and C the gutter length.
Each section of the roof is calculated in turn, which can be quite complicated if the house has a bay or a hipped roof, and allowances made for corners which are near outlets.
If there are bends within 2m of an outlet, add 20% to the area for sharp bends and 10% for round-cornered bends.
The gutter size also depends on where the downpipe is: gutters with the downpipe in the centre can cope with twice as much water as those with a downpipe at the end.
Different gutter layouts — for the same size gutter the centre layout will cope with 20 per cent less roof area than the top; the bottom layout with loo per cent more
Extra support brackets are needed at external (and internal) corners
Since semi-detached houses usually share a rainwater system, it would be sensible for both householders to do the calculations for replacing the system together.
If you don't do this, it can be difficult joining different makes of new plastic guttering or joining plastic to old cast iron.
Manufacturers publish tables showing the different sizes of guttering which should be used for different sizes of house but, as a rule of thumb, 100mm (4in) or 112mm (4½in) guttering with 68 or 69mm (2¾in) downpipe, which will cope with 110 sq m of effective roof with a central downpipe (or 55 sq m with an end pipe), should be enough for all but the largest houses.
The gutter will cope with more if laid with a slight (1 in 600) fall rather than being laid level.
Having chosen the size of guttering, draw up a list of the various bits and pieces you need.
Working out the length of guttering can be done at ground level; calculate the length of downpipe by hanging a string from the existing gutters or downpipe.
Some systems use support brackets for pipe joints, outlets and elbows; with others, the joints, outlets and elbows are themselves screwed directly to the fascia.
The manufacturer's catalogue will specify the fixing distance for the gutter brackets: normally these will be every 1m (or 3ft), with extra brackets at corners and where the outlets are fitted.
Guttering is usually supplied in 2m lengths, so each length needs one joint and one (or two) support brackets.
Although most downpipes are fixed vertically, there may well be other arrangements, including downpipes angled across the wall and, possibly, discharging into a hopper head.
Allow for any bend you need including offsets (or a swan neck) for connecting the downpipe.
Fittings for rainwater systems
Removing the old guttering
Make sure that the ladder you are working on is secure and put up at the correct angle (1 metre out for every 4 metres up the wall).
You might feel more secure on a hired platform tower.
Choose the sort with lockable wheels since you will want to move it round fairly frequently.
When removing cast iron guttering, wear stout (gardening) gloves as the sections can be quite sharp.
Start with the length of guttering attached to the downpipe and saw off the gutter bolts (unless they can be unscrewed).
Prise apart the joints with a screwdriver and remove each section in turn.
You will need a rope to lower them to the ground as they are heavy — throwing them down is dangerous.
Unless the gutters are screwed directly to the fascia boards there will be brackets, either screwed to the fascia boards or screwed to the roof rafters — part of the roof covering may need lifting in order to remove them.
It's quite likely that the screws holding the brackets will have rusted in place.
If so, chop through them with a small cold chisel.
Once the guttering has been removed, start on the downpipe and remove it a section at a time, starting from the top.
A crowbar may help to prise off the wall brackets.
If you are removing an asbestos cement guttering system, do not attempt to cut it and don't break up the sections.
Wear a face mask when removing this type of system.
Repainting the fascia boards
When you remove the old guttering, even if you find that the top part of the fascia board has not been painted at all, paint it now — after repairing any damage, including any caused by removing the guttering.
Check that the fascia boards are worth repairing: if they have started to rot, you will have to replace them before starting on the guttering.
Fixing the guttering
The method of fixing the guttering varies a little from brand to brand.
Make sure you get the instructions for your brand: they will usually be in the catalogue if not supplied (as they should be) with the fittings.
The instructions below are for the Osma system in which the joints, elbows and outlets have their own fixing holes.
The first thing to decide is where the downpipe is going to be.
This will, of course, be dictated by the position of the drain or gully and the final downpipe must run vertically downwards to this point.
The position of the outlets on the fascia board can be determined by a plumbline hanging down centrally over the gully or drain inlet.
Where existing downpipes are sound and disappear into, say, a concrete path, it may be easier to leave them in place and to fit the new system so that the outlet matches up with the top of the existing pipe: 68mm plastic pipe will fit into 2¼ in cast Iron pipe.
It is easiest to use the fascia boards as a guide to the horizontal line: check with a spirit level that they are horizontal or what allowance you must make if they are not.
Having established the position of the downpipe, some mathematics will be required to work out the correct height to fix the brackets.
The bracket furthest away from the downpipe position will be higher than the outlet to give a fall of 1 in 500 (4mm for each 2m length or 1in for each 40ft).
Choose the position of the brackets so that the end bracket is as high up as possible and the lowest point of the gutter (at the outlet position) is not more than 50mm (2in) below the roof drip.
Screw the outlet in place using 25mm rust-proof (zinc-plated) No 8 screws, fit a stop end outlet if the outlet is at the end of the roof and then move to the other end of the roof (or one of the two ends if a central downpipe is being used).
Some systems have different fittings for central and end outlets; others (like the Osma) use the same fitting with an optional stop end.
Taking your measurement from the fascia board, fix the bracket which will be positioned here about 150mm (6in) from the end of the run.
Now secure the plumbline to this bracket and pass the end through the outlet so that the line is taut.
This is a good moment to pause and check that the outlet is correctly positioned over the drain: remember that the plumbline will now be offset by half the diameter of the downpipe.
From the outlet, fit the first bracket 1m along, against the string line (allowing for the thickness of the gutter) and fit the first length of guttering to the outlet and the supporting bracket.
The gutter must be correctly positioned in the joints in order to allow room (usually 6mm) for expansion.
Gutters often ‘click’ as they expand and contract: a little silicone lubricant on the seals will help prevent this.
Marley gutter joint with notches cut for retaining straps
In the Osma system, the gutter is pushed under the back clip of the outlet or bracket and the front clip is snapped over the gutter.
The joint bracket can now be fitted to the end of the length in the same way and screwed in place.
On the Marley system, the ends of gutters have a notch cut into them to fit the retaining clips at joints.
Where a short length is required, you have to cut these notches yourself.
After the first length is fitted, work along the gutter in the same way until you come to within 2m of the corner of the house.
Here, the length will have to be marked on the last piece when it is in position and the excess cut off with a hacksaw.
If the corner is the end of the run, mark the gutter 50mm past the roof and fit a stop end.
If the gutter goes round the corner, hold the appropriate elbow (90°, 100° or 135°) against the gutter and mark where the gutter will come to inside the fitting.
Remove the plumbline from the last bracket before fitting the last length, but fix it temporarily to the inside of the gutter (with something like plasticine) to provide a guide for the downpipe.
If the gutter is to be joined to existing cast iron guttering (next door's, perhaps), the appropriate connector will be needed.
It is a good idea to draw the profile on to a sheet of paper when buying this.
It is connected in the same way that cast iron guttering is repaired — i.e. with mastic and a new gutter bolt.
Installing new gutters
Determine position of outlet (directly above drain) and screw outlet and end bracket in place to give a fall of 1 in 500 
Fix first gutter support 1m from outlet and position the first length of guttering.
The hooks clip over the front of the gutter 
Fix gutter joint bracket, leaving the correct expansion gap, and screw it to the fascia.
Continue fitting lengths in the same way 
At the end of a run, measure 50mm beyond the end of the roof and cut the gutter to length.
Clip on a gutter stop end 
If the gutter is to be taken around a corner, hold the appropriate elbow (here 90°) in place to mark the cutting line 
Where the outlet is at the end of the gutter run, push an outlet stop end into the free end of the outlet (or use a stop end outlet)
To join the new guttering to existing cast iron guttering, the appropriate adaptor must be used.
Apply mastic and screw up 
The downpipe is fitted from the bottom upwards.
Push the first length of pipe into the ground or fit a pipe shoe and bracket 
The backplate of the bracket holding the pipe shoe is screwed to the wall and the clip pushed into the slots 
A length of pipe is pushed into the shoe and upwards to the outlet.
Fix one bracket per connector and leave gaps 
To make an offset, first push a 112½° bend on to the outlet.
Hold a second bend in place to mark the length of pipe required 
Cut this piece to length and push into the two bends to mark the correct length to cut off the downpipe.
Fix pipes and brackets 
Fixing the downpipes
When all the guttering is in place you can start on the downpipes These are generally fixed from the ground working upwards, but you must make sure that you are working to the right line if (as is common) the guttering is offset from the wall.
If the pipe disappears into a hole in the ground, simply push the new pipe into the hole: seal any slight gap around it with mastic.
If the existing pipe discharges over or into a gully, a shoe supporting bracket should be screwed to the wall with zinc-plated screws (this time 38mm [1½in]No 10s) and the shoe clipped into place.
See also Connecting to the drains.
For connecting to the wall, holes must be drilled with a masonry drill bit and wallplugs fitted.
Where the bricks are tough, it may be easier to drill into the mortar joints.
Work upwards in 2m lengths, fitting a pipe connector between lengths (not necessary with all systems) and a supporting bracket for each pipe connector until you reach the outlet.
In the Osma system, a small hole in each pipe connector tells you when you have pushed the pipe in far enough to allow for expansion: 10mm is normally allowed.
If the outlet is directly over the pipe, simply cut the pipe to length and push it over the outlet connection.
If an offset is required, use two 112½° bends and a short length of pipe.
Push the bend on to the outlet and, holding the other bend against the downpipe, mark the length of the pipe required using the ‘sight holes’ in the bends and cut it off.
Fit the second bend and mark the length to be cut off the downpipe, cut it, and assemble, fitting the bend to the outlet last.
Fit a supporting bracket to the lower bend.
Use pencil lines to align pipes to be solvent-welded
Adaptor for connecting downpipe to underground drainage
Downpipe connected to back inlet gully leading to a combined drain
Downpipe connected to rainwater shoe (needs separate drainage)
Different ways of connecting the downpipe
With some systems, you prefabricate the offset bend, solvent-welding the short length of pipe and elbows together.
This requires careful  measurement and joining to keep the two elbow bends aligned — assemble them dry and mark with a pencil.
Where pipes are to be angled across walls, they should be cut into 1m lengths and a connector/support fitted between lengths.
Use 92½° or 112½° bends for changing direction and a 112½° branch connector for joining any pipes from different outlets to a single downpipe.
Connecting to the drains
Normally, when replacing a rainwater system, the connection to the drains (or soakaway) can be made in the same way as before.
There are three main methods of connection.
The first (and simplest) is where the downpipe terminates in a shoe which discharges over a gully.
It would be better to make the discharge below the level of the grating of the gully even if it was over the gully before, to prevent leaves and garden debris blocking the gully.
The second is where the pipe is fitted to a back inlet gully; and the third is where the pipe is connected directly to an untrapped bend.
With either of these two methods, the pipe can either be mortared in place (using a 2:1 sand:cement mix) or fitted with a special adaptor to seal the joint.
Testing
The simplest way to test the system is to pour water into the gutter from a watering can or run water from a hosepipe connected to the kitchen tap or a garden tap.
Check all the joints between gutters and pay particular attention to bends and joints in the downpipe.
Flat roof drainage
Flat roofs are laid with a slight slope so that rainwater can be collected by conventional gutters and led down to the drains.
A slight ‘upstand’ at one end of the roof ensures that the water will not fall off the wrong end.
For garages and extensions, smaller gutters (75mm) and downpipes (5Omm) can be used, and where a garden shed has guttering it may be possible to fit a water butt to collect rainwater for watering the garden.
The big problem with water butts is that they can overfill if not emptied regularly and the water inside can become stagnant and a source of bacteria.
These days, water butts are made of glass reinforced plastic.
At the edge of a flat roof, the roofing felt projects over the gutter
Soakaways
Most domestic soakaways are simply holes in the ground lined with hardcore (10mm to 150mm) to within about 250mm of the top.
The hardcore is then ‘blinded’ with sand or covered with heavy-duty polythene and backfilled with soil to the surface.
The pipe is led into the soakaway from a trapped gully fitted at the bottom of the downpipe.
The size of hole necessary for a soakaway of this type depends on the water table and the permeability of the soil and is something the local Building Control Officer will advise on: usually a hole about 2m deep and 1.2m square is sufficient.
A better type of soakaway can be constructed by making a chamber with open-jointed walling, a concrete base and an inspection cover.
This has the advantages that the soakaway can be cleaned out when necessary and that you can get at it should anything go wrong.
Again, the Building Control Officer will be able to advise you.