

PART ONE SALE OF GOODS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITION OF CONTRACT OF SALE OF GOODS
The sale of goods is the most common type of commercial transaction.
The term ‘sale of goods’ embraces agreements which are apparently very different.
For example, the sale of a newspaper for 20p from a stand in the street, the sale of industrial machinery for millions of pounds to a large company and the sale of aircraft to the government are all equally contracts (i.e. agreements) of sale of goods.
The bulk of the first part of this book is devoted to the contractual relationship between the buyer and seller, i.e. the rights and duties between them.
A clue to these will often be found in the Sale of Goods Act.
Reference will constantly be made to sections of this Act.
It must be remarked at the outset that it is principally between the buyer and seller that rights and obligations exist.
These arise out of their bargain (I.e. their contract of sale).
It is commonly thought, but wrongly so, that the buyer's best legal rights exist against the manufacturer.
This common misconception is fostered and perhaps shared by a great many retailers.
Of course, a manufacturer does enjoy the rights and incur the obligations of a seller but these exist as between himself and the person(s) to whom he sells his goods.
Similarly, he has the rights and obligations of a buyer as against the person from whom he purchases his raw materials.
A manufacturer does have some obligations which arise independently of his position as buyer or seller.
Reference will be made to manufacturers as well as to auctioneers who also have liabilities (and rights) distinct from those of the seller or buyer.
One matter in particular will not figure much in Part 1.
This is where goods are taken on hire purchase, credit sale or conditional sale terms.
These types of agreement will be considered in Part 2.
Before the definition of a contract of sale of goods is 1–3 considered, something must be said of the history and sources of the law relating to sale of goods.
The Sale of Goods Act 1979, only the second such Act to have been passed in this country, replaced the original Sale of Goods Act 1893.
The original Act had been amended in the years before 1979 by such Acts as the Misrepresentation Act 1967, the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
These amendments, though significant, were principally changes of detail and were not substantial in extent.
Thus the 1893 Act remained largely in the form in which it was originally enacted.
The current Act, the Sale of Goods Act 1979, did not seek to make further changes in the law, but is a consolidation measure which reproduced (with a few technical amendments) the provisions of the 1893 Act as amended.
Thus the provisions of the 1979 Act are in large part the very same ones as those originally passed in 1893.
Indeed the majority of the section numbers are the same as they were in the 1893 Act.
It is still true to say that the law of sale of goods today is basically the common law, i.e. the law as stated over the years by judges in the process of deciding cases before them.
The 1893 Act was intended, not to effect radical changes in the law, but to codify it, i.e. to put the common law into one statute to which it was easy to refer.
The 1979 Act once again puts the law into one statute by incorporating all the amendments which had been made in the original Act.
However, decided cases still have to be referred to in two situations.
The first is where the Act is silent or ambiguous on any given point and the second is where the court in a decided case has given a particular interpretation to a section of the Act (or to the same section in the original Act of 1893).
In the case of a conflict between the pre-existing common law and any statute, the latter prevails.
In this book references to sections of the Sale of Goods Act are references to sections of the current Act, the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
DEFINITION
Section 2(1) of the Sale of Goods Act defines a contract of sale of goods as: ‘a contract whereby the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a money consideration, called the price.’
Three elements in this definition require explanation, ‘property,’‘goods’ and ‘money consideration.’
‘Property’ means ownership.
Selling is the most common method by which ownership is transferred from person to person.
Sometimes the contract provides that ownership will be transferred at some later date.
Such a contract is termed ‘an  agreement to sell’ but it is still a contract of sale within the definition because of the words in section 2(1) ‘agrees to transfer.’
Of course, a contract which lacks any agreement to transfer property (ownership) at all , will fall outside the definition, e.g. a contract where one person agrees simply to borrow or hire another person's goods.
This type of contract, i.e. where possession, but not ownership, is agreed to be transferred, is altogether different and is called a contract of bailment.
‘Goods’ is defined by section 61 to include ‘emblements, industrial growing crops and things attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale.’
Thus, a contract to sell crops which are growing or to be grown — whether they mature within a year (e.g. wheat) or not (e.g. timber)— is a contract of sale of goods.
The only exception to this is when the crops are sold along with the land on which they are growing or to be grown.
In this case the crops are not ‘agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale.’
Things — other than crops — which are ‘attached to or form part of the land’ are ‘goods’only if they are identifiable as being distinct from the land.
Morgan v. Russell & sons (1909 D.C.) concerned the sale of some slag and cinders which were lying on a particular piece of ground.
They were not in identifiable heaps but had melted into the soil.
It was held that the slag and cinders were not distinct from the land itself and therefore were not ‘goods.’
Other things which are not ‘goods’ are ‘things in action and money’(section 61).
Things in action include cheques and stocks and shares.
Although money is not normally ‘goods,’ a coin which is sold as a curio piece, and not as currency, is regarded as goods, Moss v. Hancock (1899 D.C.).
Apart from the exceptions mentioned, ‘goods’ include ‘all chattels personal,’i.e. all tangible moveable things.
The third element of the definition is ‘money consideration.’
A contract of barter, i.e. where goods are exchanged for other goods — lacks this element and is not a contract of sale.
However, where goods are exchanged for a combination of money and other goods, the contract is one of sale of goods.
In this case there is a money consideration even though goods are also given.
In Dawson v. Duffield (1936 K.B.), two lorries worth £475 were to be paid for by a combination of two ‘trade-in’ lorries worth £250 and the balance in cash.
The buyer paid the cash sum but failed to deliver the two ‘trade-in’ lorries.
It was  held that there was a contract of sale of goods and that the sellers could sue for the outstanding balance of the price.
Whether there was a ‘money consideration’ was in issue in Esso v. Commissioners of Customs and Excise (1976 H.L.).
Esso devised a petrol sales promotion scheme whereby a World Cup coin was given away at Esso petrol stations with every four gallons of petrol purchased.
Posters displayed at petrol stations read ‘Free World Cup Coins.’
‘One coin given away with every four gallons of petrol.
’ There could be no doubt that when a garage proprietor sold petrol to a customer he made a contract of sale (i.e. of the petrol) with the customer, since the customer agreed to pay a ‘money consideration,’the price.
Did the garage proprietor also make a contract of sale in relation to the World Cup coins?
If he did, then Esso were liable to pay purchase tax (since abolished) in respect of all the World Cup coins they had produced.
Esso advanced two arguments.
First, they claimed that the garage proprietor made no contract at all with the customer in relation to the World Cup coins.
The coins had a small intrinsic value and therefore the offer in the posters could not have been intended to create a legally binding relationship (i.e. a contract) between the garage proprietor and the customer.
The majority of their lordships rejected this argument and held that it had been intended that a customer who accepted the offer by buying four gallons would thereby become entitled in law to have a World Cup coin.
Esso's second argument succeeded.
It was held that the contract in relation to the World Cup coins was not a contract of sale.
There was not just one contract made between the garage proprietor and the customer.
There were two.
Beside the contract of sale of the petrol there was a separate collateral contract relating to the World Cup coins.
The posters amounted to an offer by the garage proprietor to supply a World Cup coin if the customer would buy four gallons of petrol.
That offer was accepted by the customer making a contract to buy four gallons.
The consideration which the customer gave for the garage proprietor's promise to supply a World Cup coin was the making of a contract to buy four gallons of petrol.
The making of a contract to buy four gallons of petrol was not a ‘money consideration.’
(For a further discussion of this case and of contracts of barter, see paragraphs 8–03 and 8–04 below.)
SALE DISTINGUISHED FROM OTHER TRANSACTIONS
We have already examined the difference between sale and  barter.
More can be learned about the nature of sale from a comparison of it with other contracts.
Contracts for labour and materials supplied
These contracts are not uncommon.
Take an example: a builder sub-contracts the job of putting the roof on a house which he is building.
The sub-contract requires the subcontractor to supply the tiles.
This is not a contract of sale of goods because its principal object is the provision of services, Young & marten v. McManus Childs (1968) H.L.).
The words in section 2(1) ‘transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer’ have been interpreted by the courts to require that the transfer of ownership to the buyer should be the main object of the agreement.
If the main purpose is something else (e.g. the provision of labour) then the agreement is not a contract of sale.
This is so even though an incidental or ancillary object of the contract is the transfer of ownership in some goods.
In Robinson v. Graves (1935) the Court of Appeal held that a contract whereby an artist agreed to paint a client's portrait for him was not a contract of sale of goods.
Even though, when finished, the canvas would be transferred to the buyer's ownership, the substance of the agreement was the provision by the artist of his skill and labour.
If, on the other hand, the client selected from the artist's studio a finished painting and agreed to pay for it, that agreement would be a contract of sale of goods.
In that case the artist would be agreeing, not to provide his skill and labour, but simply to part with the ownership of a finished canvas, the fruit of his past efforts.
The substance of such an agreement is the transfer of ownership.
It is not always easy to decide what is the substance of the contract, the provision of services or the transfer of ownership.
It may be helpful to know that the courts have treated the following as contracts of sale contracts: to make and supply ships' propellers according to a specification, Cammell Laird v. Manganese Bronze & brass (1934 H.L.); to prepare and supply food in a restaurant, Lockett v. A. & m .
Charles Ltd. (1938 K.B.); to compound and supply animal foodstuff according to a formula setting out the ingredients and their proportions, Ashington Piggeries v. Hill (1971 H.L.).
A borderline case, Samuels v. Davis, came before the Court of Appeal in 1943.
It concerned a contract to provide a made-to-measure set of teeth and it arose because they did not fit.
The court sidestepped the question of whether it was a contract of sale or for services, by  holding that, whichever it was, there was an implied term of the contract that the goods should be reasonably fit for the purpose for which they were intended.
The seller was therefore liable.
Contracts of hire-purchase
It is the hall mark of a contract of sale that seller and buyer each enter a commitment that there will be a transfer of ownership from the seller to the buyer.
A hire-purchase agreement lacks this.
Under a hire-purchase agreement the hirer undertakes to hire the goods for a specified period at a specified rent and he is given an option to buy the goods when he has paid all the specified rent.
Since he has only an option and does not legally commit himself to buy the goods, the contract is not one of sale, Helby v. Matthews (1895 H.L.).
For a fuller explanation see paragraph 17–02, below.
Contracts of agency
Sometimes X sells goods to Y who in turn sells them to Z. Sometimes, however, Y acts as X's agent in selling to Z. In the former case Z buys his goods from Y and if they are not delivered or are defective Z can look to his seller, Y, and if necessary can sue him for breach of his contract of sale.
In the latter case Z buys from X through X's agent Y; it is with X that he made his contract and if things go wrong, he can look to his seller, X, for a remedy.
The answer to the question ‘who sold to Z?’ depends upon whether Y was a buyer and re-seller or whether he was merely an agent for X. The answer is not helped by the fact that people who are in fact buyers and resellers are often termed in the trade ‘agents.’
Car dealers, for example, may be called ‘Vauxhall agents’ but they are not merely agents for the manufacturer.
They themselves buy new cars and re-sell them to members of the public.
The true nature of the transaction can be ascertained only by examining the terms of the contract between X and Y. If it is clear that Y is buying the goods for himself, albeit with a commitment or an intention to re-sell, then Y is a buyer and re-seller.
The problem can arise acutely in a situation where Y takes goods from X on ‘sale or return’ terms.
Is Y a buyer and reseller or is he X's agent?
In either case he does not run the risk of being left with the goods; if he cannot find a purchaser he can return them to X. The answer is that he is X's agent if under the terms of his contract with X he has no right himself to buy the goods but can only sell to a third party, Weiner v. Harris (1910 C.A.).
Contrariwise, if he has the right himself to  buy the goods he is a buyer and the contract between X and Y will be one of sale of goods and not one of agency, Weiner v. Gill (1906 C.A.).
The problem can also arise where Y takes goods from X under a sale of goods contract which contains a retention of title clause, i.e. a clause stating that Y is not to become the owner unless and until he has paid for them and that if Y re-sells them before paying for them, X's ownership is to transfer from the goods to the proceeds of the re-sale received by Y. Suppose Y sells the goods to Z before he has paid X for them.
Clearly, although he is not yet the owner of the goods, he has the authority of the owner, X, to re-sell them.
In this situation is Y a buyer and re-seller or is he merely X's agent for selling the goods to Z?
This question will be important if Z wishes to sue his seller for breach of contract (e.g. if the goods are defective) or if Z fails to pay the price.
Who can Z sue and who can sue Z?
To put it another way, who is the other party to the contract by which Z purchased the goods?
Who is the seller who sold the goods to Z?
The answer is twofold.
First, as between X and Y, Y is acting as X's agent in selling to Z; secondly, as between Y and Z, Y is selling as principal, Aluminium Industrie Vaasen BV v. Romalpa Aluminium Ltd. (1976 C.A., for a fuller account see paragraph 3–26 below.)
Thus although Y owes X the duties which an agent owes to his principal, it is Y who as seller can sue Z for the price and be sued by Z for breach of the contract of sale.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE DEFINITION
Contracts other than contracts of sale of goods, are not governed by the provisions of the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
Although they will often be governed by some other Act of Parliament, none of them is governed by an Act which is as comprehensive as the Sale of Goods Act.
Later in this book, some of these other Acts of Parliament are considered, including the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 (Chapter 23) and the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 (Chapter 8).
Another important statute, the Consumer Protection Act 1987, which deals with manufacturers' liability is also considered later (chapter 9).
Chapter 2
FORMATION AND CANCELLATION OF THE CONTRACT
FORMATION OF THE CONTRACT
A contract of sale is an agreement by which the seller and buyer undertake mutual obligations.
At the very least the seller agrees that the buyer shall become the owner and the buyer agrees to pay the price.
Often there are more obligations than just these.
The number and extent of the obligations can be ascertained only by reference to the terms expressly agreed in the contract and to those extra terms which the law automatically implied into it.
These will be discussed later.
At present we are concerned with what amounts to an enforceable agreement (i.e. a contract).
If there is no contract or it is unenforceable, then neither the buyer nor the seller can complain that the other other has broken it.
Time of making the contract
It is important to know exactly when a contract is made because until that time either party is free to back out.
An agreement is made when one person makes an offer to another and that other accepts it.
Until there is an offer which is accepted, there is no contract.
An offer is something which is clearly intended if accepted to form a binding agreement.
Thus it has been held that the display of goods on the shelves of a self-service shop is not an offer, Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain v. Boots Cash Chemists (1952 D.C.).
The customer who takes them from the shelf therefore does not accept an offer.
Rather, the offer is made by the customer when he takes the goods to the cash desk and it is accepted by the assistant at the cash desk.
At any time before that, either party can back out.
In particular the customer can restore the goods to the shelf and will be under no obligation to pay for them.
Similarly, the display of goods in a shop window does not amount to an offer, Fisher v. Bell (1961 D.C.).
The person who enters the shop and asks to buy goods displayed in the window does not therefore accept an offer.
He in fact makes an offer  which the shopkeeper is free to accept or to reject.
The display of goods in the shop window or on the shelves of a supermarket is an invitation to treat, i. e. an invitation to members of the public to make an offer to buy.
The acceptance of an invitation to treat does not make a contract.
The difference between an offer and an invitation to treat can most clearly be seen in auction sales.
The auctioneer asks for bids.
He may receive quite a lot of bids and will usually accept the highest.
When the auctioneer asks for bids he is making, not an offer, but an invitation to treat.
Each bid is a separate offer and a contract is not made until the auctioneer accepts one of them.
Thus section 57(2) of the Sale of Goods Act reads:
‘A sale by auction is complete when the auctioneer announces its completion by the fall of the hammer, or in other customary manner; and until the announcement is made any bidder may retract his bid.’
Another problem which has sometimes exercised the minds of academics is ‘At exactly what stage is the contract concluded in the ease of a purchase from an automatic vending machine?’
Is it when the purchaser puts his money in or is that merely an offer which the machine accepts?
Some words of Lord Denning M.R. in Thornton v. Shoe Lane Parking (1971 C.A.) are helpful in this context.
The case actually involved a contract made between a motorist wishing to park his car and the proprietor of a car park with an automatic entrance barrier.
His Lordship, however, also spoke about a machine which issues railway tickets and his comments would appear to apply equally to a machine selling goods.
Referring to the customer, he said: ‘He was committed at the very moment that he put his money into the machine.
The contract was concluded at that time.
It can be translated into offer and acceptance in this way.
The offer is made when the proprietor of the machine holds it out as being ready to receive the money.
The acceptance takes place when the customer puts his money into the slot.’
It seems then that the display of goods in an automatic vending machine — unlike that in a shop window or on the shelves of a supermarket — is not merely an invitation to treat but is an offer.
Once an offer can be identified there is not usually any difficulty in ascertaining whether it has been accepted.
The general rule is that an acceptance takes effect when it is actually communicated to the offeror, Entores v. Miles Far Fast Company (1955 C.A.) and Brinkibon Ltd. v. Stahag Stahl (1982 H.L.).
There are however two or three exceptions to this.
First, in circumstances where the post is expected to be used as the means of communication between the seller and the buyer, an acceptance takes effect when it is posted.
Thus there is still a contract even if he letter of acceptance is lost in the post, Household, Fire & carriage Insurance Company v. Grant (1879 C.A.).
Secondly, where the offeror expressly or implicitly waives the need for the acceptance to be communicated to him, the acceptance will take effect when the acceptor does whatever act is necessary to indicate his acceptance.
The vending machine situation provides a good example of this.
The contract is complete when the customer puts his money in the slot.
He is certainly not expected to telephone or to write a letter to the proprietor of the machine.
Even if the offeror waives the need for communication to him, there must always be some act to indicate acceptance.
The offeror cannot say ‘if you do nothing you will thereby accept my offer!’
In Felthouse v. Bindley (1863 Q.B.) the offeror wrote to his nephew offering to buy the latter's horse.
In the letter he said ‘If I hear no more about him, I consider the horse mine.’
The nephew sent no reply and the court held that no contract was made.
A contract is an agreement.
It follows that one person cannot impose a contract upon another.
There may be a third exception to the general rule that an acceptance takes effect when it is actually communicated to the offeror.
In Brinkibon Ltd. v. Stahag Stahl (1982 H.L.) the House of Lords confirmed the decision in Entores v. Miles Far East Company, that normally in the case of a telephone conversation or a telex communication the postal exception does not apply and therefore the acceptance takes effect when (and where) it is actually communicated to the offeror.
Their lordships did, however, state that a different result might apply to a telex message which was not a direct communication in office hours between the acceptor and the offeror, e.g. if it was sent at night or was sent or received through telex machines operated by third persons.
In such a case the acceptance could take effect upon despatch or upon communication to the machine at the receiving end of the telex link or upon actual communication to the offeror.
A court would have to decide that issue by reference to the intention of the parties, to sound business practice and to its own judgment as to where the risk should lie.
Unsolicited goods
Goods are sometimes sent without prior request.
The  recipient might become worried if successive letters then come threatening that action will be taken to obtain the price from him.
Clearly, the recipient who does nothing does not enter into a contract to buy the goods and therefore is not bound to pay.
In spite of the lack of any right to secure payment, some unscrupulous firms have in the past found it profitable to market their wares by sending them out unsolicited.
This had two undesirable results.
One was that some members of the public were unaware that they need not pay and gave in to the pressure of successive threatening letters.
The other was that the goods, if they were not purchased by the recipient, still belonged to the sender.
Therefore the recipient did not dare to throw them away and was in effect forced to give them house room.
The Unsolicited Goods and Services Act 1971 was aimed directly at these two social problems.
It makes it a criminal offence to make a demand for payment without reasonable cause to believe there is a right to it.
It also provides that after six months, unsolicited goods are deemed to be an unconditional gift to the recipient.
Further, if the recipient does not wish to wait six months he can serve a notice on the sender in which case, if the sender does not come within one month to collect them, they then become an unconditional gift.
Form of the contract
The law on this is very easy and is contained in section 4:
‘…a contract of sale may be made in writing (either with or without seal), or by word of mouth, or partly in writing and partly by word of mouth, or may be implied from the conduct of the parties.’
In this respect contracts of sale of goods are different from contracts for the sale of land.
Whereas there are no particular formalities for the former, a contract for the sale of land is unenforceable unless there is some signed, written proof of the contract's existence, Law of Property Act 1925, section 40.
The distinction between goods and land (see paragraph 1–07) is therefore important.
Capacity
Certain persons lack the legal capacity to make a contract.
Thus contracts are not generally binding on the following people: persons who at the time of making the contract were either minors, or so insane or drunk as not to know what they were doing.
Such a person can enforce the contract against the  other party but can not generally himself be sued.
An exception to this, however, is found in section 3:
‘(1)
Capacity to buy and sell is regulated by the general law concerning capacity to contract and to transfer and acquire property.
(2)
Where necessaries are sold and delivered to a minor or to a person who by reason of mental incapacity or drunkenness is incompetent to contract, he must pay a reasonable price for them.
(3)
In subsection (2) above ‘necessaries’ means goods suitable to the condition in life of the minor or other person concerned and to his actual requirements at the time of the sale and delivery.’
In one case a minor undergraduate bought 11 fancy waistcoats, Nash v. Inman (1908 C.A.).
It was held that the tailor could not sue for any money because the goods were not necessaries; the minor was already well supplied with waistcoats.
The result of this decision was that not only was the minor under no obligation to pay for the waistcoats but also, apparently, he could keep them!
Now, however, the law is different.
Section 3 of the Minors' Contracts Act 1987 empowers the court, where it would be ‘just and equitable’(i.e. fair) to do so, to require the minor to return property which he has acquired under a contract which is unenforceable against him.
A further change in the law since the case of Nash v. Inman was brought about by the Family Law Reform Act 1969 which reduced the age of majority to 18 so that only people under that age enjoy the privileged status of minor.
Not surprisingly some traders are reluctant to deal with minors on any basis other than that the minor pays cash before taking the goods away.
On the other hand to refuse to give credit can be to turn away valuable business.
Thus sometimes a trader will agree to give credit to a minor providing an adult (usually a parent) signs a document guaranteeing the minor's debt.
Until recently, however, a guarantee was no safeguard because the legal nature of guarantee is that it is subsidiary to, and dependent upon, the contract which is guaranteed.
If the latter was void, then the trader had no recourse against the guarantor, Coutts & Co. v. Browne-Lecky (1946 K.B.).
If, on the other hand, the adult had signed a contract, not of guarantee, but of indemnity, that contract could be enforced against the adult even if the minor's contract was void, Yeoman Credit Ltd. v. Latter (1961).
Thus the difference between a  contract of guarantee and one of indemnity was vital until section 2 of the Minors' Contracts Act 1987 changed the law.
Now, where a contract is unenforceable against someone merely because he is a minor, a contract of guarantee is enforceable against the guarantor.
THE PRICE
The amount
Section 8 provides:
‘(1)
The price in a contract of sale may be fixed by the contract, or may be left to be fixed in a manner agreed by the contract, or may be determined by the course of dealing between the parties.
(2)
Where the price is not determined as mentioned in subsection (1) above the buyer must pay a reasonable price.
(3)
What is a reasonable price is a question of fact dependent on the circumstances of each particular case.’
The price is normally a basic part of the agreement and normally it will be expressly agreed.
It might appear from section 8(2) that, if no price is agreed and there is no method of ascertaining it, a reasonable price is automatically payable.
This is not necessarily so.
The price is so basic that, if the parties have expressly left it over for later agreement, the court may well conclude that the parties did not intend to make and have not made, a contract.
This was the conclusion of the House of Lords in May & butcher v. R. (1934) where an agreement for the purchase of government tentage provided that the price, the manner of delivery and dates of payment were to be agreed upon from time to time.
If the contract had simply failed to mention these items, they could have been resolved by applying the provisions of the Sale of Goods Act.
However, the contract expressly left them over for later agreement.
That being so, and the items being so basic, their lordships held that the parties had not intended to make a contract but had simply agreed to agree.
There was therefore no contract.
If, however, a relatively minor matter is left over for later agreement it does not necessarily follow that there is no contract.
It is perfectly possible in law for parties to make an interim agreement for the sale of goods which requires further negotiation to iron out the less important details of the transaction, Pagnan S.p.A.
v. Feed Products (1987 C.A.).
All  the circumstances must be examined to see if the parties intended to leave over the entire agreement or whether they intended to make a binding contract, albeit one with some details still outstanding.
In Foley v. Classique Coaches Ltd. (1934 C.A.) the defendants bought some land from the plaintiff and it was a condition of the purchase that the defendants agreed to buy petrol (for their coach business) only from the plaintiffs.
The agreement provided for the price of the petrol ‘to be agreed by the parties from time to time’ and failing agreement to be settled by arbitration.
It was held there that the parties had made a binding contract, albeit with the price still outstanding.
Clearly if there is no contract, as in May & butcher v. R., no price is payable and section 8 is irrelevant.
If there is a contract the price is ascertained by the relevant method in section 8 — in Foley's case by arbitration, the manner agreed in the contract.
Valuation
Valuation by a third party is one method the parties can stipulate for ascertainment of the price.
Section 9 provides that where he cannot or does not make the valuation, the contract is avoided.
In that case there is no obligation on the seller to deliver the goods and none on the buyer to pay.
Section 9 does have one exception to this:
’…if the goods or any part of them have been delivered to and appropriated by the buyer he must pay a reasonable price for them.’
Section 9(2) provides that where the valuation is prevented by the fault of one of the parties, the other may maintain an action for damages against the party at fault.
Deposits
It is not uncommon for the buyer to pay part of the price at the time of making the contract to buy.
This payment could be either a deposit or mere part payment.
The effect of a deposit or mere part payment is a matter of agreement between the parties.
In the absence of any agreement to the contrary, a deposit is generally forfeited by the buyer if the sale falls through because of his fault.
A mere part payment, however, is returnable.
A deposit is in the words of Lord Macnaghten in Soper v. Arnold (1889 H.L.)‘a guarantee that the purchaser means business.’
It is a security for the completion of the purchase.
As so often, the law endeavours to discover the intention of the parties.
It examines all the circumstances to see whether they intended the money to be a deposit or merely a payment on account.
If the parties actually used the word ‘deposit,’ then unless there is evidence to the contrary it will be assumed that that is what they meant, Elson v. Prices Tailors Ltd. (1963 Ch.D.).
Of course, if the seller has a claim against the buyer either for the price or for damages (see Chap.
12) he will in making his claim have to bring into account any money already received — whether as a deposit or merely as a part payment.
The seller can not expect on the one hand to be fully compensated for the sale falling through and on the other to be allowed in addition to retain a deposit already received.
CANCELLABLE AGREEMENTS
The general rule is that, once a contract is made, neither party is free to back out.
To that rule there is an exception created by the Consumer Protection (Cancellation of Contracts Concluded away from Business Premises) Regulations I987.
These Regulations give effect to a Directive of the European Community and, broadly speaking, give a cooling-off period of seven days to a customer who enters a contract (to buy goods or services) as a result of doorstep canvassing.
The customer is given the right to cancel the contract during the cooling-off period.
This gives him an antidote to the high pressure selling techniques sometimes employed by door-to-door salesmen.
The Regulations are intended to protect ordinary consumers and therefore do not apply where the customer is a company or corporate body or where the customer is making the contract for his business purposes.
The Regulations apply when the customer makes the contract during an unsolicited visit by the trader (or his representative) to the customer's home, to someone else's home or to the customer's place of work.
The visit is not ‘unsolicited,’ and therefore the Regulations do not apply, if the customer has expressly requested the visit, e.g. by completing and returning a reply paid card asking for the visit or by telephoning asking for it.
If, on the other hand, the trader (without the customer having requested him to do so) has telephoned the customer indicating that he is willing to make a visit, the trader's subsequent visit will be unsolicited and the Regulations will apply.
Suppose that the customer has expressly requested a visit for one purpose (say, a possible purchase of kitchen fitments) and that during the visit the trader talks the customer into buying something else, say a television.
In that case the contract to buy the television will be cancellable provided the customer did not know, and could reasonably have known, that the trader sold televisions.
Obviously, if the customer had been prompted to request the visit by an advertisement indicating that the trader sold televisions as well as kitchen fitments, the contract to buy the television will not be cancellable.
We have seen that a contract made during an unsolicited visit is cancellable.
This will be the case where an offer is made by one side which during the visit is accepted by the other.
It could occur, however, that the visiting salesman gets the customer to complete an application or proposal form (i.e. an offer to buy) and that the salesman takes the form away saying that the customer will be hearing.
If a few days later the salesman's firm sends the customer a letter accepting the customer's offer, the contract is made, not during the visit, but a few days later.
Nevertheless the Regulations still apply to such a contract.
In addition to the contracts mentioned so far, the Regulations also apply to contracts made during an excursion organised by the trader away from his trade premises.
This is a trading practice (more common on the Continent than in the United Kingdom) whereby a trader organises a coach or boat trip and then during the trip gets the travellers to buy or offer to buy goods or services.
The resulting contracts are cancellable under the Regulations.
This does not, however, apply to a contract made by someone visiting the Ideal Home Exhibition and making a contract at a trader's exhibition stand.
Even if such a customer is on an excursion, it is not one organised by the trader.
Excepted contracts
There are some important exceptions to what has been said so far.
Certain contracts are excepted and are therefore not cancellable under the Regulations (even if made during or following an unsolicited visit or an excursion), namely any contract:
1.
where the price (including V.A.T.) is £35 or less,
2.
to buy, sell, dispose of, lease or mortgage land,
3.
to finance, or provide bridging finance for, the purchase of land,
4.
for the construction or extension of a building or other erection on land (Nevertheless contracts for repairs and improvements are not excepted unless they are secured by a land mortgage),
5.
for the supply of food, drink or other goods intended for current consumption by use in the household and supplied by regular roundsmen.
Also excepted are certain contracts which are governed by some other piece of legislation: contracts of insurance to which the Insurance Companies Act 1982 applies; investment agreements within the meaning of the Financial Services Act 1986 and certain agreements for the making of deposits within the meaning of the Banking Act 1987.
There is a further exception for certain mail order (and other)‘catalogue’ agreements which give the customer equal rights.
Such a contract is excepted if three conditions are all satisfied:
(i)
its terms are set out in a catalogue which is readily available to be read by the customer in the absence of the salesman before the contract is made;
(ii)
there is to be a continuing contact between the trader (or his representative) and the customer;
(iii)
the contract expressly gives the customer the right to return any goods within seven days of receiving them and to cancel the  agreemnent.
Finally, a contract is excepted if it provides credit of f35 or less (unless it is a hire-purchase or conditional sale agreement).
This last exception leads to an absurdity whereby a contract (say, to install new kitchen units for a cash price of £2,000 payable immediately on completion of the work) which would otherwise be cancellable, will be excepted if it contains a term that £35 of the price is not payable until, say, six months after completion.
Cooling-off period
Where the Regulations apply, they give a cooling-off period entitling the customer to cancel the agreement at any time ‘within the period of 7 days following the making of the contract.’
Thus where during the trader's unsolicited visit an offer is made which is accepted only later, the customer effectively has a longer cooling-off period.
His cooling-off period does not expire until the end of seven days following the acceptance.
The Regulations require the trader to give the customer a notice of his cancellation rights and a detachable form must also be provided for the customer's use.
These must be in the form required by the Regulations and must be given to the customer during the trader's visit (or during the excursion).
If the trader fails to comply with these requirements, he is not allowed to enforce the agreement against the customer.
The customer is entitled to cancel the agreement by giving the trader within the cooling-off period written notice of his intention to cancel the contract.
He does not have to use the detachable form provided by the trader.
If the customer posts his notice of cancellation, it will be effective to cancel the agreement provided it is posted within the cooling-off period, i.e. even if it does not reach the trader until later or even if it never reaches him.
Effect of cancellation
Broadly speaking, the customer is entitled to be repaid any money he has already paid before cancellation and must return any goods he has received.
He need not, however, transport the goods but can wait for the trader to come and collect them.
The customer's duty to take care of the goods ceases 21 days after he cancelled the agreement, unless before then he has received from the trader a written signed request to hand them over.
By way of exception, goods in the following four categories are not returnable and the customer will remain liable to pay for them (and for the provision of any services in connection with their supply):
(i)
perishable goods,
(ii)
consumable goods which have been consumed before cancellation,
(iii)
goods supplied to meet any emergency,
(iv)
goods (e.g. bricks or plants) which before cancellation have been incorporated in land.
Subject to having to pay for goods in the last four categories, the customer is entitled to be repaid any money he has already paid.
He is also given a lien on any goods which he is himself supposed to return.
This entitles him to refuse to hand them over until he has been repaid the money repayable to him.
If as part of the cancelled contract the customer has traded in goods in part-exchange, the trader must return those goods (in substantially the same condition) to the customer within 10 days beginning with the date of cancellation.
If he does not, the  customer is entitled to their part-exchange allowance instead.
The customer can use his lien to enforce this; he can refuse to hand over any goods which are returnable by him, until he receives the part-exchange goods or the part-exchange allowance.
Relationship with cancellation provisions of Consumer Credit Act
A number of contracts cancellable under the Regulations will also be cancellable under the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
The latter provisions are fully explained in Part Two of this book at paragraph 22–46 onwards.
The rules are very similar, the main difference being that in most cases the cooling-off period under the Consumer Credit Act will be longer.
From the trader's point of view the position is straightforward.
If the contract is cancellable under the Consumer Credit Act as well as under the Regulations, it is only the provisions of the former with which he must comply — i.e. provisions as to giving the customer notice of his cancellation rights.
It should also be noted that in the case of some excepted contracts (i.e. where the Regulations therefore do not apply), there will be provisions of the Consumer Credit Act giving protection to the customer.
Thus a contract for house repairs or improvements which is secured by a mortgage of the house will normally be subject to a compulsory pre-contract consideration period (see paragraph 22–39 below).
CHAPTER 3
THE PASSING OF PROPERTY AND RISK
A contract of sale is made in order to transfer ownership from the seller to the buyer.
This transfer of ownership is called by the Sale of Goods Act ‘the Transfer of Property.’
It often takes place on the very instant that the contract is made.
However, it can occur at almost any time from the making of the contract onwards — perhaps months or years later.
Until it does so, the goods remain the property of the seller.
The word ‘property’ as used in the Sale of Goods Act means ownership.
When considering the passing of property from the seller to the buyer, we are therefore dealing with something different from the physical handing over (i. e. delivery) of the goods.
The transfer of ownership and the transfer of physical possession, often do not occur simultaneously.
Thus, sometimes a seller will find himself still in possession of goods after the ownership in them has passed to the buyer.
Equally, it is possible for goods to be delivered to the buyer some time before they become his property.
Contrary to common belief, the buyer's right to obtain possession of the goods does not depend upon him being the owner.
Unless the parties agree otherwise, he has the right to take delivery upon payment of the price and to do so irrespective of whether property has passed to him.
Why then does it matter at what point in time the property passes?
The answer is that four important things depend upon the passing of property.
(i)
Unless the parties agree a different time for payment, the seller can sue for the price only after property has passed, section 49 (see paragraph 12 02).
(ii)
Unless and until the buyer has the ownership in the goods he cannot transfer that ownership on to any further person.
This rule is subject to a number of exceptions (see Chapter 5).
(iii)
Risk, prima facie, passes with property — section 20.
The risk of accidental damage is borne (unless otherwise agreed) by the owner.
This rule is of questionable merit.
It would seem sensible to link risk with possession rather than with ownership, because the person in possession of the goods is in the best position to see that they come to no harm.
Still, section 20 represents the law and we shall return to it later.
(iv)
In the event of either the seller or buyer becoming bankrupt (or, in the case of a company, going into liquidation), the rights of the other party over the goods may well depend upon whether property has passed to the buyer.
CLASSIFICATION OF THE CONTRACT
We cannot pinpoint the exact time that property passes without first classifying the contract.
It will be one of two types, being either (i) for the sale of specific goods, or (ii) for the sale of unascertained goods.
Specific goods
These are defined in section 61 as ‘goods identified and agreed upon at the time a contract of sale is made.’
If, at the time the contract is made, it is possible to point out the particular goods upon which the parties have agreed, then those goods are specific.
For example second-hand car deals are usually contracts for the sale of specific goods.
At the time of the contract the parties know which particular car is being sold and bought.
They have ‘identified and agreed upon’ that car.
Similarly, most contracts made in supermarkets are purchases of specific goods.
At the time of the contract (i. e. at the cash desk) the parties have identified and agreed upon the goods (i.e. those brought by the customer to the cash desk).
Kursell v. Timber Operators (1927 C.A) concerned the sale of timber which at the time the contract was made was still growing in a Latvian forest.
The buyer was to fell and take away the trees for himself.
The trees which he was entitled to fell and remove (i.e. which he was buying) were described in the contract as ‘all trunks and branches of trees, but not seedlings and young trees of less than six inches in diameter at a height of four feet from the ground.’
They were to be measured at the time of felling and the buyer was given 15 years in which to do the felling.
Until the time for felling, it therefore could not be said which trees were within the contract.
They were not ‘identified’ at the time the contract was made.
It was held that therefore they were not specific goods.
An agreement to sell some unspecified goods out of a larger specified quantity, as in Kursell v. Timber Operators, is not a contract for the sale of specific goods.
The goods actually being sold must be identified.
Contracts to sell the following are therefore not contracts for the sale of specific goods: ‘a bottle of port from the seller's stock’; or, ‘one of the seller's current stock of 12 bottles of port’; or, ‘12 of the seller's stock of 13 bottles of port.’
This description does not tell us which 12 out of the specified 13 are being sold.
Re Wait (1927 C.A.) involved a contract to sell 500 tons of wheat out of the cargo of 1,000 tons in the ship ‘Challenger.’
The 500 tons were not specific goods because, in the words of Lord Hanworth M.R. ‘There was no ascertainment or identification of the 500 tons out of the cargo in bulk.’
Even if the 500 tons were subsequently separated from the bulk of the cargo and thereby identified, this would not make them ‘specific goods.’
The relevant time is when the contract is made.
Only if they are at that time identified and agreed upon, will they be specific goods.
This is clear from the definition in section 61.
Suppose a seller with just 12 bottles of port in stock agrees to sell 12 bottles of port to a particular buyer.
Even this may not be contract for the sale of specific goods.
Even if the seller has every intention of supplying the buyer with the 12 bottles currently in stock, it still may not be a contract for the sale of specific goods.
In order to determine whether it is, the terms of the contract must be examined and, if necessary, construed (i.e. interpreted).
If the terms are such as to leave the seller free, if he should wish to do so, to obtain more wine of the same description for delivery to the buyer, then the contract goods have not been identified and agreed upon at the date of the contract and the contract is not one for the sale of specific goods, Re London Wine Co.
(Shippers)(1986) Q.B.D.).
There is a difference between a contract to sell ‘12 bottles of port’ and one to sell ‘the 12 bottles of port which I have now in stock.’
The former is not a contract for the sale of specific goods; whereas, if the seller has just 12 bottles of port in stock, the latter is a contract for the sale of specific goods.
Unascertained goods
If the contract is not for the sale of specific goods then it must be for the sale of unascertained goods.
This was the position in both Kursell v. Timber Operators and Re Wait.
However, within the category of unascertained goods there are two types:
(i)
Unascertained goods out of a specified bulk — e.g. ‘500 tons of wheat from the cargo of 1,000 tons on the ‘Challenger.’’
(ii)
Purely generic unascertained goods e.g. ‘500 tons of wheat.’
In the former the seller can fulfil his contract only by delivery of 500 tons from the specified cargo, whereas in the latter he can fulfil his contract by supplying 500 tons from any source.
This difference, however, does not alter the fact that both are contracts for the sale of unascertained goods.
Having been told that there can be a contract either for the sale of specific goods or for the sale of unascertained goods, one might ask, ‘Is there not a third category?
Can there not be a contract for the sale of ascertained goods?’
The answer is that there is no third category.
If at the time the contract is made, the goods are ascertained (i.e. identified and agreed upon), then the contract is one for the sale of specific goods.
If they become ascertained only after the contract was made, the contract at the time of its creation was for sale of unascertained goods.
The time for classification is when the contract is made.
Therefore there are only two possible categories of contract, for the sale of specific goods and for the sale of unascertained goods.
The word ‘ascertained’ is used in the Sale of Goods Act to mean goods which become identified and agreed upon only after the contract is made.
Future goods
Section 5(1) reads:
‘The goods which form the subject of a contract of sale may be either existing goods, owned or possessed by the seller, or goods to be manufactured or acquired by him after the making of the contract of sale, in this Act called ‘future goods.’’
The problem here is to decide into which category future goods fall.
Are they specific or are they unascertained?
Examples of future goods are:
275 tons of barley to be grown by the seller (see Sainsbury v. Street (1972) Assizes));
animal feedstuff to be made according to a specification supplied by the buyer (see Ashington Piggeries v. Hill (1971 H.L.));
a ship to be built by the seller to a specification (McDougall v. Aeromarine of Emsworth (1958 Q.B.)).
Although these particular examples each concern a contract for the sale of unascertained goods, it is not true that all future goods automatically fall into that category.
For example X may agree to sell to Y ‘the Morris car, registration number ABC 123, at present in the ownership of Q and to be acquired from him by X.’ This is a contract for the sale of specific goods.
In Varley v. Whipp (1900 Q.B.) the contract was for the sale of a specified second-hand reaping machine which at the time of the contract the seller did not own but had still to acquire.
The court nevertheless regarded the reaping machine as specific goods.
THE TIME OF THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY
The rules as to the time that property passes are contained in section 16–1g and they differ according to whether the contract is for the sale of specific or unascertained goods.
Specific goods
Section 17 says that property in specific goods passes to the buyer at such time as the parties intend it to be  transferred .
It also says that the intention of the parties can be determined by reference to the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the circumstances of the case.
If the contract expressly states when property is to pass then that is fine.
Often, however, it does not do so.
The seller is concerned about being paid and the buyer about getting hold of the goods.
It is not unusual therefore for the contract expressly to deal with the time for payment and the time for delivery but to be silent about the time of the transfer of property.
In such a case? one must still examine all the circumstances of the case in order to discern what was the parties' intention as to the passing of property.
For example, a clue may be obtained from the time that the parties have stipulated for delivery and/or payment.
In Ward v. Bignall (1967 C.A.), Diplock L.J.
said’…in modern times very little is needed to give rise to the inference that property in specific goods is to pass only on delivery or payment.’
One is attempting to discover what was the intention of the parties at the time they made the contract.
If their intention subsequently changes, that is irrelevant and the property will pass in accordance with their intention at the time of making the  contract.
In Dennant v. Skinner (1948 K.B.) the buyer had a van knocked down to him at an auction.
Shortly after this he paid for it by cheque and on request signed a statement that property in the van was not to pass to him until the cheque was cleared.
The court in attempting to discover the intention of the parties ignored the signed statement because it had been made after the making of the contract.
Often even the diligent searcher will fail to discover when the parties intended property to pass.
In this case property passes according to whichever of the rules in section 18 is relevant (see below).
This is what occurred in Dennant v. Skinner.
Unascertained goods
Section 16 says:
‘Where there is a contract for the sale of unascertained goods no property is transferred to the buyer unless and until the goods are ascertained.’
This is no more than common sense.
Until the parties have identified the goods which the buyer is to have, no property can pass from the seller to the buyer for the simple reason that it is impossible to tell in which goods the property is passing.
So, in a case where the seller was to build a yacht for the buyer and they agreed that on payment of the first instalment the vessel and all materials used in its construction should become the absolute property of the buyer, the court held that nevertheless no property passed on payment of the first instalment because at that time the boat's construction had not commenced and the materials to be used had not yet been identified, McDougall v. Aeromarine of Emsworth Ltd. (1958 Q.B.).
A similar contract was involved in Re Blyth Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co. (1926 C.A), but in that case the vessel was already in course of construction when the first instalment was paid.
It was held that property in the incomplete ship passed on payment of the first instalment but that no property passed at that time in some materials which were Lying in the ship yard and might be used in the ship's construction.
The reason was that it was not at that time ascertained that those materials were definitely to be used.
Suppose a seller, S, has contracted with A in Aylesbury to sell him 60 cwt. of potatoes and with B in Bristol to sell him 25 cwt. and with C in Cardiff to sell him 15 cwt.
Suppose also that the seller despatches a lorry carrying 100 cwt. of potatoes to make delivery to A, B and C in that order.
Until the lorry has unloaded both A's and B's deliveries, the potatoes are all mixed  up and C's 15 cwt. are unascertained.
As soon as A's and B's deliveries have both been made, C's 15 cwt. become ascertained by exhaustion, since it is then possible to say that all the potatoes left on the lorry are destined for C. Now suppose that before the lorry is despatched, C sells his 15 cwt. to B and arranges with S that the lorry shall drop 40 cwt. to B in Bristol.
In that case B's 40 cwt. become ascertained by exhaustion as soon as A's 60 cwt. have been unloaded.
That is so even though B's 40 cwt. may not have been subdivided or allocated as between the separate contracts by which he bought them, Karlshamns Oliefabriker v. Eastport Navigation Corporation, The Elafi (1982 Q.B.).
It is an overriding principle that no property can pass in goods until they are ascertained.
It does not follow that the property will necessarily pass as soon as the goods are ascertained.
Property passes when the parties intend it to, section 17.
Section 17 applies to ascertained goods in exactly the same way as it does to specific goods.
Again, as in the case of specific goods, if the intention of the parties is not apparent, then property passes according to the relevant Rule in section 18, i. e. in the case of a contract for the sale of unascertained goods, usually Rule 5.
Rules in section 18
Section 17 is the governing section and the rules in section 18 are to be consulted only if the parties have not evinced their intention as to when property is to pass.
This is clear from the opening words of section 18:
‘Unless a different intention appears, the following are rules for ascertaining the intention of the parties as to the time at which the property in the goods is to pass to the buyer.’
‘Rule I: Where there is an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods, in a deliverable state, the property in the goods passes to the buyer when the contract is made, and it is immaterial whether the time of payment or the time of delivery or both be postponed.’
The essence of this is that if the goods are identified and agreed upon and ready to be handed over, the parties are taken to have intended the buyer to become the owner immediately, i.e. at the very instant that the contract is made.
In Dennant v. Skinner (1948 K.B.) a van was auctioned and knocked down to a Mr. King.
Hallet J. quoted Rule 1 and continued:
‘Accordingly, on the fall of the hammer the property of this car passed to King unless that prima facie rule is excluded from applying because of a different intention appearing or because there was some condition in the contract preventing the rule from applying.’
He held that therefore the van became King's immediately.
It is not completely settled what is the meaning in Rule 1 of ‘an unconditional contract.
’ This could refer to a contract without any conditions whatsoever.
Such an interpretation, however, would be absurd, since any contract of sale must have a condition somewhere at its core.
It is difficult to imagine one without at least two conditions, namely, that the buyer will pay the price and that the seller will deliver the goods.
The words ‘unconditional contract’ therefore do not mean a contract without conditions in the sense just referred to, i.e. important terms of the contract (see Chapter 7).
It seems sensible therefore to assume that they mean a contract which contains no condition preventing Rule 1 from applying.
An example of such a condition would be if, to the buyer's knowledge at the time the contract was made, the seller was not the owner of the goods.
In that case ownership will not pass to the buyer before the seller has himself succeeded in acquiring that ownership.
This was precisely the position in the case, referred to earlier, of Varley v. Whipp, where at the time of the contract the seller still had to acquire the second-hand reaping machine which he was agreeing to sell.
It was held that the contract was not ‘unconditional’ and that therefore Rule 1 did not apply.
The words ‘deliverable state’ are defined in section 61(5) as, goods ‘in such a state that the buyer would under the contract be bound to take the delivery of them.
’ Thus if the goods require anything to be done to them in order for them to be ready for delivery or in order to make them comply with the contract, they will not be in a deliverable state.
In Underwood v. Burgh Castle Brick & cement Syndicate (1922 C.A) the contract was to sell a-30 ton condensing machine which at the time of the contract was standing bolted to a concrete emplacement in which it had become embedded because of its weight.
It was an expensive and time consuming task to remove it.
In the contract the sellers had agreed to do this and to deliver the machine f.o.r.
(free on rail) which meant that they undertook to see that the machine was conveyed to and loaded upon the train.
The Court of Appeal had two reasons for deciding that Rule 1 did not apply.
First, the parties had, by  making an f.o.r.
agreement, indicated their intention that property should pass when the goods were loaded onto the rail.
Secondly, the machine was not at the time of the contract in a deliverable state, since it still had to be removed from the concrete emplacement.
We now come to the closing words of Rule 1, ‘it is immaterial whether the time of payment or the time of delivery, or both, be postponed.’
From these, it is clear that a buyer can be owner of the goods even though he has not paid for them and even though they remain in the seller's possession.
As we shall see in Chapter 12, the seller usually has the right to retain possession of the goods until the buyer pays.
This does not alter the fact that if Rule 1 applies the buyer becomes owner at the instant the contract is made.
Hallett J. explained in Dennant v. Skinner, ‘the passing of property and the right to possession are two different things.
Here, in my judgment, the property had passed on the fall of the hammer, but still the (seller) had a right to retain possession of the goods until payment was made.’
In other words, what occurs, after the contract is made, in relation either to the possession of the goods or to the payment of the price, can have no bearing upon the operation of Rule 1.
However, what might affect it is if at the time of the making of the contract the parties make an agreement about delivery and/ or payment, e.g. that they be postponed.
Such an agreement could easily give rise to the inference that they intended the passing of property to be similarly postponed (see Underwood v. Burgh Castle Brick & cement Syndicate, above).
In that situation none of the rules in section 18 would apply since those rules are only relevant ‘unless a different intention appears.’
‘Rule 2: Where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods and the seller is bound to do something to the goods, for the purpose of putting them into a deliverable state, the property does not pass until the thing is done, and the buyer has notice that it has been done.’
One unanswered question here is what ‘notice’ means.
Suppose the seller puts a letter in the post informing the buyer that the goods are in a deliverable state.
Does property pass when the letter is posted or when it arrives?
‘Notice’ probably means actual knowledge in which case the property passes when the letter arrives.
So, if the letter is lost in the post, property does not pass until the buyer actually discovers that the goods are in a deliverable state.
‘Rule 3: Where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliverable state, but the seller is bound to weigh, measure, test or do some other act or thing with reference to the goods for the purpose of ascertaining the price, the property does not pass until the act or thing is done and the buyer has notice that it has been done.’
It is important here to note that Rule 3 applies only if it is the seller who is to do the weighing, measuring, testing, etc.
In Nanka Bruce v. Commonwealth Trust Ltd. (1926 P.C.) it was agreed that the buyer would pay 59s per 601b.
The buyer was going to re-sell the goods and it was recognised that the buyer's sub-purchaser would test the weight and thus ascertain the precise sum to be paid to the seller.
The Privy Council held that property passed from the seller before the sub-purchaser had tested that goods for weight.
Thus, where specific goods are to be weighed or tested, etc., by some person other than the seller, property will pass under Rule 1 or Rule 2 unless the parties have agreed otherwise.
‘Rule 4: When goods are delivered to the buyer on approval or on sale or return or other similar terms the property in the goods passes to the buyer:
(a)
when he signifies his approval or acceptance to the seller or does any other act adopting the transaction;
(b)
if he does not signify his approval or acceptance to the seller but retains the goods without giving notice of rejection, then if a time has been fixed for the return of the goods, on expiration of that time and, if no time has been fixed, on the expiration of a reasonable time.’
It is sometimes difficult to know whether the purchaser has done an act adopting the transaction.
He will have done such an act if he does something which substantially impedes his ability to return the goods by the end of the period (whether that be a stipulated period or a reasonable length of time).
Thus he ‘adopts’ the transaction when he re-sells the goods or when he pledges them with a pawnbroker (Kirkham v. Attenborough, 1897 C.A.).
What is the position, though, where the buyer resells the goods on sale or return terms?
Passages from the judgments from Genn v. Winkel (1911 C.A.) are particularly helpful here.
Fletcher Moulton L.J.
said,
‘A person who receives goods on sale or return and at once passes them on to someone else under a like contract is entitled to demand them from that third person just  as soon as the original owner of the goods has the right to demand them from him, but I am clear that, if he allows a period to elapse before he hands them on to a third person on sale or return, he has done an act which limits and impedes his power of returning the goods.
If 14 days be a reasonable length of time in such a contract in this particular trade, and if he waits seven days before entrusting the goods to a third person on sale or return, that third person has the right to keep them as against him for 14 days, whereas the original owner has a right to the return of them within seven days from that date and I think that is clearly an act inconsistent with anything but his having adopted the transaction.’
Buckley L.J.
said,
‘If A delivers goods to B on sale or return and B having received them immediately delivers them to C on sale or return, the reasonable time in the one case must, I think, be co-extensive with that in the other case and if that reasonable time elapses and C brings back the goods to B and B takes them back to A, everybody is acting within his rights, and it appears to me that property never passes…if under like circumstances A delivers goods to B and B delivers them to C in each case on sale or return and the reasonable time be, let us say, 14 days, and C after four days sells the goods or elects to buy the goods, I think property will have passed, because C will have done an act which renders it impossible for B to return the goods to A.’
Two further points need to be made about Rule 4.
First, if the cause of the purchaser being unable to return the goods within the approval period is something which occurs entirely without his fault and beyond his control (e.g. if the goods are stolen or accidentally destroyed) he can offer that as an excuse and property will not pass, Re Ferrier (1944 Ch.).
Secondly, as with all the rules in section 18, Rule 4 is irrelevant if the parties when making the contract express their intentions as to when property shall pass.
Thus in Weiner v. Gill (1906 C.A.) although jewellery sold on approval was subsequently re-sold by the buyer, the court held that property had not passed because of an express statement in the original contract that property was not to pass until the seller was paid.
‘Rule 5:(1) Where there is a contract for the sale of unascertained or future goods by description, and goods of that description and in a deliverable state are unconditionally appropriated to the contract, either by the seller with the assent of the buyer, or by the buyer with the assent of the seller, the property in the goods then passes to the buyer; and the assent may be express or implied, and may be given either before or after the appropriation is made.
(2) Where, in pursuance of the contract, the seller delivers the goods to the buyer or to a carrier or other bailee or custodier (whether named by the buyer or not) for the purpose of transmission to the buyer, and does not reserve the right to disposal, he is taken to have unconditionally appropriated the goods to the contract.’
There are many contracts for the sale of unascertained goods where the parties do not express their intention as to when property shall pass.
Rule 5 applies to these contracts.
It contains two basic requirements for property to pass.
First, goods complying with the contract must be unconditionally appropriated to the contract by one of the parties.
Secondly, the other party must give his assent.
Take an example: Mrs. Jones telephones her coal merchant asking him to deliver six bags of coal.
He agrees.
Next day the merchant, his lorry loaded with 200 bags of coal, sets out to make deliveries.
He arrives at Mrs. Jones with 150 bags left on the lorry.
He knocks at her door.
She unlocks the coal house door for him.
He goes to his lorry where he drags six bags to the edge of the lorry's platform.
He takes one of them, brings it to the coal house and empties it there.
He repeats this with each of the other five bags.
At what time does the property in the coal pass to Mrs. Jones?
It is not when the merchant set out on his round because at that time Mrs. Jones' coals was as yet unascertained — McDougall v. Aeromarine of Emsworth (above).
For the same reason, it did not pass when the merchant drew up outside her house.
Rule 5 tells us that property passes when it is unconditionally appropriated by one party with the other's assent.
In Carlos Federspiel & Co. v. Charles Twigg & Co. (1957 Q.B.) Pearson J. had to consider what amounted to an ‘unconditional appropriation.’
He said,
‘A mere setting apart or selection by the seller of the goods which he expects to use in performance of the  contract is not enough.
If that is all, he can change his mind and use those goods in performance of some other contract and use some other goods in performance of this contract.’
Thus, in our example, property did not pass when the merchant moved the six bags towards the edge of the lorry's platform.
Pearson J. went on,
‘To constitute an appropriation of goods to the contract, the parties must have had, or be reasonably supposed to have had, an intention to attach the contract irrevocably to those goods.’
It would seem then that in our example there was an unconditional appropriation of the contents of each bag as when it was emptied into Mrs. Jones' coalhouse.
Pearson J. was considering a contract where the seller had agreed to despatch goods f.o.b. (free on board) a ship, i.e. the seller undertook to convey the goods to the ship and to load them.
He had got as far as the packaging and labelling them at his premises prior to taking them to the ship.
Pearson J. held that property had not passed under Rule 5 for two reasons.
First, section 18 was irrelevant since the parties by making an f.o.b. contract had indicated their intention that property was to pass as and when the goods were loaded onto the ship (see Underwood v. Burgh Castle Brick & cement Syndicate, above).
Secondly, the goods had been merely set aside and not unconditionally appropriated.
Re London Wine Co (Shippers)(1986 Q.B.D.) also illustrates the principle that for an appropriation there has to be an apparent intention to attach the goods irrevocably to the contract.
The selling company dealt in wine and maintained considerable stocks.
In contracted to sell wine on terms that after the contract the wine would be stored for the purchaser by the vendor.
The company issued each purchaser with a document confirming that the purchaser was the sole owner of the wine he had purchased.
In one instance a contract was made to sell to one purchaser a quantity of a given type of wine which exactly equalled the seller's stock of it.
In another instance several contracts with different purchasers exhausted the seller's stock of another type of wine.
Each purchaser was given a document stating him to be the owner of the quantity he had purchased of the wine in question.
It was held, nevertheless, that in neither instance was there an appropriation.
Where there  were several purchasers of the same type of wine, it was impossible to say who owned which of the bottles of wine in the seller's stock.
Even where there was only one purchaser, there was nothing to identify the particular cases of wine in stock as the subject-matter of the purchaser's contract.
It was quite open to the selling company, if it wished, to obtain more wine of the same description for delivery to the purchaser.
Thus no property passed in any of the wine remaining in the seller's stock.
When goods have to be despatched by a carrier (e.g. the Post Office) Rule 5(2) is often helpful.
Thus the goods will normally be unconditionally appropriated when handed over to the carrier.
However, there are two limitations to this.
Firstly, there is no unconditional appropriation when the seller reserves the right of disposal, see section 19 (below).
The other limitation is that property cannot pass in unascertained goods, see section 16 (above).
To put it another way, goods are not appropriated unless it is clear which goods are appropriated.
This is neatly illustrated by Healy v. Howlett (1917 K.B.).
The seller contracted to sell 20 boxes of mackerel f.o.r.
(free on rail).
He despatched by rail all at the same time 190 boxes to go to various customers.
He did not label the boxes to go to particular destinations but left it to the rail company to allot the appropriate number of boxes to the various destinations.
Ridley J. held that putting the 190 boxes on the rail was not in this case an unconditional appropriation because it was impossible to say which of them was appropriated to any given buyer.
They therefore were still unascertained goods.
Property therefore could not pass until the railway company made the allotments.
The problem of when does an unconditional appropriation occur can arise in a very different situation; when the buyer has to collect the goods, not from the seller, but from a third person.
There is an unconditional appropriation when the goods are identified and the third person acknowledges that he now holds them for the buyer, Wardars (Import & exports ) v. W. Norwood (1968 C.A.).
This case concerned the sale of 600 cartons of frozen kidneys out of a bulk of 1,500 cartons stored for the seller at a cold store.
The buyer's carrier went to the cold store with a delivery order.
He found that 600 cartons had been set aside ready for him.
He handed over his delivery order to an official who thereupon gave instructions for loading to commence.
The Court of Appeal held that there was an unconditional appropriation when the delivery order was accepted and loading allowed to commence.
under Rule 5 an unconditional appropriation will not pass  property unless the other party assents.
This assent could sometimes be difficult to establish but fortunately Rule 5 allows it to be implied and to be given in advance.
Thus, in our example earlier, Mrs. Jones's assent can be inferred from the fact that she unlocked the coal house door.
Similarly, in Aldridge v. Johnson (1857 Q.B.) where the buyer supplied bags for the seller to put the goods (barley) into, it was held that property passed when the seller filled the bags.
An easy and neat example of assent can also be found in the case of a purchase of petrol at a garage.
If a petrol pump attendant puts the petrol into the customer's car, that is an unconditional appropriation to which the buyer's assent is clearly implied, Edwards v. Ddin (1976 D.C.).
At a self-service garage it is the motorist who unconditionally appropriates the petrol by pouring it into his tank, the assent of the seller being equally clearly implied.
Thus at a self-service station, as in the case of a non self-service one, property in the petrol passes to the buyer when it is poured into his tank, R. v. McHugh (1977 D.C.).
On the other hand, assent is sometimes given only after the unconditional appropriation is made.
In that case the property passes not upon appropriation but when the other party's assent is subsequently given.
This was the position in Pignataro v. Gilroy (1919 K.B.) where the sale concerned some unascertained bags of rice which the buyer was to collect.
The sellers got the rice completely ready for collection and were requested by the buyer for a delivery order enabling him to collect the rice.
They sent him delivery order but he failed to come and collect the rice.
He did nothing.
The buyer's assent to the appropriation made by the sellers was inferred from his failure to object after receiving the delivery order.
Therefore property passed to him when after a reasonable length of time he had failed to object.
Section 19
Section 19 provides that, if the seller reserves a right of disposal of the goods until certain conditions are fulfilled, property does not pass until those conditions are fulfilled.
Thus if a seller entrusts identified and appropriated goods to a carrier with instructions that they be conveyed to the buyer but not handed over until the buyer has paid, the goods will remain the seller's property until the buyer pays for them.
It is quite common in an import or export sale for the seller to agree to arrange the carriage of the goods by ship to the buyer and also to arrange for their insurance en route.
Such  contracts are termed c.i.f. because the cost (i.e. the price paid by the buyer to the seller) includes the insurance and freight.
In this case the bill of lading (i.e. the document given by the shipowner acknowledging that he has received the goods) will usually indicate that the goods are held according to the seller's instructions.
The seller will normally send by air to the buyer some documents: one will be the bill of lading transferred to the buyer to enable him to collect the goods at their port of destination; another will be a bill of exchange which the buyer will normally sign and return thereby undertaking to pay for the goods on the date specified on the bill of exchange.
If the buyer finds that the bill of lading is not in order, i.e. it indicates that the contract has not been complied with, he can refuse to accept it and will therefore refuse to sign the bill of exchange.
In such a case no property passes to the buyer, section 19.
Also, section 19 requires the buyer to return the bill of lading to the seller.
If on the other hand the buyer finds the bill of lading in order he will retain it and will sign and return the bill of exchange.
When he does this property will pass.
This, of course, does not preclude the buyer from refusing to accept the goods if when they arrive they do not comply with the contract.
If he does that, then property will pass back to the seller, Kwei Tek Chao v. British Traders (1954 Q.B.).
The Romalpa case
In business it is not uncommon for a seller (X) to sell large quantities of a commodity to a buyer (Y Ltd.) in the knowledge that Y Ltd. will be able to pay for them only out of the proceeds of re-selling them.
It may be that Y Ltd. is only a buyer and re-seller, i.e. only a link in the chain of distribution.
Alternatively it could be that Y Ltd. is a manufacturer and that the commodity he buys from X is part of his raw materials.
In either case the problem for X is the same, namely what is X's position if Y Ltd. having taken delivery then becomes insolvent and goes into liquidation before paying for the goods?
Has X got property rights over the goods entitling him to recover the goods (or their value) in priority to any other creditors of Y Ltd., or, on the other hand, is he merely an unsecured creditor having only a right to sue for the price?
The latter will be the case if property has passed to Y Ltd.
In that situation X, being an unsecured creditor, is likely to obtain no more than a small percentage of the price he is owed.
In the absence of a contrary statement in the contract between X and Y Ltd., property will normally have passed by virtue of sections 16–18 of the Sale of  Goods Act (paragraphs 3–07 to 3–24).
However, a provision in the contract to the effect the property does not pass until Y Ltd. has paid the price, will not entirely meet X's needs.
Y Ltd. has got to be allowed to sell the goods; otherwise Y Ltd. may never be able to pay X. How can X protect himself against the possibility that Y Ltd., having sold the goods, might then go into liquidation before paying X?
The way to do so was demonstrated by the Dutch sellers in Aluminium Industrie Vaasen BV v. Romalpa Aluminium Ltd. (1976 C.A.).
The contract was for the sale by a Dutch company of aluminium foil some of which the buyers (an English company) were to use in their manufacturing process.
At the time of manufacture the foil would obviously become mixed with other materials.
The buyers took delivery of the foil but never made full payment.
Later they became insolvent and a receiver was appointed.
At that time the buyers still had some of the foil which had not yet been taken into the manufacturing process (i.e. unmixed foil).
They had also sold some of the foil, some unmixed and some mixed (manufactured).
The Dutch sellers now relied upon a clause (clause 13) in their contract of sale with the buyers and claimed therefore to have proprietary rights entitling them to have priority over the buyers' other creditors.
This claim, however, was limited to unmixed foil and the proceeds of the sale of unmixed foil.
Clause 13 was in two parts.
The first part dealt with unmixed foil and stated that ownership in the foil would transfer to the buyers only when they had paid all that was owing to the sellers.
The second part dealt with mixed foil and stated that the ownership of the sellers would transfer from the foil used in the manufacture to the finished products and that these would remain the property of the sellers until full payment had been made to them.
Furthermore the buyers were to keep the finished goods as ‘fiduciary’ for the sellers.
The second part of clause 13 also authorised the buyers to sell these finished goods, on condition that they would if requested transfer to the sellers the benefit of those sales.
Foil (mixed or unmixed) which had been sold by the buyers clearly now belonged to whoever had bought it, since the Dutch sellers had expressly authorised the buyers to sell it.
Any unmixed foil unsold by the buyers clearly still belonged to the Dutch sellers by virtue of the first part of clause 13.
Ownership passes when (and not before) the parties intend it to.
In relation to the unmixed foil which the buyers had sold, the Court of Appeal held that the Dutch sellers were entitled to receive from the buyers the proceeds of the sales by the buyers.
The Dutch  sellers were entitled to those proceeds of sale in priority to the buyers' other creditors (secured and unsecured).
This was because of the right of an owner (here, the Dutch sellers) to ‘trace.’
This is a right to follow, and take, the proceeds of a sale where the owner's goods are disposed of by someone in a fiduciary relationship with the owner.
It was held that clause 13 dearly imposed that fiduciary relationship upon the buyers.
In relation to the unmixed goods the clause worked by a combination of two things.
First, it reserved title to the sellers and secondly it imposed a fiduciary duty upon the buyers which enabled the sellers to trace into the proceeds of sale.
Mixed goods
What would be the position with mixed goods?
The answer is that the clause would, because it said so, give the sellers property rights over the mixed (manufactured) goods.
This, however, is not because title in the mixed goods is reserved to the sellers.
It is possible to reserve title only in goods in which one has got title to start with, i.e. the unmixed goods.
In Re Peachdart (1983 Ch.D.) the sellers of leather which the buyers then made into handbags could reserve title in the leather which they supplied but could not reserve title in the handbags which were newly created goods.
When made into handbags, the leather ceased to exist as separate goods and became absorbed into the handbags.
The contract of sale of the leather stated that the ownership in any mixed goods (i.e. handbags) should also be and remain with the sellers.
The ownership which the sellers were thus given in the handbags was not, however, reserved to the sellers but was granted to them by those who would otherwise have been the owners, namely the buyers of the leather.
This property right was therefore a charge created by the buyers of the leather.
It was void because any charge created by a company is void unless registered, Companies Act 1948, section 94 (now the Companies Act 1985, section 365).
It seems then that a Romalpa clause will, if properly worded, work in the case of unmixed goods and the proceeds of sale of unmixed goods, but that in the case of mixed goods (and their proceeds of sale) will work only if it is registered as a charge created by the buying company.
Unmixed goods
In Clough Mill Ltd. v. Martin (1985) the Court of Appeal  confirmed that the seller can, by the terms of the contract, effectively retain title in unmixed goods which the buyer has not re-sold.
Such a clause does not require registration under the Companies Act because the buyer is not creating a charge over his (the buyer's) assets.
Rather the goods do not become the buyer's assets until the buyer has paid.
Thus if the buyer goes into liquidation before fully paying for the goods, any of the goods which have not been re-sold by the buyer and which remain unmixed will belong to the seller.
The seller, not the buyer's other creditors, will be entitled to take those goods.
Assuming that the seller can then re-sell them elsewhere for the same price as the buyer had agreed to pay, the seller will suffer no loss.
If the seller is able to sell the goods elsewhere for more than the buyer had agreed to pay, the seller will in fact make a profit (i.e. will be better off than if the buyer had fully paid the seller before going into liquidation).
It is possible that before going into liquidation the buyer had paid part of the price to the seller.
Clearly, if the seller has been able to sell the goods elsewhere for the same price as the buyer had agreed to pay (or a greater price) the seller must refund the buyer's part payment.
That part payment will then be available for the buyer's other creditors.
If, however, the seller has been able to re-sell the goods elsewhere only at a loss (i.e. for less than the buyer had agreed to pay) the seller is entitled to deduct that loss from the refund.
The loss (i. e. the amount to be deducted) is the difference between the price the buyer had agreed to pay and the lower price which the seller is able to get on a re-sale elsewhere.
Suppose the buyer had agreed to pay £2,000 and at the time of liquidation had paid only £1,000.
Assuming that the seller had retained title to the goods, the seller must refund the £1,000 unless the seller is unable to re-sell the goods elsewhere for at least £2,000.
If the seller was only able to sell the goods elsewhere for £1,800, then the seller must refund £800.
Now, suppose that the buyer had agreed to pay £2,000 (for the goods, a load of timber) and had actually paid the £2,000 but that the contract reserved title to the seller until the buyer had satisfied all his liabilities towards the seller (i.e. under not only this contract but also any other contracts there might be between them).
Suppose also that at the time of the buyer's liquidation the buyer owed £500 to the seller under another contract.
The decided cases do not yet give a clear answer to this problem but presumably the retention of title clause would entitle the seller to take and re-sell such of the timber he had  supplied under this contract as remained unsold and unmixed in the buyer's possession.
Presumably also the seller would then be entitled to deduct from the £2,000 refund, not only any loss on re-selling the timber but also the £500 just mentioned.
(For a discussion of the effect and validity of ‘all liabilities’ retention of titled clauses, see [1986]M.L.R. 96).
Proceeds of sale of unmixed goods
In the Romalpa case, not only was the seller entitled, as owner, to the unmixed goods which the buyer had not sold, but the seller was also entitled to the proceeds of the sale which the buyer had received from sub-sales of unmixed goods.
This was because the terms of the contract between seller and buyer made it clear that the buyer in re-selling the goods was doing so, not for his own account, but as agent for, and on account of, the seller.
This is not, however, the normal effect of a clause authorising the buyer to sub-sell the goods.
The normal effect of such an authorisation is that the buyer is sub-selling for his own account.
In Pfeiffer GmbH v. Arbuthnot Factors (1988 Q.B.D.), there was a clause retaining title for the seller and nevertheless authorising the buyer to make sub-sales.
The contract required the buyer to pass on to the seller all the buyer's rights under the sub-sales contracts.
However, it required this to be done only up to the amount of the buyer's outstanding indebtedness to the seller.
It was held that this did not entitle the seller to take from the buyer the proceeds of the sub-sales of his (the seller's) property; instead it merely created a charge in favour of the seller which was void because it was not registered under the Companies Act.
In order without being registered, to entitle the seller to take the proceeds of sale in priority to the buyer's other creditors, the contract should, it seems:
1.
reserve the seller's title to the goods themselves (i.e. until either the buyer has paid or else the goods are sold by the buyer or lose their identity in the buyer's manufacturing or other process), and
2.
expressly state one or more of the following things:
(a) that the buyer is (until title passes) in possession of the goods as bailee of the seller;
(b) that the buyer, in having possession of the goods and in selling them, is in a ‘fiduciary’ relationship with the seller;
(c) that the buyer in selling them, does so on account of, and as agent for, the seller and
3.
not provide that the buyer's duty to account to the seller for the proceeds of sub-sales is limited to the buyer's outstanding indebtedness to the seller.
These provisions would give the seller a kind of property right over, and thereby give the seller entitlement to, all the proceeds of the sub-sales of unmixed goods (except those sub-sales made after title has already passed to the buyer).
To make commercial sense of this arrangement, the contract would also need to contain a provision placing a duty on the seller to account to the buyer for any amount by which the proceeds of sub-sales of unmixed goods exceed the amount of the buyer's indebtedness to the seller.
TRANSFER OF RISK
Section 20
Unless the parties agree otherwise, risk passes with property, section 20(1).
Thus if the goods are damaged or stolen this loss falls on the seller if it occurs before property has passed; otherwise it falls on the buyer.
This is so irrespective of whose possession the goods were in at the time.
This is illustrated by Pignataro v. Gilroy (1919 K.B.) where we have seen that property passed to the buyer under section 18, rule 5.
The buyer failed to collect them and they were stolen from the seller's warehouse.
It was held that the buyer must bear this loss because property had passed to him before the goods were stolen.
The basic rule that risk passes with property is subject to three limitations; they are section 20(2) and (3) and the fact that section 20(1) only applies unless otherwise agreed.
Section 20(2)
‘But where the delivery has been delayed through the fault of either buyer or seller the goods are at the risk of the party at fault as regards any loss which might not have occurred but for such fault.’
This was applied in Demby Hamilton v. Barden (1949 K.B.) where the buyer was supposed to take delivery of some apple juice in weekly loads.
The buyer held up delivery and the juice  went bad as a result.
It was held that the buyer must bear the
Section 20(3)
‘Nothing in this section shall affect the duties or liabilities 3–32 of either seller or buyer as a bailee or custodier of the goods of the other party.’
This means that the person in possession must take reasonable care of the goods even if the ownership is with the other party.
Thus if the goods are damaged or stolen because of his negligence he will have to bear the loss even though at the time he was not the owner.
To put it another way, the risk which under section 20 passes with property (i.e. which falls upon the owner) does not include the risk of loss or damage due to the other party's negligence.
‘Unless otherwise agreed’
The parties can agree when risk shall pass.
They can select a time before or after the passing of property.
In order for their agreement to have any effect it must be part of the contract.
It may be remembered that in Healy v. Howlett no property passed in the mackerel put by the sellers onto the rail because the consignment was not allotted as to the various destinations.
After putting them on the rail the sellers sent the buyers an invoice stating ‘At sole risk of purchaser after putting fish on rail here.’
Ridley J. said, ‘I do not see how those words form part of the contract.’
He therefore ignored them.
The mackerel went bad before the railway had allocated particular boxes to particular destinations.
Therefore, since property had not passed, the loss fell on the seller.
An agreement that the passing of risk shall not be simultaneous with the passing of property can be inferred from the circumstances.
An example is the difficult case of Sterns v. Vickers (1923 C.A.).
The sellers owned 200,000 gallons of white spirit stored for them by an independent person, X, in his tanks.
They sold to the buyers 120,000 out of the 200,000 gallons and gave the buyers the benefit of free storage at X's for a given period, i.e. down to January 31.
It was agreed that the buyers would make their own arrangement for storage thereafter.
The sellers gave the buyers a delivery note to enable them to collect the spirit from X. However, the buyers chose to keep it at X's  and did not come to remove it for some months by which time it had deteriorated.
Clearly, property had not passed because, until collected, the 120,000 gallons out of the 200,000 remained unascertained.
In spite of this, the Court of Appeal held that the parties intended risk to pass when the buyers accepted the delivery note.
The buyers therefore had to bear the costs of the deterioration.
There are three things to note about this case.
First, the agreement that risk should pass independently from property was not express but inferred by the court from the circumstances of the case.
Secondly, that agreement resulted in risk passing before property.
Thirdly, it resulted in the risk passing in the unascertained goods.
This last point is not without difficulty.
Which goods were at the buyer's risk?
Clearly no more than 120,000 gallons — but which 120,000 gallons?
If, say, only 100,000 out of the 200,000 gallons had deteriorated, it would have been difficult to allocate the loss as between seller and buyer.
Presumably it would be done pro rata, i.e. the buyer would bear 
This is possible where, as in Sterns v. Vickers, the contract is for the sale of unascertained goods out of a specified bulk.
One can identify the bulk, calculate the total loss and make the buyer bear a proportion according to his share of the bulk.
This could not be done where the contract was for the sale of purely generic goods.
In that case until the goods are ascertained it is impossible for risk to pass.
Not only would it be impossible to identify the goods which were at the buyer's risk but also it would be impossible to identify any goods which were pro rata at his risk.
Let us now turn to a less difficult situation where the rule in section 20 may be affected, i.e. where the seller undertakes to deliver the goods.
The seller does not have to agree to this and if he does, that will not normally affect the operation of section 20.
Thus the risk of loss or damage (other than that caused by late delivery or the seller's negligence) will pass at the same time as the passing of property.
If on the other hand the seller agrees to deliver ‘at his own risk’ this will alter the operation of section 20.
Its effect will be that even if property passes earlier to the buyer, the goods will remain at the seller's risk until their arrival.
However, even in this case, unless the parties  agree otherwise, the buyer must bear the ‘risk of deterioration necessarily incident to the course of transit,’ section 33.
Thus where the seller agrees to deliver the goods ‘at his own risk’ the buyer will bear the risk of any unavoidable deterioration in the goods in transit but the seller will have to bear the risk of them being stolen from his lorry on route.
Effect of loss falling on one party
If because risk had passed to him the buyer has to bear some loss, it follows that he is not excused from carrying out the contract.
Thus, if he refuses to accept the goods or to pay because they have deteriorated, he is in breach of contract.
The seller will have all the usual seller's remedies.
If because risk had not passed to the buyer, the seller has to bear the loss, this does not necessarily excuse him from performing the contract.
It will do so only if it frustrates the contract (i.e. renders it impossible to carry it out — see Chapter 4).
Unless the contract is frustrated, the seller will still have to carry out the contract and if he delivers goods which do not comply with it, he will be in breach of contract.
CHAPTER 4
PERISHING OF GOODS
WE have just considered the problem of who is to bear the loss when goods perish.
We now face a different problem — namely, what effect does the perishing of the goods have upon the contract?
In other words, must both parties still fully carry out the contract and, if not, to what extent is either party excused?
GOODS PERISHING BEFORE THE CONTRACT IS MADE
Section 6 provides:
‘Where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods, and the goods without the knowledge of the seller have perished at the time when the contract is made, the contract is void.’
If the parties have made an agreement about goods which do not exist, it is an agreement about nothing.
Thus in Couturier v. Hastie (1856 H.L.) a contract to sell a cargo of corn was held to be void because, unknown to the seller, the ship's master had already sold it in Tunisia, as it had begun to ferment en route.
At the time of the contract the cargo no longer existed.
The words ‘void contract’ are a contradiction in terms; a void contract is no contract at all.
Thus neither party is under any obligation to carry it out.
In Couturier v. Hastie, where the seller was suing the buyer for the price, the action therefore failed.
It follows that if the buyer had paid he could have recovered that money.
One must not be misled by the apparent simplicity of section 6 and Couturier v. Hastie.
There are in fact some considerable difficulties.
(i)‘Perish’
The meaning of this word as used in the Sale of Goods Act is in doubt.
In Horn v. Minister of Food (1948 K.B.), Morris J. considered that potatoes which had become seriously rotten had not ‘perished’ because they were still potatoes, albeit worthless ones.
From this it appears that they would have to become  unrecognisable as potatoes before they could have been said to have perished.
This view seems a little extreme and in Asfar v. Blundell (1896 C.A.) it was held that dates, which were under water for two days and became impregnated with sewage, had perished — i.e. in a commercial sense.
They could no longer be bought and sold as dates.
Whichever of these two cases correctly reflects the meaning of ‘perish’ one thing seems clear — goods which have deteriorated to some slight extent but not sufficiently to change their commercial character, have not ‘perished.’
It was held in Barrow, Lane & ballard v. Phillips (1929 K.B.) where goods had disappeared — presumably stolen — that they had perished within the meaning of section 6.
The case involved the sale of a specific lot of 700 bags of nuts lying in the seller's warehouse.
Unknown to the parties, 109 of the bags had already disappeared.
Wright J. applied section 6 and held that the contract was void.
Because the contract was indivisible it was entirely void.
Had it been severable, i.e. if it had been the sale of separate lots to be separately paid for, then presumably the contract would have been void only as to those lots which were not complete at the time of the contract.
In that case the seller would have had to deliver and the buyer to pay for the lots remaining complete.
The decision in Barrow, Lane & ballard v. Phillips clearly indicates that if only some of the goods have perished that is sufficient to make the contract void.
There remains one further point about the word ‘perish.’
Goods that never existed cannot perish.
It follows that if A agrees to sell specific goods to B which both A and B believe to exist but which never have existed, section 6 cannot apply.
However, the contract would still be void, because at common law a contract is void if it is made on a false assumption that its subject-matter is in existence.
Section 6, like many other sections of the Act is no more than an attempt to put into an Act of Parliament a rule of common law.
It was not intended to oust or restrict any of the common law rules (section 62(2)).
Thus in our example where no goods perished because none ever existed, the contract is void at common law.
The reason is that right from the start the contract is impossible to carry out.
It is an agreement built upon a non-existent foundation.
All of this in no way affects the ability to make a contract for the sale of future goods.
Such goods are expected to materialise.
It cannot be said at the outset that it is impossible for the contract to be carried out.
A contract for the sale of future goods is not made on any false assumption that the goods are in  existence at the time of the contract.
Indeed we saw in the last chapter that a contract for the sale of future goods is quite possible.
(ii) Unascertained goods
Section 6 applies only to specific goods.
However, again the common law may declare void a contract which does not fall within section 6.
A contract for the sale of unascertained goods may or may not be void because of the fact that certain goods have perished or do not exist at the time of the contract.
It will be void if that fact makes it impossible right from the outset to carry out the contract.
It is important to remember the distinction explained in the last chapter between purely generic unascertained goods (e.g. ‘500 tons of wheat’) and unascertained goods from a specific bulk (e.g. ‘500 tons of wheat out of the 1,000 tons in the vessel Neptune’).
In the case of purely generic goods, if the particular goods which the seller had in mind to supply had in fact perished at the time of the contract this would not make it impossible for him to perform the contract.
He could fulfil the contract by supplying wheat from any source; the contract is therefore not void.
On the other hand, if he has to supply goods from a particular source and at the time of the making of the contract that source has ceased to exist (e.g. the Neptune has sunk) the contract is void at common law.
(iii) Contrary agreement
Both section 6 and the common law rule making contracts void apply only in the absence of any agreement of the parties to the contrary.
It is a matter of examining the contract to see whether the parties intended it to remain valid even if the goods were not in existence or had perished.
For example, the buyer may have agreed to buy a spes (i.e. a chance).
He may have agreed that if the goods were in existence he would acquire the ownership of them and if they were not in existence he would get nothing but that in either event he would pay the price.
If that were the agreement made by the parties the contract would be valid, even if the goods were not in existence, and the buyer would be liable to pay the price.
In Couturier v. Hastie, the House of Lords said it was a matter of construing the contract and it was only after doing so, that their Lordships held that the buyer had not agreed to buy a spes and that the contract was therefore void.
It will be relatively seldom that a buyer will agree to buy a spes.
He will certainly be most unlikely to agree  a very high price if he is to run the risk of getting absolutely nothing for his money.
A different possible interpretation of a contract is that, not the buyer, but the seller has undertaken to accept the risk that the goods might not exist, i.e. he has undertaken as part of the contract that the goods do in fact exist.
In this case, if it turns out that the goods do not exist at the time of the contract, the seller will be liable in damages to the buyer for breach of his contractual undertaking.
This is exactly what happened in the Australian case of McRae v. Commonwealth Disposals Commission (1951).
The Disposals Commission agreed to sell a wreck on the Jourmand Reef off the coast of Papua.
The buyer subsequently discovered that the wreck had never existed and that, indeed, neither had the reef!
The Australian court construed the agreement and concluded that the contract was not void, because the sellers had impliedly warranted that the wreck existed at the spot specified.
The sellers were therefore liable in damages to the buyer.
To sum up: a contract is void if, at the time the contract is made and unknown to the parties, goods have perished or do not exist, thereby rendering it impossible for the contract to be performed; this, however, is subject to the qualification that the contract will not be void if the parties expressly or impliedly agreed otherwise.
GOODS PERISHING AFTER THE CONTRACT IS MADE
Section 7 provides:
‘Where there is an agreement to sell specific goods, and subsequently the goods, without any fault on the part of the seller or buyer, perish before the risk passes to the buyer, the agreement is avoided.’
Like section 6, this section is only part of a wider principle of common law.
The principle this time relates to frustration of contract.
It applies when, through no fault of either party, events take an unexpected turn making it impossible to carry out the contract as originally conceived.
In such circumstances the contract is frustrated or (in the terminology of section 7) avoided.
This can occur not only if the goods subsequently perish but also, for example, if after the contract is made, it becomes illegal to carry it out.
It happened in Avery v. Bowden (1855 Q.B.) where there was a contract to bring goods from Russia.
Before the ship was due to be loaded, the Crimean war  broke out making it illegal to trade with Russia (the enemy).
It was held that no claim could be brought against the defendant for failing to load because the contract had been frustrated by illegality before the time for loading.
It can be seen that in the event of specific goods perishing, the contract may be avoided by section 7 but if in any other case the contract becomes impossible or illegal to perform, it will be frustrated at common law.
Again, there are some difficulties:
(i) The time of perishing
Both section 7 and the common law doctrine of frustration are concerned with events occurring after the contract was made.
If the goods had already perished at the time the contract was made, then section 6 is the appropriate section.
If section 6 applies, the contract is void.
Where the events occur after the contract was made and the contract is avoided or frustrated the effect is not the same (see below).
(ii)‘Perish’
The word ‘perish’ presumably means the same as in section 6.
Indeed one of the cases quoted above, Horn v. Minister of Health, was a case on section 7.
The point was made in relation to section 6 that goods cannot perish if they never have been in existence.
Thus a contract for the sale of future goods (e.g. a crop to be grown on a specific farm) will not be avoided by section 7 if the goods do not materialise.
Nevertheless such a contract may be frustrated at common law.
In Howell v. Coupland (1876 C.A), the seller agreed to sell 200 tons of the potato crop on a specific piece of land, which would normally have produced easily that amount.
However, the crop failed due to blight.
The court held that the seller was not liable for non-delivery of the goods because the contract had been made on the assumption that the crop would materialise.
The crop failure was an unexpected turn of events rendering it impossible to perform the contract which was therefore frustrated.
(iii) Unascertained goods
Again like section 6, section 7 applies only to specific goods.
However, a contract for the sale of unascertained goods can be frustrated at common law if it subsequently becomes impossible to perform because of an unexpected turn of events, as in Howell v. Coupland.
As with section 6, it is important to  remember the difference between unascertained goods out of a specific bulk (e.g. Howell v. Coupland) and purely generic goods.
In his judgment in Howell v. Coupland, Blackburn J. said,
‘Had the contract been simply for so many tons of potatoes of a particular quality then, although each party might have had in his mind when he made the contract this particular crop of potatoes, if they had all perished, the defendant would still have been bound to deliver the quantity contracted for.’
Thus a great deal turns on the exact terms of the contract — whether it stipulates ‘200 tons of potatoes to be grown on Blackacre’ or simply ‘200 tons of potatoes.’
The failure of the crop of Blackacre will render it impossible to perform the contract in the first example, whereas in the latter case the contract can be fulfilled by supplying potatoes from any source.
(iv) The passing of risk and property
Once risk has passed to the buyer the contract cannot be avoided by section 7.
Equally, a contract for the sale of unascertained goods out of a specific bulk will not be frustrated by the perishing of the bulk if this occurs after risk has passed to the buyer.
All of this should be easily understood when it is realised that the effect of the contract being avoided or frustrated is generally that the parties are no longer required to carry out the contract; they are excused.
So, for example, the buyer is under no obligation to pay.
If this were to be the position when goods perish after the risk has passed to the buyer, it would be a contradiction in terms.
In such a case the only way to make sense of the rule that the buyer must bear the loss is still to make him pay whilst allowing him to take whatever remains of the goods.
That is exactly the legal position.
The contract in such a case is most certainly not frustrated or avoided.
Neither will the contract be avoided or frustrated if at the time the goods perish, property has already passed to the buyer.
Section 7, on its wording, applies only to agreements to sell.
An agreement to sell becomes a sale when property passes to the buyer.
The common law doctrine of frustration applies only where the main purpose of the contract has become impossible to achieve, Herne Bay Steam Boat Co. v. Hutton (1903 C.A.).
The main purpose of a contract of sale of goods is that the buyer should become owner of the goods, Rowland v. Divall  (1923 C.A. see paragraph 7–08 below).
That purpose is achieved the instant that property passes to the buyer.
The contract cannot be frustrated by the goods perishing after that moment.
(v) Effect of the contract being frustrated or avoided
The main effect is that the parties are excused from further performance of the contract.
The seller need not deliver the goods and the buyer need not pay for them.
The law is putting into effect what it reasonably presumes would have been the intention of the parties.
It presumes, although the parties did not anticipate the contract becoming impossible or illegal to perform, that nevertheless, if they had thought about it, they would have stated that further performance was to be excused.
Thus, if the parties did actually turn their minds to the possibility that such things might happen (e.g. that the goods might perish) and provided in the contract for that eventuality, then the effect of the event occurring will be whatever is stated in their contract.
In this case it is not in fact accurate to say that the contract is avoided or frustrated; the contract remains and its provisions apply.
Indeed, section 7 applies only in the absence of contrary agreement.
Usually it is reasonable to presume that (if the parties had considered the eventuality that the contract would become impossible or illegal to perform), they would have intended all further performance to be excused.
However, the law will not excuse all further performance of the contract if that, on the facts of the particular case, is an unreasonable presumption of what the parties would have intended.
Sainsbury v. Street (1972 Assizes) is a recent case with facts similar to those in Howell v. Coupland.
The contract was an agreement to sell 275 tons of barley to be grown by the seller on his farm.
In the event the crop was an unexpectedly poor one and amounted to only 140 tons.
Clearly, following the decision in Howell v. Coupland, the seller was excused his obligation to deliver 275 tons.
The question was whether he was entirely excused from performance for he had not offered to supply the reduced amount of 140 tons but had instead sold it to someone else.
MacKenna J. held that there was an implied term that in such a case the seller was not completely excused from all performance but that the buyer had the option of accepting delivery of the reduced quantity, at a pro rata price.
Therefore the seller was liable in damages for non-delivery of 140 tons.
So it can be seen that the parties will usually be excused further performance of the contract, either  partly or entirely, according to what is a reasonable presumption of what the parties would have intended.
A problem can arise for the buyer if, before the contract was frustrated or avoided, he has paid all or part of the price.
Can he recover his money?
The answer differs according to whether the contract was avoided by section 7 or frustrated at common law.
In the former case there is an ‘all or nothing’ rule.
The buyer is entitled to the return of his money in full provided he has suffered a total failure of consideration, i.e. has received no benefit under the contract, Fibrosa Spolka Akcyjna v. Fairbunt Lawson Combe Barbour Ltd. (1943 H.L.).
This will be the position provided the goods perished before any had been delivered to the buyer.
If, however, he had any benefit under the contract, i.e. some use of the goods, before the goods perished, then he will be unable to recover any of the money he has paid.
It will, of course, seldom happen that after the buyer has had some benefit, the contract is avoided by section 7 because usually by the time the goods are delivered to the buyer risk will have passed to him; section 7 applies only where the goods perish before the risk passes to the buyer.
On the other hand, if the contract is frustrated at common –16 law (as occurred in Howell v. Coupland) the position as to the return of the price to the buyer is now regulated by the Law Reform (Frustrated Contracts) Act 1943 (which does not apply to contracts avoided by section 7).
The position under this Act is that the buyer can recover his money but the court can deduct from that a sum towards expenses incurred by the seller in performing the contract.
Further, the 1943 Act empowers the court to order the buyer to pay a reasonable sum for any benefit he has received under the contract.
This will occur if for example the buyer has had some use of the goods and subsequently they perished thereby frustrating the contract.
It should be emphasised again that this last situation will occur only very seldom, because usually by the time the buyer gets possession of the goods risk will have passed to him and, if the goods perish after risk has passed to the buyer, that will not frustrate the contract.
If the contract is not frustrated, the buyer will not be entitled to the return of any money and will have to pay any money still outstanding.
CHAPTER 5
SELLER NOT THE OWNER
SOMEONE not having the authority to do so, sells or otherwise disposes of goods which do not belong to him.
This may involve an element of roguery but the knotty question which often comes before the courts is ‘Who is the owner?’
Is it the original owner or is it the innocent purchaser?
Whichever of these two is the loser usually suffers a considerable loss.
If it is the buyer he will have to give up goods (or their value) for which he has paid good money.
It is true that whichever is the loser will have a remedy against the unauthorised seller.
However, if the latter is a rogue he is likely to have disappeared and if he can be found will probably be penniless.
There is, then, a problem of ownership and remember, the law uses three words all meaning the same thing, ‘ownership,’‘property’ and ‘title.’
In choosing between the original owner and the innocent purchaser, the law is having to choose between upholding the sanctity of property and giving effect to a commercial transaction.
There is no obvious answer.
The law's solution is to have a general principle in favour of the original owner with a number of exceptions in favour of the innocent purchaser.
The goods will therefore be regarded as belonging to the original owner unless one of the exceptions applies.
The general principle —‘Nemo dat quod non habet’
The general principle is in section 21(1):
‘Subject to this Act.
where goods are so]d by a person who is not their owner, and who does not sell them under the authority or with the consent of the owner, the buyer acquires no better title to the goods than the seller had, unless the owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded from denying the seller's authority to sell.’
This rule that someone without title cannot without authority transfer title, is illustrated by the decision in Greenwood v. Bennett (1972 C.A.).
Bennett, the original owner of a Jaguar car entrusted it to one Searle for some repairs to be carried out.
Searle was a rogue and used it for his own purposes.
He had a crash and damaged it extensively.
Entirely without authority he sold it for £75 to Harper, a garage proprietor who was unaware that Searle was not the owner.
Harper spend f226 on repairing it and sold it to a finance company.
The court held that the car still belonged to Bennett.
Searle did not have title and therefore could not transfer it to Harper.
For the same reason Harper did not transfer title to the finance company.
(There was one further point: Harper carried out work in good faith believing the car to be his; because of this Bennett recovered a car worth more than it would otherwise have been.
It was held that Bennett must compensate Harper for that work by paying him £226).
A claim for conversion
An owner who wishes to bring a claim to recover possession of his goods from someone who has refused to return them can bring a claim for conversion (Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977).
If the owner wishes to bring a claim against someone who has wrongfully sold the owner's goods, his claim will again be for conversion.
Suppose the goods are sold by X to Y who in turn sells them to Z. Suppose the goods belong to O and that X sold them wrongfully and without authority.
We have just seen that the general rule is that since X is not the owner he can not confer ownership on Y, who similarly can not confer ownership on Z. If Z refuses to return the goods to O, O has a claim against Z for conversion of the goods.
Alternatively O may choose to bring a claim for conversion against X or Y. Where O brings his claim against Z, Z will naturally wish to claim against Y who sold to him.
He can do this.
He can claim the return of the price he paid to Y. This claim is based upon a breach of contract by Y in that Y did not have the right to sell the goods and failed to confer any ownership upon his buyer, Z (see paragraph 7–07 below).
The fact that Y may have been quite innocent and have genuinely believed at the time that the goods were his to sell, gives him no defence either to a claim by Z for breach of contract or to a claim by O for conversion.
Y can also reclaim from X the price Y paid to X.
Now suppose that Y had improved the goods (just as Harper did in Greenwood v. Bennett).
The Torts (Interference With Goods) Act 1977, passed since the decision in Greenwood v. Bennett, provides a mechanism by which the innocent improver is to be reimbursed.
If O sues Y for conversion (i.e. for selling O's goods to Z), then O will obtain judgment against Y for  damages equal to the value of the goods on the date of the sale to Z less the deduction of an improvemenh is attributable to the improvement by Y. If O does not sue Y but instead sues Z for conversion, then Z gets the benefit of the improvement allowant allowance.
That allowance is the proportion of the value of the goods which is attributable to the improvement by Y. If O does not sue Y but instead sues Z for conversion, then Z gets the benefit of the improvement allowance.
The judgment obtained by O against Z will not normally be an order to Z to return the goods.
Such an order will be granted only where damages would not be an adequate remedy (e.g. if the goods were unique, or virtually so).
O may, however, obtain judgment against Z in the alternative, i.e. judgment ordering Z either to return the goods or to pay damages equal to their value.
Z is thereby given the option.
In either case Z gets the benefit of the improvement allowance.
In the latter case it is deducted from the damages he has to pay O. Where he returns the goods to O, O must pay Z the improvement allowance.
In our example, this allowance relates to improvements performed by Y. Thus in a claim by Z against Y, Y is entitled to deduct the improvement allowance when returning Z the price paid by Z.
In all of this it has been assumed that the general rule applies and that X, not being the owner could not confer ownership on Y who in turn could not confer ownership on Z. It now remains to examine those exceptional situations where the original owner may lose his ownership, i.e. where title may be conferred by someone who himself has no title.
Estoppel
When an estoppel is raised, the original owner is estopped (precluded) from asserting that the sale was unauthorised.
Thus if an estoppel is raised the unauthorised sale takes effect as if it was authorised — i.e. it transfers ownership to the buyer in the ordinary way (see section 21(1), above).
An estoppel is raised when the original owner by his statements or conduct leads the innocent purchaser to believe that the unauthorised seller in fact has the right to sell the goods.
More accurately, for the innocent purchaser to obtain a good title by estoppel, all the following requirements must be fulfilled:
(i)
The original owner must have made a representation (by statement or conduct) that the seller was entitled to sell the goods.
(ii)
The representation must have been made intentionally or negligently.
(iii)
The representation must have misled the innocent purchaser.
(iv)
The innocent purchaser must have bought (and not merely agreed to buy) the goods.
One problem with the first requirement is what conduct by the original owner will amount to a representation that the seller has the right to sell the goods.
A case where a plea of estoppel succeeded and the innocent purchaser therefore obtained a good title was Eastern Distributors v. Goldring (1957 C.A.).
The facts, however, can be appreciated only with a knowledge of the role of the finance company in a modern hire-purchase transaction (for a full explanation see paragraph 17–06, below).
Briefly, the customer sees at a trader's premises the item he wishes to acquire.
He asks for credit terms and, at the trader's suggestion, he fills in a finance company's hire purchase proposal form, which is in fact an offer made by the customer and addressed to the finance company to acquire the item from the finance company on hire purchase terms.
The customer will leave the completed form with the trader.
The trader himself will fill in another form offering to sell the same item to the finance company.
He will then send both forms to the finance company which will either accept or reject both offers.
If it accepts, it thereby agrees to purchase the item for cash from the trader and at the same time agrees to transfer it on hire-purchase terms to the customer.
In Eastern Distributors v. Goldring, the customer wished to raise a loan on his van.
He and a motor trader got together to deceive the finance company.
They each filled in their respective forms as if the van belonged to the trader and as if the customer wished to acquire the van on hire purchase terms.
Everything appeared in order to the finance company, which accepted the forms believing the trader to be the owner of the van.
Thus it bought the van from the trader and transferred it on hire purchase to the customer.
The customer did not pay his instalments under the hire-purchase agreement and sold the van to X, an innocent purchaser.
The finance company discovered the fraud and the question arose as to who was the owner.
The customer was the original owner and provided he had not in the interim lost his ownership, he transferred that ownership to X. However, the court upheld the finance company's claim that the customer had by the doctrine of estoppel lost his ownership to the finance company.
He had submitted through the trader a form offering to acquire the van on hire-purchase terms.
Thereby he had represented to the finance company that the  van was not his but that it belonged to the trader.
This was an intentional deception.
Since the customer was therefore stopped from asserting his ownership, the finance company obtained good title when it bought the van from the dealer.
It still had that ownership because under a hire purchase agreement property does not pass until the customer has paid all his instalments (see paragraph 1–14 and Chapter 17).
Thus the car did not belong to the customer who therefore could not transfer ownership to X.
In Goldring's case, the customer had done something clearly conveying to the finance company that he did not own the van and that so far as he was concerned the seller (the trader) had every right to sell it.
An act which does not clearly convey that fact is not sufficient to raise an estoppel.
So, if the owner of goods merely allows another person to have possession of them,(e.g. at a left luggage office) that act will not raise an estoppel for it does not convey to others that he considers the person in possession to have the right to dispose of them.
If O lends his car to Q who then unauthorisedly sells it to P, O is still the owner and he can assert that ownership.
In Central Newbury Car Auctions v. Unity Finance (1957 C.A.) a customer wished to acquire a car on hire purchase.
He and the motor trader filled in the usual forms.
Before the finance company's reply was received, the trader allowed the customer to take delivery of the car (together with its registration document).
The customer sold the car to X. The finance company rejected the offers.
It was held that the car still belonged to the trader.
His allowing the customer to have possession of the car did not amount to a representation that the customer had the right to sell it.
His giving him possession also of the registration document made no difference since a registration document is not in the eyes of the law a document of title.
An estoppel will not be raised unless the representation was intentional or negligent.
In Eastern Distributors v. Goldring the original owner (the customer) clearly intended to make the deception.
In Mercantile Credit Co. v. Hamblin (1964 C.A.) the customer had no intention.
Like the customer in the former case, Mrs. Hamblin wished to raise a loan on her vehicle.
She went to a motor trader who told her this could be done.
He agreed that he would enquire as to what terms could be obtained from a finance company and would then telephone Mrs. Hamblin to see if they were acceptable.
He got her to sign a proposal form of a particular finance company.
She believed this to be an application to the finance company for a loan on  the security of her car.
In fact it was the usual proposal form to acquire the car on hire purchase terms.
Placing her confidence and trust in him she was guided by the trader and signed the form in blank and agreed with the trader that, if he succeeded in obtaining terms acceptable to her, he would then be able to fill in the details on the form and send it to the finance company.
However, the trader subsequently filled in the form without having reported back to her and therefore without her authority.
He also filled in the usual trader's form offering to sell the car to the finance company and sent both forms off to the finance company.
The finance company accepted the proposals.
Who now owned the car?
Mrs. Hamblin had not intended to make it appear that the car belonged to the trader.
The court held that neither was she negligent.
She knew nothing of financial matters and had acted quite reasonably in placing her trust and confidence in a motor trader who had a good reputation in the area.
In the absence of intention or negligence, no estoppel could be raised against her.
The car was therefore still hers.
The question of negligence was discussed in Moorgate Mercantile v. Twitchings (1976 H.L.).
Moorgate Mercantile were a finance company which owned a car.
They let it on hire purchase terms to a customer.
Before completing his instalments, the customer without authority sold the car to Twitchings, a car dealer.
Moorgate Mercantile and Twitchings were both members of H.P. Information Ltd.
(H.P.I).
H.P.I. is an organisation which operates a register where finance companies can register their hire purchase agreements so that any other member (e.g. a car dealer) can, before buying a second hand car, check with H.P.I. to see if the car is the subject of a registered hire purchase agreement.
On this occasion Moorgate Mercantile had carelessly failed to register their hire purchase agreement with the result that Twitchings was told by H.P.I. that there was no hire purchase agreement registered in connection with this particular car.
Twitchings claimed that Moorgate Mercantile were estopped from denying that their hire purchase customer was the owner of the car.
This claim failed.
Moorgate Mercantile had not made any representation to Twitchings.
The only statement to Twitchings had been made by H.P.I., namely that there was no registered hire purchase agreement relating to the car in question.
That statement had been true and had in any case not been made by Moorgate Mercantile, since H.P.I. was not an agent of Moorgate Mercantile for the purpose of making such a  statement.
As to negligence it was true that Moorgate Mercantile had been careless in failing to register their hire purchase agreement.
However, carelessness did not amount to negligence unless the carelessness was a breach of a legal duty to take care.
Moorgate Mercantile were under no legal duty to join H.P.I. and, having joined, were under no legal duty to take care to register their hire purchase agreements.
Thus in the  absence of either a deliberate misleading by Moorgate Mercantile or negligence on their part, no estoppel could be raised against them.
Moorgate Mercantile therefore succeeded in their claim against Twitchings for conversion of the car.
(Since the facts of this case occurred, H.P.I. has written into its terms of membership for finance houses an absolute duty to register hire purchase agreements.
Thus if the facts of the case were to occur again, the result might well be different).
An estoppel can be raised only if the representation misled the innocent purchaser.
In Farquharson Bros. v. King (1902 H.L.) a timber firm owned some timber which was in the possession of a dock company.
The firm told the dock company to deal with the timber according to the instructions of a clerk of the firm.
The clerk, a rogue, instructed the dock company to hold the timber to the order of ‘Brown’(which was the clerk under an assumed name).
In his assumed name of Brown he sold the timber to an innocent purchaser.
To whom did the timber belong?
The House of Lords held that it still belonged to the timber firm.
The statement made by the timber firm to the dock company had not come to the attention of the innocent purchaser; it therefore could not have misled him.
The only thing which misled the purchaser was Brown's roguery.
No estoppel could be raised against the timber firm.
Where an innocent purchaser is able to rely upon an estoppel, property in the goods passes to him in the normal way, i.e. as if his seller himself has good title to give.
Thus he will obtain good title if, and when, according to the terms of his contract of purchase, property in the goods is to pass to him.
To put it another way, someone who has ‘bought’ goods (i.e. to whom property has passed under his contract of purchase) can rely upon an estoppel.
Someone who has only agreed to buy (i.e. to whom property has not yet passed) can not do so, Shaw v. Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis (1987 C.A.).
In this case the innocent purchaser had agreed to buy a car from, as he later discovered, someone who did not own it, on terms that property in the car would pass to him upon payment of the price.
It was held that since he had not paid the price, no  property in the goods could have passed to him.
Therefore he could not claim a good title by raising an estoppel against the true owner.
Owner's signature on document intended to have legal effect
Quite apart from the doctrine of estoppel, there may be another alternative basis on which the owner may be precluded from denying the seller's authority to sell — namely where the owner has signed a document clearly conveying the implication that the seller is entitled or authorised to sell the goods.
There is a rule that normally a person is bound by his signature, Saunders v. Anglia Building Society (1970 H.L.).
This rule is not confined to someone signing a fully completed document.
It applies also to someone signing a document with the blanks for the particular transaction not filled in but agreeing to, or authorising, another to fill in those blanks later, United Dominions Trust v. Western (1975 C.A.).
Thus in Mercantile Credit v. Hamblin (paragraph 5–07 above), if Mrs. Hamblin had authorised or agreed to the trader filling in the proposal form, the result of the case would have been different.
Mrs. Hamblin would have been precluded from denying the trader's authority to sell the car.
This would have been, not because of the doctrine of estoppel (which would have required either a deliberate misleading or negligence by her), but because of her signature on a document which, as was apparent on the face, was intended to have legal effect and which she had authorised the trader to complete.
There are two particular exceptions to this rule, i.e. where the signer will not be bound by his signature.
The first is where he can plead non est factum.
This plea will succeed where he can show two things:(i) that he was radically mistaken about the nature or effect of the document (ii) that he was not careless in signing it, Saunders v. Anglian Building Society.
The mistake in Mercantile Credit v. Hamblin would not have been sufficiently radical to justify a plea of non est factum.
The hire purchase proposal (i.e. involving the sale of the car by the trader to the finance company and the re-acquisition of the car by Mrs. Hamblin on hire purchase terms) was not radically different in substance from a loan on the security of the car.
The second exception could arise in a Mercantile Credit v. Hamblin type of situation.
It would arise if the motor trader were the agent of the finance company in dealing with the customer.
At common law the dealer is not normally the agent either of the finance company or of the customer.
However, section 56 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 now makes him in most cases the statutory agent of the finance company (see paragraphs 22–06 to 22–07 below).
The customer can not be bound to the finance company by his signature on a document which the finance company's agent knows does not reflect the customer's intention.
Mercantile agents
The Factors Act 1889, section 2(1) provides:
‘Where a mercantile agent is, with the consent of the owner, in possession of goods or of the documents of title to goods, any sale, pledge or other disposition of the goods, made by him when acting in the ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent, shall, subject to the provisions of this Act be as valid as if he were expressly authorised by the owner of the goods to make the same; provided that the person taking under the disposition takes in good faith, and has not at the time of the disposition notice that the person making the disposition has not authority to make the same.’
There are here six requirements to be fulfilled in order for an unauthorised sale by a mercantile agent to confer good title upon an innocent purchaser.
(i)
The seller must be a mercantile agent, i.e. a factor.
Broadly, a mercantile agent is an independent agent acting in a way of business to whom someone else entrusts his goods and upon whom is conferred authority of a type referred to in the Factors Act 1889, section 1(1).
That section provides:
‘The expression ‘mercantile agent’ shall mean a mercantile agent having in the customary course of his business as such agent authority either to sell goods or to consign goods for the purpose of sale, or to buy goods, or to raise money on the security of goods.’
This statutory definition is not complete.
In order to be a mercantile agent, an agent must have not merely the customary authority referred to in the statute but also three further characteristics.
First he must be independent from the person (his principal) for whom he is agent.
A ‘mere servant or shopman’ or ‘caretaker’is therefore not a mercantile agent.
Secondly, he must be acting as agent in a way of business.
This ‘business’ characteristic does not require that he should regularly carry on business as an agent but simply that on the occasion in question he was acting as a business proposition.
In Lowther v. Harris (1926 K.B.) an agent was entrusted with a tapestry with a view to selling it.
He was instructed not actually to conclude a sale without first referring back to his principal; he was to receive commission if a sale was concluded.
In fact he sold the tapestry to an innocent purchaser without first having referred back to his principal.
Wright J. held that the agent who had no general occupation as an agent, who normally bought and sold goods on his own account and who was the agent for only the one principal, was nevertheless a mercantile agent.
Therefore since all the requirements in section 2 of the Factors Act were fulfilled, the innocent purchaser had good title to the tapestry.
The third characteristic referred to above is that the agent must be authorised to deal with goods in his own name without disclosing his agency.
In Rolls Razor Co. v. Cox (1967 C.A) the court had to consider the status of some travelling salesmen.
Lord Denning M.R. said,
‘The usual characteristics of a factor are these.
He is an agent entrusted with the possession of goods of several principals, or sometimes only one principal, for the purpose of sale in his own name without disclosing the name of this principal and he is remunerated by a commission.
These salesmen lacked one of those characteristics.
They did not sell in their own names but in the name and on behalf of their principals, the Company.
They are agents pure and simple and not factors.’
Before leaving the question of who is a mercantile agent, it should be said that someone who is not an agent cannot be a mercantile agent.
It can be difficult sometimes when someone takes goods on ‘sale or return’ terms to decide whether he was acting as an agent or as principal (see Chapter 1).
(ii)
The mercantile agent must be in possession of the goods or documents of title; and he must have that possession at the time he sells, pledges or otherwise disposes of the goods.
An example of a document of title is a bill of lading (i.e. the document given by a shipowner acknowledging that he has received goods which have been shipped).
A motor vehicle's registration document is not, however, a document of title.
Thus, a mercantile agent in possession of the registration book  but not of the vehicle itself can not confer good title under section 2 of the Factors Act, Beverley Acceptances v. Oakely (1982 C.A.).
A mercantile agent in possession of the vehicle itself might well be able to confer good title on an innocent purchaser, but the sale to the latter must occur whilst the mercantile agent is still in possession.
Imagine a mercantile agent who obtains possession of the goods (perhaps by borrowing them from the owner) and who shows them to X, an innocent prospective purchaser.
The mercantile agent then will not confer good title on X under section 2 of the Factors Act if he does not make the contract of sale with X until after he has returned the goods to their true owner, Beverley Acceptances v. Oakley.
(iii)
The mercantile agent must be in possession of the goods or documents of title in his capacity as a mercantile agent.
The car owner who leaves his car with a garage for repairs to be carried out does not consent to the garage having possession in its capacity as a mercantile agent (i.e. as a dealer).
Therefore the garage cannot confer good title under section 2 of the Factors Act.
(iv)
The mercantile agent must be in possession of the goods or document of title with the consent of the owner.
This consent is presumed in the absence of evidence to be contrary and withdrawal of consent is of no effect until that withdrawal is brought to the notice of the person taking the goods — Factors Act, section 2(3) and 2(4).
The fact that consent was obtained by a trick or by fraud is irrelevant so long as the consent was given to the agent in his capacity as a mercantile agent.
For the consent to be operative it must be such as to clothe the agent with with apparent authority to sell the goods.
This would occur in the case of a second hand car only if the owner consented to the dealer having possession not only of the car but also of the registration book and the ignition key.
Two cases illustrate the point.
In Pearson v. Rose and Young (1950 C.A.) the owner left his car with a dealer with instructions for the latter not to sell it but to see what offers could be obtained for it.
The owner did not intend to leave the registration document but showed it to the dealer who arranged a trick whereby the owner was called away on an imaginary emergency thereby forgetting the registration document.
The dealer sold the car.
The dealer was in possession of the car with consent  and in his capacity as a mercantile agent, since the possession was with a view to an eventual sale, but he was not in possession of the registration document with the consent of the owner.
As regards the registration document, it was not a case of obtaining consent by a trick; he had obtained the possession by a trick but he had obtained no consent at all to that possession.
This case was followed in Stadium Finance v. Robbins (1962 C.A.) where the owner left his car with a dealer with instructions to see what offers could be obtained for it.
He retained the ignition key though he accidentally left the registration document locked in the glove compartment.
The dealer supplied his own key, found the registration document and sold the car.
It was held that the owner had not clothed the dealer with apparent authority since he had retained the ignition key and not consented to the dealer having possession of the registration document.
In each of these cases, therefore, the innocent purchaser acquired no title to the car which still belonged to the original owner.
This was extremely harsh on the innocent purchaser who bought goods in good faith from a mercantile agent and who could not reasonably have suspected that anything was wrong.
Sometimes the ownership of goods is split.
This occurs for example when goods are pledged as security for a loan.
The pledgor gives the pledgee (the lender) some rights but does not part with all rights of ownership.
The pledgor and pledgee together combine to constitute ‘the owner.’
Someone in possession with the consent of them both can be said to be in possession ‘with consent of the owner.’
Lloyds Bank v. Bank of America (1938 C.A.) involved dealings not with goods but with documents of title.
The owner, a mercantile agent, pledged bills of lading with Lloyds Bank.
Lloyds Bank released the bills back to him so that he could sell them and thereby obtain the money to pay off the loan from the Bank.
However, instead of selling them, he pledged them without authority from Lloyds with the Bank of America.
It was held that all the requirements of section 2 of the Factors Act were complied with including the requirement that the mercantile agent be in possession of goods or of the documents of title with the consent of ‘the owner.’
Therefore the Bank of America took its title entirely free from the interest of Lloyds Bank.
Lloyds Bank, therefore, lost its security.
(v)
The mercantile agent in disposing of the goods must have been acting in the ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent.
Clearly selling a second-hand car without an ignition key or registration document would not be acting in the ordinary course of business.
This was taken one step further in Stadium Finance v. Robbins where it was held that this requirement was not complied with.
Willmer L.J.
said,
‘A sale involving delivery to the hirer of the car without its registration book would not in my judgment be in the ordinary course of business.
Following Pearson's case, I think the same applies to a sale involving delivery…of a registration book obtained by larceny or fraud or other unlawful means.’
On the other hand, the agent does not have to have been acting within the ordinary course of his own particular business or even within the normal course of business of his particular type of trade.
It is sufficient that he was acting within the ordinary course of business of mercantile agents generally.
The mercantile agent in Oppenheimer v. Attenborough (1908 C.A.) was a diamond broker.
Without authority he pledged the diamonds entrusted to him.
Although diamond brokers do not ordinarily have authority to pledge diamonds in their possession it was held that the broker had acted in the ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent.
The pledgee therefore obtained good title to the diamonds.
(vi)
The person taking the goods must have taken them in good faith without notice of the agent's lack of authority.
The burden of proof lies on him to prove that he was in good faith, etc.
(Heap v. Motorists Advisory Agency (1923)).
He will find it difficult to do this in circumstances where he is ‘put upon notice.
’ An example can be found in the judgment of Lord Alverstone C.J. in Oppenheimer v. Attenborough:
‘there may be particular agents, such for instance as auctioneers, by whom a pledge would be such a departure from the ordinary course of their business as to put the pledgee upon notice.’
Markets overt
Section 22 of the Sale of Goods Act provides:
‘Where goods are sold in market overt, according to the usage of the market, the buyer acquires a good title to the goods, provided he buys them in good faith and without  notice of any defect or want of title on the part of the seller.’
The law relating to markets overt is an anomalous survival of a bygone era.
The innocent purchaser of goods openly offered for sale in the City of London or in a market overt obtains a good title to those goods irrespective of the title of the seller.
It is therefore not surprising that few questions are asked by the purchasers in markets overt and that these places are commonly used for disposing of stolen property.
There are certain requirements to be complied with in order for a purchaser to obtain a better title than the seller:
(i)
The location must be a shop in the City of London or a market overt.
A market overt is a market, constituted under statute, by royal charter or by long standing custom.
There are no markets overt in Wales or Scotland.
(ii)
The sale must be according to the usage of the market in question.
In Bishopgate Motor Finance Corporation v. Transport Brakes Ltd. (1949 C.A.) someone who was hiring a car under a hire purchase agreement offered it for sale by auction at Maidstone market.
This failed and when the auction was over he sold it by private treaty (agreement).
It was held that Maidstone market was a market overt because it was established by charter in 1747 and that the innocent purchaser obtained a good title to the car because it was customary at Maidstone market for goods to be sold by private treaty after the auction.
(iii)
The goods must be openly displayed for sale to the public.
A sale in the City of London by a member of the public to a shopkeeper would not satisfy this requirement and nor would a sale which took place in a private part of the shop, Hargreave v. Spink (1892 Q.B.).
The importance of the openness of the transaction was emphasised in Reid v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner (1973) where the Court or Appeal held that the sale must occur between sunrise and sunset.
A pair of Adam candelabra had been stolen from Mr. Reid's home.
They were sold at the New Caledonian Market in Southwark during the half light before sunrise to an art dealer who did not know they were stolen.
It  was apparently customary for business to be transacted in those early hours.
It was held that the candelabra still belonged to Mr. Reid and no title passed to the art dealer because the transaction was concluded before sunrise.
For section 22 to operate, the goods need to be displayed in a place where those who stand or pass by can see them.
(iv)
The purchaser must be bona fide and unaware of the seller's lack of title.
Sale under a voidable title
Section 23 of the Sale of Goods Act provides:
‘Where the seller of goods has a voidable title to them, but his title has not been avoided at the time of the sale, the buyer acquires a good title to the goods, provided he buys them in good faith and without notice of the seller's defect of title.’
A voidable title is less than perfect and yet section 23 allows a seller with a voidable title to confer a perfect title upon an innocent purchaser.
A void title on the other hand is no title at all and an innocent purchaser who buys from someone with a void title can derive no benefit from section 23 (although, of course, he might acquire good title by virtue of some other exception to the ‘nemo dat’ principle).
What is a voidable title and how it differs from a void title can best be shown by an example: A owns some goods which he sells to B who in turn sells them to C. If the first contract (i.e. Between A and B) is valid then title passes from A to B. If it is void for any reason then it is no contract at all and no ownership passes to B. If it is voidable then it is initially valid but can be avoided (set aside) later.
Under a voidable contract ownership passes to B in the normal way but will pass back to A if and when the contract is later avoided.
The commonest example of a voidable contract is one where a party has by making a mesrepresentation induced the other party to enter the contract.
This gives the latter (the innocent party) the right subsequently to avoid the contract (see Chapter 6).
In our example, if B has induced A to sell him the goods by making a misrepresentation, then B will acquire only a voidable title.
A will have the right to set the contract aside and to demand the return of the goods.
If, however, B sells the goods to C before A finds out that he has been duped, then C (provided he was  innocent) will get a perfect title by virtue of section 23 and A will therefore be unable to recover the goods.
Although a misrepresentation by B can render the contract between A and B voidable, there can be present some factor which renders that contract completely void.
The difficulties have arisen mainly in cases where B has misrepresented to A his (B's) identity.
In these circumstances, the contract between A and B is void if the two following characteristics are both present:
(i)
The buyer's identity was a vital factor for the seller (A) in deciding to make the contract.
(ii)
The seller when making the contract was intending to deal with someone other than B.
In Cundy v. Lindsay (1878 H.L.) the seller, Lindsay, received a letter from a rogue called Blenkarn from an address at 37, Wood Street, Cheapside.
The letter ordered some goods and was signed by Blenkarn in such a way that the signature looked like ‘Blenkiron & co .
’ Lindsay knew of a reputable firm Blenkiron & Co. who traded from 123, Wood Street.
Without checking Blenkiron's address, Lindsay despatched the goods to ‘Messrs. Blenkiron & Co., 37, Wood Street.
’ Blenkarn received the goods but never paid for them and sold them to Cundy who knew nothing of his fraud.
The House of Lords held that the contract between Lindsay and Blenkarn was void and that therefore the goods still belonged to Lindsay.
Cundy v. Lindsay involved a transaction (between Lindsay and Blenkarn) conducted through the post.
In a contract made between parties face to face the seller will find it difficult to show that to him the identity of the buyer was a vital factor in deciding to make the contract.
In the absence of strong evidence to the contrary, the law presumes that in face to face agreements the seller is prepared to deal with the person in front of him — whoever that may be.
This is particularly so in the case of a shopkeeper.
In Phillips v. Brooks (1919 K.B.) a rogue called North entered a jeweller's shop, selected some items including a ring and asked to pay by cheque and to take the ring with him.
The shopkeeper agreed to this after the rogue told him that he (the rogue) was Sir George Bullough.
The rogue took the ring to Brooks, a firm of pawnbrokers, and pledged it with them for £350.
The cheque given to the jeweller proved worthless and he sued the pawnbroker to recover the ring.
It was held that the contract between the jeweller and rogue was not void but merely voidable.
Since it had not been set aside  before the pawnbroker took the ring, the pawnbroker acquired good title to the ring.
Of course, he did not get complete ownership for he did not buy the ring but the limited title he got was perfectly valid and he could enforce that against the jeweller.
Phillips v. Brooks was followed by the Court of Appeal in Lewis v. Averay (1971).
Lewis advertised his car for sale.
A rogue responded to the advertisement.
He told Lewis that he was Richard Green, a well known film actor (which was untrue).
They agreed on a price of £450 and after seeing ‘proof’ of the buyer's identity as Richard Green (a pass for Pinewood Studios), Lewis agreed to accept a cheque.
The rogue took the car and registration documents.
The cheque was worthless.
The rogue posed as Mr. Lewis in selling the car to Averay, an innocent purchaser.
The court held that there was a contract between Lewis and the rogue and that therefore Averay now had perfect title to the car.
Lord Denning M.R. said,
‘When a dealing is had between a seller like Mr. Lewis and a person who is actually there present before him, then the presumption in law is that there is a contract, even though there is a fraudulent impersonation by the buyer representing himself as a different man than he is.
There is a contract made with the very person there who is present in person.
It is liable no doubt to be avoided for fraud but it is still a good contract…’
In both the last cases, the innocent purchaser (the pawnbroker in Phillips v. Brooks, and Mr Averay in Lewis v. Averay) acquired the goods before the contract between the original owner and the rogue had been avoided.
If, before the innocent purchaser bought the goods, the original owner had avoided his contract with the rogue, ownership in the goods would have reverted to the original owner.
If this had happened the rogue could not have conferred title upon the innocent purchaser (unless under some other exception to the nemo dat principle) for the rogue would no longer have had a voidable title.
The normal method of the original owner to ‘avoid’ the contract is for him to inform the rogue that he does so.
However, it is often impossible to locate the rogue.
In this case the contract is avoided as soon as the original owner has done all that he reasonably can.
Car and Universal Finance v. Caldwell (1965 C.A.) was another case where a rogue bought a  car and by fraud induced the seller to accept a cheque which proved to be worthless.
On discovering this the seller immediately informed the police and the Automobile Association.
It was held that this operated to avoid the contract.
After this, but before the car or rogue had been traced, the rogue sold the car to an innocent purchaser.
Since, at the time the rogue sold the car, his title had been avoided, it was held that the purchaser acquired no title under section 23.
Seller in possession
Two provisions in two different statutes are almost identical, section 24 of the Sale of Goods Act and section 8 of the Factors Act 1889.
Section 8 provides:
‘Where a person, having sold goods, continues, or is, in possession of the goods or of the documents of title to the goods, the delivery or transfer by that person, or by a mercantile agent acting for him, of the goods or documents of title under any sale, pledge, or other disposition thereof, or under any agreement for sale, pledge or other disposition thereof, to any person receiving the same in good faith and without notice of the previous sale, shall have the same effect as if the person making the delivery or transfer were expressly authorised by the owner of the goods to make the same.’
This relates to the situation where A sells or agrees to sell goods to B and then later sells or agrees to sell them to C. To whom do the goods belong?
If under the contract between A and B property had not yet passed to B (see Chapter 3), then A was still the owner when he sold to C. Still being the owner, A could pass that ownership to C. One has to examine the two contracts, B's and C's, and find out under which of them property was to pass first.
If it is C's then C will be the owner.
Usually (i.e. in the case of a sale of specific goods in a deliverable state, see Chapter 3), property will have passed first to B (i. e. at the time he made his contract).
In this case, following the nemo dat principle, B is now the owner; they were B's goods at the time A sold them to C and therefore A could not, without B's authority, confer title upon C. This result would be, different, however, if C could show that C's contract with A fell within one of the exceptions to the nemo dat principle.
The statutory provisions in section 8 of the Factors Act and section 24 of the Sale of Goods Act constitute one of those  exceptions and were designed specifically to help someone in C's position.
In order for C to acquire good title under these provisions, a number of requirements must be fulfilled.
(i)
The seller must have been in possession of the goods or documents of title.
The point here is that the first purchaser can safeguard himself by taking immediate delivery and not leaving the goods or documents of title with the seller.
The seller's possession does not have to be a ‘personal possession.’
If they were in the possession of a warehouseman (or other agent) holding them on behalf of the seller, that is sufficient.
In City Fur Manufacturing Co. v. Fureenbond (1937 K.B.) A owned some skins which were stored for him at an independent warehouse.
A sold them to B who did not collect them.
Later, A pledged them to C. On A's instructions the warehouseman handed them over to C who therefore acquired good title to the goods under section 25(1) of the Sale of Goods Act 1893 (now section 24 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979).
The nature of the seller's possession is immaterial.
So if A sells goods to B who then decides to leave them for A to repair, A is a person who ‘having sold goods continues or is in possession of the goods,’ Pacific Motor Auctions v. Motor Credits (1965 P.C.).
If A then sells and delivers them to an innocent purchaser, the latter will acquire good title.
It does not matter that A was at the time in possession in his capacity, not as seller, but as repairer.
(ii)
There must be a delivery to the subsequent purchaser of the goods or documents of title.
In Nicholson v. Harper (1895) A owned some goods stored for him at a warehouse.
He sold them to B who did not take delivery.
The warehouse proprietor was unaware of B's purchase and himself bought them from A. It was held that the warehouse proprietor did not acquire good title, since being already in possession of the goods he did not take delivery under the contract of sale.
(iii)
The subsequent purchaser must be ‘in good faith and without notice of the previous sale.’
In Worcester Works Finance v. Cooden Engineering (1971 C.A.) all the requirements of the section were fulfilled.
X sold a car to Y (a car dealer) who in turn sold it to Z (a finance company).
The reason for the sale  by Y to Z was that Z at the same time accepted a hire purchase proposal relating to the same car from M, a customer of Y's.
Y (the car dealer) was fraudulent and two things occurred which ought not to have done.
First, the cheque which Y had given X when Y took delivery of the car from X, was dishonoured.
Second, Y never gave possession of the car to his customer (M) as he should have done after the finance company (Z) had accepted the hire purchase proposal.
After Y's cheque to X was dishonoured, X (with Y's acquiescence) repossessed the car from Y's premises.
At the time of this repossession by X the car clearly belonged to Z. This was because X had sold it to Y who had sold it to Z. It was held, however, that Y, in allowing X to repossess the car, was within the section.
Having sold the car to Z, Y was a seller in possession of it.
Since he had not delivered it to his customer (M) he had ‘continued’ in possession (albeit wrongfully).
His allowing X to repossess the car amounted to a ‘delivery or transfer’ of it under a ‘disposition.’
This was because it amounted to a transfer back to X of property in the car (because Y's cheque had not been met) in return for X waiving any right to enforce payment from Y. At the time of the repossession, X was unaware of Y's sale to Z and thus by repossessing the car with Y's acquiescence, X obtained ownership of it by virtue of section 25(1) of the 1893 Act (i.e. section 24 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979).
Buyer in possession
There is normally no problem because a buyer in possession of goods will usually in fact be the owner of them, i.e. property will have passed to him (see Chapter 3).
Being the owner, if he sells the goods he will be able to pass on that ownership to his purchaser.
If he himself has not paid for them then the person who sold him the goods will be able to sue him for the price but will have lost any chance of recovering the goods.
However, it is possible in some circumstances for the buyer to take delivery of the goods before property has passed to him.
This is most likely to occur where he agrees with his seller that property shall not pass to him until he has paid for them.
This occurred in Weiner v. Gill (see paragraph 3–18).
In this situation he cannot confer good title on the sub-purchaser unless that sale falls under an exception to the nemo dat principle.
The most likely exception is that contained in two almost –33 identical statutory provisions, section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act and section 9 of the Factors Act 1889.
This latter reads:
‘Where a person, having bought or agreed to buy goods, obtains with the consent of the seller possession of the goods or documents of title to the goods, the delivery or transfer, by that person or by a mercantile agent acting for him, of the goods or documents of title, under any sale, pledge, or other disposition thereof, or under any agreement for sale, pledge or other disposition thereof, to any person receiving the same in good faith and without notice of any lien or other right of the original seller in respect of the goods, shall have the same effect as if the person making the delivery or transfer were a mercantile agent in possession of the goods or documents of title with the consent of the owner.’
The requirements for the operation of this exception to the nemo dat principle are as follows:
(i)
The person selling (pledging, etc.) must be someone who has ‘bought or agreed to buy.’
Someone who has taken only an option to buy has not ‘bought or agreed to buy.’
This excludes someone who has taken goods on ‘sale or return’ terms, Edwards v. Vaughan (1910 C.A.).
For the same reason, someone hiring goods under a hire purchase agreement is also excluded.
Therefore if the hirer sells the goods, section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act and section 9 of the Factors Act will not operate to give his purchaser a good title.
This is apparent from Helby v. Matthews (see Chapter 17), where someone who was hiring a piano on hire purchase terms, sold it to an innocent purchaser.
The House of Lords held that the hirer had not ‘bought or agreed to buy’ the piano which therefore still belonged to the person from whom it had been hired.
In the light of this decision it is easy to understand why hire purchase has become popular with traders and finance companies as a means of supplying goods on credit.
It has been held that a buyer under a conditional sale agreement is someone who ‘bought or agreed to buy,’ Lee v. Butler (see Chapter 17).
However, that position has been radically altered by the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
A buyer under a conditional sale agreement which is a consumer credit agreement within the meaning of that Act (see Chapter 19), is for the purposes of section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act and section 9 of the Factors Act, not someone who has ‘bought or agreed to buy,’(Consumer Credit Act 1974, Schedule 4 and section 25(2) of the Sale of Goods Act).
We have already seen that someone with a voidable title can nevertheless transfer to an innocent purchaser a perfect title, provided he does so before his title is avoided.
However, if the transaction falls within section 25 (or section 9 of the Factors Act), he can pass on a good title even after his voidable title has been avoided, Newtons of Wembley v. Williams (1965 C.A.).
The reason is that, even though his title has been avoided, he is still someone who has ‘bought or agreed to buy’ the goods.
In Newtons of Wembley v. Williams a rogue bought a car and persuaded the seller to accept a cheque.
When the cheque was dishonoured the seller did all he could to trace the rogue and car and he informed the police.
After this but before the rogue was traced, the rogue took the car along to a market in Warren Street (where dealers commonly sold cars) and he sold it to an innocent purchaser.
The Court of Appeal held that the innocent purchaser acquired good title under section 9 of the Factors Act.
(ii)
The person selling the goods must have been a buyer ‘in possession,’ i. e. he must have obtained ‘with the consent of the seller, possession of the goods or documents of title to the goods.’
Two principles derive from Cahn v. Pockett's Bristol Channel Steam Packet Co. (1899 C.A.).
First, it is sufficient that he obtains possession with the seller's consent and it is immaterial whether that consent is later withdrawn.
Secondly, it is immaterial whether or not he had obtained possession before he made the contract with the innocent purchaser; it is sufficient that the possession was obtained before he transferred or delivered the goods or documents of title to the innocent purchaser.
The facts were that B agreed to buy goods from S. S sent to B a bill of lading together with a bill of exchange (see Chapter 3, paragraph 3–25 above).
B did not, as he should have done, sign and return the bill of exchange.
This meant that property did not pass to B (see section 19, paragraph 3–25 above).
However, B had already agreed to sell the goods to Cahn and, on receiving the documents from S, he transferred the bill of lading (the document of title to the goods) to Cahn.
It was held that Cahn acquired good title to the goods by the operation of section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act.
The question whether the person selling had been a buyer ‘in possession’ arose in Four Point (Garage Ltd. v. Carter (1985 C.A.).
An innocent purchaser, Mr. Carter, agreed to  buy a new Ford Escort XR3i from X, a car dealer.
X, who did not have one in stock, contracted to buy one from Four Point Garage.
Under the terms of this contract, property in the car was not to transfer to X until he had paid Four Point Garage.
Mr. Carter paid X for the car.
At X's request Four Point Garage delivered the car direct to Mr. Carter who believed himself to be taking delivery from X. X became insolvent without ever paying Four Point Garage.
The latter claimed that the car was still theirs since X had never paid and property had therefore never passed to X. It was held, however, that Mr. Carter had obtained good title under section 25.
When Four Point Garage, at X's request, delivered direct to Mr. Carter, it was exactly the same as if X had taken delivery from Four Point Garage and himself delivered the car to Mr. Carter.
In other words, X was deemed to have been a buyer ‘in possession’ and deemed to have delivered the car to the innocent purchaser.
(iii)
There must be a delivery or transfer of the goods or documents of title to the innocent sub-purchaser.
Where documents of title are involved it will usually turn out that the buyer transfers to his sub-purchaser the same document of title which he received from his seller.
This occurred in Cahn v. Pockett's.
The requirement is equally complied with if he receives a document of title from his seller and then transfers to the innocent sub-purchaser a different document of title relating to the same goods, Mount v. Jay (1960 Q.B.).
(iv)
The buyer in possession must have acted in the normal course of business of a mercantile agent.
This may seem a little absurd since the buyer in possession may well not be a mercantile agent.
It is, however, implicit in the closing words of both section 9 of the Factors Act and section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act.
This was held to be so by the Court of Appeal in Newtons of Wembley v. Williams.
The sale in that case (see above) was in fact in the ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent since car dealers did commonly sell cars in Warren Street.
(v)
The sub-purchaser must be bona fide and unaware that the original seller has any rights in respect of the goods.
The seller's lien and other rights will be explained in Chapter 12.
If any one of the above requirements is not fulfilled, the sub-purchaser will not acquire good title by virtue of the two sections under consideration.
However, it is always possible that the person who sold him the goods, later acquires the title to them.
This can happen if, for example, the sub-purchaser bought the goods from someone who was hiring them on hire purchase terms.
Normally under a hire purchase agreement as soon as the hirer pays off all moneys due under the agreement, the goods become the hirer's property.
Thus if the hirer subsequently pays off all the remaining instalments, ownership will pass to the hirer and straight on to the purchaser from the hirer.
This process is known as ‘feeding the title.’
It means that the purchaser from the hirer does eventually acquire good title, albeit somewhat delayed, Butterworth v. Kingsway Motors (see paragraph 7–09 below).
We have seen that section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act and section 9 of the Factors Act typically apply where a seller lets his buyer take possession but retains property (title to the goods) until the buyer pays the price.
There is then a risk that the buyer, before he has paid and therefore before he has acquired title, sells and delivers the goods to a sub-purchaser who is unaware that he is buying from someone who has no title.
The theory behind the sections is that, if an owner of goods agrees to sell them to someone and retains title but nevertheless lets the buyer have possession, that owner must bear the consequences (i.e. loss of title) if the buyer then sells and delivers the goods to an innocent sub-purchaser.
Thus the sections give good title to the innocent sub-purchaser.
Typically then they operate to defeat the title of the unpaid seller (let us call him C) who has entrusted his goods to a buyer who, without paying C, has in turn sold them to an innocent purchaser.
In National Mutual General Insurance Association Ltd. v. Jones (1988 H.L.) the issue was whether the sections could operate to defeat the title of someone much earlier in the chain of events than C. Thieves had stolen a car and sold it to A who sold it to C (a car dealer) who sold it to D (another car dealer) who sold it to Jones.
Jones claimed to have good title by virtue of the two sections, thereby defeating the title of the owner from whom the thieves had stolen the car.
The House of Lords rejected this argument and held that the two sections could defeat the title only of an owner who had entrusted possession of his goods to a buyer.
Therefore the two sections could not take title away from the owner from whom the goods had been stolen.
Disposition of motor vehicles under the Hire Purchase Act 1964, Part III
Part III is all that remains of the 1964 Act.
The rest has been repealed.
We have just seen that a hirer under a hire purchase agreement is not someone who has ‘bought or agreed to buy’ for the purpose of section 25 of the Sale of Goods Act.
This meant that an innocent purchaser could buy a car from such a hirer only to discover at some later date that the car did not after all belong to him.
The owner could reclaim the car and was entitled to come along and seize it.
Part III of the 1964 Act was designed to protect the innocent purchaser in this situation.
The purchaser acquires good title provided the following requirements are fulfilled:
(i)
The seller must be someone who is hiring the vehicle under a hire purchase agreement or buying it under a conditional sale agreement.
The nature of these two types of agreement will be explained in Chapter 17.
(ii)
The purchaser must be a ‘private purchaser.’
That is someone who is not a dealer (or finance house) carrying on business in the motor trade.
Dealers do not need the same protection since they know the importance of checking to see whether the seller is the owner of the car.
Thus a car dealer does not obtain the protection and that is so even if he is buying the vehicle for his own private purposes and not for his business purposes, Stevenson v. Beverley Bentinck (1976 C.A.).
It is possible for Part III of the 1964 Act to operate even though the hirer sells the car to a dealer.
Although the Act gives no protection to a dealer, it will give protection to the first private purchaser providing he was bona fide, etc.
So if the dealer sells the car to an innocent private purchaser, the latter will acquire good title.
(iii)
The goods involved must be a motor vehicle.
Thus the decision would be the same today, if the facts of Helby v. Matthews (a piano) were again to come before the courts.
(iv)
The private purchaser must be bona fide and unaware of any relevant hire purchase or conditional sale agreement.
In Barker v. Bell (1971 C.A.) the private purchaser of a motor car believed what he was told by the vendor — namely that the latter had bought the car under a hire purchase agreement from B finance company.
The vendor showed him a receipt from B finance company across which was written ‘final payment.’
In fact, unknown to the purchaser, the vendor was hiring the car under a hire purchase agreement with A finance company.
It was held that the purchaser was unaware of any relevant hire purchase agreement.
Lord Denning M.R. said,
’…a purchaser is only affected by notice if he has actual notice that the car is on hire purchase.
He is not affected merely by being told that it was previously on hire purchase which has now been paid off.’
The purchaser therefore obtained good title to the car.
(v)
The transaction under which the private purchaser buys the goods must be an ordinary sale, or a hire purchase or conditional sale agreement.
Thus the 1964 Act gives no protection in the event of a pledge.
Having looked at the requirements, it remains to point out that there are no financial limits on the operation of the 1964 Act.
It is immaterial for how much the car was being hired or bought, or how much credit was involved, and equally it is immaterial whether the hirer or buyer was a body corporate.
The 1964 Act, then, gives protection to a bona fide private purchaser who buys a motor vehicle unaware that the seller is hiring or buying it under a hire purchase or conditional sale agreement.
For example, O supplies a car to P on hire purchase terms and P, before he has finished paying off his instalments, sells the car to a bona fide private purchaser, Q, who is unaware of the hire purchase agreement.
The Act gives good title to Q, but only as against 0.
Thus, if O were not the owner but had, for example stolen the car (or bought it from someone who had stolen it) then the true owner (i. e. from whom the car was stolen) will still have good title (i. e. unless one of the other exceptions to the nemo dat principle applies).
Sale under a common law or statutory power
Certain persons are given the right by common law or statute in certain circumstances to sell the goods of another.
Examples are a pawnbroker selling the pledgor's goods when the loan is not repaid and an innkeeper selling the guest's property when  the bill is not paid.
When a sale is made under a common law or statutory power the purchaser acquires good title to the goods — Sale of Goods Act, section 21(2) (a).
It is also to be noted that under the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977 a person such as a repairer, improver, valuer or storer has the right to sell uncollected goods.
He must first serve upon the bailor (i.e. the person who left the goods for repair, treatment or valuation, etc.) a notice containing certain details of the intended sale.
If after expiry of the notice the goods remain uncollected and the right of the sale is duly exercised, the purchaser will obtain good title as against the bailor.
However, if the bailor was not the owner but had, for example, stolen them before leaving them for repair or treatment, etc. then the true owner will still have good title (i.e. unless one of the other exceptions to the nemo dat principle applies).
Sale under a court order
The High Court has power in certain circumstances to order the sale of goods.
If it exercises this power, the purchaser acquires good title, notwithstanding any claim by the original owner — Sale of Goods Act, section 21(2) (b).
Effect of writ of execution
When judgment is given in court for a sum of damages, the defendant usually pays up.
If he does not, the successful plaintiff can enforce the judgment by causing a writ of execution to be issued.
It is then the  sheriff's duty to carry it out.
He has the legal right to seize enough of the defendant's goods to satisfy the judgment.
He has this right in relation to goods which the defendant owns at the time the sheriff receives the writ.
Anyone who after time purchases goods from the defendant therefore runs the risk of having them seized by the sheriff.
However, section 138 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 protects the purchaser from this provided that when he bought the goods he was bona fide and unaware of any writ of execution relating to the defendant.
CHAPTER 6
MISREPRESENTATION
THE seller who makes a false statement in connection with the supply of goods can find himself liable in one or more of a number of ways.
There are three principal ways.
First, he may be liable to conviction of an offence under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968.
This will be considered in Chapter 16.
Secondly, he may be liable to his purchaser for breach of a term of his contract — a matter to be considered in the next chapter.
Thirdly, the purchaser may have a remedy for misrepresentation.
WHAT AMOUNTS TO AN ACTIONABLE MISREPRESENTATION?
A misrepresentation is a false statement of fact made by one party (or his agent) which is intended to and does induce the other party to enter the contract.
A statement may be made in writing, orally or even by contract, for example, by making the goods tell a lie about themselves as in the case where the seller patched up a crack in the barrel of a cannon so as to make it appear unfractured, Horsfall v. Thomas (1862).
A mere statement of opinion, provided the opinion is genuinely held, is not a statement of fact, Bisset v. Wilkinson (1927 P.C.).
However, a statement of opinion by someone in a position to know the facts will be regarded as a statement of fact.
In Smith v. Land & house Property Corporation (1884 C.A.) the seller of some premises described them as ‘let to Mr. Frederick Fleck (a most desirable tenant).’
In fact it had been only with difficulty that the seller had managed to get rent from Mr. Fleck who was still in arrears.
It was held that the seller made a misrepresentation.
A mere trader's puff is not a statement of fact.
Thus the car dealer who describes a second-hand car as ‘a beautiful looking car’ makes no misrepresentation.
However, the distinction between a trader's puff and a statement having legal significance is a fine one.
The car dealer who tells his purchaser ‘It's a good little bus.
I would stake my life on it,’ will not be able to claim either that it was a mere trader's puff or that it was a mere  statement of opinion.
After all, the dealer is in a position to know whether the car has any serious defects.
The statement need not be made fraudulently.
Although the remedies available may be less extensive, a statement made quite innocently can nevertheless amount to a misrepresentation, as in Leaf v. International Galleries (1950 C.A.) where the sellers incorrectly stated that a painting was by Constable, a statement which they genuinely believed.
A statement is not an actionable misrepresentation unless it induced the other party to enter the contract.
It does not have to be the only thing which persuaded him to do so but it does have to have been a factor in influencing him.
If he placed no reliance at all upon it, he cannot complain of a misrepresentation.
Thus in Horsfall v. Thomas above, the purchaser lost his case because he had not bothered to examine the cannon before purchasing it and therefore was unaware of the misrepresentation.
Equally, if the purchaser, though aware of the statement, chooses to place no reliance upon it, he cannot subsequently complain of it.
This would be the position if a potential purchaser, on being told that a car was mechanically sound, nevertheless insisted, before buying, on having his own mechanic examine it.
REMEDIES
There are two possible remedies:
Rescission
A misrepresentation by one party makes the contract voidable at the option of the other.
This means that the latter can rescind the contract.
This involves the parties being returned to their positions as they were before the contract, i. e. the return of the price to the buyer and the goods to the seller.
If the innocent party is the buyer and he has not paid then he may simply refuse to do so and return the goods if he has already received them.
Rescission is an equitable remedy which means that it is not available if that would be unfair.
Thus it is not available in the following situations:
(i)
Where it is impossible to restore the parties to their pre-contract positions, e.g. if the purchaser has consumed the goods.
(ii)
Where it would involve upsetting the rights of an innocent third party, e.g. if the purchaser has sold the goods to an innocent sub-purchaser.
(iii)
Where there has been a lapse of more than a reasonable length of time from the time the contract was made.
Thus in Leaf v. International Galleries above, the purchaser was unable to rescind the contract some five years after it was made.
(In the case of a fraudulent misrepresentation, the purchaser is allowed a reasonable length of time from when he discovers it to be untrue.)
(iv)
Where the innocent party has affirmed the contract, i.e. indicated his intention of continuing with it in spite of the misrepresentation.
In Long v. Lloyd (1958 C.A.) the seller had claimed that the lorry was in excellent condition and was capable of 40 m.p.h. and 11 m.p.g.
On the first run the purchaser discovered a number of faults; the dynamo did not work and the lorry consumed petrol at the rate of 5 m.p.g.
He telephoned the seller and complained.
The seller offered to meet half the cost of repairing the dynamo.
The buyer accepted that offer.
When the lorry broke down again, the purchaser indicated that he was rescinding the contract.
It was held that he could not, since by accepting the seller's offer on the telephone he had accepted the goods and thereby affirmed the contract.
Affirmation, which defeats the buyer's right to rescission for misrepresentation, is very similar to ‘acceptance’ which defeats the buyer's right to reject the goods and regard the contract as repudiated for breach of condition (see paragraph 13–03 below).
Damages
Damages may be claimed on their own or in addition to rescission.
Unlike rescission, damages are not available for all misrepresentations and the state of mind of the person who made the misrepresentations is important.
(i)
A fraudulent misrepresentation is one made (a) without belief in its truth, or (b) recklessly, careless whether it be true of false.
For a fraudulent misrepresentation, damages are available in deceit, Derry v. Peek (1889 H.L.).
(ii)
A negligent misrepresentation is one made by someone who believes it to be true but has no reasonable grounds for so believing, e.g. a car dealer who claims as having been made in 1959, a car of a type not manufactured before 1960.
Damages are available for a negligent  misrepresentation — Misrepresentation Act 1967, section 2(1).
(iii)
A completely innocent misrepresentation is one made by someone who genuinely and on reasonable grounds believes it to be true.
Damages are not normally available for this sort of misrepresentation, although the court does have a discretion to award damages instead of(but not in addition to ) rescission — Misrepresentation Act 1967, section 2(2).
The burden of proof is upon the defendant to prove that he had reasonable grounds for believing his statement.
Otherwise it will be presumed to have been a negligent one — Misrepresentation Act 1967, section 2(1).
In Howard Marine & dredging Co.
Ltd. v. Ogden (1978 C.A.) the owner of a vessel which a customer was considering hiring told the customer that its payload was 1,600 tons, whereas its payload was in fact only 1,055 tons (so stated in the ship's documents).
After the contract was made, the hirer brought a claim for damages for misrepresentation.
The owner claimed to have had reasonable grounds to believe the truth of his misrepresentation because the Lloyd's Register had (in a rare mistake) wrongly stated the payload as 1,800 tons.
It was held that in showing that he relied upon the figures in Lloyd's Register and had disregarded the figure in the ship's documents, he had failed to prove that he had had reasonable grounds to believe the truth of his misrepresentation.
The hirer therefore won his claim for damages.
EXCLUSION
Any provision in a contract which would have the effect of excluding or restricting liability for a misrepresentation is ineffective, except to the extent that the clause is shown to satisfy the requirement of reasonableness — Misrepresentation Act 1967, s.3 as amended by the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
The requirement of reasonableness is set out in section 11 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act (see paras.
10–23 and 10–25 below).
ADDITIONAL OR ALTERNATIVE DEFENDANT
We are in this chapter considering misrepresentations made to the buyer by the seller (or the seller's agent).
It follows that the remedies we have discussed are those which the buyer has  against the seller.
Normally the seller will be the only person against whom the buyer will be entitled to make a claim.
However, to this there is an exception, created by section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
So, where the buyer bought the goods under a credit agreement of a certain type he will be able to bring against the creditor a claim similar to that which he can bring against the seller.
The most common type of situation where this will occur is where the buyer uses his credit card to buy an item costing over £100.
The credit card company is the person who provides the credit (i. e. is the creditor) and therefore the buyer may be able to bring a claim against the credit card company for a misrepresentation by the seller.
The circumstances in which section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act applies will be more fully considered in Chapter 23.
Section 56 of the Consumer Credit Act also can operate to entitle a buyer in some cases to sue the creditor (e.g. a credit card company) in respect of a misrepresentation by the seller.
Section 56 is more fully considered in Chapter 22 (para. 22–14 below).
CHAPTER 7
TERMS OF THE CONTRACT
CONTRACTS of sale vary enormously.
At one extreme one may find a written contract containing many detailed clauses setting out the terms of the contract.
At the other extreme, the parties may have expressly agreed only as to which goods were being sold and how much the price was.
In the latter case the parties have left much unsaid, e.g. as to delivery, payment, the transfer of ownership, the quality of the goods, etc.
Many provisions of the Sale of Goods Act were designed to remedy such deficiencies in the contract.
Freedom of contract
The original Sale of Goods Act of 1893 was intended, not to dictate to the parties what the terms of their bargain should be, but only to provide solutions to problems and questions unforeseen and unconsidered by the parties.
Thus most of the sections of the Act originally applied only in the absence of contrary agreement by the parties.
The Act was based upon the notion of freedom of contract, i.e. that the parties were free to make their contract upon whatever terms they pleased.
However, the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 has in relation to exemption clauses made a large inroad into this doctrine of freedom of contract and section 55(1) of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 now reads as follows:
‘Where a right, duty or liability would arise under a contract of sale of goods by implication of law, it may (subject to the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977) be negatived or varied by express agreement, or by the course of dealing between the parties, or by such usage as binds both parties to the contract.’
The provisions of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 will be considered in Chapter 10.
In the present chapter we shall consider terms other than exemption clauses.
Express terms
Although the parties are free to agree what terms they  choose, they will not be bound by any term which is not properly incorporated in the contract.
In the case of terms in a written contract signed by both parties, there will be no doubt that the terms have been properly incorporated.
Often, however, the terms will not be in a signed contract.
It is perfectly possible for the parties to incorporate terms by agreeing to them orally or in writing whether or not signed.
Chapter 10 deals with the position where one of the terms is an exclusion clause.
In that case, the party whom the clause favours (usually the seller) will not be found to have incorporated it in the contract unless either it was in a contractual document signed by the other party or else reasonable steps had been taken to bring it to the attention of the other party.
This rule applies not only to exclusion clauses but to any clause which is particularly onerous or unusual and unlikely to be known to the other party, Interfoto Picture Library v. Stiletto Visual Programmes (1988 C.A.).
In that case an advertising agency telephoned a transparency library with whom the agency had never previously dealt.
The agency asked to hire some transparencies of the 1950s.
Accordingly the library sent 47 transparencies with a delivery note clearly requiring that they be returned by March 19.
The delivery note included nine conditions, printed in four columns, which the agency never read.
Condition 2 stated that a charge of £5 plus V.A.T. per transparency was payable for each day they were late being returned.
After the agency returned the transparencies 14 days late, the library claimed over £3,500 under this condition.
The court refused to allow the claim, holding that the clause (imposing an exorbitant charge) was particularly onerous and unusual and the library had not taken all reasonable steps to bring it to the attention of the agency.
Presumably the library should at least have highlighted it in some way such as printing it in red, on the front of the delivery note, perhaps with a large red hand pointing to it.
As Bingham L.J.
put it,’…the more outlandish the clause, the greater the notice which the other party, if he is to be bound, must in all fairness be given.’
As a general rule, if sufficient notice is given and the clause is therefore incorporated, the court will enforce it.
That is unless it is either an exclusion clause made unenforceable by the Unfair Contract Terms 1977 (see Chapter 10) or a penalty clause.
Curiously, the clause in Interfoto Picture Library v. Stiletto Visual Programmes was almost certainly a penalty and unenforceable even if it had been properly incorporated (see paragraph 14–13 below).
Terms which are not expressly agreed between the parties but inserted by law into the contract are called implied terms.
Any term, express or implied, may be a condition or a warranty.
Warranties and conditions
The law classifies breaches of contract into two categories, first, breaches of a less serious nature which entitle the innocent party only to damages and secondly, more serious breaches which give him also the option to regard the contract as repudiated.
The difference is that with the first type, the innocent party, though entitled to damages, must still perform his part of the bargain, whereas with a repudiatory breach he may, in addition to claiming damages, regard himself as discharged from his obligations under the contract.
The former and less serious type is a breach of warranty and the latter is a breach of condition.
It is therefore important to know which terms are conditions and which merely warranties.
With the terms implied by sections 12–15 of the Sale of Goods Act it is easy because the Act makes it clear.
With terms expressly agreed by the parties it is not always so easy.
It is a matter of construing (interpreting) the contract — conditions being those terms which ‘go to the root’ of the contract or are ‘of the essence’of it.
In Wallis & wells v. Pratt and Haynes (1911), Fletcher Moulton L.J.
said that conditions ‘go so directly to the substance of the contract or, in other words, are so essential to its very nature that their non-performance may fairly be considered by the other party as a substantial failure to perform the contract at all.’
Warranties ‘are other obligations which, though they must be performed, are not so vital that a failure to perform them goes to the substance of the contract.’
Section 61(1) of the Sale of Goods Act defines a warranty as’…an agreement with reference to goods which are the subject of a contract of sale, but collateral to the main purpose of such contract, the breach of which gives rise to a claim for damages, but not to a right to reject the goods and treat the contract as repudiated.’
The neat classification, just explained, of contract terms into two categories, conditions and warranties, has begun to crumble in recent years.
So far as the effect of a breach of condition is concerned, the position remains unaltered.
If the seller commits any breach (even a minor one) of a term which is clearly a condition, the buyer will be entitled not only to damages but also to reject the goods and treat himself as discharged from his obligations.
This will therefore be the position where, for example, the seller is in breach of one of the conditions as to description, merchantable quality or fitness for purpose, implied by the Sale of Goods Act, sections 13 and 14.
However, where there is a breach of any term which is not a condition, that breach could be either repudiatory (i.e. equivalent in effect to a breach of condition) or a mere breach of warranty (i.e. giving rise only to a claim to damages).
It is a matter of looking at the extent of the actual breach which has occurred.
If that breach ‘goes to the root of the contract’ or deprives the other party of ‘substantially the whole benefit of the contract,’then it entitles the latter to treat the contract as repudiated and himself as discharged from it.
This approach was clearly adopted by the Court of Appeal in Cehave v. Bremer (The Hansa Nord)(1975) and approved by the House of Lords in Reardon Smith Line v. Hansen-Tangen (1976).
In Cehave a written contract for the sale of fruit pellets contained the express term ‘Shipment to be in good condition.’
On shipment some (about a third) of the pellets were not in ‘good’ condition.
However, although they were worth less on the open market than if they had been in ‘good’ condition, they were still fit for the purpose for which the buyer wanted them (making into cattle food) and were still so upon arrival.
It was held that there was no breach of the condition implied by the Sale of Goods Act as to merchantable quality, because the pellets were still saleable, albeit at a reduced price.
Also the express term was not a ‘condition’ in the contract.
Therefore, since the sellers' breach had not been serious enough to go to the root of the contract, the buyers were entitled only to damages.
It seems that an express stipulation will not easily by construed by the court as a ‘condition.’
It will be a condition only if either there is an earlier case establishing that such a clause is a condition (i.e. ‘of the essence’) or else it was clearly intended by the parties when they made the contract that any breach of that term would entitle the other party to repudiate the contract and reject the goods.
Stipulations as to time
There is a presumption that the time of payment is not ‘of the essence,’ section 10, although the parties could expressly agree otherwise.
However, a stipulated time for delivery is likely to be more important and therefore in an ordinary commercial transaction a delivery date is normally ‘of the essence,’ Hartley v. Hymans (1920 K.B.).
Similarly, if a date is specified for shipment by the seller, that will be ‘of the  essence.’
So, if a delivery or shipment date is not met, the buyer, as well as claiming damages, can if he wishes regard the contract as repudiated, i.e. reject the goods and reclaim any money paid.
Of course, if delivery is late the buyer may accept late delivery thereby waiving his right to treat the contract as repudiated.
If he does, he loses his right to reject the goods but still has a right to damages, section 11(4).
In Rickards v. Oppenheim (1950 C.A.) the seller contracted to build a car for the buyer, the car to be built by March 20.
It was not ready by that date.
The buyer did not repudiate the contract but pressed for early delivery.
When at the end of June it still was not finished, the buyer informed the seller that if it was not ready in another four weeks he would then regard the contract as repudiated.
It was held that the buyer had acted within his rights.
By his waiver he had lost his right to regard the contract as repudiated on March 20, but in the circumstances it was a condition of his waiver that delivery should take place as soon as possible.
He could therefore revive his right by giving reasonable notice.
At the end of the four weeks, the car was still not ready.
Therefore the buyer was under no obligation to buy it.
Suppose that under a contract, the seller is to deliver the goods to a ship and that the buyer is to nominate the ship so that delivery can be made.
Then if there is a stipulation as to the time by which the buyer must make his nomination, that stipulation as to time relates to delivery and will be ‘of the essence,’ Bunge Corporation v. Tradax (1981 H.L.).
Thus, if the buyer is late in making his nomination, the seller is entitled, if he wishes, to regard the contract as repudiated (i.e. entitled to refuse to supply the goods).
IMPLIED TERMS- SECTIONS 12–15
The expression ‘buyer beware’ is not entirely reflected in the law.
It is true that in the law relating to misrepresentation, the seller cannot be liable for failing to disclose defects in the goods but only for any actual statements made by him or his agents.
However, the terms implied by sections 12–15 are designed to see that the buyer receives certain basic benefits from the transaction.
They relate to title, description? quality and sample.
In spite of this, the words ‘buyer beware’ still carry a very real warning in one type of purchase and that is what is colloquially called a private sale.
The reason, as will be seen, is that the implied terms as to quality (in section 14) apply only where goods are sold in the course of a business.
Before turning to the detail of sections 12–15 it must be noted that under the original Sale of Goods Act of 1893 the wording of some of these sections was slightly different prior to 1973 when the sections were amended by the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973.
Thus some of the cases which will be discussed in the next few pages were decided on sections which were not absolutely identical with the current provisions.
However, because the changes were not substantial, this does not significantly diminish the authority of those cases.
The current wording of the sections will be used in this book.
Title — section 12
Section 12(1) and (2) reads:
(1)
In a contract of sale, other than one to which subsection (3) below applies, there is an implied condition on the part of the seller that in the case of a sale he has a right to sell the goods, and in the case of an agreement to sell he will have such a right at the time when the property is to pass.
(2)
In a contract of sale, other than one to which subsection (3) below applies, there is also an implied warranty that—
(a) the goods are free, and will remain free until the time when the property is to pass, from any charge or encumbrance not disclosed or known to the buyer before the contract is made, and
(b) the buyer will enjoy quiet possession of the goods except so far as it may be disturbed by the owner or other person entitled to the benefit of any charge or encumbrance so disclosed or known.’
Most important is the implied condition that the seller has a right to sell the goods.
This condition is commonly broken by someone selling goods which are not his.
Chapter 5 was devoted to the question of who then owns the goods, the purchaser or the original owner.
If the purchaser does so, then he has no quarrel with his seller.
If however, the original owner still owns them, the purchaser has an action against his seller for breach of condition; he can claim damages and/or a return of the price.
Rowland v. Divall (1923 C.A.) has attracted considerable criticism.
Three months after buying and taking delivery of a car, the purchaser discovered that it had not belonged to the seller and still belonged to its original owner.
It was returned to the latter and the purchaser brought an action against the seller  under section 12.
It was held that he was entitled to the return of the price, on the ground that he had suffered a ‘total failure of consideration.’
The whole object for a buyer in making a purchase is to obtain legal ownership of the goods.
If he does not obtain that, then he suffers a total failure of consideration and is entitled to the return of the price.
Thus, in effect, the buyer had over three months' free use of the car.
If the buyer does obtain ownership, then he does not suffer a total failure of consideration.
It can happen that at the time of the sale the seller is not the owner (and thus is in breach of the condition in section 12) but that he subsequently obtains that ownership, e. g. by buying the goods from their owner.
This ‘feeds’ the purchaser's title (see paragraph 5–39).
Thus good title is conferred upon the purchaser but at a date later than it should have been.
If this occurs, the buyer can no longer claim to have suffered a total failure of consideration.
The goods will be his, he will not be able to reject them (because he will have ‘accepted’ them, section 35, paragraph 13–03 below) and his only claim will be for damages.
However, at any time before the purchaser's title is fed (i.e. before the seller obtains ownership), the buyer is entitled by virtue of the seller's breach of condition to regard the contract as repudiated, to reject the goods and thus to reclaim the price on a total failure of consideration.
These principles were applied in Butterworth v. Kingsway Motors (1954 Q.B.).
Miss A acquired a car on hire-purchase terms.
Before completing her payments and therefore before the car was hers, she sold it to B. B sold it to C, who sold it to Kingsway Motors, who in turn sold it to Butterworth.
All this time Miss A still had not completed her payments.
It followed that each seller was liable to his buyer for breach of the condition in section 12.
After using the car for 11 months, Butterworth discovered that he was not the owner.
He thereupon immediately wrote to Kingsway Motors informing them of the situation and claiming the return of his purchase price.
A week later Miss A completed her payments under her hire-purchase agreement and in doing so fed title down the line of purchasers.
The process of feeding stopped at Kingsway Motors who thus became owners of the car.
Ownership did not pass to Butterworth who by his letter had already indicated that he regarded his contract as repudiated.
It was held that Butterworth had suffered a total failure of consideration and was entitled therefore to the return from Kingsway Motors of his purchase price.
However, neither Kingsway Motors nor C nor B had suffered a total failure of consideration because their  title had been fed.
Once they had ‘accepted’ the goods (see paragraph 13–03 below) and their title had been fed, they lost the right to reject the goods for breach of condition.
Kingsway Motors, C and B obtained only damages from their respective sellers.
Kingsway Motors' damages were assessed as the difference between the value of the car when ownership should have passed to them (i.e. when they bought it) and its lower value when ownership actually passed to them (i.e. when title was fed).
C obtained the same sum from B and B from Miss A.
Before leaving Butterworth v. Kingsway Motors it should be noted that if the same facts (i.e. involving a motor vehicle) were to occur again today, the result would be different because of the Hire Purchase Act 1964, Part III (see paragraph 5–40 above).
It can happen that the ownership of one person is subject to certain rights which someone else has over the goods.
This could occur where someone has a lien over the goods, i.e. a right to retain possession of them until a debt is paid.
For example, when goods are entrusted to a repairer for repair, he has a lien over them to compel payment of his repair bill.
The owner can still sell the goods even though they are in possession of the repairer who is exercising his lien.
In this case the seller will not be in breach of the terms implied by section 12 provided that before the contract was made he disclosed to the buyer the existence of the lien.
It can happen that there is some doubt about someone's title 7–11 to goods, e.g. a finder's title.
A finder does have title to the goods (a ‘possessory’ title) but it is subject to the title of the original owner.
The latter, if he ever turns up, can therefore reclaim the goods.
A finder who sells goods without first disclosing that he has only a finder's title is in breach of the condition in section 12.
However, if he has disclosed that fact so as to indicate that he is transferring to the purchaser only his own possessory title, then he will not be in breach of the condition, section 12(3).
Section 12(3) applies to a contract where it appears from the contract or is to be inferred from the circumstances that the parties intended that the seller should transfer only a limited title (whether it be the limited title of the seller himself or of some third person from whom the seller would obtain it).
In such a contract there is no implied condition that the seller has or will have a right to sell the goods.
There are, however, implied warranties of quiet possession, etc.
The seller will be in breach of these if all charges and encumbrances (e.g. liens) known to him were not made known to the buyer before the contract was made.
So far it may have appeared that the condition in section 12 will be broken only if the seller turns out not to be the owner, anything less serious being merely a breach of one of the warranties.
There is, however, some overlap between the warranties and the condition in section 12.
The condition is broken if for any reason (undisclosed to the buyer) the seller does not have the right to sell the goods.
The sellers in Niblett Ltd. v. Confectioners Materials Co. (1921 C.A.) agreed to sell tins of condensed milk.
They supplied tins labelled ‘Nissly Brand.’
This infringed the Nestlé trade mark.
Nestlé Co. could have obtained an injunction restraining the sale of those tins and they required the buyers not to resell them without first removing the labels.
The buyers claimed damages from the sellers.
It was held that the sellers were in breach both of the condition that they had the right to sell the goods and also of the warranty of quiet possession.
Nibble's case was considered in Microbeads v. Vinhurst Road Markings (1975 C.A.).
Shortly after the sale of some road marking machines, a company unconnected with the contract of sale obtained a patent relating to road marking machines.
This entitled them to bring a patent action against the buyers to enforce the patent.
The buyers sued the sellers under section 12 claiming a breach of the condition as to title and a breach of the warranty of quiet possession.
It was held that there had been no breach of the condition as to title because that condition related to the time of the sale.
At that time no patent had been obtained; at that time the buyers could use the machines undisturbed; at that time the sellers thus had the right to pass the ownership in the machines and to confer undisturbed possession upon the buyers.
The warranty as to quiet possession, however, relates to the future.
It states that the buyer ‘will enjoy quiet possession.’
The sellers were liable to the buyer in damages for breach of warranty.
Description — section 13
7–13 Section 13 reads:
‘(1)
Where there is a contract for the sale of goods by description, there is an implied condition that the goods will correspond with the description.
(2)
If the sale is by sample as well as by description it is not sufficient that the bulk of the goods corresponds with  the sample if the goods do not also correspond with the description.
(3)
A sale of goods is not prevented from being a sale by description by reason only that, being exposed for sale or hire, they are selected by the buyer.’
The condition is implied only where there is a sale by description.
Clearly, goods are sold by description where the purchaser has not seen the goods but is relying on the description alone.
Equally, in the words of Lord Wright in Grant v. Australian Knitting Mills (1936 P.C.)‘there is a sale by description even though the buyer is buying something displayed before him on the counter; a thing is sold by description, though it is specific, so long as it is sold not merely as the specific thing but as a thing corresponding to a description.’
In that case the sale of woollen underwear across the counter was held to be a sale by description.
The essence of a sale by description is that in deciding to buy the buyer placed some (but not necessarily exclusive) reliance upon the description.
In Beale v. Taylor (1967 C.A.) the buyer saw an advertisement for a ‘Herald, convertible, white, 1961.’
He answered the advertisement, inspected the car and bought it.
Although the buyer had inspected the car, he had relied, not purely on his own assessment of its value, but to some extent on the description.
The seller was held liable under section 13, since the car consisted of the rear half of a 1961 car and the front half of an earlier model.
Even a sale in a supermarket is usually a sale by description.
The reason that the buyer selects a packet labelled, say, ‘cocoa’ from the shelf is that she wants cocoa and she is relying on the description ‘cocoa’accurately to identify the packet and its contents.
It is a sale by description even though it is the customer who decides which particular goods to select from the display, section 13(3).
Occasionally, goods, e.g. vegetables, are displayed without any label or notice describing them.
It would seem that such goods are not sold by description.
A sale by sample will often be a sale also by description.
Section 13(2) embodies a principle illustrated by Nichol v. Godts (1854).
The buyer bought by sample ‘foreign refined rape oil.’
It was held that the goods must correspond not only with the sample but must also be ‘foreign refined rape oil.’
In order to determine whether the goods correspond with the contractual description it may be necessary to determine the exact scope and meaning of the description.
Obviously, the  more detailed it is, the more stringent is the seller's obligation to supply goods corresponding with it.
A contract to supply ‘staves’ is one thing but a contract to supply ‘staves, half an inch thick’is altogether more onerous.
If in the latter case the seller supplies staves between half an inch and nine-sixteenths of an inch thick, he is in breach of the condition as to description, Arcos v. Ronaasen (1933 H.L.).
If the seller wants a margin, he must stipulate for it in the contractual description.
The fact that the goods are of defective quality is usually irrelevant in deciding whether they correspond with their description.
Pinnock Bros. v. Lewis & peat (1923 K.B.) involved a contract for the sale of ‘copra cake’ which was to be used to feed cattle.
The goods actually supplied consisted of copra cake combined with a quantity of castor oil, the latter being poisonous to cattle.
The sellers were in breach of the condition as to description.
However, this was not because the goods were unfit for use but rather because they included goods of a different description.
Ashington Piggeries v. Hill (1971 H.L.) involved a contract for the sale of ‘Norwegian herring meal fair average quality for the season, expected to analyse…’ which was to be used to feed mink.
The sellers supplied Norwegian herring meal, i.e. Norwegian herrings plus preservative.
The herrings and preservative had reacted together and produced a chemical which was poisonous to mink.
Here, the sellers were not in breach of the condition as to description since, unlike Pinnocks case, there was no addition of goods outside the contractual description.
The key to section 13 was said to be ‘identification’ not ‘quality.’
Hence the expression ‘fair average quality for the season’ was held not to be part of the contract description, since it did not ‘identify’the goods sold.
Goods which are useless or unsuitable for any normal purpose will still correspond with their description (here ‘Norwegian Herring Meal’) if it accurately identified them.
A balloon, though punctured, is nevertheless accurately identified and described as a ‘balloon.’
Re Moore and Landauer (1921 C.A.) is now a controversial decision.
The sellers had agreed to sell a quantity of tinned pears which were to be packed in cases containing 30 tins each.
They had delivered the correct total quantity of tins but half of them were packed in cases of 24 tins each.
It was held that the contract requirement that they be packed in cases of 30 was part of the contract description.
Therefore the buyers were entitled to refuse to accept delivery because the sellers had committed a breach of condition (i.e. of section 13) and the buyers were  entitled to do so even if they would have suffered no loss by having the tins packed in cases of 24 instead of cases of 30.
The correctness of the decision in Re Moore and Landauer has, however, been doubted by Lord Wilberforce in Reardon Smith Line v. Hansen Tangen (1976 H.L.).
Because section 13 is an implied condition anything which is regarded by the court as part of the contract description automatically becomes ‘of the essence’ and, if it is not complied with, automatically gives the buyer a right to reject the goods for breach of condition.
The modern trend is therefore to regard as part of the contract description only those contract words which help in ‘identifying’ the goods.
Other expressions in the contract (such as‘fair average quality for the season’ or ‘packed in cases of 30’) can then be regarded, not as part of the contract description, but as express terms of the contract in their own right.
Unless the contract clearly indicates otherwise, these express terms (not being stipulations as to the time of delivery) will then normally be warranties and not conditions.
Thus if the seller is in breach of one of them, the buyer will not be entitled to reject the goods unless the seller's breach is such as to deprive the buyer of substantially the whole benefit of the contract, Cehave v. Bremer; paragraph 7–04 above.
Of course, if there is a defect of quality, a buyer who wishes to reject the goods may still be able to do so, i.e. if he can show that there has been a breach of one of the conditions implied by section 14.
Quality — section 14
There are two conditions which may be implied by section 14 — as to merchantable quality (section 14(2)) and as to fitness for purpose (section 14(3)).
Before considering in what circumstances these conditions will be implied, note should be made of section 14(1) which reads:
‘(1) Except as provided by this section, and section 15 below and subject to any other enactment, there is no implied condition or warranty about the quality or fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied under a contract of sale.’
The two conditions implied by section 14 extend, not only to the goods actually bought, but also to goods ‘supplied under’ the contract, e.g. a returnable bottle, Geddling v. Marsh (1920 K.B.).
They also extend to the instructions.
It would, for example, be no defence for the seller to say that his farm fertiliser was perfectly safe and effective when applied in the  right concentration (at the right time of the year) if the instructions supplied with the fertiliser stated in error the wrong concentration, whether too weak to be effective or so strong as to kill the crops.
The law does not consider just the goods.
It asks whether the goods with their instructions were of merchantable quality and reasonably fit for their purpose, Wormell v. R.H.M.
Agriculture (East)(1987 C.A.).
Merchantable quality — section 14(2)
Section 14(2) reads:
‘(2) Where the seller sells goods in the course of a business, there is an implied condition that the goods supplied under the contract are of merchantable quality, except that there is no such condition-CC
(a)
as regards defects specifically drawn to the buyer's attention before the contract is made; or
(b)
if the buyer examines the goods before the contract is made, as regards defects which that examination ought to reveal.’
The condition is implied only if the goods are sold ‘in the course of a business.’
These words were new in section 14 by virtue of the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973.
A clue as to their meaning might be found in decisions on the meaning of similar expressions in the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 and the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 (see Davies v. Sumner and R & b Customs Brokers v. U.D.T. paras.
16–07 and 10–18 below).
Section 61(1) of the Sale of Goods Act tells us that:
‘business’ includes a profession and the activities of any government department (including a Northern Ireland department), or local or public authority.’
Thus someone buying coal from the National Coal Board does have the benefit of the implied condition that it shall be of merchantable quality.
There are two exceptions in section 14(2).
First, the buyer cannot complain of defects which had been specifically drawn to his attention, although naturally the condition will still apply in relation to other defects rendering the goods of unmerchantable quality.
The second exception applies ‘if the buyer examines the goods before the contract is made.’
So, if the buyer does, he cannot complain of defects which he ought thereby to have discerned.
In Thornett & fehr v. Beers (1919 K.B.) the buyers of some barrels of glue had examined only the outside.
It was  held that a normal examination would have involved looking inside and that they could not complain of defects in the glue which an inspection inside would have revealed.
Thus a buyer's legal position is better if he made no examination than if he made merely a superficial one.
Suppose the buyer examines the goods, discovers a defect but decides nevertheless to buy, taking the view that the defect is one that can be easily remedied.
If it is easily remedied, then clearly the buyer cannot complain of the defect in question.
If it turns out to be incapable of being remedied, the result may well be different.
If at the time of making the contract, the buyer was unaware, and could not reasonably have been aware, of the gravity of the defect, then the court would probably hold that the condition as to merchantable quality was implied.
In R & b Customs Brokers Co.
Ltd. v. United Dominions Trust Ltd. (1988 C.A.) the buyer had discovered that the car had a leak but did not discover until after the contract the gravity of the leak or that it was incurable.
Neill L.J.
said ‘I am not at present persuaded, however, that the condition in section 14(2) is excluded if at the time the contract is made the buyer is reasonably of the opinion that the defect can be, and will be, rectified at no cost to himself.’
The Court of Appeal side-stepped having to decide that issue, by holding that the buyer was entitled anyway to rely on section 14(3) (paragraph 7–19 below); the car was not reasonably fit for the particular purposes (driving upon the roads in England — in English weather) for which the buyer had informed the seller that he wanted it.
Now, i.e. since 1973, there is a statutory definition of ‘merchantable quality.’
Section 14(6) of the Sale of Goods Act provides:
‘(6) Goods of any kind are of merchantable quality within the meaning of subsection (2) above if they are as fit for the purpose or purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having regard to any description applied to them, the price (if relevant) and all the other relevant circumstances.’
It is important to assess the quality of the goods against the description applied to them.
Goods sold as ‘animal food’ are of merchantable quality if suitable for feeding to most kinds of cattle and poultry.
This is so even if they are poisonous, say, to mink.
However, food sold as ‘mink food’ is not of merchantable quality if it is poisonous to mink.
The relevance of the price was discussed in Brown v. Craiks (1970 H.L.) which involved the sale of industrial fabric.
The buyer found it unsuitable for making into dresses.
It was, however, perfectly suitable for other industrial purposes and could be sold for such — albeit at a slightly lower price.
The House of Lords held that it was of merchantable quality because it was saleable without any substantial reduction of the price.
Their Lordships said that if it had been saleable only at a ‘throw away’ price, that would indicate that it was not of merchantable quality.
The word ‘reasonable’ in the definition indicates that the goods are not necessarily required to be of the very best quality but that the level of quality demanded depends upon the circumstances of the ease, including the price.
For example, second-hand goods can hardly be expected to be in perfect condition.
In Bartlett v. Sydney Marcus (1965 C.A.) the seller, a car dealer, told the buyer that the car had a defective clutch and that if he bought it as it was he could have it for £550 but that if the seller were to repair it first, the price would be £575.
The buyer opted to take the car as it was.
About a month later the buyer had the clutch repaired at a cost of £45 and claimed this sum from the seller, alleging that the car was not of merchantable quality and not reasonably fit for the purpose of being driven on the road.
The claim failed.
‘A buyer should realise that, when he buys a second-hand car, defects may appear sooner or later.
’ The car came up to the standard required.
On the other hand major defects in a second-hand car might well mean that it is not of merchantable quality (see Crowther v. Shannon paragraph 7–19 below).
A second-hand car which is not safe to be driven on the road (for example because the brakes are in such a state that they would fail if the driver had to carry out an emergency stop) is clearly not of merchantable quality, Lee v. York Coach and Marine (1977 C.A.)— unless of course the car was only sold for scrap.
In Rogers v. Parish (Scarborough) Ltd. (1986) the Court of Appeal said it could not be assumed that the statutory definition of merchantable quality (which dates from 1973) was merely a codification of earlier judicial pronouncements upon the meaning of merchantable quality; pre-1973 cases therefore should not be relied upon.
This was probably wrong.
Nevertheless nothing decided in the case was actually inconsistent with earlier cases.
Rather the court gave an authoritative ruling on how the statutory definition applies in the case of a motor vehicle.
The statutory definition requires the goods to be 
‘as fit for the purpose or purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect…
’ In the case of motor vehicles those purposes include, not merely the purpose of driving it from place to place but of doing so with the appropriate degree of comfort, ease of handling and pride in the vehicle's outward and interior appearance.
The appropriate degree varies with the price, the description and other relevant factors.
The relative weight to be attached to the different characteristics of the vehicle depends upon which market it is aimed at.
On a vehicle sold as new, the performance and finish to be expected are those of a model of average standard with no mileage.
No less is to be expected of a vehicle sold with a manufacturer's warranty.
This authoritative ruling makes it clear that defects in appearance, if of sufficient degree, can render a vehicle unmerchantable.
The merest blemish on a Rolls Royce might render it unmerchantable whereas it might not on a humbler car.
The concept of merchantable quality is one of degree.
Deficiencies which are unacceptable on a car sold as new might be acceptable on a second-hand car.
Nevertheless the general approach laid down in Rogers v. Parish (Scarborough) Ltd. applies equally to second-hand vehicles Business Applications Specialists Ltd. v. Nationwide Credit Corpn.
Ltd.,(1988 C.A.) and, as noted earlier, sufficiently serious defects can render even a second-hand car unmerchantable.
Thus in Shine v. General Guarantee Finance Co.
Ltd. (1988 C.A.) a 20-month-old Fiat was held to be unmerchantable because, unknown to the buyer, it had eight months earlier been totally submerged in water for over 24 hours and had consequently been treated as a ‘write off’ by its insurer.
According to another recent Court of Appeal decision, Aswan Engineering Establishment v. Lupdine (1987), the statutory definition of merchantable quality does encapsulate the earlier law.
Thus it is still the case that goods are of merchantable quality if they are suitable (without substantial abatement of the price) for one or more of the purposes for which goods of that description are normally bought.
Some heavy-duty buckets (which were suitable for most purposes for which such buckets were normally bought or used) collapsed when left by the buyer for several days stacked in extreme heat such that the contents reached 70° Centigrade (156° Fahrenheit).
These buckets were held to be of merchantable quality (but see paragraph 7–22 below).
Where perishable goods are to be despatched to the buyer by carrier, it is reasonable to expect the goods to be of such a  quality as to be able to withstand a normal journey — Mash & murrell v. Joseph Emmanuel (1961 Q.B.).
More generally on durability, it seems that the requirement that the goods be of merchantable quality is a continuing requirement that they will continue to be of merchantable quality for a reasonable period after delivery so long as they remain in the same apparent state as that in which they were delivered, apart from normal wear and tear.
This is the position with the implied condition as to fitness for purpose (see paragraph 7–19 below) and presumably is equally true of the merchantable quality requirement.
Fitness for purpose — section 14(3)
Section 14(3) reads:
‘(3) Where the seller sells goods in the course of a business and the buyer, expressly or by implication, makes known (a) to the seller or (b)…any particular purpose for which the goods are being bought, there is an implied condition that the goods supplied under the contract are reasonably fit for that purpose.
whether or not that is a purpose for which such goods are commonly supplied, except where the circumstances show that the buyer does not rely, or that it is unreasonable for him to rely, on the skill or judgment of the seller…’
(For an explanation of the omitted words see paragraph 23–17 below.)
This condition, like the one in section 14(2), is implied only where the goods are sold in the course of a business.
Further, the buyer must have made known to the seller the particular purpose for which he was buying the goods.
With goods having only one normal use the mere fact of the purchase will, by implication, make it known that this is what the buyer wants them for, e. g. a hot-water bottle, as in Priest v.
Last (1903 C.A.).
Someone who buys goods having more than one common use or who wants goods for an abnormal purpose will not benefit from section 14(3) unless the seller was expressly informed of the particular purpose for which they were required.
In Griffiths v. Peter Conway (1939 C.A.) the purchaser of a tweed coat contracted dermatitis from wearing it.
It was shown that someone with normally sensitive skin would not have been affected but that the purchaser had abnormally sensitive skin.
Since she had not made that fact known to the seller, she lost the case.
If the buyer does not rely on the seller's skill or judgment he will have no claim under section 14(3).
However, the courts seem quite ready to infer the necessary reliance.
Lord Wright, in Grant v. Australian Knitting Mills (1935 P.C.), said:
’…thus to take a case like that in question of a purchase from a retailer the reliance will be in general inferred from the fact that a buyer goes to the shop in confidence that the tradesman has selected his stock with skill and judgment.’
On the other hand, if the buyer asks for an article by its trade or brand name and does so in such a way as to exclude any discussion of its suitability, then he is not relying on the seller's skill or judgment, Baldry v. Marshall (1924 C.A.).
Sometimes there will be partial reliance, the buyer relying in some respects upon the seller's skill and judgment and in others upon his own.
Should the goods prove unfit for their purpose, the buyer will have a claim only if their unfitness relates to the sphere of reliance placed upon the seller.
In Cammell Laird v. Manganese Bronze & brass (1934 H.L.) the sellers were to supply a particular ship's propellers which they were to make according to a specification supplied by the buyer.
The seller's skill and judgment were relied upon as to matters not within the buyer's specification.
This included ensuring that adequate materials were used and that the specification was embodied in the propellers.
It also included other matters not provided for in the specification.
In fact the propellers were unfit for their purpose because they were not thick enough, a matter not included in the buyer's specification.
The sellers were liable.
In Teheran — Europe v. S. T. Belton (1968 C.A.) tractors were purchased for the purpose of exporting and reselling in Persia.
They in fact infringed Persian regulations and the buyer was fined by a Persian criminal court.
He sued the seller.
It was held that since the buyer knew much more about Persia than the seller, he must have been relying on his own judgment as to whether the tractors were suitable for the Persian market.
The buyer lost.
The words ‘reasonably fit’ do not require the goods to be of the very best quality.
The quality to be expected will depend upon all the circumstances of the sale.
Second-hand goods cannot be expected to be perfect.
Minor defects must, for example, be expected to materialise in a second-hand car (see Bartlett v. Sydney Marcus above).
However, major defects existing at the time of the sale are another matter.
In Crowther  v. Shannon (1975 C.A.) a car dealer sold for £390 an eight-year-old Jaguar car with 82,000 miles on the mileometer.
Three weeks and 2,300 miles later, the engine seized up.
It needed replacing.
It was held that the fact the engine seized up after only three weeks was evidence that at the time of the sale the car was not reasonably fit for the purpose of being driven on the road.
The seller was liable for breach of the condition of fitness for purpose.
Although the words ‘reasonably fit’ do not require the goods to be of the very best quality, they do impose upon the seller an absolute obligation.
It is no defence that he acted reasonably if in fact the goods are not reasonably fit for their purpose.
In Frost v. Aylesbury Dairy (1905 C.A.) milk was sold containing typhoid germs.
It was no defence that the sellers had taken all reasonable precautions as to hygiene.
It is at the time of delivery that the goods must be reasonably fit for the purpose for which the buyer indicated he wanted them.
They must also continue to be so for a reasonable time after delivery.
In Lambert v. Lewis (1981 H.L.) Lord Diplock said that the condition of fitness for purpose was a continuing obligation ‘that the goods will continue to be fit for that purpose for a reasonable time after delivery, so long as they remain in the same apparent state and condition as that in which they were delivered, apart from normal wear and tear.’
In that case a farmer had bought from a dealer a towing coupling for his Land Rover.
He continued to use the coupling after it had become apparent to him that the locking mechanism of the coupling was broken.
Subsequently, due to defective design (i. e. not the broken locking mechanism), the coupling failed while in use and a road accident occurred as a result of the trailer becoming detached from the Land Rover.
Clearly, the farmer had been supplied with a coupling which was not reasonably fit for the purpose for which he had indicated he wanted it.
Nevertheless, he was unable, on the basis of that breach of condition, to claim from the seller any of the damage and losses which the farmer suffered in the accident.
Once it had become apparent to the farmer that the locking mechanism was broken, that had brought to an end the seller's obligation that the coupling continue to be reasonably fit for its purpose.
Sample — section 15
Section 15 provides:
‘(1)
A contract of sale is a contract for sale by sample where there is an express or implied term to that effect in the contract.
(2)
In the case of a contract for sale by sample there is an implied condition–
(a) that the bulk will correspond with the sample in quality;
(b) that the buyer will have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the sample;
(c) that the goods will be free from any defect, rendering them unmerchantable, which would not be apparent on reasonable examination of the sample.’
Section 15 applies only if there is a term of the contract that it is a contract of sale by sample.
In the case of a written contract the sale will be by sample only if that is included in the writing.
Merely exhibiting a sample during the negotiations will not make it a sale by sample unless the parties agree that it is a sale by sample.
In Drummond v. Van Ingen (1887 H.L) Lord MacNaghten explained the function of a sample:
‘The office of a sample is to present to the eye the real meaning and intention of the parties with regard to the subject-matter of the contract which, owing to the imperfection of language, it may be difficult or impossible to express in words.
The sample speaks for itself.’
Under section 15(2) (a) it is no defence that the bulk can easily be made to correspond with the sample.
In F. & s .
Ruben v. Faire Bros. (1949 K.B.) Linatex was sold which was crinkly whereas the sample was soft.
The seller was liable even though by a simple process of warming, the bulk could have been made soft.
Although the buyer cannot complain under section 15(2) (c) of defects which he could reasonably have discovered on an examination of the sample, he may nevertheless have an action under section 14(2) or (3) above.
Remedies
For breach by the seller of any term of the contract, the buyer can sue for damages.
In the case of a breach of condition the buyer has the additional right to reject the goods and recover the price.
The buyer however may lose the right to reject the goods either by waiver of that right or by ‘acceptance’ of the goods.
‘Acceptance’ has a technical meaning.
This will be explained in Chapter 13 which deals with the buyer's remedies.
At this stage, however, it should be noted that there is a general rule that the buyer cannot accept part of  the goods and reject the rest.
This is a general ‘all-or-nothing’ rule to which there are only limited exceptions.
Law Commissions' proposals
In a joint report in 1987, the Law Commission and the Scottish Law Commission proposed changes in the law relating to the implied terms.
There are three main proposals.
The first relates to the implied term as to merchantable quality.
This, it is proposed, should be reformulated so as to replace the expression ‘merchantable quality’ with ‘acceptable quality’and to make it clear that it covers the fitness of the goods for all their common purposes, their safety, durability, freedom from minor defects and appearance and finish.
This would, perhaps, clarify the law.
In one respect, however, it would mean a change.
The requirement would be that the goods be reasonably fit for all the purposes for which such goods are commonly bought.
At present, goods are of merchantable quality if they are reasonably fit for some (or even only one) of the purposes for which such goods are commonly bought (see paragraph 7–18 above).
The second main proposal relates to the buyer's rights to reject the goods and to treat the contract as repudiated because of a breach of one of the conditions in sections 13–15.
At present the buyer can reject the goods for any breach of condition, however minor the breach.
The proposal is that a buyer who is a non-consumer should not have this right where the breach is so slight that it would be unreasonable for him to reject the goods.
This restriction on the buyer's rights would apply only to breaches of the conditions in sections 13–15 and would not apply where the contract clearly specified to the contrary.
In any case it would not affect a buyer who deals as a consumer (definition at paragraph 10–17 below).
The third main proposal is that a buyer who has a right to reject the goods should not be faced with an all-or-nothing rule.
He should have the option of rejecting either all the goods or just those which do not conform to the contract.