

COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Your Committee met on 18 September and 23 October 1989.
Apart from routine business, the final arrangements were made for the IGM (Interim General Meeting).
The Social Secretary reported on the winter programme — details of each event from him in due course.
INTERIM GENERAL MEETING
This was held at The Community College, Bishop's Castle at 7.30 p.m. on Friday, 3 November 1989 and was attended by 33 members.
The Chairman, Cllr.
J. C. E. Roberts, welcomed all present and remarked that although the Society had only been in existence for a few months, much had already been done and the Society had a firm foundation on which to build.
He then called upon the Hon Secretary, Mr Ken Lucas, to give his report.
The Hon Secretary gave a resume of the events held so far and also said that he was pleased to have many requests for information and membership from a wide area of the country.
Membership had passed the 100 mark already.
He also expressed the Society's thanks to our President, Lady C. M. More, for the loan of items for display at the Steam Rally and the Museum Roadshow.
Since the Society was formed the Community College and the SWSHAS had both been most helpful.
The Hon Treasurer, Mr G. Lloyd, submitted interim accounts, showing that the Society had a credit balance of £274.73, after all expenses to date had been paid.
He suggested that the financial year should end on 31 March each year and would submit audited accounts at that time.
After discussion, this was agreed and it was further resolved that this meeting be treated as an interim one and that a full AGM be held in March 1990 and annually thereafter.
Committee
The Committee and Officials were re-elected en bloc to serve until the AGM in March 1990.
Mr R. Newcombe was elected to the Committee to represent the Clun members.
Restoration Projects
Keith Lucas, our Social Secretary, gave an update on the Glenburrell Bridge and Horderley Station projects and hoped that as many members as possible, who are able to do outdoor work, would participate in this restoration work.
Books etc.
Committee Member Mr Ron Davies has kindly offered to sell copies of ‘Shropshire Railways Pictorial’— an excellent new book — compiled by the Shropshire Railway Society and published by Shropshire Books at £4.95 per copy.
Also available are back copies of the Journal at 50p per copy and sets of 4 postcards of BCR at £1.50 per set.
Ron's shop is at 36, High St., Bishop's Castle, Shropshire.
(0588-638436).
All profits from these sales go to the Society funds.
The Chairman then declared the Meeting closed.
A short break followed when refreshments were served by the ladies.
RAILWAY PRESERVATION IN BRITAIN TODAY
This was the title of a fascinating talk and film show, following the IGM and given by Mr Ron Davies, Bishop's Castle.
He made the point that enthusiasts, such as himself, whose principal interest was working main line steam, now have very limited scope in this Country and have to look increasingly to far off under-developed countries for this form of traction.
The first film contained excellent material concerning the narrow gauge railways, in particular the Talyllyn Railway — the forerunner of the preservation movement — and the Ffestiniog Railway.
The second film was devoted to preserved main line steam, including the SVR goods train visiting Newport (Mon) as part of the 150th Anniversary Celebrations of the GWR.
Many thanks to Ron for such an interesting evening and we hope that he will give further shows in the future.
THE WINTER PROGRAMME
Our next talk and slide show will be given by a most distinguished speaker, Mr Graham Vincent of Wolverhampton, a former chairman of the Tal-y-Llyn Railway.
He will be talking about ‘The Minor Railways of Shropshire’.
Russell Mulford says that Mr Vincent has given talks to the Shropshire Railway Society several times and they are always events to look forward to.
It is unfortunate that the talk comes quite so soon after Christmas, but I hope all members living locally will make every effort to come and I know that they will be glad they did.
The talk is on Friday the 5th of January 1990 at our usual time of 7.30 p.m. at the Community College.
Members might like to note that the first half hour is usually a chance to chat; we try to get the talks under way by eight o'clock.
REMINISCENCES
The first of the BCRS winter meetings was held at the Public Hall, Bishop's Castle, on Friday, 6 October 1989.
The Chairman for the evening — Mr R. Mulford — welcomed all present to an evening which was to be an informal discussion centred on Members' reminiscences of the BCR in its working days.
To set the scene, however, we were fortunate to have Mr Jack Bedell (BCRS member), a well-known local farmer whose family have lived in Bishop's Castle for many years, to recall his memories in a talk on the BCR and its importance to the business and farming community.
This led on to many of our older members recalling their experiences too.
All the information obtained is being collated and will be published in the Journal in due course.
PRESERVATION NEWS
The Glenburrell Bridge:
On Saturday 11th November five members of the Society met the owner of the Glenburrell bridge, Major Minton Beddoes, who kindly spent the whole afternoon with us discussing, not only the bridge itself, but various aspects of the line such as access to it and possible future developments.
He would like it made clear that the line is not a public right of way, but he does not object to access under suitably controlled circumstances.
It was agreed that the Society would undertake a project to restore the bridge, which has suffered from the ravages of weather and plant growth for a long time.
The first task will be to remove saplings growing too close to the bridge, but I must hasten to reassure conservationists that we were unanimous in agreeing that this must be done sensitively.
We have already ear-marked one fine beech for only minor surgery.
The remaining work will be on the bridge itself and will entail some reconstruction of the parapet and a great deal of work on the pointing.
Such work is not without its dangers and the Committee is currently making enquiries about an insurance policy.
Volunteers working on this and future projects will also be required to wear the appropriate safety gear.
Full details of the guidelines for volunteers are given below.
Why are we going to all this trouble over a bridge that we don't own and that will probably never see a train again?
There are two or three reasons.
The main one is that it is now the only complete remaining structure of the BCR, apart from three stations which have become houses.
Thus it is the one complete record of how well the line was constructed — forget the stories of how run-down it was after years of poverty.
Apart from that, we like to think that we are a preservation society in a small way, and this project will show what we can do.
Needless to say, all contributions of time, money, materials or food to feed the troops will be gratefully received!
The Horderley Station Platform:
I have been in contact with Butterley Brick Ltd. and I am hopeful that they will contribute some materials.
STOP PRESS: Bricks are now promised.
BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY — MODEL COACHES
Committee Member, Mr C. M. Lavender, has kindly offered the Society two model coaches on permanent loan — an offer which your Committee has gratefully accepted.
One coach only needs a small amount of work to restore it to its original condition, but the other requires extensive work.
The Society are now seeking a skilled modeller to carry out this work and have undertaken to bear the costs involved.
Mr Lavender writes:—
‘My father, Mr F. Lavender, was appointed Town Clerk of Bishop's Castle in 1922, in succession to Mr Ernest Griffiths and at the same time purchased the latter's solicitors’ practice and the old office building.
This building contained a cellar, stacked up to the door and ceiling with all sorts of stuff, some of it junk and rubbish, but also including a number of deed boxes, some furniture and several very interesting old items, e.g. an Admiral Fitzroy barometer, letter scales etc.’
‘This all needed careful sorting, particularly the contents of the deed boxes, and with little space available, it was some time in 1925 before the job was complete.
It must have been then that the two coaches came to light because we moved house in 1925 and quite certainly the coaches were never at the old house but appeared very early on at the new one.
I am convinced that stuff had been accumulating for many years in this cellar and that Ernest Griffiths had no idea what was in there.
There were, for example, two old wooden boxes containing torn up paper and many stamps from Penny Blacks to Edwardian; also a number of other relics from his brother's model-making activities.’
‘The brother's name may have been John Griffiths but I have no real confirmation of this.
I was told, back in those days, that he had built a working steam model of the locomotive to go with the coaches, but this must have left the district some years earlier, as my father never saw it, and never met John Griffiths, though he knew of Ernest from about 1910, having started his articles in that office.
Ernest had no family, but I have been told that there were nephews.
Whether these were John's family or whether there was another brother or sister I do not know, but I have never been able to find out anything about who they were or where they went to.
He was quite capable of building a locomotive as I have a working steam model threshing engine, on about the same scale, that also came from the old office.’
‘Wouldn't it be grand to find a cellar like that in this day and age?!’
The coaches are in 5’ gauge and are 21’long x 7 ¼’wide x 9 ¾’high.
There are two centrally positioned doors on each side and two lampholes in the roof.
Each coach runs on a pair of 2 ¾’ brass wheels.
Paintwork is black with white roof.
Much attention has been paid to detail — the makers' plates bear the markings of the Midland Carriage Works.
These are thought to be models of the original coaches used on the BCR which were later sold to the Golden Valley Railway.
They are also similar to coaches described as being in use on the Brecon & Merthyr Railway.
Research into these interesting vehicles is continuing — meanwhile if you have any information, please let the joint Editors know.
MUSEUM ROADSHOW — BISHOP'S CASTLE
Your Society was pleased to accept an invitation to participate in the Museum Roadshow held at The Community College, Bishop's Castle on 22/23 September 1989.
The stand and materials used were similar to those used at the Steam Engine Rally.
Members manning the stand were kept busy answering many questions from both adults and children.
Clearly occasions such as this are much enjoyed by the public who attend and are a valuable source of publicity for the organisations taking part.
This event was the fourth major Living History Exhibition run by the SWSHAS and was visited by some 300 children and 150 adults.
The Exhibition celebrated Museums Year and also gave the opportunity to display some of the County's resources.
SCC staff (Shrewsbury, Acton Scott and Much Wenlock) attended and helped to identify objects brought in by member of the public and answer questions on display material.
Of particular local interest were a Bronze Age spearhead found near The Lea an fragments from a German bomb dropped on Oakley Mynd in 1940.
(One of this stick of bombs exploded approximately 400 yds. east of the BCR bridge near Cook's Cottage).
The cast of a thigh bone of the Shropshire Monster attracted much attention.
The Regimental Museum KSLI loaned uniforms supplemented by a collection of medals and memorabilia all expertly explained by Major Thornburn KSLI (Ret).
NOTES FROM THE HON SECRETARY
Photos and information are now coming in as promised at the Steam Engine Rally and Museum Roadshow which the BCRS attended.
The first items that I wish to acknowledge are from Mr Norman Wheeler of Stokesay.
These are two photos and a rubbing.
The first photo is of ‘Carlisle’, showing the engine over the open inspection pit on the goods platform side at BC Station with tender removed and the centre axle and wheels also removed.
The date is not certain, but we think it would be somewhere around 1925.
The second photo shows the GWR loco on loan to the BCR whilst both of their engines were out of commission in 1930, on the occasion of it being decorated at Craven Arms Station to transport the son of our local MP (The More Family) returning from his honeymoon.
The rubbing was taken off the ‘Carlisle’ tender plate, denoting the quantity of water that the tender held.
Mr Wheeler informs me that his family moved to Craven Arms from the Ross- on-Wye area.
His father was a carpenter and one of his first jobs was helping to build the Salop County Council depot in Clun Road, Craven Arms and that the stone used to construct the entrance came from the BCR bridges at Horderley.
The stone was also used to construct the entrance of the Divisional Surveyor's house further on down the Clun Road.
The Society would like to express their sincere thanks to Mr Wheeler for the gifts of these photos and information.
Further news in the next edition of the Journal.
MR DAVID BAYES OF EDINBURGH
Following the publication in the national railway press of the formation of the BCRS, the above-named person wrote to me, giving me certain information regarding artefacts of the BCR.
Since then we have kept up an ongoing communication with one another.
Mr Bayes is very interested in the BCR, due to the fact that his mother was a Kitson — a direct descendent of the family who built ‘Carlisle’.
He has also presented several photos to the Society that are new to me and we reproduce one in this Journal — others will follow in further editions.
The Society wish to extend their sincere thanks to Mr Bayes for information and photos.
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of, please contact Paul Lucas — Tel.
No. 0588 638446 — a BCRS member.
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contact Mr M Lawson- Finch, ‘St Cyres’, 20 Downs View Rd., SEAFORD, E. Sussex, BN25 4PT — a BCRS member.
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Rd., LLwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
(BCRS member)
STRETFORD BRIDGE JUNCTION
There is no known plan of the arrangements at Stretford Bridge when the BCR opened, and by the time the first 1/2500 scale Ordnance Survey plan was surveyed in 1883 only the platform remained.
This plan is from the 1901 revision.
At the bottom of it the Cheney Longville road can be seen crossing the double track of the Shrewsbury and Hereford joint line, as it still does, by an overbridge.
The signalbox that controlled the junction is shown as a small building marked S B. Signals are shown by dots identified by the initials S P, and a milepost on the joint line is marked M P. The BCR's single track curves away to the left from the junction points, and the small platform of the halt lies on the right of the line.
STRETFORD BRIDGE — A TEMPORARY STATION?
A passenger looking out of the right-hand window of the carriage after the train for Bishop's Castle had clattered over the pointwork away from the Shrewsbury and Hereford joint line, to curve westwards into the Onny valley, would have seen a small timber platform marking the site of a temporary station that became a permanent feature.
To discover the origins of a station in such an unlikely place we must look to the problems faced by the BCR when it began working.
Although the railway's opening ceremony had taken place on 25 October 1865, the company was probably not granted running powers over the joint line from Stretford Bridge Junction to Craven Arms until several months had elapsed, for BCR trains did not begin to run into Craven Arms station until 8 January 1866.
Even then, the Board of Trade had still not authorised the opening of the BCR, and when Lt Col W Yolland, one of the Board's Inspectors of Railways, visited the railway on 26 January, he found that the arrangements for receiving BCR trains at Craven Arms had not been completed.
The most important item lacking was a turntable, which was needed so that Bishop's Castle locomotives could work chimney first both up and down the line — an important safety consideration for passenger traffic as the engines would have been likely to run more steadily when going forward.
Yolland saw that the BCR had installed a turntable at Stretford Bridge, constructed a platform and upon it had placed a temporary station — presumably a building of some sort.
There must also have been a loop so that locomotives could run round their trains in order to be at the front for the journey back to Bishop's Castle.
These arrangements, Yolland was told, were intended to make the line complete in itself, so that it could be opened independently of the execution of the works at Craven Arms.
No-one told him that BCR trains had already been working into Craven Arms for more than a fortnight.
Yolland recommended that the Board of Trade authorise the BCR to open its line for running between Stretford Bridge and Bishop's Castle only, and the Board presumably did so.
The BCR then announced that passenger traffic would commence on 1 February 1866 with four trains daily, two of them mixed, and all running into Craven Arms.
Not only had Yolland been deceived about the BCR's intentions at Stretford Bridge; he had also failed to realise that the need to reverse trains at Lydham Heath made tender first running on some part of the line inevitable, whether or not there was a turntable at the lower end of the railway.
Perhaps the real reason for the temporary arrangements at Stretford Bridge was to enable trains to be run between there and Bishop's Castle before agreement to work over the joint line had been reached.
Whatever their purpose, the turntable, loop and building were probably removed within a relatively short time, for in the years following its opening the BCR could not afford to keep anything that it did not need.
The platform may have been left, although there is no indication that it was used until Stretford Bridge began to appear in the timetable as a request stop in 1890.
As there was no building, tickets could not have been issued from there; it would be interesting to know if it was possible to buy tickets to Stretford Bridge.
The Railway Clearing House Handbook of Stations for 1904 lists ‘Stretford Bridge Junction Station’, suggesting something rather more grand than the single platform, without even a name board, that represented the sole facility for passengers here.
The timber-faced platform was built into the side of a cutting which truncated the small hillock lying between the BCR and the joint line.
At the back of the platform was a fence, and although it had apparently been painted white in the early 1900's, in later years the paint had peeled off and bushes had grown up on the cutting side to provide a new backdrop to the isolated platform beside the overgrown railway.
Stretford Bridge could have been little used after the first few months of the BCR's life, when passengers presumably had to walk between there and Craven Arms — unless horse-drawn transport was provided along the road.
Can anyone recall catching a train to or from Stretford Bridge?
Write and tell the editors if you remember the halt being used — we should all be interested to hear about it.
THE DINAS MAWDDWY RAILWAY AND THE HENDRE DDU TRAMWAY
It is becoming a tradition in our family (extended by friends) to do a fairly long walk between Christmas and the New Year, to walk off some of the effects of the turkey and tone up the system for the usual see-the-New- Year-in celebrations.
This time my new-found railway craze had to be accommodated, and so in December 1986 we did a walk taking in part of the old Hendre Ddu tramway network and the Dinas Mawddwy Railway.
The Dinas Mawddwy Railway is remarkable even by the standards of the last century in that it was financed largely by just one man, Mr Edmund Buckley of Bryn Hall, Llanymawddwy.
The family was not native to the area, but had made their money in trade in Manchester, and, let us be fair, spent it very generously in providing much-needed railway communication for the area.
Indeed, Mr Buckley was either too generous or too fool-hardy (probably a bit of both) for his own good, for he eventually went bankrupt.
It is no surprise to learn that Mr Buckley also put money into the Channel Tunnel Company (the first one, of course).
Nevertheless, the line was built and opened officially in 1868 and there were plans to extend it to Bala by tunnelling under the mountains.
This extension was never built.
The line was seven miles long, single track, and of standard gauge.
It depended for its prosperity on the local slate quarries and when these ran into trouble so did the railway.
The line closed in 1908, re-opened in 1911, was given a boost by two world wars, and survived until 1951, when damage to a river bridge presented the usual choice — spend or end — and it closed finally.
Connecting with the railway at Aberangell was the Hendre Ddu Tramway network.
This was of narrow gauge (1' 11’) and opened in the same year, 1868, to carry slates from the Hendre Ddu quarries and timber down to the railway.
It was initially horse-drawn, and later a Simplex Tractor was used.
There was more than one branch.
The network closed in 1939.
Not knowing the area well, and conscious of the time of year, I did a survey walk with a friend.
We started at the old junction with the Cambrian Line, Cemmaes Road, and immediately found a problem.
Due to a road scheme the line taken by the railway was far from clear.
As I said in a previous article, the Dinas Mawddwy Railway has been obliterated in some places much more than other lines I have walked.
Naturally this depends on the type of area and I am talking about hilly rural areas like this one.
I have no doubt that obliteration of closed railways in some parts of the south of England has gone much further.
However in rural Wales and Shropshire, my usual hunting grounds, the norm is the occasional road scheme, the odd building, maybe a breach in an embankment, and certainly some overgrown areas, but otherwise an intact railway trackbed.
The Llangurig line is a classic in this respect; much of the damage is due to nature and man has not gone out of his way to remove a monument of the past.
I have discussed old lines with various people and a common view seems to be ‘preserve what you can, without being silly about it’.
Eventually we worked out where the line had been and followed it for a short way up to a demolished bridge.
The abutments survive and are substantially built.
There were two bridges over the R. Dovey; I do not know which was the one whose state of disrepair forced the closure.
To cross the river we returned to the road, followed it for some way parallel to the railway and then joined the line again near a farm.
The track now survives and is quite easy to follow as far as Cemmaes.
There are two points of interest near Cemmaes.
The first is an overbridge, probably for pedestrians and cattle.
It must have had substantial embankments leading to it, for the nearby ground level is that of the line.
All that survives now is two walls, standing in splendid isolation, up to the deck height of the bridge.
The second point of note is that in places hollows in the ground were bridged on low piers, rather than filled, the more usual and cheaper method.
A farmer explained that the area is subjected to floods sometimes, and it was necessary to let the water run away to the river.
However this is not obvious since the land runs down to the hollows.
Only when the water is very high will it run the other way.
There is a second river bridge near Cemmaes, also demolished.
To rejoin the line one turns left along the road, crosses the river on the road bridge, and then turns right.
It is possible to take a difficult route back to the line almost immediately, or go on to the next farm and follow a track there.
The trackbed is not particularly badly overgrown here, but is, however, very wet under foot in places.
We found no particular problems in getting to Aberangell.
Just short of the village there is one point where the track is lost and the land has reverted to its original contours.
The line crossed the road on the level and then entered the village behind a row of houses.
We decided to start the later group walk at Aberangell, because a mixed group of people will inevitably be slower than just two reasonably fit men and a dog.
On both walks we left the railway near the station and turned left along the Hendre Ddu Tramway.
This starts along a walled lane which opens out into a field.
I thought the tramway quite remarkable in that the trackbed is sturdily built in stone and still very clear.
After a few hundred yards it crosses a road and indeed has become a road, which we followed for two miles.
We then left the tramway (grid reference SH 822 113), though I mean to explore it more fully on a future occasion, and turned right up a forest track past some quarry buildings.
There were now two miles uphill ahead of us with good views of mountain scenery.
We passed into a conifer forest and followed firebreaks downhill until a road was reached.
After two miles of road, and maybe the first blisters and unknown muscles making their presence felt, came the test!
A marked footpath through the trees seemed almost vertical to the wearier souls, and indeed it was steep (SH 838 136).
The top, however, is rewarding, and well worth the climb.
One energetic character asked if we minded waiting while he climbed another two hundred feet to see what the view over a nearby rise was like.
The rest of us descended to the valley bottom and had our lunch in a derelict cottage (SH 833 142).
I forgot to mention that we were accompanied on the walk by our own Welsh collie bitch and a borrowed Corgi dog.
Lunch-time entertainment consisted of Madam being very unladylike and seeing that the Corgi neither got any bits of sandwich that were going, nor too much attention.
A couple of miles along well-marked tracks, and then the verge of the A470, brought us to Dinas Mawddwy.
We by-passed the town and went straight to the former station, which is actually not in the town itself, but at Minllyn.
The station site is now owned by Meirion Mill, an enterprising woollen manufacturing company.
The site is distinguished by an imposing pair of gates, there is the station building itself and the mill.
It is possible to visit the mill, though it was not open when we were there.
However teas were available.
A 600 yard narrow (2') gauge line following the old trackbed was opened by Meirion Mill in 1975, but unfortunately it closed in 1977.
We left the station in the proper way, along the railway.
Apart from the odd fence there are no particular problems to start with.
Later it is easier to follow the road, which is never far from the line, to Aberangell.
However there is one stretch, substantially higher than the road, which has some points of interest.
(The start is at SH 857 130.)
Sleeper depressions are very clear along this part of the line, and, apart from that, there are some cut hardwood tree stumps of a size which I could hardly believe, bearing in mind that the line has been closed only thirty-five years.
Presumably some growth could have started before closure on a run-down line, but it would have been very small.
There is also an old goods wagon at this spot, but it is not from this line.
We walked no further on the trackbed itself, because on the first walk the owner of the land here had gently but firmly expressed the view that his fences might suffer if climbed over.
I can see his point of view, and will take the opportunity to express my appreciation of those farmers who cheerfully give permission with no more than the usual reminder to shut the gates.
Since I started walking railways I have been amazed at how many other people do it, so the poor farmers potentially have a lot to put up with.
The land rises most of the way to Aberangell, so the railway was well below us and usually visible.
Some stretches are lost, but one or attractive embankments and cuttings remain.
Incidentally, what is it about old railway earthworks that one finds attractive?
I can't say, but I don't think I'm alone in the feeling.
Certainly they evoke a whole string of imaginings about past scenes — the construction, people travelling, especially on outings, steam trains with all the associations they conjure up, and so on.
However, many of these earthworks and their settings are attractive in themselves.
We were fortunate in having one car parked at Cemmaes, so it was possible to extend the walk by a couple of miles and finish it there, just before the daylight went.
For once I didn't take my beloved camera with me to record the state of the line, for the simple reason that it results in very slow progress, and that is hardly wise near the shortest day of the year.
So I suppose the Dinas Mawddwy Railway will see further action sometime in the future.
Acknowledgment:
This article was first published in the VORRSA Newsletter and is re-printed here by kind permission of the Editor.
Notes:
There is a short history of The Dinas Mawddwy Railway, accompanied by some excellent photographs, in Vol 2 of Branch Line Byways by G F Bannister.
Published by Atlantic Transport Publishers, Waterside House, Falmouth Rd., PENRYN, Cornwall, TR10 8BE.
Eight other Central Wales branch lines are also featured in this volume.
Vol. 1 by the same author deals mainly with branch lines from Cleobury Mortimer, Ludlow, Woofferton, Kington and the Craven Arms-Wellington branch.
Oxley-Kingswinsford provides the final chapter.
Both volumes are highly recommended to anyone interest in small branch lines.
(Cost when published £2.75 and £3.25 for Vols 1 and 2 respectively).
Maps:
The above-mentioned Dinas Mawddwy Railway and the Tramway are clearly marked on Sheets Nos 116 and 127 of the 1’ O. S. Maps of 1947 and 1952 respectively.
THE BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY ABUSED
The Railway Times was a journal published from 1837 to 1914 and is now of great interest to railway historians as a contemporary record of events.
In its earlier years it was extremely outspoken in its condemnation of anything that failed to gain its approval.
The BCR was certainly not one of the Railway Times's favourites, as the following extract from the issue for 6 January 1866 shows:—
BISHOP'S CASTLE
This wretched abortion is submitting one of its most impudent proposals to Parliament.
The preamble recites that the line between Bishop's Castle and Craven Arms is ‘complete’, which is a ‘misapprehension of dates’ at all events, inasmuch as there is neither station nor locomotive on the line.
The preamble further asserts that the company are making ‘considerable progress’ on the remaining portion of the main line between Bishop's Castle and the Cambrian, which is not exactly according to fact, in as far as the term ‘considerable progress’is popularly understood.
The branch obtained last year from Chirbury to Minsterley remains with its ground unbroken, and yet the directors of the Bishop's Castle are not ashamed to appear in Parliament with a demand to use so much of the Cambrian as will permit the former to effect communication with the Mid-Wales, another abortion over which no one can be found to preside save Mr Whalley, and which has not yet ventured to publish a return of traffic, or to submit an account of its income and expenditure for public inspection.
THE KERRY RAILWAY
Not so far from the Bishop's Castle Railway another standard gauge branch line ran between Abermule and Kerry.
On 1 May 1956 this branch finally closed, having been opened to passenger and freight traffic in 1863.
From 1864 it was a constituent of the Cambrian Railways Company.
In 1922 the Kerry Railway was absorbed by the GWR and in 1931 it was closed to passengers but continued to run for freight only as part of the BR (Western Region) from 1 January 1948.
It has been said that the failure of this railway to attract passengers was due primarily to the tedious roundabout rail journey to Newtown via Abermule as compared with the direct and cheaper approach to the market town by bus.
Although the Kerry Railway terminated at Kerry, there was a Tramway from there on which began as private lines laid on a narrow gauge of 1' 11 ½’(popularly known as the ‘2ft gauge’).
This line was, in fact, the private timber carrier from C J Naylor's Bryn Llyarch estate to Kerry.
The tramway ceased to run in April 1895.
In 1917, however, it was relaid on the 1’ 11 ½’gauge under the joint auspices of the War Department, the Board of Trade and the Forestry Commission.
Early in 1922 the tramway fell into disuse for the second and final time.
A detailed history of the Kerry Railway and Tramway will be found in the Oakwood Press Vol.
No 32 —‘The Mawddwy, Van and Kerry Railways’.