

HONORARY SECRETARY -KEN LUCAS
At the committee Meeting on 12 February 1990, the Chairman opened the proceedings by expressing his regret that our Hon.
Secretary, Mr Ken Lucas, had recently been taken ill but happily was now out of hospital and making good progress.
However, he has to take a complete rest for the next few weeks.
The Committee unanimously decided to send Ken their best wishes for his speedy recovery and hope that he will soon be able to resume his duties.
ACTING HONORARY SECRETARY
Your Committee have appointed Mr D H Young as Acting Honorary Secretary until Ken Lucas is able to return to duty.
Please address correspondence to ‘Silverdale’, Corporation Street, Bishop's Castle.
Tel 638575.
COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Committee Meetings have been held on 27 November 1989, 8 January and 12 February 1990, when the following matters were discussed:
Bishop's Castle Railway Photographs
The Hon.
Secretary reported that the first set of four photographs had proved to be very popular and sales to date had covered costs.
It was decided to put in hand production of a further set of four photographs.
125th Anniversary of the Opening of the Bishop's Castle Railway
It was noted that the 125th Anniversary of the Opening of the Bishop's Castle Railway is on 14 October 1990.
Your Committee feel that this should be suitably celebrated.
Have Members any suggestions please?
Stand at the Shropshire Steam Engine Show, Bishop's Castle, 26/27 August 1990
Application is being made to Shropshire Steam Engine Society for space for a stand at their Show at Bishop's Castle, to be held on the August Bank Holiday, 26/27 August 1990.
It was felt that the Stand we had last year was well worthwhile.
Filing Cabinet
Mr C M Lavender has kindly donated a 4-drawer metal filing cabinet to the Society -our thanks to Mr Lavender for this gift.
The Hon.
Secretary reports that he has already put it to good use.
Expenses — Visiting Speakers
Your Committee have agreed that visiting speakers be re-imbursed for their travelling expenses.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
Your Committee have given further consideration to the date of the Annual General Meeting of the Society and now recommend that it be held on 4 May 1990 at 7.30 pm at the Community College, Bishop's Castle.
Following the meeting, Mr R Mulford has kindly offered to give a talk and slideshow.
LATE NOTE: It is now possible that this will have to be switched to the Public Hall.
If so, then this will be advised in the local press.
OTHER MEETINGS
A piece of hot news is that we now have an offer from BR to visit the Shrewsbury signal box on the 6th of April, though the number of visitors is limited to twenty.
The probable meeting time will be 7.00 p.m. in the foyer of the station.
If you would like to go, please contact me, Keith Lucas, Tel. 09743-516 at once.
Leave your telephone number, because the decision whether to go ahead with the visit, or hold another talk, will have to be a late one.
There is a committee meeting on Monday 9th of April at 8.00 p.m. at the Boar's Head, Bishop's Castle.
Honorary Members
The question of Hon.
Members was raised and it was decided to defer this for decision by the A.G.M. as to the merit of the suggestion, and if agreed, whom the Society would wish to make Hon.
Members.
SETTLE AND CARLISLE RAILWAY
A diesel hauled rail trip, from various pick-up points in the West Midlands, will take place on Saturday, 5 May 1990, organised by Bill Morris Coaches, Bromyard.
The highlight of this event will be a one way trip over the famous Settle to Carlisle route.
Provisional timings are:
The cost is £22.50 per person.
Full details from Bill Morris Coaches, Broadbridge House, Bromyard, Hereford, HR7 4NT.
Tel 0885-82285.
Bookings to be made direct to Morris Coaches.
IMPORTANT -all bookings to be in by 15 April 1990.
Some forms are available from Acting Hon.
Secretary.
NEW MEMBERS
The Society is still receiving applications for membership, one of the most recent being from Australia.
Sgt. Peter Allen of the Royal Australian Air Force is now a member of our Society.
Peter emigrated to Australia some 20 years ago from Leicester and at this time picked up an old copy of Bradshaws and became interested in the Bishop's Castle Railway.
His other interests are The Potts and the LNWR & GNR Joint Railways.
For anyone who wishes to communicate with Peter, his address is:—
Sgt. P W Allen A47409, RAAF East Sale, Victoria 3852, Australia.
Welcome to the BCRS, Peter.
WINTER PROGRAMME
The Community College, Bishop's Castle has been the venue for three very interesting presentations, all well attended despite some very difficult weather conditions.
Many thanks to the visiting Speakers and all who helped in any way.
Train Timetables in Wartime Britain
Timetables are not everybody's favourite reading.
An imaginative study of the significance of earlier tables, however, can reveal a lot of information of real interest to the railway enthusiast.
So it was not surprising that Col. Savill should have had an attentive and appreciative audience on 1 December 1989, when he spoke on this subject.
Perhaps the item most worthy of consideration revealed by this examination of timetables in wartime Britain was the contrast between the dominance of railway usage at that time and the present post Beeching era.
The size of the former timetables, when compared with the present volumes, is ample evidence of this extraordinary curtailment of British Railways.
The Minor Railways of Shropshire
The programme continued on 5 January 1990, when Mr G Vincent (Society Member) of Wolverhampton and a former Chairman of the Tal-y-Llyn Railway, gave a talk and slide show dealing with the minor railways of Shropshire, of which there were quite a number in the heyday of steam.
He commenced by dealing with the importance of Shrewsbury as a trial centre and the value to rural communities of the branch lines, until the latter largely suffered closure due to competition from road transport.
Among the lines featured were the Shropshire & Montgomery (The Potts), Ludlow-Clee Hill, Cleobury Mortimer & Ditton Priors, The Severn Valley and the narrow gauge Snailbeach & District Railway.
This border country is indeed rich in railway history.
One Man's View of Britain's Railways
Mr P R Field of the Oldbury Steam Live Railway Museum (Bridgnorth) was our guest speaker on 2 February 1990 when he gave his views on Britain's railways over the years, first explaining that it was in Scotland that he began to take an interest in them and then he become ‘hooked’!
Mr Field followed his talk with a film on a very original model railway which he has constructed in his garden at Oldbury.
There will be an opportunity to see this when he holds an Open Day in aid of charity in the Spring.
Mr Field has joined the Society and I gather that he intends to put his practical skills to use for our benefit and make a model of the Bishop's Castle signal.
The Central Wales Line
For our final talk in the previously arranged programme (note the earlier comment on the Shrewsbury signal box visit) we were treated to an excellent talk on the Central Wales Line by Mr Tony Birdwood of Llanwrda.
After giving a short overview of the history of the line he showed us a selection of slides covering various aspects of the line.
Particularly successful aspects of the talk were the invitation to contributions from the floor, which led to several interesting points being made, and the mix of old photographs from the heyday of steam with modern ones mostly taken by himself.
It is clear that the Central Wales Line still has much to offer, even with modern traction, much as we would all like to see BR allowing us the pleasure of an occasional steam run.
PRESERVATION NEWS
Our preservation programme is now under way.
As we have said before, we like to think of ourselves as a preservation society, rather than just a rail interest society, valuable as such societies are.
We are also trying to be sensible about what a small society can do.
At the time of writing we have had two productive days clearing the front of the Horderley station platform and building the lower courses of the new facing wall.
The original wall survives at the base to a greater degree than we had realised and gives us a substantial footing.
There were no fewer than four courses of bricks at the base (good old Victorian quality there!) and they remain, stepped down from the platform side to the railway side.
The main wall was presumably just two courses, as will be the new one.
I have taken some photographs, but they are still in the camera, and I hope to have a complete set ready for the next Journal.
Members who have worked on this project are Beth and Ray Arnold, Stephen and Tim Wallace, Mrs Jeffrey, Paul Lucas and myself — the Magnificent Seven you might say!
We have been fortunate in receiving donations of bricks for the facing wall and the required sand and gravel for the building work from two companies who operate in Shropshire.
An acknowledgement is included elsewhere in this Journal.
Our other project for this year — the Glenburrell bridge — was described in detail in the last Journal.
Work has not started yet because our tree feller has been heavily involved in clearance work after the recent storms.
He has also had problems with soft ground, so the first phase, the removal of a small number of trees, will probably be delayed another week or two.
GEMS FROM MY TICKET COLLECTION
Illustrated are some of the tickets in my collection of the Bishop's Castle Railway and BC Transport Company material.
I hope that the following notes are helpful.
BC Transport Company also used tickets with no operator's name.
Excursion Tickets were multi-coloured and must date from the early days of the Railway.
Golf tickets must be quite unique.
The second class return Bishop's Castle to Horderley, by the style, suggests that it is an early printing, whilst the single from Bishop's Castle to Horderley is without doubt a very late printing.
This also applies to the first return.
Parliamentary Tickets appear to have been used to the end, although the need to supply a Parliamentary Train or trains had long passed.
Privilege Tickets were issued and were buff with a red line down each half.
I have a B10 to Plowden and some used dated halves Craven Arms to Bishop's Castle.
Blanks were also stocked and I have seen a printed example to Shrewsbury.
THE TANAT VALLEY RAILWAY
The Tanat Valley Railway was at one time likely to have been involved in the grandiose proposal of 1845 concerning the West Midlands, Shrewsbury and Coast of Wales Railway Company.
This would have actually brought Bishop's Castle, Montgomery Town, Llanfair Caereinion, Llangynog, Llandrillo, Bala, Ffestiniog and Portmadoc within its compass.
Many schemes were in fact devised before finally, in September 1899, the formal start of the construction of the TVLR was made.
Actual railway operations, however, did not begin until 5 January 1904, when a special train left Oswestry for the ceremony which took place at Porthywaen Station.
The train consisted of Cambrian 4-wheelers headed by a ‘Seaham’ class 2-4-0 and it proceeded up the Tanat Valley.
Shortly after midday the train reached Llangynog, where the passengers got out onto the new station platform.
The special train then left Llangynog for Oswestry at 4.30 pm.
The next day regular passenger and goods services began.
Like the Bishop's Castle Railway, the TVLR Company remained in the hands of the Receiver, and was in debt to the Cambrian Railway to the tune of £40,676 16s 8d by 1917.
It was not until 1921 that the TVLR (Transfer) Order was put into effect so that it was now absorbed by the Cambrian Railway, which itself was soon to be absorbed by the GWR in January 1923.
From January 1948 the line formed part of the Western Region of British Railways until the closure of practically the whole line in December 1960.
The first timetable of the TVLR showed 4 trains daily, taking 70-75 minutes from Oswestry to Llangynog.
In 1908 the goods became a regular all-the- year-round service and remained so right up to 1951.
By 1925 there were three trains each way, the last ones on Wednesdays and Saturdays running later than on other days.
During World War II the passenger service was reduced to 2 trains each way.
After the War the timetable remained practically unchanged although less time was needed for turn-round at Llangynog because of the decreased goods traffic.
Because of a coal crisis, passenger services ceased over the whole line as from 15 January 1951 and were never resumed.
Goods services between Llangynog and Llanrhaiadr Mochnant ceased as from 1 July 1952 for ever.
A daily weekday goods continued to run from July 1952 until December 1960 when heavy floods damaged the Tanat river bridge between Llangedwyn and Pentrefelin.
From that date no trains ran beyond Blodwell Junction which, until 1979, continued to be served by a mineral train which left Oswestry at about 11.45 am.
It is worth noting, in conclusion, that Llangynog is now the site of an attractive complex known as ‘Glendower’.
The owners have built a gift shop and a tastefully laid out caravan site on the actual station area.
As a tribute to the old railway they have retained the platform edge, decorated it with flower urns, and it thus forms a feature of the site.
A detailed history of the Tanat Valley Light Railway will be found in the Oakwood Press Vol 48, to which the present article is indebted.
KITSONS OF LEEDS
The Bishop's Castle Railway's most distinguished locomotive ‘Carlisle’ was built by the famous firm, Kitsons of the Airedale Foundry, Leeds in 1867.
A word or two about the company might therefore be of some interest.
The Works were established by James Kitson in 1835, and in 1838 the company was known as Todd, Kitson & Laird.
Todd had previous experience with Matthew Murray, one of the early pioneers, and David Laird was a rich farmer, who supplied capital to the business.
Todd soon set up as a rival next door, a firm which became Hudswell, Clarke & Co.
A Mr Hewitson joined Kitsons, whose title changed several times, but from 1863 the firm was known as Kitson & Company.
The first locomotive was built in 1838, and was extracted from the small workshop by demolishing a wall to let it out!
This engine, ‘Lion’ was an 0-4-2 for the Liverpool & Manchester Railway, and had a remarkable career, much of it at Princes Dock, Liverpool, where it was used by the Mersey Docks & Harbour Board as a stationary boiler until it was discovered in almost original condition and restored at Crewe for the 1930 L & M R film ‘The Titfield Thunderbolt’.
Today it is probably the world's oldest locomotive still capable of steaming.
Kitsons' first export order was in 1844 for Germany, and from then on they sent engines to countries in all parts of the world.
Two delightful 2-2-2WTs of 1855 have been preserved in India, which has also retained a magnificent Kitson Pacific, built in 1924.
‘Aerolite’, in York Museum, is a much rebuilt remnant of a loco built for the Great Exhibition of 1851.
Locomotives were also built for many British railways and industrial users.
An 0-6-2T, now on the North Yorkshire Moors Railway, is an interesting example.
‘Carlisle’ was ordered in 1867 by T B Nelson for the Bishop's Castle Railway and was Works Number 1421.
About that time, Kitsons had been supplying 0-4-2s and 0-6-2s of similar dimensions, to the Mid Wales Railway, later Cambrian Railways, and also 0-6-0s to the Great Northern, Midland and Rhymney Railways.
Stationary and pumping engines and other general engineering items were subsequently added to the product list.
Most had distinctive characteristics.
Kitsons' own designs for light railways, such as the Leek & Manifold in Staffordshire, were rugged and powerful.
A Barsi Light Railway 4-8-4T is preserved.
Another area of Kitsons' pre-eminence was in the short fashion for steam trams in the last quarter of the 19th Century.
About 300 were built, of which two 3ft gauge examples for the Portstewart Tramway in Northern Ireland have survived (one in Belfast and one in Hull), and a third is at Ferrymead Museum, Christchurch, New Zealand.
An interesting development by Kitsons was the Kitson-Mayer articulated loco, which proved practical and successful, even after the rival Beyer Garratts had been introduced.
The Kitson-Meyers were particularly useful on the difficult Andean lines of South America, where one or two remain.
Steam railcars early this century were another example of Kitson workmanship.
They could be found in South Australia, India, South Africa and on the Belfast & County Down and South Eastern & Chatham Railways.
World War I brought big orders for standard Great Central 2-8-0s for the Railway Operating Division and these were scattered widely across the world.
Alas, within 10 years there were too many locomotive builders for the small number of orders being produced in those depressed time.
Kitsons experimented with a combined steam-diesel loco — the Kitson-Still 2-6-2.
It was not unsuccessful, but development costs were high and the market was not there.
The firm went into receivership and loco building creased in 1938, though engineering work continued through World War II, when the works became the home of McLaren Diesel Engines.
Goodwill and patterns were taken over by Robert Stephenson & Hawthorns (who in turn succumbed) and in 1960 by the Hunslet Engine Company of Leeds.
Kitson locos had a reputation for good workmanship and innovative design.
‘Carlisle’ might have been but one humble example of nearly 5500 locomotives constructed by the firm, but it was an honest product of a reliable company.
Think of her when you see ‘Lion’— Kitsons' pioneer product!
A JOURNEY ON THE BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY
I have been asked by several Society members what it was like to take a ride on the Bishop's Castle Railway, and the best description that I know of is the account by the late Sir Jasper More in his book, ‘A TALE OF TWO HOUSES’, published by Sir Jasper in 1978.
On the last occasion that I spoke to Lady More, our President, she gave me permission to reprint this extract from the book.
For any member who wishes to read the book in full, the Bishop's Castle Library has a copy.
‘Then back to the station, to rescue the luggage, and to the train, destined to become so familiar, standing in the bay.
‘Passengers are requested not to throw out of the window anything likely to injure men working on the line’, said a notice in the compartment.
Above the seats would be photographs of strange mysterious places; Kenilworth, Llandrindod Wells, the Mumbles.
The whistle would blow and Aunt Dorothy would wave goodbye.
We were on our way.
Past Condover, past Dorrington, past Leebotwood and then the climb up into the South Shropshire hills, once seen never forgotten.
Our excitement would rise; soon we knew the names; on the left the Lawley and Caradoc, on the right the Longmynd, and in two minutes we would be drawing up at the nerve centre Church Stretton.
Then down the hill to Marshbrook, and the great event of the day, the station at Craven Arms.
Once we decanted ourselves and our luggage, rushed over the bridge and there standing in the bay was our special favourite, the Bishop's Castle train.
The Bishop's Castle train, even to our youthful eyes, was not like other trains.
It was not even like other railways, for it was a railway on its own, the Bishop's Castle Railway.
It had started -so we came to learn — in the 1860's and partly under More auspices, with the double purpose of providing an English-Welsh railway link across the border and of providing rail connection between our local town of Bishop's Castle and the outside world.
As happened not infrequently where the More family was concerned, the money ran out, the first object was abandoned and the enterprise focused on Bishop's Castle.
It was nine miles of single track with five intermediate stations.
The landowners had not been paid, the company went bankrupt and thereafter spent the rest of its corporate life in Chancery.
Occasionally landowners would get restive, and men would be employed to interrupt the service by removing the rails.
The company would retaliate with a double gang, one gang to decoy the landlords' men to drinks in the nearest pub, the other to put back to rails to let the train through.
Eventually this was thought to be precarious and the landowners were bought out by the Bishop's Castle Railway Defence Trust to which my father had to contribute five hundred pounds.
There were two engines, ‘Carlisle’ and ‘No 1’, and we would look eagerly to see which was heading the train today.
‘No 1’ was small, but ‘Carlisle’, built in 1865, was a largish engine with tender and we soon got to know that Whitaker would let us onto the footplate.
(Once, in the 1914-18 War we did the footplate journey in the company of eighteen very large Australian soldiers).
Mademoiselle and the luggage would have to find a carriage.
As the carriages were successively condemned, the ‘receiver’, who ran the railway, would buy up job lots and you never knew if you would be travelling in something from the Brecon & Merthyr, the London & South Western, or the Cockermouth Keswick & Penrith.
The whistle would go, Whitaker would show us how to swing over the regulator and we would be away.
The first station, Stretford Bridge Junction, was one of our favourites.
It had no station nameplate, just a platform with two metal advertisements for Mazawattee Tea and Bibby's Foods, and it could only be approached by trespassing across a farmer's field.
Horderley, Plowden and Eaton were grander, each with a red brick station house.
We would begin to thread our way up the railway's magical valley with sonorous rumbling as we negotiated bridge after bridge over the River Onny.
At Plowden was a road bridge built of transverse timbers with gaps in between; it was here, on one of our journeys, that we sighted a cow with all four legs fallen through the gaps and its horns waving over the line; Cadwallader (the guard) had had to pull it by the horns with main force while the station master sat on its head and Whitaker slowly drew the coaches past.
Eaton had no station master but was looked after by Mrs Bason, a station mistress of character who, if there were no waiting passengers, would signal the train through at walking pace.
Newspapers and packets would be thrown out by Cadwallader onto the platform while any more fragile parcels would be carefully lobbed into Mrs Bason's out-stretched skirt.
The next station would be Lydham Heath.
From Eaton onwards we finished the magical valley and launched into an expanse of open country, beyond which we would see the Linley skyline.
Excitement mounted; the hills we got to know so well; on the left Heathmynd, then Rhadley and Linley Hill; and then on the right the dramatic landmark of the Beech Avenue curling over the top of Norbury.
Somewhere short of these hills was our destination, the Cottage.
Lydham Heath was as far as the railway had managed to get on its way to Wales.
It now formed a terminus and for the final two miles to Bishop's Castle the train had to reverse.
This meant all trains had to stop and, as Lydham Heath was our station, this was all to the good.
It consisted of a short platform, a tin shack, and a set of buffers up against the hedge which bordered the main road.
This was the branch line station from which, in time long past, my grandfather's forgotten London guests had had to be retrieved.
There was no house in sight; no form of transport; indeed hardly any road traffic.
In railway terms there were awkwardnesses; all trains had to include goods and cattle as well as passengers; sometimes it would be the cattle rather than the passengers who finished up opposite the Lydham Heath platform; and in my grandmother's day, Cadwallader had had on occasions to shout in broadest Shropshire to the driver; ‘hitch up the train a bit, Harry.
Mrs More canna’ get in'.
But none of these problems were ours.
For there, waiting on the platform, would be our ever reliable guide, philosopher and friend, Sam Davies.
The important part of Sam's equipment today would be the wheelbarrow.
While Whitaker was manoeuvring ‘Carlisle’ to the far end of the train for the last two miles to Bishop's Castle, Sam would be loading the luggage.
The luggage made a sort of mountain in the barrow, and some of it would have to be lashed to the sides with ropes.
A farewell wave to Whitaker and off we would all set, pacing the wheelbarrow with Sam.’
DERAILMENT AT EATON
From the Bishop's Castle Advertiser, 19 June 1914:
Not a little consternation was caused on Monday by the delayed arrival of the 12 o'clock train conveying passengers, daily newspapers, the mail and goods.
It transpired that the engine had fouled the points at Eaton.
With commendable promptitude Mr H Harris ordered a lorry to be requisitioned on the line, and this conveyed to the town -arriving two hours late -two male passengers, the mail, news parcels, and perishable goods.
Afterwards Mr Harris, accompanied by the loco superintendent, Mr Sinclair, Mr J Lewis, and several employees proceeded on the lorry to Eaton and undertook operations for the resumption of the train services.
The 5.40 train service Bishop's Castle to Craven Arms was resumed as usual.
THE BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY IN THE ‘NEWS OF THE WORLD'
The following item appeared in the ‘News of the World’ on 24 May 1931:
RAILWAY STATION RUN BY A SIXTY-YEAR-OLD WOMAN
Mrs Annie Bason, although sixty years of age, carries out her duties as stationmaster, porter and booking clerk at Eaton, Shropshire, on the Craven Arms to Bishop's Castle railway.
Mrs Bason has issued all the tickets from her station during the past 25 years, during which time she has had no assistance whatever.
FROM THE HON SECRETARY'S COLLECTION OF QUOTES
(On the BCR)
‘A journey over it was in itself an education in railway history.
No telegraph or telephone, just as in early days of railways, when nobody knew where a train might be until it arrived; a track laid with rails and chairs which in some cases were dated 1865 and ballasted with earth; semaphores of antique pattern, dropping into the post for ‘all clear’ and appearing to be operated on no principle at all…’
Thus and more wrote the late much travelled T W Perkins in ‘The Railway Magazine’ about the Bishop's Castle Railway after its closure on 25 April 1935.
SUBSCRIPTIONS
Believe it or not, the society has now been in existence for a year and subscriptions became due on the 16th of March.
Unless a decision to the contrary is taken at the A.G.M. it has been decided to keep the subscription at the 1989-90 level, namely £5.
Why not renew now and be sure?
This notice does not apply to members who have joined since Christmas for whom the current membership lasts until March 1991.
N.B. Please send your membership card with your subscription, so that it can be updated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In appreciation of gifts of materials from two firms with operations in Shropshire we are pleased to include our first ever advertisements.
Butterley Brick Limited
We gratefully acknowledge the above firm's gift of the bricks for our platform restoration project at Horderley.
Butterley Bricks has its headquarters in Ripley, Derbyshire and has donated the bricks through its South Wales Sales Office, 44 Chepstow Road, Newport, Gwent NP9 8XB .
If its prompt and courteous treatment of our request is anything to go by then I can say with confidence
The BCRS also wishes to express its gratitude to the Revd.
K Hathaway of Holt Construction Ltd., Church Stretton, Shropshire for the gift of sand and gravel for the same project.