

HONORARY SECRETARY — KEN LUCAS
As many Members will already be aware, our enthusiastic Hon Secretary — Ken Lucas — is able to resume his duties after his recent illness.
Correspondence should now be sent to him as usual.
COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Your Committee met on 9 April 1990, the main business being arrangements for the Annual General Meeting to be held on Friday, 4 May 1990 at 7.30 pm at the Community College, Bishop's Castle.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The A. G. M. was held on Friday, 4th May 1990 at the Community College, Bishop's Castle.
The Chairman opened a well-attended meeting with a few words about the gratifying growth and vigour shown by the Society in its first year.
The Secretary gave further details of some of the activities undertaken, which have covered the whole range of railway interest from history, through trips on both BR and preserved lines, a walk along part of the old BCR trackbed, and a varied and interesting programme of talks, to a start on some preservation activities on a scale consistent with the resources of the Society and the area.
These are described elsewhere in this Journal.
The Treasurer reported that the Society's funds are in a healthy state, again the details are given later in this Journal.
In a motion from the floor, the committee was thanked for doing a good job in the previous year, and re-elected en bloc.
Several points were discussed; these will be written up more fully in the minutes.
Brief reference was made to the Society's hopes of establishing a railway museum in the town.
Suitable buildings are being considered but no final agreement has been reached at the time of going to press.
It is clear that finance, even for a small museum, cannot be taken lightly, but this is generally felt to be a project that the Society should go ahead with, if at all possible.
Mr Philip Field was appointed Membership Secretary.
It is a measure of success in any society when this post is filled as a way of taking the pressure off the General Secretary and we are grateful to Mr Field for offering his services.
TALK AND SLIDE SHOW — R MULFORD
After the formal part of the A. G. M. was concluded, members were treated to a most entertaining talk, film and slide show by Russell Mulford.
The material was taken from his personal archive, and consisted of a cine film of the Cambrian Lines and slides of railway scenes around Shrewsbury.
On both media Mr Mulford managed to show us some previously unseen and very imaginative shots, and indeed it is a constant source of wonder how many good photographs taken in our own area are unknown to most of us.
I think we must twist his arm to see if he can repeat the trick in the longer time available in one of our winter talks.
In the mean time, thanks Russell for an entertaining hour.
CARLISLE TO SETTLE RAILWAY
A number of members went on Bill Morris's chartered train on the 5th May 1990, the highlight of which was the run from Settle to Carlisle along this route, which is spectacular for both its engineering works and for the countryside through which it passes.
The route from Shrewsbury was via Crewe, Warrington, Wigan, Leyland, Blackburn, Clitheroe, Hellifield and so to Settle and on to Carlisle.
Return was along the West Coast Main Line over Shap to Crewe.
What a field day the train spotters had!
A thoroughly enjoyable day out.
BRADSHAW'S — NOVEMBER 1867
This is the first entry of the Bishop's Castle Railway in Bradshaw.
A piece of history, as Mr Bayes of Edinburgh, who sent us this entry, points out:
THE CLEOBURY MORTIMER AND DITTON PRIORS LIGHT RAILWAY
The Light Railways Act of 1896 led to development in many places including that of the Cleobury Mortimer and Ditton Priors Light Railway.
This was particularly linked with the opening up of the Dhu stone mines on Lord Boyne's estate…on March 23rd 1901 an order under section 10 of the Light Railways Act was granted.
Not till 13th February 1907, however, did the contractors take possession of the required land near Cleobury Mortimer.
In July 1908 the railway was ready for traffic and on the 19th a daily freight train commenced to run.
Motive power was initially provided by the contractors: An 0-6-0 saddle tank, Fleetwood.
Lt. Col. Yorke approved the opening of the railway to passenger traffic under certain conditions.
The most important of these restricted speed to 20 mph for the first 6 months of working in order to permit the road bed to consolidate satisfactorily.
On 20th February 1908 the CM and DPLR opened to passenger traffic from Cleobury Mortimer Junction and terminated at Ditton Priors some 12 miles on.
The railway prospered from the mineral traffic emanating from Ditton Priors and also Detton Ford.
Detton Ford was connected in February 1909 by an aerial ropeway with the Magpie Quarries on Titterstone Clee Hill.
During the whole of its independent life the railway possessed only 2 locomotives, both Manning Wardle outside cylinder, 0-6-OSTs, named Cleobury and Burwarton, which were taken over by the GWR in 1923 and survived in traffic until the 1950s.
They were given Nos 28 and 29.
In GWR days the Royal Navy established an ordnance depot at Ditton Priors.
This line used its own diesel shunting locomotives.
In July 1938 the official announcement of passenger closure came.
This took effect on and from Monday September 26th, the last passenger trains actually running on September 24th as there was, and never had been a Sunday service.
By 1946 the requirements of the naval depot had reduced to such an extent that it was only necessary to provide a thrice-weekly service.
Nationalisation had little effect upon the operations of the line.
British Railways, like the Great Western before them, continued to run the supply trains up as far as Cleobury North Crossing.
Then at Easter 1965 the CM & DPLR closed quietly.
It is believed that the last trip was run on April 16th, and eventually the Ministry of Defence advertised the track and other materials for sale by tender, the closing date being 4th October 1966.
A detailed history of the Cleobury Mortimer & Ditton Priors Light Railway will be found in the Oakwood Press, Vol No 21, by M R C Price.
DON'T FRIGHTEN THE HORSES
Even by the time the Bishop's Castle Railway opened in 1865 there was still sufficient concern about the frightening effect of trains on horses to make special precautions necessary.
The railway was close to the turnpike road down the Onny valley in several places and the Turnpike Trustees asked for screens to be provided in 3 locations.
Lt Col W Yolland reported on this request to the Board of Trade, for which he was an Inspector of Railways, on 25th December 1865.
Where the line emerged from a cutting north of Plowden the Trustees were no doubt concerned that the sudden appearance of a steam locomotive from the cutting would be startling.
The exact point, which is about ¼ mile south of Myndmill Bridge, is described in the report as 14 miles 10 chains from the intended junction with the Cambrian Railways, north-west of Montgomery, for it is characteristic of the BCR's unfulfilled ambitions that, although its main line to join the Cambrian was never completed, the railway's mileposts showed the distance from that non-existent junction.
Yolland thought that the only action needed was to cut down some of the trees in a young plantation in order to give people riding or driving on the turnpike a good view of an advancing train in the cutting.
In two other places he considered that screens were needed.
At 17 miles 2 chains, which is between the railway bridge over the Onny and the stone overbridge, known to the BCR as Longville Bridge, he required a screen 8 feet high and 80 yards long, on the north side of the line.
It is difficult to understand why this screen — which was presumably intended to be a close-boarded fence — was needed, as the turnpike road is some distance away, one field beyond the other side of the river.
The track that crosses the BCR at Longville Bridge runs below the railway at this point, and perhaps the screen was for the benefit of users of the track, but as it is also below the railway on the opposite side of the ford, and no screen was suggested there, it seems doubtful that this was the reason.
Screening was also required near Hill End, at 15 miles 77 chains, where the road from Bishop's Castle drew close to the railway and ran beside it for a short distance.
The bend has now been smoothed out, but was at the end of the straight section of road south-east of Hillend Farm.
The screen was obviously needed because trains approaching from Horderley would be hidden from view by the spur of hillside around which the road ran.
The general intention in each case was not to screen the train completely, but to ensure that trains did not suddenly come into view without warning, for that would have given no time for a rider or driver to control the horse, which might otherwise bold or unseat its rider.
This was a genuine and reasonable cause for concern at a time when the peace of the Onny valley was not disturbed by the frequent and fast motor traffic of today, but only by the infrequent passage of a Bishop's Castle Railway train.
THE CENTRAL WALES LINE
Members will recall that Mr Tony Birdwood, of the Heart of Wales Line Travellers' Association, gave an excellent talk on the Central Wales Line at our March 1990 Meeting.
With grateful acknowledgement to Mr Birdwood, the first instalment of his talk is printed below, as the Heart of Wales Line is of much interest to this Society:
‘Our Association was formed in November 1981 when a group of concerned people got together at a public meeting in Llandrindod Wells.
The aims then, as now, were to promote the use of the Heart of Wales line and railways in general, and to liaise with BR and other rail user groups with similar aims.
We feel that we have largely succeeded in these aims, but more of that later, as I would like to take you back to the early nineteenth century when the object of our association was first mooted.
The history of the Central Wales Line, to give it its proper name, is typical of many railway lines in Great Britain.
A few local lines were built first, and then a larger company stepped in with a grand strategy to create a trunk route and compete for valuable traffic.
In May 1858 the Knighton Railway was incorporated, providing for the construction of a railway from Craven Arms to Knighton, on the English/Welsh border, a distance of some 12 miles.
The line was opened to Bucknell in October 1860, and to Knighton in March 1861.
The running of this line was taken over by the London and North Western Railway in July 1862.
During this time, the Central Wales Railway proper had been incorporated by an Act of August 1859, to build a single line of track from Knighton to Llandrindod.
This line was opened as far as Crossgates, now Penybont, in October 1864, and throughout to Llandrindod in September 1865.
While this was being completed, the Central Wales Extension Railway obtained an Act in July 1860 to build a further 26 miles of single track to Llandovery.
This line reached a crossing of the Mid Wales Line, of the Cambrian Railway, at Builth Road in April 1867, then known as Llechryd but taking its name from the high level station which still survives.
The line reach Garth in May, Llanwrtyd in June 1867 and finally Llandovery in October 1868, having traversed the two most significant engineering problems on this section — the Sugar Loaf tunnel and Cynghordy Viaduct.
Shortly afterwards, this extension was absorbed by the London and North Western Railway.
However, it is misleading to think of the Central Wales Line as having developed originally as a route from NW England to S Wales.
Its beginnings are to be found in the Llanelly Dock & Railway Company, one of the earliest Welsh railways, which obtained powers in 1835 to build a line from Llanelli to Llandeilo to serve various collieries and the rich agricultural land in the Towy Valley.
This section was opened to Ammanford, known then as Dyffryn Lodge, in 1841, and to Llandeilo in 1857.
Shortly after this, in April 1858, the Vale of Towy Railway was opened from Llandeilo to Llandovery, thus making the through route from Craven Arms to Llanelli complete when the extension opened in 1868.
The basic network was supplemented by the opening of 2 further lines by the Llanelly Railway from Llandeilo to Carmarthen in 1864 to 1865; and from Pontarddulais to Swansea Victoria in 1866 to 1867.
These additions were taken over the London and North Western Railway in 1871 after a convoluted legal battle with the Llanelly company.
The upshot was that the London and North Western Railway, much to the disgust of the Great Western Railway — which later absorbed the Llanelly Railway — obtained easy access to the coal, tinplate and other industrial traffic of SW Wales, and to the developing holiday areas of West Wales, such a Tenby.
In the last quarter of the 19th century sections of double track were opened in order to cope with the many freight and passenger trains which used the line, which of course saved many miles between the NW of England and SW Wales.
Typical was Llandovery which, on average, recorded over 90 freight movements per week during this period.
Almost all the stations and halts on the line had a thriving goods and passenger business, the railways then being THE PRIME MOVER, and the only efficient means of transport over great distances.
Despite the severe engineering problems encountered in building the line, which are still very evident today, the line prospered into the first quarter of the 20th century.
At grouping in 1923, the smaller railway companies, who in many cases were responsible for the rural railway feeders, were bought out, and often their lines were closed and lifted.
At the same time, a gradual decline set in with the advent of freight transportation on the roads.
Again in 1948, after struggling through the war years, for which services they were grossly undercompensated, these 4 grouped companies, virtually bankrupt, were nationalised, and the less profitable lines, often many of them rural, were closed and the tracks lifted.
In 1962-3 a committee, headed by Dr Beeching, reported on the need for rationalisation of the British Railways network.
Again the countryside suffered with the closure of rural lines, may of which were in Wales.
The Central Wales Line survived, only to face a further closure proposal in 1967 and its second reprieve in 1969.’
This article will be concluded in the next issue.
HORDERLEY STATION PLATFORM
This job is now completed and we are hoping to hold a short ‘opening’ ceremony as soon as it can be arranged.
The new brick facing blends very well with the surroundings and adds to Ray and Beth Arnold's work over several years in restoring Horderley to the appearance of a station.
Incidentally Ray has re-erected the Horderley station sign.
The most regular workers on this project were Ray and Beth themselves, Tim and Steven Wallace, Paul and Keith Lucas, but we are certainly not forgetting Mrs Jeffrey, who was prevented from attending more often by her tireless work for the Stone House campaign.
(For the benefit of non-local members I will explain that the Stone House is the Cottage Hospital, earlier the Bishop's Castle workhouse.
The county Health Authority proposes to turn it into a mere residential home, removing hospital facilities.
BCRS members of all people will understand something of the geography and communications of the area, and will, I am sure, be interested to know that it was to the Stone House that our Secretary was taken after his recent heart attack.)
GLENBURRELL BRIDGE
The preservation group is now turning its attention to the Glenburrell Bridge project.
With such a small group we are very much at the mercy of the various other events in people's lives and all of us have distractions over the summer.
We are hoping to arrange a working weekend for either the 11-12th August or the 18-19th August.
I should have mentioned that Joe Lawley and Graham Lloyd have already made a start with tree clearance.
Some youngish trees which are damaging the bridge have been removed and others are still to be removed.
Necessary jobs are helping to clear up the smaller branches and making a start on repointing the bridge itself.
We would be delighted to welcome anyone who fancies the occasional day in the fresh air doing whatever work lies within your capacity.
If you are interested, above all don't be put off by the thought that you are too old/young/weak/unskilled etc.
We ourselves are learning as we go along.
BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY — DOCUMENTS DEPOSITED AT COUNTY RECORDS OFFICE, SHIREHALL, SHREWSBURY
For any member who is interested in the Acts of Parliament relating to the Bishop's Castle Railway, I intend, over the next issues of the Journal, to give you details of them.
They are all deposited at the Shirehall, Abbey Foregate, Shrewsbury, and are available for inspection.
In all 18 Acts are deposited there, together with other items of interest concerning the Bishop's Castle Railway
THE BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY
(Bishop's Castle to a junction with the Hereford line near Craven Arms)
1860
Plans deposited at the Shirehall, Shrewsbury.
1861
Bill receives assent.
1862
Final Surveys.
1863
Railway in financial trouble.
1865
Opening postponed and Act obtained for a branch from Chirbury to Minsterley to join with the Welshpool line, not constructed.
1866
Line opened.
Bailiffs move in and stock sold at the George Hotel, Shrewsbury.
1877
Further financial trouble.
1935
Line closed.
The original scheme was to link the Oswestry & Newtown Railway with a junction at Montgomery and to join the Shrewsbury & Hereford Railway at Wistanstow.
Of this, only the line between Craven Arms and Lydbury
388
Deposited 30 November 1860 (but see below).
Bishop's Castle Railway, plans and sections (from a double junction with the Shrewsbury & Hereford railway near Wistanstow to a south-facing junction with the Oswestry & Newtown Railway near Caer-Howel and branches to Montgomery and Bishop's Castle.
Engineers:
R & B Piercy, Welshpool.
Acting Engineer:
Mr J. Mickleburgh, Montgomery.
Joint Solicitors:
Thomas Griffiths, Bishop's Castle.
William Wilding, Montgomery.
Parliamentary Agents:
Pritt, Sherwood, Venable, Grubbe & Jones.
Main line:
1 title page, 5 sheets of plans, 5 sheets sections, 1 sheet cross-sections;
Bishop's Castle branch:
1 sheet plan and sections.
Montgomery branch:
1 sheet plan and sections.
All bound together in paper covers.
1 book of reference, 1 notice and 1 O S Map 1’.
*************
388b
Deposited 30 November 1861
1 loose sheet plan and section of intended deviation at Lydham (apparently necessitated by deviation of Oswestry & Newtown Railway).
1 book of reference.
1 galley proof of Gazette Notice of Intended Application for ‘Alteration of Line during progress of Bill’.
*************
396
Deposited 30 November 1860
Shrewsbury & Welshpool Railway, Extension (to Bishop's Castle from Minsterley and to join Oswestry & Newtown Railway at Caerflos; doubling at Minsterley Branch; Level Crossing in Alderbury).
Engineer: Edward Woods, 8 New Palace Yard, Westminster Solicitor for the Bill: S F Noyes, 5 Lincoln's Inn Field, London
1 title page; 1 published map; 15 sheets, plans, sections and cross-sections; 1 book of reference containing Notice.
*************
441
Deposited 30 November 1864
Bishop's Castle Railway, extensions to Montgomery & Craven Arms Stations (short continuation from Junction authorised) and to authorised Wenlock Railway at Marsh Farm (a short spur from authorised line to run northwards to line named).
Engineer:
B. Piercy, 28 Great George St.
Solicitors for the Bill:
Thomas Griffiths, Bishop's Castle William Wilding, Montgomery.
1 title page; 1 OS Map 1’; 3 sheets plans and sections, bound; 1 book of reference; 1 notice.
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact PAUL LUCAS,— Tel.
No 0588 638446 (BCRS member).
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contract MR M LAWSON-FINCH, ‘St. Cyres’, 20 Downs View Road, Seaford, E Sussex, BN25 4PT (BCRS member).
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Road, Llwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
[BCRS member]
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
NEW: I am now publishing a new publication starting in June 1990 entitled ‘Railway Antiques Monthly’.
Full details on request.
POSTCARDS
Mr G J Martin writes ‘At one time there was a commercially available post card showing a freight wagon in a Bishop's Castle Railway yard.
If a BCRS member has a copy, then I would very much like to borrow it, or perhaps it could be published in the Journal.
From memory the wagon is No 1 in a fleet owned by ‘Bowen’.
Many years ago I came across the card in the Doll Museum in Wrexham and I've been on the lookout for it every since.’
Does anyone have information regarding this card?
If so please contact the Hon Secretary and also Mr Martin, who is at 17, Balmoral Crescent, West Moseley, Surrey, KT8 9QA.
AN EVENING OUT ON THE HEART OF WALES LINE
Picture a warm summer evening in June and the normal one or two travellers who would join the Heart of Wales Line at Craven Arms.
The 22 June 1990 brought a thrill to British Rail Guard, Mr Cyril Reynolds when 44 BCRS members and an enthusiastic ‘train-loving’ dog, Juno, joined the 19.26 service bound for Swansea, and travelled to Llandrindod Wells.
It is difficult to capture the essence of why a trip is enjoyable.
Little cameos come to mind:
The glorious greens of the rolling countryside in the slanting rays of the evening sun.
Magnificent patches of white elder, their scent adding to the heady summer evening.
The spontaneous friendliness of the Guard and his helpful care of his passengers.
The rural branchline atmosphere with all passengers friends and the sense of unhurried purpose of the train crew.
The moment when Juno, our canine train spotter, decided to leave the train for a better view at a wayside station.
Her slightly anxious mistress arrived, breathless, on the platform, to find her lead in the guard's capable hands, her nose raised adoringly to him.
The youngest BCRS member, 3-year-old Daisy Nottingham's look of horror as the train entered the first tunnel.
Her family's obvious enjoyment of her awe quickly reassured her again and she was up, searching for that little O of light which tells the end is in sight.
Nobody on their own and animated conversations all throughout the 2-car DMU.
New friendships made and old ones cemented.
Knowledge of the line shared both verbally and from the sheets with information on the passing stations.
The thrill of crossing the Knucklas viaduct with its castellated ends, some members for the first time.
Arriving at Llandrindod Wells and being carefully instructed by the guard how to cross to the other platform and the reassurance that he would be coming with us.
Our return DMU entering the station as we disembarked with the comfortable words from our guard —‘No hurry, now — it has to wait for me!’
The glass of wine brought round by smiling member Tim with his superb BCRS jumper with its fairisle train in 3-D on its track.
He being closely followed by pretty Sally with squash for those members who would prefer it.
Last, but not least, the care of the trip's organiser, the Social Secretary, as he ‘seemingly’ wandered up and down, sorting out the finances of the Group Ticket, talking to each member, handing out information, giving a sense of completeness to a splendid outing.
REPORT AND ACCOUNTS FOR 1989
These are given on the centre pages.
‘BISHOP'S CASTLE REMEMBERED'
In 1986, Bishop's Castle Local History Research Group co-operated with Martin Davies of Harrogate in organising the first-ever exhibition on the history of the Bishop's Castle Railway.
John Roberts’ collection and the two ‘CARLISLE’signs of course formed the centrepiece, but all sorts of other items came to light.
One of the chief pleasures was seeing the reunion of many people who had first-hand experience of travelling or working on the Line, and met against after many years.
As a result, Martin Davies and I later went to record some of them recalling their memories: Mr Sherwood at Glenburrell, Mr Sid Cadwallader, the late Mr Maurice Alderson and the late Mr Claude Summerfield among others.
I was surprised to find that Mr Summerfield had known the first Station Master of Bishop's Castle, Elisha Edwin Owen — it was a thrill to speak to someone who had received first-hand memories of the start of the Railway.
Even before that, I had been recording some of the memories of the older generation of Bishop's Castle residents, realising how many of them really did ‘well remember’ the early part of this century; much of this material has been used in the ‘RECALL’project at Stone House, whose members have contributed greatly to my understanding of that period.
Two marvellous collections of photographs came to light — Miss Puckle's and Mr Emmanuel Beddoes' — I have been given permission to use these, and many others lent by individuals.
Putting together some of the memories and matching them with photographs where possible, I have tried to give a flavour of life in Bishop's Castle from the turn of the century to the 1920s.
I chose to end the period about the time when the role of the Railway was beginning to be superseded by buses, lorries and private cars.
Its importance as a link between Bishop's Castle and the rest of the world in the days before motorised transport is emphasised by all the recollections of the time.
For a real account of the BCR we must wait for Martin Davies's definitive history, but although I have only included some of the anecdotes which crop up again and again, and a few photographs, many BCRS member have given invaluable assistance, and the presence of the Railway taken for granted throughout the time covered by ‘BISHOP'S CASTLE WELL-REMEMBERED’.
TV STEAM SEASON
A full season of steam railway films is to be screened on television this autumn.
Conceding that ‘millions of people are linked by an enduring minority interest which has been largely neglected by television’, Channel 4 is to broadcast a ten-day ‘steam season’ in September under the title ‘Going Loco’.
Classic feature films such as the ‘Titfield Thunderbolt’ and Hitchcock's ‘Strangers on a Train' are to be shown, as are important documentaries, including a new one about steam enthusiasts themselves, called ‘The Emotive Locomotive’.
There will also be a live outside broadcast form a preserved line.
Completing the history-making line-up are ‘4468 — The Record Breaker’, Equinox's ‘Iron Road’, ‘The Last Train through Medicine Hat’, ‘Night Mail’, ‘Manchuria Express’, ‘Palace on Wheels’ and ‘O. Winston Link’the most innovative steam photographer.
The season will be complemented by the best shorts in the British transport film unit's archive.
The season starts on September 22nd.
(Condensed from ‘Steam Railway’, with acknowledgements.)
THE PRODUCTION OF THIS JOURNAL
We have had one or two comments on items announced in the Journal too late to be useful.
The accompanying suggestion that we send round an additional sheet giving dates of events, at least within the area, has been taken up.
Please do keep telling us of any complaints or suggestions you have either about the Journal or about the way the Society is being run.
I am sure our editors will be pleased to include in future issues comments passed on either by word of mouth or in letters.
For the present let me put it on record that the main hold-up has been with me, in setting up the Journal for printing.
In a future issue we hope to explain exactly how it is produced.