

COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Apart from routine matters such as arrangements for displays at shows and discussion of the social programme there are two items of interest to members to report.
We have been invited to have a stall, with an exhibition of the railway, at next year's Bishop's Castle Agricultural Show.
This in itself shows that we have already become a recognised part of the local scene, but it is of particular interest now, in that 1991 marks the centenary of this event.
Since the railway would have been Bishop's Castle's main link with the outside world in 1891, we are strongly inclined to accept and the Committee will be discussing the details in future meetings.
It was of great interest to us to learn that a copy of the catalogue (programme) of the first show still exists and the railway is mentioned in it because of its role in transporting materials.
The show is being extended to two days in 1991, the 27th and 28th of July.
There has been some progress on the Museum.
The Secretary, and committee members Richard Newcombe, Graham Lloyd and Bill Jarvis went along to the proposed building to meet the owner, Mrs Davies, and Mr McCabe from the Leisure Services department, Shropshire County Council to discuss the proposal.
We are, of course, hoping to obtain some financial assistance from the county towards the cost of setting up the museum.
The attitude of the county representative was positive, but financial constraints will mean that we are likely to be involved in negotiations for some time to come.
A further meeting is scheduled for the near future.
TRIP ON THE WELSHPOOL-LLANFAIR RAILWAY
On Sunday 24th July twenty four members of the society and friends took a trip on our nearest private railway, the Welshpool and Llanfair Railway.
No doubt many middle aged and older people our area will remember the original railway before its closure and subsequent preservation.
We met at Raven Square, Welshpool in time for the 12 o'clock train.
The line is steeply graded and the locomotive ‘Joan’ had problems with slipping wheels early in the journey, getting stuck for a while until the crew could sand the rails by hand.
After that we had no more problems.
The railway offers a scenic eight mile ride in a variety of coaches from Europe and Africa — it has astutely cornered the market in demonstrating foreign narrow-gauge rail travel.
There was just enough time for a picnic at Llanfair Caereinion, or a look at the workshops according to taste, before we commenced the return journey.
Some of us went along and parked at Welshpool Station and took a look at the narrow-gauge line's original terminus where it connected with the Cambrian Line.
After indulging in one's usual moan about the virtual demise of freight on the Cambrian, we went along and spent a pleasant hour investigating an even older mode of transport at the nearby Canal Wharf Museum, which is well worth a visit.
Future Trips
The Committee would welcome suggestions from members for future trips.
Our two trips on the Central Wales Line have been very well supported and we have had a reasonable number on the two July ones (last year's was on the Severn Valley Railway).
Interest has been expressed in both the Crewe Heritage Centre and Ironbridge among nearby centres and I have received a suggestion that we might visit the Gwili Railway farther afield.
The Gwili is a small society running a two-mile line on a shoe-string and yet it is having some success in extending both the length of the line and its infrastructure.
It is well known for the friendliness of its reception and the readiness of its members to take time to talk to visitors.
It would entail a coach trip of about two and a half hours each way.
Alternatively if there were enough interest we could go part way on the Central Wales Line and arrange a coach pickup at an appropriate point.
A possibility next year is to bring forward the Central Wales Line trip — assuming that we don't try another line — to make a point about BR's cancellation of the evening trains for the duration of the winter timetable.
Probably some of the rail user groups would join us.
Let us know your opinion, especially if you live near the Central Wales Line and are affected by this change.
COMING TALKS
There is a change to the announced talk for next month.
Col. Savill has offered to give us a slide show
Five Years of Railway Slides (1966-1970)
This will cover a variety of material from the aftermath of the disastrous Beeching line closures of the early Sixties, when Col. Savill was able to record on colour film many of the much-loved structures of the railway scene that are now lost.
I understand that some locomotive photographs are also included.
Those who were looking forward to Col. Savill's repeat of his much acclaimed talk last December ‘The Summer Timetables of 1939’, which some of us missed due to last year's influenza epidemic or because of other engagements will be pleased to hear that Col. Savill has also agreed to give this talk at a future date.
In January another member, the popular local broadcaster Russell Mulford will be showing some of his large collection of archive material.
(Once at a committee meeting when I claimed to be the most nostalgic person present where railways are concerned, Russell was quick to put me in my place — second.)
This is guaranteed to be an entertaining evening of railway nostalgia.
In February a well-known speaker and broadcaster on a variety of railway topics, John Horsley Denton, will give us a talk on railways further afield.
These talks will all be at the usual time, date and place — 7.30 p.m. on the first Friday of the month, at the Community College, Bishop's Castle.
People who work late might like to note that we usually spend up to twenty minutes chatting before the talk gets under way.
OLDBURY STEAM MUSEUM
In mid-August a dozen members paid an evening visit to the Bridgnorth area, not this time to see the Severn Valley Railway, but to see the Oldbury Live Steam Museum, a complete garden given over to a variety of exhibits, mainly around a railway theme, but also with models of vintage buses, ships and aeroplanes.
All exhibits are constructed entirely from scrap and are imaginatively displayed with lighting and sound effects.
The whole museum has been built by one man, our membership secretary, Philip Field, over a period of more than a decade.
If you are likely to visit the Bridgnorth area it will be well worth your while to see it, but note that it is located a couple of miles outside the town, and a telephone call is necessary to find our when it is open, since Philip's work involves awkward shifts.
There is no charge for admission, but a donation would be appreciated, and the proceeds will go to charities such as cancer research.
THE MIDLAND METRO
For the first meeting of our 1990-91 winter programme our invited speaker was Mr Michael Parker of ‘Centro’, the West Midlands Transport Executive, who gave us a fascinating insight into the planning, routes and probable operation of the intended West Midlands light rail system.
It is hoped that the first line — Wolverhampton to Snow Hill — will be open by 1993.
This system constitutes an attempt to contain the growing road traffic problem in and around Birmingham.
(It would be unrealistic to think of removing road congestion entirely.)
Evidence suggests that new road building is not the answer as a new road rapidly fills up with cars, which often contain only one person.
On the other hand modern trams, modelled on Continental systems, particularly the one in Grenoble, can carry up to 250 people.
Mr Parker emphasized the virtues of tram /light rail systems — proven technology, more flexible and cheaper than ‘heavy rail’ systems, very safe, fast and environmentally friendly.
A striking point is the very extensive effort ‘Centro’ is making to inform and persuade the public that this scheme is a beneficial one — a welcome contrast to the many cases of official bullying one hears about!
‘Centro’ is even prepared to send speakers to rural railway societies far removed from the scene of action.
Other societies in search of a good speaker might like to take note of this.
In a perceptive question, one of our committee members, Russell Mulford, asked whether the scheme was a bad thing for Shropshire — because it might attract the funding that could otherwise be used to electrify the Wolverhampton — Shrewsbury line — or a good thing — because of the boost it will give to rail travel generally.
Who knows, someday we might see the Minsterley and Shropshire-Montgomeryshire lines restored as light railways to solve Shrewbury's commuter problems!
CLUN CARNIVAL AND SHOW
On Saturday August 4th 1990, the Society displayed a mini exhibition at Clun Carnival and Show.
A lot of interest was shown by the people attending.
Quite a few membership forms were applied for, together with promises of photographs, information etc.
Approximately 400 people visited our stand.
I would like to thank Paul Lucas, Bridget Nottingham and family, Tim and Steve Wallace, Richard Newcombe and Derek Whitefoot (who supplied us with a stand) for their help in erecting and dismantling the stand and their attendance during the event.
SHROPSHIRE STEAM ENGINE RALLY
The Society also repeated last year's successful experiment of holding a miniature display and bookstall at the famous Shropshire Steam Rally held in Bishop's Castle.
This year we sold books, souvenirs and model parts in co-operation with our member Len Davies, the proceeds going mainly to aid the Condover School for the Blind.
This part of the enterprise was particularly successful and we are grateful to Len for supplying the goods and our Hon.
Sec. for arranging it.
We also sold some copies of Mrs Janet Preshous's book Bishop's Castle Well-Remembered (see the last issue of the Journal).
Both Len and Janet kindly donated to our funds a percentage of the proceeds.
THE NATIONAL RAILWAY MUSEUM ON TOUR
During major works, including a new roof, at the National Railway Museum, York, the exhibits have been removed, some to the Great Railway Show in the Peter Allen Building and some to form the N.R.M. on Tour at Swindon (until 31st August 1990).
The N.R.M. on Tour is staged in the vast No. 19 Shop of the former G.W.R. works, Swindon.
The site of the works which at one time covered some 600 acres is now being re-developed by Tarmac (Swindon) Ltd., but part of the works including No. 19 Shop and the adjoining No. 20 Shop will be preserved.
Twenty three locomotives are on display from humble shunters to the famous, such as‘King George V’(in Shop 20 for overhaul), ‘Mallard’, ‘City of Truro’, ‘Evening Star’ and ‘Puffing Billy’.
On display also are a range of coaches, from the oldest preserved Royal coach in the world -namely Queen Adelaide's Saloon constructed in 1842 to the prototype BR Mk II coach of 1962.
Adjoining the exhibition in Shop No. 20 are the workshops of Swindon Railway Workshops Ltd., a company set up to carry out complete overhauls to locomotives, carriages and wagons (or their major components) for preservation societies, private owners and museums such as the N.R.M. many of the employees are ex the old Swindon works.
Work is also undertaken on modern rolling stock for industry.
The specialist tools including large lathes for turning the wheel rims of express steam locos are of great interest.
A quality exhibition well worth visiting.
THE CENTRAL WALES LINE
This concludes Tony Birdwood's article begun in the last issue.
In 1974, the Railways Act provided for the non-profitable services run by British Rail; this was the first recognition of the ‘social railway’.
During this period of contraction, both passenger and freight services were withdrawn at an alarming rate, being substituted by short-lived bus services and road freight transport.
The Central Wales Line did not totally escape: in 1964 the Pontarddulais — Swansea Victoria section was closed; through freight traffic ceased; in 1965 most of the line was again singled; and then in 1970 the service again reached Swansea via Llanelli into High Street station.
The direct link to West Wales between Llandeilo and Carmarthen was closed in 1963, despite the proposed use of this link and the Central Wales Line for the through Milford Haven oil tanker trains.
Historically, the rural railway line brought life to the areas it served.
Farming communities, such as are found in Central Wales, benefitted a great deal from the advent of the railway: it meant cheaper raw materials, but at the same time the value of farm produce increased due to the railways' ease of access to the more affluent urban markets.
Now, however, with only a passenger service remaining, the railway has as much relevance to the life of the land through which it passes as do the aeroplanes overhead.
The farmer's daughter, attending a distant university, may depend on trains with her Young Person's Railcard, but, in general the railways have been withdrawn from the rural scene they once so dominated.
By the end of 1981, more disturbing rumours were again in evidence, and as a result the Heart of Wales Line Travellers' Association was formed.
One of our early tasks was to confront the report of the Serpell Committee in May 1982, and accordingly we gave evidence at the All Wales Conference held in Cardiff in that year.
British Rail hoped that the Serpell Report would enable an increased level of investment to be budgeted within their external financing limit.
Unfortunately the bulk of the findings in the report suggested a kinship to Dr Beeching.
The worst option, leaked in a rather conspiratorial manner prior to publication, and which would have left Wales with two short stubs of main line, was immediately rejected by the Government, as if to say that to the public that now there was nothing more to worry about.
But for the people of Wales, the remainder of the report was equally bad, with the closure of many of our lines recommended.
It has been said that the report was the civil servants' idea of heaven, with even more figures for the number-crunching mandarins to compare with those that British Rail provided yesterday — to be followed by requests for further reports tomorrow to explain the discrepancies.
With our Association growing in numbers over the years, to what seems to be a plateau of about 1200 members, the collective voice has been heard, especially since some of those members are Community, District and Borough Councils; as well as various clubs and businesses.
By increasing public awareness of the line and its services through enhanced publicity, providing a regular volunteer buffet service and by having direct contact with the BR managers in the territory to discuss timetables and passenger grievances, we have been able to sustain a year on year increase in numbers using the line, and a gradual narrowing of the gap between attributable costs and revenue received.
Apparent success came with the announcement in April 1985 of a three quarter million pound investment programme to resignal the line.
Not only has this reduced the operating costs, but it has also meant that for the first time in its history the Central Wales Line has been able to support a Sunday service; indeed in July 1987, one Sunday saw fourteen train movements, what with BR's own service train, the various Recreation Ramblers, sponsored by the Sports Council, and two excursion rail tours.
The tragedy at Glanrhyd Bridge in October 1987 brought home to all rail enthusiasts the frailty of human endeavours.
We mourn those bereaved, and in their memory we welcomed the reopening of the line a year later.
We cannot be complacent, and a lot of hard canvassing needs to be done to regain lost passengers.
The Heart of Wales Line has come full circle; from prosperity in the early days, via near disasters, to what seems to be a gradual revival of its fortunes today.
We hope that with the help of its staff, its passengers and its supporters, the line can look forward to a future reflecting its hey day.
Our Association is in the business of urging people to WANT a better rail service: too many are of the opinion that a rail network is superfluous to the needs of the people of rural Wales.
It has been said that few revolutions have been so complete in the British countryside as the start and end of the railway age.
Some railways have certainly reached senility, but with the right investment and use, Welsh rural railways can, and will, be kept alive.
This concludes Mr Birdwood's article and again many thanks to him for the talk he gave last March and for permission to reprint same.
SEVERN VALLEY — 25th ANNIVERSARY
As part of their 25th Anniversary celebrations the S.V.R. staged a gala steam weekend on 21-22nd September 1990.
The large crowds present had a real feast of steam including some twelve trains per day each way and numerous engine movements at Bridgnorth as locos took their turns to take a train out or return with one from Kidderminster.
Undoubtedly the visit to the S.V.R. of ex LNER No. 4472 ‘Flying Scotsman’ was the star attraction, complete with plaque commemorating its record run on 8th August 1989 when on tour in Australia, of 422 miles non-stop from Parkes to Broken Hill, New South Wales, the longest non-stop steam hauled run ever.
Also in steam were ex LNER No. 3442 ‘The Great Marquess’, ex Southern No. 34027 ‘Taw Valley’, ex GWR No. 7819 ‘Hinton manor’, ex GWR No. 2857 (heavy freight loco), ex GWR 2-6-2 tank engine No. 4566, ex BR No. 75069 (class 4MT standard loco), ex LMS No. 8233 (class 8F Stanier), ex LMS No. 47383 (0-6-0T ‘Jinty’) and ex BR No.
D3586 (diesel shunter).
In steam but not running was ex WD 600 ‘Gordon’(a massive 2-10-0).
Under repair at Bridgnorth were ex LMS 46521 (class 2MT 2-6-0)—(boiler removed), ex LMS 5690 ‘Leander’(class 6P ‘Jubilee’ 4-6-0), ex GWR No. 5164 (2-6-0T), ex GWR No. 6960 ‘Raveningham Hall’, ex BR No. 80079 (2-6-4T), ex LMS No. 2968 (class 5MT 4-6-0) and ex GWR No. 4930 ‘Hagley Hall’.
Congratulations to the S.V.R. for all they have achieved over the past 25 years and I am sure that all members of the BCRS will wish them continuing success in the years to come.
BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY — DOCUMENTS DEPOSITED AT COUNTY RECORDS OFFICE, SHIREHALL, SHREWSBURY
This is Part 2 of a list of documents deposited at the County Records Office, Shirehall, Shrewsbury.
434
Dep. 30 Nov 1863 (but see below)
Central Wales & Staffordshire Junction Railway (from Catchen's Corner) Junction with the Stour Valley Railway, south of Wolverhampton and the Oxford, Worcester and Wolverhampton Railway, south of Dudley to the Severn Valley Railway at Bridgnorth and on to the Knighton Railway beyond Craven Arms; with branches to Swindon from the line from Dudley south of Trysull, a branch to Burton and Wenlock Edge; another to Bromfield making a south-facing junction with Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway and a north-facing junction to the proposed Bishop's Castle Railway via a spur at Craven Arms.
Engineers:
(none stated)
Solicitors for the Bill:
G. A. Crawley, Arnold & Green, 20, Whitehall Place, Westminster.H.
M. Wainwright, Dudley.R.
O. Backhouse, Bridgenorth.W.
Wilding, Montgomery.
Parliamentary Agents:
Jeyes & Bingham, 28, Parliament St., Westminster.
1 O.S. map — 34 sheets, plans and sections, bound, 1 book of reference containing notice.
434b
11 May 1864
Amendment: 1 title page, 34 sheets revised plans and sections, 1 book of reference.
434c
Amendments: 10 sheets revised plans and sections, alternating with pages of descriptive letter press, bound in paper covers, 1 book of reference.
440
Dep.
Nov 30th 1864.
Bishop's Castle Railway, extension from Chirbury to Minsterley, plans and sections (from a double junction with authorised Bishop's Castle Railway at Chirbury to end-on junction with Minsterley Branch at its terminus.
Engineers:
(none stated)
Solicitors for Bill:
Griffiths, Bishop's Castle.William Wilding, Montgomery
1 title page, 1 O.S. map 1’, 6 sheets plans and sections, bound, 1 book of reference, 1 notice.
441
Dep. 30 Nov 1864.
Bishop's Castle Railway, extensions to Montgomery and Craven Arms stations (short continuations from junction authorised) and authorised Wenlock Railway at Marsh Farm,(a short spur from authorised line to run northwards to line named).
Engineers:
B. Piercy, 28, Great George St.
Solicitors for the Bill:
Thomas Griffiths, Bishop's Castle.
William Wilding, Montgomery.
1 title page, 1 O.S. 1’, 3 sheets plans and sections, bound, 1 book of reference, 1 notice.
(Note: The Society is in possession of a photo-copied book of reference dated Nov 1864, relating to the parish of Churchstoke regarding the last two bills.)
Photo-copies of acts of Parliament relating to the Bishop's Castle Railway, held by the Society.
5th July 1865 Bishop's Castle Railway (deviations)
7th Aug 1884 the Bishop's Castle Railway and Montgomery Railway Act.
BOOK REVIEW
’ Bishop's Castle Well-Remembered’
This is the title of an excellent book recently written and published by Janet Preshous (society member) dealing with life in Bishop's Castle from the turn of the century until the 1920's.
Of particular interest to Society members even those far afield who perhaps do not know B.C. very well, if at all, is the way it illustrates the influence the Railway had on the community at that time.
A must for all who know B.C. or may have visited the area and to anyone interested in the many facets of rural life as it was in years gone by (ISBN 0951596403, price £5.95).
GLENBURRELL BRIDGE
Work continues whenever we can muster a gang of at least two, which is quite often.
Actually we have got on pretty well with the tree clearance, though there is still plenty to do.
Of course we will be affected by the weather for the next month or two, as chain saws in particular are dangerous in wet weather.
Though this is the priority at the moment, we have also cleaned a small patch of the stonework under the arch, cutting out the old mortar and wire brushing the surface.
It is intended to experiment with different mixes of cement in order to achieve a good colour match.
I would like to emphasise that all are welcome to take part.
Our gangs have varied between two and ten, usually being somewhere in the middle.
If you live out of Bishop's Castle, just telephone Paul Lucas (same number as the Hon.
Sec.) or me, stating roughly when you might be available.
Make sure we have your ‘phone number.
We will make an effort to let you know when we are going to have a session working at the bridge.
I am putting together an album of our preservation activities as we go along and will try to make it available on meeting nights and other public occasions.
LETTERS/ARTICLES
Society members are urged to submit letters or articles, suitable for publication in the Journal, to the Joint Editors, for inclusion in future issues.
Please contribute — the reservoir of material is running low!
B.C.R. PHOTOGRAPHS — SECOND SET
The second set of photographs published by the Society is now available from the Hon.
Sec., price £1.70 including p.p.
Many thanks to George S. Hearse & David Baynes for permission to use their photographs in this set ‘B’.
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact PAUL LUCAS,— Tel.
No 0588 638446 (BCRS member).
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contract MR M LAWSON-FINCH, ‘St. Cyres’, 20 Downs View Road, Seaford, E Sussex, BN25 4PT (BCRS member).
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Road, Llwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
[BCRS member]
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
NEW: I am now publishing a new publication starting in June 1990 entitled ‘Railway Antiques Monthly’.
Full details on request.