

ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The Annual General Meeting of the B.C.R.S. was held at the Community College, Bishop's Castle at 7.30 p.m. on Friday the 3rd May 1991.
The meeting was opened by the chairman, who welcomed those present and was pleased to see so many attend.
He remarked on the continued success of the Society in the past year — the monthly meetings, trips and preservation activities had all provided members with much to interest them.
He thanked the officers and committee for their support and looked forward to the B.C.R.S. continuing to progress during the coming year.
The minutes of the SGM held on the 4th May 1990 were read and it was agreed that the chairman sign them as a true record.
The Hon.
Sec. in his report gave a resume of the year's business and in particular referred to the proposed museum and the difficulties of establishing it with the very limited resources at the Society's disposal.
He is looking into the possibility of grant aid and members will be informed when firm progress has been made.
Apologising for the fact that the audited accounts for the past year were not yet available, the Hon.
Treasurer gave the figure of £281 as the approximate balance in favour of the Society.
Some concern was expressed from the floor and the Hon.
Treasurer undertook to produce details as soon as possible.
The membership subscription of the B.C.R.S. resulted in considerable discussion and it was finally decided that the matter be deferred to a future meeting to decide.
Any change recommended would not become effective until next year.
The Social Secretary outlined the events which had been held in the past year, all of them well attended.
He invited suggestions for future meetings/outings.
Details will be given when the programme is finalised.
Progress on the restoration of Glenburrell Bridge was reviewed by Mr Tim Wallace; in particular he reminded members that volunteers were always most welcome to join the working party at the bridge.
It was confirmed that a separate fund be set up for preservation work.
After discussion it was agreed that the Committee be re-elected as it was, with two exceptions.
Mr Len Davies was proposed and accepted instead of Mr Alan Belcher, and it was further pointed out that the Society had no Vice-Chairman.
Mr R. Newcombe was duly elected to serve in this office for the ensuing year.
Members agreed that no smoking be permitted at future meetings of the Society.
Following this lengthy AGM, light relief was provided by Russell Mulford with more of his extensive collection of slides.
His introduction caused particular mirth, since a mistake by the Social Secretary had announced the title of the talk as ‘A Look-back at Railways in Shropshire and the Border Counties’.
In fact it was about two very interesting lines in Portugal and Italy!
PRESERVATION GROUP NEWSLETTER
All the major timber clearance work has now been completed apart from twelve small saplings, and also two rather dangerous trees to be felled by our expert timber feller (Joe Lawley).
Work is progressing on clearing the years of growth and rubbish from the parapet of the bridge, and clearing the decking has reached an advanced stage.
This work has been carried out by a small group of volunteers (three to four persons).
We would love to have some more members join us.
It should not be particularly heavy or hard work, that has been done.
It is a lovely and quiet spot to spend a day out.
You can bring a picnic along with you, and brewing up is now possible owing to member Ron Davies donating a kettle for this purpose.
There is even talk of having a fry-up, as a large frying pan has come to light, just right for this purpose.
Work on the two drainage ditches to keep water off the deck has now been completed and we have now done some work to provide steps down to trackbed level.
This will benefit the local community with better access to the nearby footpath.
The Preservation Group is hoping to have a stall at some car boot sales in the district to raise funds for this project, as we do not intend to take money out of general society funds, other than the original £100 provided to purchase materials etc.
Very soon we shall be entering into considerable expense, when we start to concrete the deck of the bridge.
We would like to be self-supporting in this project, raising our own funds.
Thus we are appealing for things to sell at the car boot sales, or maybe you would prefer to make a small donation to our funds.
If you have anything to offer please make contact at the two addresses at the end of this newsletter.
Information as to dates of working can also be obtained from these addresses.
TRIATHLON AND CARNIVAL
Once again some members of the Society took part in the Bishop's Castle Tandem Triathlon, held on Saturday 6th July.
The Social Secretary was encouraged by fellow members of the preservation group to obtain sponsorship for the group's funds and succeeded in raising an amount which, when all payments are collected, should exceed £40.
Other members of the group organised a stall on the carnival field.
With the Hon.
Secretary's ‘Joey the Clown’ particularly in demand, this should net us a further useful sum.
APRIL TALK
At our April meeting our member Vic Smith took us right across the country in a talk entitled ‘The Changing Railway Scene in East Anglia’.
(He started the talk by saying that he had misled us, its true title was ‘An Excuse for Vic Smith to Look at His Railway Slides Again’!)
In his presentation Vic covered a good proportion of the East Anglian network, lines such as King's Lynn — Liverpool Street, Norwich — Liverpool Street, going through Thetford and Ely with its cathedral (known as ‘The Ship of the Fens’), King's Cross — Cambridge via Royston, Norwich — Ipswich, and one or two freight branches such as the one to the cement works at Barrington, with its Rolls-Royce diesel shunters, and a line to a sugarbeet factory, now closed.
The word ‘changing’ in the title refers mainly to the electrification of some of these lines, and Vic's talk was largely a record of these lines as they were, with Deltics, Class 31's, 37's and 47's and Sprinters of Class 150 and even 156, interspersed with slides of the overhead wire installation, and the Class 317's and 321's to be seen now.
Another remarkable change in services was shown in slides of Sprinters standing in Ely station with Liverpool or Manchester on their destination boards.
In addition we were treated to several interesting idiosyncrasies of the East Anglian scene, such as the long platform at Cambridge station, with its odd method of working.
Trains on different services pull in to the same platform, and turnouts are installed to enable them to move in and out and pass one another.
East Anglia is flat, but the impression given is not quite as flat as one might expect.
In some areas the lines seem to run on embankments, and one wonders why these were necessary.
The truth is that they weren't built as embankments, but the drained marshes have shrunk, while the ballasted railway has retained its original dimensions.
Another oddity — the telegraph poles on old shots look short.
The explanation is that there is no reason for them to be long — as distinct from other areas where they need to carry the wires over undulating terrain.
Many thanks, Vic, both for stepping in when a gap had appeared in our programme, and for providing a stimulating look at an area most of us hadn't seen, and indeed some views that we now never shall see.
THE CRAVEN ARMS MODEL RAILWAY SOCIETY
On the 10th May 1991, at the kind invitation of the above society, our members visited their headquarters at Craven Arms.
Their layout in ‘OO’ gauge is most impressive, being a model of Craven Arms Station as it was in the immediate post-war period.
Many hours of work have been put in by them in tracklaying and modelling to scale the station buildings, engine sheds, goods shed and signal box as they were.
What changes have taken place in Craven Arms during these past 40 years!
Work on signalling on the layout is still being carried out and when finished will mark the end of many years of effort.
The track is the property of the C.A.D.M.R.S., but the locos and rolling stock belong to the individual members.
Rounding off the evening were excellent refreshments and the chance to natter.
Russell Mulford, who remembers the old layout well, thanked the C.A. society for their hospitality and congratulated them on building such a superb layout.
Perhaps the B.C.R.S. will consider, when suitable premises become available, the construction of a model layout of the B.C. Railway.
HEREFORD RAIL FESTIVAL
This excellent event was organised by BR in the freight yard at Hereford and the 6000 Locomotive Association at Bulmer's Railway Centre and held on Sunday 5th May 1991.
Many years must have passed since such a crowd thronged Hereford Station.
The freight yard was used to display a large cross section of modern diesel locos together with some early versions now preserved — such as a Class 35 ‘Hymek’, a Class 45 ‘Peak’ and a class 55 ‘Deltic’.
Shuttle services were provided between the station and Bulmer's, one by vintage bus and the other by diesel railcar.
The highlight of the event at Bulmer's was undoubtedly provided by ‘Princess Elizabeth’, No. 6201 and ‘City of Truro’ No. 3717, the former hauling two coaches plus 3717 in a westerly direction and ‘City of Truro’hauling the two coaches plus 6201 on the return.
No. 3717 hauled the load of some 240, tons with ease.
The fine condition of these locomotives reflects great credit on their respective owners, The Princess Elizabeth Society and the National Railway Museum.
Trips by diesel were available to Ledbury, Worcester, Craven Arms and Abergavenny.
This was a one-off event as the freight yard tracks are due to be lifted later in the summer.
SUMMER TRIP
As members will have seen from the local press, the committee decided to postpone the proposed trip to Llangollen on 13th July.
Some people had expressed the view that this trip came too close to the Central Wales Line excursion and it seemed clear that we would not get enough people to justify the expense of a coach.
We now hope to go on Saturday 7th September.
If you are interested then please contact the Hon.
Sec. or myself.
NEXT WINTER'S PROGRAMME
As usual our winter meetings will be held on the first Friday of each month, starting on the 6th of September at 7.30 p.m. at the Community College.
I am starting to fill up the dates.
September
— Rev. Derek Hearn: How a Steam Engine Works.
October
— Sid Breeze: By popular request, another chance to hear Sid tell us what it was like to drive a steam engine on British Railways.
November
— To be arranged.
December
— Members' Evening Quiz
With regard to the quiz, don't be afraid that ‘I will never compete with all those experts!’
The quiz will be a team event, and I shall try to appoint most of our experts as team leaders.
As each question is asked each team goes into a huddle and then writes down its answer.
So come anyway and enjoy the quiz; even if you don't know many answers it will be an opportunity to learn something.
There is a possibility that we will be able to book Colin Garratt's new show for some time in the spring, but I am awaiting information as to when the new show will be launched.
EVEN MORE TICKETS FROM MY COLLECTION
I have been asked how many tickets were issued on the Bishop's Castle Railway.
This I do not know, however, my own collection has reached 57 of those issued between Craven Arms and Bishop's Castle.
There must be many more.
It has been suggested that in view of the associations with Wrexham, where there was a printing department, many more tickets were supplied to the BCR than were needed.
A good example are the ‘golf’ tickets from Craven Arms to Plowden, where upon making enquiries I was informed that there was no golf course, but there had been one in the years before World War One.
All through tickets would be returned to the Railway Clearing House, although one or two are in collectors' hands.
Railway authorities were particularly concerned over tickets getting into the wrong hands; a minor sensation was caused on the Southern Region or BR about 30 years ago when a blank ticket from South Snowdon on the former Welsh Highland Railway was handed in at Clapham Junction.
From a fixture in my possession, I am able to record that through fares from Bishop's Castle (assume third class return) were:— London 45s 8d; Wolverhampton 8s 6d; Liverpool 19s 9d; Whitchurch 6s 10d; Oxford 11s 3d.
The time period of these rates is not known to me.
Another standard gauge passenger railway in private hands was the South Shields, Marsden, and Whitburn Colliery Railway, owned by the Harton Coal Company.
It ran from South Shields to Whitburn Colliery, and was mainly used by miners; passengers were carried from 1885, but had to sign an indemnity form as the Board of Trade had not passed the railway.
Approval was granted upon inspection on the 19th March 1888 and the line continued to operate until 1953; by that time it was owned by the National Coal Board, thus becoming one of the first nationalised railways.
Workmen's and Schoolchildren's tickets were sold in lots of six, a certain colour being used on a particular day.
Tickets from Marsden Cottage were issued by the Guard.
Although Marsden is the destination on all tickets, the line was in fact extended for passenger use to Whitburn Colliery in 1929.
Three compartments next to the guard's van were kept for the use of fare paying passengers.
Most of the rolling stock used by miners was well smashed up inside, and was without windows.
Strangely this vandalism did not cease when the collieries were nationalised.
The original Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway also issued Parliamentary tickets, two of which are illustrated.
Opened in 1875, the 7 mile line was laid to a gauge of 2ft 9ins, but closed in 1909 to passengers.
Mineral traffic lingered on until about 1912.
Between August 1915 and April 1917, the line was reopened to a gauge of 15ins, and is still in operation.
THE CLOSURE OF THE DONNINGTON DEPOT RAILWAY
On the 30th April 1991, a familiar day-to-day sight within the Army's Central Ordnance Depot at Donnington disappeared and passed into history when the Railway Detachment RCT closed down.
The Railway has been a part of the Donnington landscape for 51 years, with its 10 miles of railway track criss-crossing the Depot.
It has helped to play its part in Donnington's growth and rise to importance as a major storage facility to the Army.
Its origins go back to 1939 when, due to the clouds of War, a decision was taken to remove the majority of Army Ordnance stores from Woolwich Arsenal and Dockyard to a new Army Depot to be built at Donnington in Shropshire.
The stores were to be moved by both road and rail.
The estimate of stores to be move by rail from Woolwich to Donnington was initially 16,000 tons requiring 500 closed railway wagons and 2,500 open railway trucks.
By 7th March 1940, the Chief Ordnance Officer estimated that once Donnington was operational, the railway would have to carry 1,450 rail wagons (7,250 tons) inward and 2.050 (10,250 tons) outward each month (an average 5 tons per wagon).
By road the plan was for RASC lorries to cover some 30,000 miles per week with 1000 tons spread over 250 large lorries.
One can immediately see the importance of the railway system.
The Depot Railway was to be connected to the main LMS Stafford-Wellington Railway Line at Donnington Station and at Trench.
It was to have two large marshalling yards to hold 700 wagons.
Here the LMS from Stafford and the GWR from Wellington would deliver and collect the Army rail wagons.
The main yard was built at Trench in May 1941 and is still in existence, whilst the East Yard situated between Bldgs B7 and B4,(built early 1940), has long since disappeared.
By the first week of July 1940, a total of 1,500 tons of stores entered Donnington by rail from Woolwich, rising to 3,500 tons per week at the end of July 1940.
During 1941 35,000 tons of RE stores were moved out of Donnington from the RE Stores Sub Depot in Sheds 18 and 18B (Shed 18 is in fact now building F1) to another depot at Long Marston.
It was proposed to build a railway ‘Halt’ specifically for the Depot along the South Gate railway bridge, allowing workers from outlying districts to be within a minute's walk of the Depot Gate.
Due to the expense of the project, this was never built.
The railway was worked daily by up to six steam engines until the early 1960s when new diesel locomotives took over.
The railway then had over 50 staff, both civilian and military (RTO).
They not only drove the locomotives but carried out all their own maintenance and track repairs.
Over recent years track repair was carried out by private contractors.
During its lifetime, both in peacetime and war (e.g. WW II, Korea, the Falklands and latterly the Gulf) the railway has carried hundreds of thousands of tons of stores and equipments internally for the RAOC for storage and issue, also to the REME at 34 Base Workshop for repair.
Long freight trains used to be lined up in the Trench Yard awaiting collection by British Rail going East to Stafford and West to Wellington.
As the British overseas commitment decreased, the number and size of freight trains entering/leaving the Depot reduced as well.
British Rail closed the main Stafford-Wellington line in the mid 1960s.
After the Granville Pit was closed, the line from the old Donnington Station to Trench was lifted.
The MOD became the sole user of the remaining line from Trench to Wellington once GKN Sankey had ceased using rail traffic.
Incoming/outgoing trains linked with the national rail network at Haybridge Junction, Wellington.
They entered the Depot from the old main line at Trench via a gate opened by the MOD Police.
The exchange facility finally ended on Thursday 28th March 1991 when the last British Rail train hauled by a Class 47 diesel locomotive entered the Trench Yard to collect MOD rail wagons.
There was one final sad mix-up because BR, under the impression that the last day was to be Good Friday, attempted not only to collect outgoing wagons, but deliver three new wagons, one filled with stores.
The BR driver regrettably had to take them back to Shrewsbury.
The BR driver was determined to give a final fanfare to say goodbye and enthusiastically sounded his horn all the way to Trench Crossing.
The final departure was watched by the Depot Railway Staff, two MOD Policemen and two Depot railway enthusiasts.
The diesel locomotives surviving at the closure are Ruston Hornsby 0-6-0, WD Numbers 420, 427 and 432.
Locomotive No. 432 will be the only one running to the end.
Numbers 420 and 427 have not been used for quite some time and will be sold by the MOD as surplus to requirements, perhaps to be purchased by some preserved railway?
The familiar small 4-wheeled Vanguard diesels WD 253 and WD 256, named ‘Marlborough’ sadly left by road at Eastertime fro pastures new at COD Bicester.
The current staff of the Railway Detachment now numbers only five under their OIC Yardmaster Ray McPherson and his Assistant Yard Foreman, Colin Addison.
Mr Billy Baker is the longest serving Engine Driver, having started in the Depot in 1948 as a fireman on the old steam engines, becoming a Driver when the diesel locomotives were introduced into Donnington.
Pete Bushell is the second Engine Driver, who before joining the railway in 1981, worked as a British Rail Fireman on Steam Engines at Stafford and then as an Engine Driver at the Granville Pit, Donnington.
The final member of the group is John Perry, a Leading Shunter with six years' experience with the railway.
All the railway staff are being employed on other jobs within the Depot.
It will now seem strange to see a silent Locomotive Shed (Bldg A22) wit hits doors closed for the last time.
It will also seem strange not to hear familiar strident two-tone horn of the diesel locomotives warning of their approach at Depot road/rail crossings.
No longer will road vehicles be able to race the locomotives to see who can get across the crossing first, despite the railway having priority.
The closure of the Depot Railway System is mourned by not only the Railway Staff, but by many rail enthusiasts working in COD Donnington.
HOPE FOR CAMBRIAN STATIONS
My wife took all the telephone calls that Sunday evening.
I was far too engrossed in my latest issue of ‘Railway World’ and so oblivious to all else.
One call that evening, however, was of special interest.
I was pleased to learn that Mr Tony Icke had booked to stay with us at Llanbrynmair on Monday evening.
He had mentioned something about his participation in a ‘Heritage’ tour with Sir William McAlpine who would be arriving at Machynlleth by special train on Monday afternoon.
Tony Icke with his wife, son and dog had stayed at our B & B some two years previously.
He is a devout rail enthusiast and also British Rail's Assistant Chief Civil Engineer, based at Crewe.
The ‘Heritage’ train consisting of 37418 in railfreight livery and one beautiful former North Eastern Directors' saloon No. 1 passed sedately by at 3.30 p.m.
Tony arrived from Crewe by car at 7.30 p.m. and before he even put down his suitcase I questioned him about the ‘Heritage’ tour.
Apparently Sir William along with various VIP's were to inspect examples of railway infrastructure in the Mid-Wales area that are in need of renovation, and then decide on which are most worthy of financial aid.
On Tuesday Tony was to travel by train due to leave Machynlleth for Pwllheli at about 9.45 a.m., after an early breakfast.
On arrival at Machynlleth I found Tony standing on the down platform with train on the up line and distinguished passengers posing for official photographs.
Every one, station staff, local dignitaries and even the press looked very smart…everyone that is, except for me!
To their surprise I was warmly greeted by Tony and Larry Bridges, the Line Manager, given a guided tour of the train and introduced to Sir Bill.
The carriage, owned by Sir Bill, is finished in varnished teak, sits on Gresley bogies and had a large verandah at one end.
The interior is superb with much teak panelling, brass fixtures and fittings.
The smell inside the coach suggested that of those ancient musty gentlemen's clubs…a pungent mixture of leather, coffee, cigar smoke and polish.
There were two female attendants on board who at the time were busy preparing beverages in the centrally situated galley.
Time for the ‘off’ came too quickly.
After a final farewell to Tony I watched the train move off towards Dovey Junction.
Everything was suddenly very quiet at Machynlleth.
As I stood on the footbridge I had a good view of the station.
Part of the main building has recently been restored, but the bulk of the station is in a very poor state.
I hope this station obtains the grant for refurbishment, to be followed by Aberystwyth, Welshpool and then, who knows?
Newtown?
Re.
Railway Happenings in Mid-Wales
Further to John Wildig's interesting article in Journal No. 8 ‘Railway Happenings in Mid-Wales’ I would like to say that further semaphore signals can still be seen at Machynlleth, where they control movements in and out of the DMU stabling and Permanent Way depot along with the run-round loops, and also at Llanbrynmair where they control low flying jets and high flying gricers!
THE ‘PEPPER BOX’— BISHOP'S CASTLE
On the 18th March 1884 appeared the first issue of a newspaper printed and published in Bishop's Castle by Christopher Hughes, Market Place, Bishop's Castle.
Approximately six issues came out, I have three copies of the Pepper Box, and two letters from R. Jasper More, M.P.
and a report by a Mr Fraser concerning the Bishop's Castle Railway, which is the first of my articles concerning the Pepper Box.
BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY
EXTRACT FROM MR.
FRASER REPORT
The following statement is the conclusion of a report drawn up for the debenture holders of the Bishop's Castle Railway by Mr. Fraser, now the auditor of the Cambrian, in which he shows that it would pay to make this line independently of any other.
It would be desirable now to substantiate Mr. Fraser's statements by the experience of local witnesses, and the following extract form this report is published with the hope of enabling this to be taken into consideration before the bill goes to the House of Lords.
A private or public meeting of any proposed witnesses might be called for the purpose of considering what local evidence could be adduced to support Mr. Fraser's report.
It is considered that it would be easier to raise the £80,000, declared by Mr. Fraser to be alone necessary to complete the line, independently of the Corvedale line, than to raise the larger sum proposed by Mr Addison as part of that scheme.
Passengers
For nearly the whole distance between Lydham Heath (the point of junction with the Branch to the town of Bishop's Castle) and Montgomery the completed line will pass through a rich agricultural district, containing a population nearly double that of the country occupied by the existing line, and the passenger traffic, from station to station, as well as to Craven Arms and the Cambrian Railway at Montgomery, will be proportionately larger.
The increase of the population in the lead and barytes district, through the stimulus given to mining operations by the opening of the line, will further augment the receipts under this head.
Lime and Coal
Lime is extensively used for agricultural purposes, especially in the parishes of Churchstoke and Chirbury, which is brought from Llanymynech, either by the Cambrian and then carted from Montgomery Station, or else it is sent via Oswestry, Shrewsbury, and Craven Arms and carted from Bishop's Castle.
In either case, the saving in cost by its being conveyed by rail to a station on the completed line will be from 5s. to 7s. per ton.
This difference would necessarily secure traffic to the Railway, and by cheapening the cost would increase the consumption.
The coal used in the district is mostly supplied from North Wales, and to some extent, from North Staffordshire and Lancashire, and is delivered by the Cambrian Company at Montgomery, from whence (as in the case of lime) it is carted to its destination.
The completed Railway would bring coal from Shropshire via Craven Arms, to compete with the Staffordshire coal, and would also cheapen the delivery via Montgomery, the result of which would be a large reduction of cost to the consumer.
Timber
The receipts for carriage of timber have formed an important proportion of the revenue on the part of the line already opened, and a larger traffic may be confidently expected from the other part.
Large tracts of saleable timber, within easy distance of the proposed stations, are, as yet, practically untouched, the carrying of which would, for many years, be a profitable source of revenue.
At present the timber felled in this district is carried by road to Montgomery Station, for despatch by railway.
Minerals
A glance at a geological map of England will show that the proposed line skirts, and would accommodate the mineral district lying north and east of Chirbury, from which large quantities of lead and barytes are obtained.
The lead is now sent to the Minsterley terminus of the Shrewsbury and Welshpool branch line, but if the Bishop's Castle Railway were completed the ore destined for South Wales would be conveyed from Churchstoke Station via Craven Arms and the Central Wales Railway, thus effecting a saving of twenty miles in transit as compared with the present route.
As regards barytes there are two quarries in work, both being within two miles of Chirbury village.
The produce of one quarry is probably about 1,800 tons per annum, and is carried by road a distance of thirteen miles, then ground and sent by canal.
The other quarry produces about 6,000 tons per annum, which is ground on the spot, and sent seven or eight miles by road for shipment by canal, a traction engine and trucks being used for the road haulage, which takes coals back to the quarry on the return journey.
The cost of transit necessarily restricts the development of these quarries, and the introduction of Railway communication would afford such facilities for despatch, and so much reduce the cost of delivery, that a large increase in the out-put [sic]of this mineral (for which there is a constant demand) would undoubtedly follow.
The carriage of the coal used at these quarries, the consumption of which is at present some 600 or 700 tons per annum, would also produce considerable revenue.
Building Stone
There are several quarries on the proposed line producing excellent stone for building purposes.
From one of these, situated within half a mile of the proposed Chirbury Station, it is stated that 10,000 tons are annually raised for local requirements, and that easy and cheap means of transit, such has the railway would supply, are only required to bring it into extensive use.
There are also beds of limestone close on the line at Snead and Lydham suitable for building stone, although not sufficiently pure to compete with Porthywaen lime for agricultural purposes.
RAILWAY HAPPENINGS IN MID-WALES
The Cambrian Line
The first two of the four Sundays of Cambrian Steam have taken place, on the 16th and 23rd of June.
The publicity did not make it clear what was actually happening.
In fact there were two separate steam runs on each day.
One, the ‘local’, was a three coach train starting at Machynlleth and was to Barmouth and return.
The other, the ‘London’, was a longer seven coach excursion from London to Barmouth and return, with steam from Shrewsbury.
They were a great success.
The ‘London’ was fully booked each time and for the ‘local’Machynlleth booking office took £1000 on the morning of the 22nd alone.
The locomotives ‘Hinton Manor’ and 75069 BR Standard Class 4 worked most peculiar diagrams based on crews at Machynlleth.
Both were stabled at Machynlleth.
First 75069 hauled the ‘local’, leaving Machynlleth at 1150 and arriving at Barmouth at 1305.
Meanwhile ‘Hinton Manor’ went light engine to Shrewsbury and worked the excursion coaches from there leaving Machynlleth at 1310 and arriving in Barmouth at 1341.
After allowing passengers a short time at Barmouth, the engines were exchanged and 75069, hauling the London train, left at 1530, crossed the local in Tywyn at 1600, left Tywyn at 1620, arrived Machynlleth at 1650 and departed at 1716, on its way to Shrewsbury.
Then 75069 returned light engine to Machynlleth.
‘Hinton Manor’ worked the three coach ‘local’train to Machynlleth.
The engines faced different ways on this occasion, each travelling chimney first when hauling the longer train.
The final part of the operation was a departure at 0815 from Machynlleth with both engines hauling the Network South East coaches and Severn Valley support coaches to Shrewsbury.
This poses the interesting question of how they got to Machynlleth in the first place.
I can only imagine that shortly before the excursions a long double headed steam train must have travelled from Shrewsbury to Machynlleth, but I don't know the times.
It will be worth finding out, since the whole operation is to be repeated for the steam runs on the 22nd and 29th of September, and this train should be a sight worth seeing.
Other ‘Cambrian’ news is that the new 158 set broke down with a flat battery on the morning of the 7th July and had to be substituted by a Class 150 Sprinter.
Normally it will work the 0709, 1325 and 2055 ex Aberystwyth, the 1048 ex Shrewsbury and the 1649 ex Birmingham during the summer timetable.
The Class 156 units ceased to be part of this operation from the 8th of July and presumably the temporary expedient of bus backup is in force if extra capacity is required.
On the other hand, as of the 8th of July, apart from the 0709 and 1125 there is an extra morning train departing at 0925 for Wolverhampton.
BR is hoping that this will cope with the summer demand.
Timetables have not yet been adjusted for the higher performance of the Class 158s and the journey time to London remains at about 5 hours.
The Cambrian coast retains some loco-hauled trains, two on summer Saturdays.
The Vale of Rheidol
No. 9, ‘Prince of Wales’ has now returned and commenced operations on Monday 1st July.
One set of coaching stock has been converted to air brakes and is intended to be worked by this loco.
The 8th July, coinciding with the start of BR's summer timetable, saw the first day of four train operation.
This will continue until the end of August.
Chris Newton, formerly chargehand in Aberystwyth, who was responsible for VoR maintenance before it was sold, has been appointed shed foreman on the North Yorkshire Moors Railway.
CENTRAL WALES LINE TRIP
Thirty-one members and friends descended upon Broome Station on the evening of Friday 21st June 1991 for our annual rail trip to Llandrindod Wells.
The look on the guard's face, on the request for the train to stop, was worth recording.
He told me later that he had only been a guard for fifteen months, also that the normal takings on this section of the line were approximately £10, so he was only too pleased to work out a 26% discount for a group booking that realised BR £77.35 from our party.
The weather was not quite as nice as on our two previous trips, but it kept dry.
On arrival at Llandrindod we crossed over to the other platform to board the train which had arrived from Swansea — there being only nine minutes between arrival and departure — only to be told that we would have to go back on to the unit we had travelled up on.
Due to some mechanical fault the driver did not think that the northbound unit would make it to Crewe and he would endeavour to coast it back to Swansea.
During our journey we noticed quite a lot of work being done on several station platforms.
This is in preparation for the new Sprinters when they come into service.
This will probably be the last journey that the Society will make in the old DMU's with their excellent visibility.
A point of interest to myself is that our driver, Howard Bounds, shared the next bed to me during my last stay in hospital.
Howard is a passed driver to operate steam trains on British Rail.
He told me quite a lot about his experiences during our stay in hospital together.
There has been talk of one or two members taking a trip to Llandrindod in Victorian week — Social Secretary.
OBITUARY
Mack Price
The death has occurred of Mack Price, who with his wife Sheila was an early member of the BCRS.
Mack and his wife did not take an active part in the Society, owing to Mack's illness, but he always took an interest in what we were doing.
(They managed to come on last year's Central Wales Line trip.)
Our sincere sympathy to Sheila on her loss.
RAILWAY LAWS
I pass on an interesting snippet that I read on a computer news net.
It was apparently mailed by a gentleman called Wile E. Coyote, but I think we should suspect a pseudonym:—
‘I took a trip to Spencer Shops in Spencer, NC (i.e. North Columbia) this past weekend, and learned an interesting bit of railroad legislation.
(Spencer Shops used to be a railroad maintenance /classification facility owned by Southern Railway).
Apparently, NC legislators, in their infinite wisdom, passed a law that prohibited trains from running on Sunday unless there was livestock or perishables aboard.
Southern Railway kept a mule at Spencer Shops whose sole purpose was to get on board a train on Sunday so that a run could be made from Spencer to Goldsboro.
No clue as to whether mule appreciated his weekly trip…
Any other amusing railroad laws anyone knows about?
Another item I picked up some time ago from across the Atlantic was the information that the British 7′¼″ gauge was only found on the Great Eastern , a piece of information that I'm sure Vic Smith will agree to be even more surprising than anything in his talk!
I suppose it's all East if you go that far West.
Finally, I have just picked up another item on railway laws:—
‘Kansas had a real beauty for avoiding accidents: ‘When a train reaches a crossing (with another track) about the same time as another train, the engineer must stop the train and may not start again until the other train has completely passed.’’
Seems it never occurred to them that this applies to both engineers.
No doubt there will be more of these to come.
If any of our members have any examples I will post them (electronically).
Think of it, your fame will be assured, these postings have a world-wide readership!
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact PAUL LUCAS,— Tel.
No 0588 638446 (BCRS member).
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contract MR M. LAWSON-FINCH, ‘St. Cyres’, 20 Downs View Road, Seaford, E Sussex, BN25 4PT (BCRS member).
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Road, Llwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
[BCRS member]
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
NEW: I am now publishing a new publication as from June 1990 entitled ‘Railway Antiques Monthly’.
Full details on request.