

TREASURER
At the Committee Meeting held on Monday, 2 September 1991, Mr G. Lloyd resigned as Treasurer and the Committee then invited Mr Ralph Edwards to serve in his place.
Mr Edwards accepted and was duly elected as Treasurer until the election of Officers at the next Annual General Meeting.
MUSEUM
Your Committee are actively pursuing the proposal to set up a Bishop's Castle Railway Museum in Bishop's Castle and have the offer of a suitable building.
Negotations are proceeding with a view to obtaining grant aid to help with the considerable setting up costs which will be involved and advice taken with regard to design and layout of exhibits.
In due course an Application for Planning Permission will have to be submitted to the Local Planning Authority.
Assuming that satisfactory financial arrangements can be made and Planning Permission obtained, the scheme will then be put to Members for final approval.
THE ANNUAL SUMMER TRIP
This year we decided at the AGM to visit the Llangollen Railway, having learnt from the railway press that it has made rapid progress in the last three years.
I had visited it before, in 1988, when it was open only to Berwyn, with a tantalising glimpse of rails disappearing round the next bend, so I was very keen to see what lay beyond.
The date was first fixed as the 13th July, in International Eisteddfod week, as I thought members might like to take a look at the eisteddfod after a ride on the train.
Indeed I had also hoped that we might pick up some extra coach passengers, who, strange as it might seem, would prefer to forgo the train ride altogether and just go to the eisteddfod.
However, after the very successful Central Wales Line trip in June, members started saying that the two trips were too close together.
A postponement was suggested, and the next committee meeting decided on the 7th of September.
In fact, since I had already made my holiday plans, I went ahead and paid my second visit to the railway, together with my wife and eldest daughter.
Our journey was longer this time, past Berwyn to Deeside Halt.
Incidentally, we went by public transport, first by train from Aberystwyth to Ruabon, where we saw the original departure platform.
Next, thanks to Dr Beeching's plan for the railways, we took a bus to Llangollen!
Fortunately the connections in both directions were not bad, at least when we wanted to travel, though my wife said rude words about the sprint from bus to train to make our connection when we got back to Ruabon.
We then spent three days going by rail from there to Oban via Thurso and Kyle of Lochalsh -look at the map!
I enjoy travelling by train!
Fortunately Scottish rail rovers are good value.
Close to the date, some of our members were chatting to Llangollen Railway member Peter Cutler, and he suggested that it might be possible for us to see the work on the next extension, to Glyndyfrdwy.
Despite the lack of time, he was as good as his word, and we got a phone call from Colin Dobson, second in command of permanent way work, and arrangements were made for us to contact the signalman at Llangollen, since Colin would be away on business.
I was glad to be able to say that we had something for them in return — we were bringing a distinguished visitor in the person of George Turner, a Llangollen stationmaster in BR days, before the line was closed.
On the day arrangements went smoothly and we were settling ourselves on the 1220 ex Llangollen when Colin appeared in person, having done his work in the small hours and put our visit ahead of his sleep!
He gave us a commentary on the journey to Deeside Halt, where, of course, again the rails vanished into the distance on the next extension.
But this time we were not restricted to looking at them, but could follow them.
As working volunteers of a fraternal railway we were taken on the strength of the Llangollen railway for the day, and, clad in our reflective waistcoats, we were conducted along the track, first on foot, then on the ‘Neptune’, a diesel track inspection vehicle.
We were then treated to a very detailed description of the work, done and yet to be done, by John Stowell, a BR signalling engineer who is in charge of P-way on the Llangollen railway.
The over-whelming impression I received was of a well-planned, organised operation where the human resources -always the most important part of any undertaking -are properly used.
There is nothing worse, in my opinion, than being willing to do something, but not knowing what to do, and I think that our own, smaller scale preservation group might learn something about planning the use of time from this visit.
Incidentally it did not escape our notice that Colin, his wife and John Stowell all gave up a significant part of a day for our benefit.
However I do not call that time wasted.
I became a railway enthusiast mainly because the civil engineer on the Gwili Railway at the time was willing to give of his time to answer my questions.
That has brought the Gwili Railway alone six members to date, to say nothing of the other railway societies I have joined.
‘An army marches on its stomach’ is a well-known saying.
and the Llangollen Railway has a well-organised scheme whereby for a modest £1.50 the volunteers can fill their stomachs with a sustaining cooked meal in the canteen coach.
As volunteers for the day we were accorded the same privilege.
All I can say is that this must be very good for morale.
In our society it has been pointed out that we do not always give due credit to the ladies who provide the refreshments at our meetings, and yet the coffee break is an attractive part of the evenings, the time when we can chat about the talk and other railway topics.
Well at least I can take the opportunity to thank them now, while I think about it!
(It occurs to me that our coffee break is sometimes very late in the evening.
when some people need to rush away.
Should we schedule more time for it, to allow more talk.
Letters to the editor please!)
Our Hon.
Sec., crafty devil, was in the right place at the right time when the service train arrived at Deeside Halt, and had a footplate ride on ‘Foxcote Manor’ on the run round.
Before I end I must mention that the Llangollen Railway, like all others, has its problems.
Thought it has a supportive county council and a productive work force, yet it has its cross to bear.
A local farmer is, shall we say, somewhat less than a complete admirer of the railway.
Instead of showering it with bouquets for its achievements, he prefers to see it, in the words of the popular song,
Covered all over from head to toe,
Covered all over in sh…sweet vi-o-lets, sweeter than the roses…
He is a man of action, and has indeed been known to leave parts of the railway covered all over in ‘sweet violets’.
Best wishes and thanks, to Peter Cutler, Colin and Marilyn Dobson, and John Stowell.
PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD OF THE BCR
At one time it was thought that not many photographs were taken of the Bishop's Castle Railway, especially of No 1, the ex GWR Tank Locomotive, which shares the honours with ‘Carlisle’ as being the last two engines to work the line.
However, we have compiled a list of approximately 30 photographers who have taken photographs relating to the Bishop's Castle Railway.
Leading them must be R. K. Cope, who took pictures of the trackbed, complete with rails, bridges etc, together with a number of shots of stations with rolling stock standing in them.
Next must come G. M. Perkins, who, together with his brother, T. R. Perkins, visited the line on many occasions to record its history in words and photographs.
Then there were the photographs by Charles Nevitt from Shrewsbury, who issued them in postcard form.
Also Normal Wheeler, who took several pictures between closure and demolition.
In the 1930's Professor Charles Mowat took a series of pictures.
He specialised in minor railways, and included the Bishop's Castle Railway in his travels.
On the commercial side, we have Lens of Sutton, who have 25 views, Photomatic Limited who have six and Robert Humm & Co hold three.
Unfortunately the old Real Loco Publishing and L. G. R. P. Photos held by David and Charles and Ian Allen Limited are not now available.
They tell us they are not issuing any more pictures in the forseeable future.
The number of photographs taken of ‘Carlisle’ and ‘No 1’so far to hand are 23 of ‘Carlisle’and 15 of ‘No 1’.
We know that there are more of goods wagons which we are in the process of securing.
The number so far is six, with four of coaching stock.
As to views of the stations, the numbers are as follows:
Bishop's Castle -14, Lydham Heath -3, Eaton -2, Plowden -5 and Horderley -4
No proper photographs of Stretford Bridge Halt have come to light; only views from a distance.
The Society's own collection consists of approximately 100 pictures, but we are constantly on the look out for new ‘treasures’.
Any Member who visits Bishop's Castle is quite welcome to come and browse through them.
We have also acquired for the Society a vast range of photo-copied material, which is also open for viewing.
If any member has any pictures of the Bishop's Castle Railway, other than the two sets of four photos that the Society has issued, we would be very grateful for details.
As regards colour pictures of the Bishop's Castle Railway, we know of only one genuine colour photograph, of which we have a copy.
It was taken in the early 1900s, but we are assured that it is not a tinted photograph, but a true colour print.
A number of local people took pictures of the line, and we think that we have acquired most of these, but there may be still the one or two odd ones about that we do not know of.
We know of one family collection consisting of 10 pictures that have not been seen by the general public.
Only a few privileged people have seen them, but we hope to have a set in the near future.
They belong to the family of a former employee of the Bishop's Castle Railway.
Further details will be given on these pictures when they become available.
At some future date we intend to visit the Shropshire Records Office to see what is hidden away there concerning the Bishop's Castle Railway.
We have been informed that the County Office holds several photographs concerning the old line.
Comic Cards
As far as can be assessed, there are about six comic postcards featuring the Bishop's Castle Railway.
We have seen four examples and know where two more are located.
Plowden Station was featured as a Christmas card and Russell Mulford has a copy of this postcard.
Staff on Pictures
There are several known pictures of Bishop's Castle Railway staff.
Mr Harris, Station Master at Bishop's Castle.
Robert Sinclair, Driver/Fitter.
Jack Cadwallader, Driver.
Will Lucas, Guard (later Station Master at Plowden).
Mr Whittaker, Driver/Fitter.
Mr Phillips, Station Master at Bishop's Castle.
Mrs Bason at Eaton.
Mrs Pardoe at Horderley and so on.
There are several small snap-shorts of the plate-layers' trolley in use at Horderley, the last two locomotives at Bishop's Castle and several of the other stations.
These are in our collection.
Graham Vincent, a Society Member, took a series of six pictures of the stations on the Bishop's Castle Railway after demolition had taken place.
The date of these is 13 April 1941.
As to rare cine film taken of the line, we know that Bill Cross of Shrewsbury has a small section showing ‘No 1’ going through the level crossing at Horderley.
A Mr Ross from Leominster, who owned a shoe shop in Bishop's Castle, was a keen cine photographer and when he came to Bishop's Castle (by train) he was in the habit of taking film of the railway, but the family moved away to the South Coast, after selling the business, and to date we have not been able to trace the family or film.
We know of a person from Churchstoke who has taken a Video of the remains of the old trackbed, but so far this Video has not been seen.
Finally, several photographs have appeared in newspapers and magazine articles concerning the line, not to mention several books containing pictures illustrating articles.
Last but not least, ‘Carlisle’ appeared in either the Dandy or Beano as a drawing in the 1950's.
Only one fault -Carlisle was in a red livery, which she never wore.
Footnote — the Mowat Collection
The late Charles Mowat took over 2,500 photographs of the railway scene between 1924 and 1969, also a few taken between 1900 and 1924, mainly of smaller and medium-sized stations and branch lines, including twelve scenes on the Bishop's Castle Railway.
The collection is now in the care of Brunel University Library, Uxbridge, Middlesex, also with the rest of the Mowat collection of documents, notes and railwayana, where it can be consulted by appointment with the librarian.
pictures from the collection can be obtained from Mr W. R. Burton, 3 Fairway, Clifton, York, YO3 6QA, who will forward a catalogue of photographs upon application.
The Cope Collection
The late R. K. Cope took 212 views of the Bishop's Castle Railway, mostly relating to the demolition.
Of these, 199 views were taken in June/July 1936, and 13 views taken alongside the line in October 1931.
Roger Carpenter of Birmingham is the custodian of the Cope Collection, which also covers other railways, together with the Herbert Wheeller pictures of the Bishop's Castle Railway.
He also has some of the Nevitt postcard series which includes the Bishop's Castle Railway.
R. K. Cope was Traffic Manager for the Midland Red Omnibus Co.
Photomatic Limited
We have just been informed by Mr R. Warner of Photomatic Limited that the business ceased in August 1991, but he has made arrangements with another company to carry on the photo-printing of Litho copies.
he is seeking a large railway society to be custodians of his vast range of pictures, which will still be made available to the general public.
More details when they are to hand, as Mr Warner is going to keep us informed.
Upon receipt of an SAE, the Hon Secretary can forward a list of suppliers of Bishop's Castle Railway photographs.
LETTERS TO THE EDITORS
Dear Sir,
I understand that there have been complaints about the lack of announcements of future events in the Journal and elsewhere.
Certainly this must be very annoying.
Perhaps it would help if I explained the complicated process by which the Journal is produced.
Perhaps your readers would then like to write in with suggestions for improvements.
I would also like to suggest that complaints be made as ‘Letters to the Editor’ because then we can see what the complaint is and try to deal with it.
There is no need to sign the letters if the writer does not wish to do so.
The problem with the Journal is that we are a small society trying to pare costs to the minimum.
The material submitted is sifted and ordered by our joint editors, David Young and Ray Arnold.
They then pass the manuscripts to me, and I or my wife type the journal to a computer file.
My wife is a trained typist, but her job does not leave her much time.
I am a self-taught typist, fastish, but terribly inaccurate, which necessitates retyping.
Next, I insert suitable codes for a typesetting language.
This is much slower than using a desk-top publishing system, but enforces consistent formatting and, some day, should assist in putting the journals into a database so that the information can be accessed easily.
One of the purposes of the Society, and so of the Journal, is to be a custodian of the history of the BCR.
Therefore we want to think ahead to future access to the information in the Journals, and the price is that it takes more time now.
The output is obtained on a high-quality laser printer, suitable for copying.
It is sent to our secretary, who has the considerable task of arranging the pages into a form suitable for photo-copying, inserting photographs, and if necessary reducing then to the correct size, etc. for insertion into the gaps left in the text.
Finally the copies of the Journal are run off and distributed.
This is never likely to be a fast operation and dates are sometimes passed while it is being done.
The other part of the problem is that I do not plan the talks for the winter meetings and the excursions very far ahead.
This has its problems, but it does allow a quick response to members' requests for topics.
Similarly our excursion this year had to be postponed from July to September at the request of some members.
Such a system does mean that we need to rely on the local press and Shropshire Radio to send out messages, but I think that it allows flexibility.
If members would like to write and suggest another way then I will see what can be done about it.
NOTE: The Editors would like to make letters from Members a regular feature of the Journal -please let us have your views and comments on relevant railway topics.
PRESERVATION GROUP NEWS
Due to circumstances beyond our control, we were not able to proceed with any work on Glenburrell Bridge.
It was thought that the Shropshire Country Council were the owners, but upon them looking through their records, it appears that Major Minton-Beddoes is indeed the owner, but work has once again started.
All the major tree felling is now completed (thanks Joe and Graham) and the clearing of the decking is now complete.
On Whit Bank Holiday we had a big turnout of 24 member volunteers.
This has got to be a record for our group all on one day!
The ladies did a marvellous job of feeding the group with their Bar-B-Que -a big thank you ladies -and Russell Mulford was on hand to record some of the work in pictures.
We have now had the offer of some reinforcing mesh for the bridge decking concrete work.
This will be a big saving on our cash resources.
Talking of money, the Social Secretary succeeded in raising nearly £50 in sponsorship at the Bishop's Castle Carnival Triathlon and a stall manned by willing preservation group members raised a further £30 at the Carnival, so not a bad start for our fund raising efforts.
The Junior Members wanted to donate the £6 that they won as First Prize at Clun Carnival with Thomas, the Tank Engine, but, after some discussion with them, it has been decided to start a small fund for a Christmas Party for the Junior Members.
Other fund raising activities are being planned for the winter months.
The group members have not been idle during their enforced stay from Glenburrell Bridge as we have been helping out on the Society's stall at local shows as well as building Thomas, The Tank Engine and, having purchased the show stand that we used to borrow, we are now adapting this stand for our own use at shows.
Further news in the next Journal.
HON SECRETARY'S JOTTINGS
Acknowledgment
The Committee would like to express their sincere thanks to Mrs Sheila Price, who donated two new railway books to the Society for use at our winter meetings as raffle prizes.
The first was used at our meeting on 6 September and was won by our popular member, Mr Syd Breeze, who was thrilled at having won a prize.
Thank you once again Sheila for making this very kind gesture in memory of your late husband, Mack.
Town Chest
I have been invited to go through the Town Chest belonging to Bishop's Castle Town Council, to investigate material in the chest pertaining to the Bishop's Castle Railway.
So far I have been able to copy the index made by the South West Shropshire Historical & Archaeological Society, through the kind offices of Mrs Janet Preshous, a B C R S Member who wrote the excellent book ‘Bishop's Castle Well Remembered’ and Mrs Halford, late of the County Records Office.
There is a mass of material relating to the proposed extension to Montgomery and some interesting items on the running of the line.
I hope to have more details for you in the next Journal.
European Commission
A multi-national delegation with representatives from Denmark, France, Greece and Spain from the European Commission visited the Bishop's Castle Community College on Thursday, 26 September 1991, as part of an investigation into the impact of Information Technology in rural areas and the potential for wider development.
They will be making recommendations to the European Commission after a series of visits and working seminars.
Shropshire has been chosen as the sole representative for Britain.
They are visiting 6 sites, including Bishop's Castle, on their itinerary.
I had the great honour of being invited to meet them on behalf of our Society, as our Society is one of the big users of the Resources Centre at the Community College where our Journal is printed etc.
We also make use of the photo-copying facilities and use their premises for our winter evening meetings.
The Commission wished us well in our venture of acting as custodians of material, documents, etc. relating to the Bishop's Castle Railway.
I presented a copy of our Journal and two sets of Bishop's Castle Railway photographs to the Delegation as a memento of their visit to Bishop's Castle.
THANKS TO KEN
Nearly 60 guests at the Seniors' Party organised by Lydham, More & Snead W I for those in the parishes and former residents were delighted to welcome Ken Lucas to their tea-party in September.
He brought not only the ‘Carlisle’ sign, but many other mementos and photographs and reminded everyone of the importance of the Bishop's Castle Railway and the world-wide interest in the Bishop's Castle Railway Society.
Janet Preshous played short tape-recordings of Mr Alf Shakespeare, Miss Molly Puckle and Mr Sid Cadwallader recalling the Railway's heyday and those present, may of whom had themselves travelled on the line, shared their memories.
Mrs Elsie Morgan had travelled on the train on her honeymoon in 1920; Lady More recalled some of Sir Jasper's memories; Colonel Sykes remembered that, as a boy, the engine driver used to allow him to drive the train when he returned to school at the beginning of term; and Mrs Lucy Hemmings had regularly tested the milk carried by the train for the Creamery.
Mrs Rhoda Jarman, Mrs Florence Beaumond and others brought old photos and mementos of Lydham and More, and there was great interest in the Railway items.
Thank you, Ken.
SOCIETY MEETINGS
How a Steam Engine Works
This was the title of a very interesting talk given by the Rev D. Hearne at the September meeting.
he dealt with the principles involved and went into some detail of the features of different engine designs.
The best of these were being incorporated into a 7′¼″ gauge engine he was building.
His talk was supplemented with sectional drawings and also a display of moulds from which castings for the engine would be made.
The production of these moulds in turn indicated the degree of skill required of the woodworker in producing them.
How to Drive a Steam Engine
Mr Sydney Breeze returned to give a further talk on this subject and to relate many of his experiences during his long career as a top link GWR driver.
He retired some 25 years ago, as steam was phased out of BR, to be replaced by diesel.
During his work he had driven trains carrying many notable people, including Sir Winston Churchill.
Men such as Syd obviously took a great deal of pride in their work — woe betide a fireman or fitter who did not do a good job!
Many thanks to Rev Hearne and Mr Breeze.
Reminiscences
For our November meeting we had a dual focus of interest.
Our first ever speaker, Mr Jack Bedell, returned to give some more of his reminiscences of the role played by the line in the 1920's and 1930's, particularly by the farming community.
The talk was recorded by Russell Mulford and we intend to write it up for the museum.
Paying his first visit was Mr John Scott Morgan, launching his new book on the BCR.
A brief review of this book is included in this journal.
With some of the ‘old originals’ present (I refer to that distinguished body of people who actually travelled on the BCR) we had an interesting discussion in which living memories were compared with evidence from Mr Scott Morgan's research.
BR RAILTOUR -CARLISLE
On 12 October 1991 BR ran a Railtour from Hereford to Carlisle via the Settle and Carlisle line.
This run was of particular interest to diesel enthusiasts, due to the locos employed, resulting in many photographers at all the vantage points along the route.
Leaving Hereford at 7.00 am, the 10 coach train was double-headed by Nos 50008 and 50015, Thunderer and Valiant respectively.
Loco change at Crewe -where there turned out to be an Open Day -gave a chance to see Princess Elizabeth in steam near the Heritage Centre.
Double-headed again, with Nos 26007 and 26043, a photo stop at Blackburn was soon reached and so on to join the Settle-Carlisle line at Hellifield Junction.
Two more photo stops at Dent and Appleby gave one the chance to appreciate the wild countryside through which this line passes and, finally, to Carlisle, on a mild but somewhat misty day.
Another engine change at Carlisle, No 37010 ex Cardiff Caerleon Depot and off down the WCML for the return trip -a long day, but after all the train took the strain!
PRIVATE AND UNTIMETABLED RAILWAY STATIONS
This is the title of a book published in 1982 by the Oakwood Press.
What is particularly noteworthy about this category of stations is the wide range of uses covered.
Before the days of good roads and motor cars, a nearby railway station was a necessity for landed gentlemen, but not too close however, lest the view be spoilt or the ‘hoi polloi’ approach too closely to the stately mansion!
Some such stations were paid for by the nobleman and maintained by him.
Others were more conveniently sited for them but inconveniently for the Company, as a condition of selling land for the railway.
There were many stations which, whilst not being strictly private, were set up by a narrow section of the public and usually barred to casual travellers.
So we find special stations for sporting activities such as:
Horse Riding at Ascot
Golf: A few halts were rigidly restricted to members, but a great many were public halts;
Cricket: There was a ground at LAKE HALT, between Sandown and Shanklin;
Asylums: When remote from towns, these were served by special rail branch lines, such as ALTON PARK platform for Treloars Hospital.
There were two attempts in the London area to deal with burial problems, which resulted in the MAIDEN LANE CEMETERY STATION running from King's Cross and in the NECROPOLIS STATION to be found at the south west corner of Waterloo Station.
From the London station, mourners and coffins were driven to BROOKWOOD.
CEMETERY STATION, Brookwood was, in fact, two stations: North for Catholics and Non-conformists, South for C of E!
Perhaps the most remarkable usage of a station was at PETERHEAD prison where prisoners were conveyed in special vans between work in the quarries and the quarters.
This had been started in 1888 and progressively abandoned from 1950.
It should be remembered that there were numerous Industrial Private Stations and Workmen's Halts.
These included Reservoir Railways especially significant during the ‘boom period’(1890-1910) of construction; Munition Works' Coal Mines.
There was always a close relationship between the Armed Forces and the railways so that we are not surprised to learn that many barracks were built by or for Service personnel.
Another specific usage of private stations was that of Railway Staff halts which enabled staff to reach a place of work which was some distance from a public stopping place.
Those of us who are not so far from the notable Sugar Loaf Summit on the Central Wales Line (Heart of Wales) will recall this example of a Staff Halt.
A suitable train was scheduled to pick up the wives of the workmen along side their homes.
There were also occasions when trains were run from stations that were already closed but could be brought into operation for special purposes such as excursions, et for Wakes Weeks in Lancashire and the Potteries.
Perhaps the most surprising discovery that can be made is that there were ‘unopened station’.
At LULLINGSTONE, a ferro-concrete station was built and planned to open in April 1939.
It was to serve housing estates and an airfield.
Opening was postponed because these had not been built and, after the war, the station lay in a ‘green belt’ and the housing could not be built…so end of story: An ‘unopened station’.
Such indications of strange and unexpected happenings involving stations can clearly stimulate the reader of the book to pursue still further the study of stations and their usages.
RAILWAY HAPPENINGS IN MID-WALES
Recent Developments on the Cambrian Lines
The 1991 summer has not been one of the best for tourism in mid Wales and this has been reflected in the passenger loadings over the BR system and, once September came in, things turned particularly quiet with the local line stated to be absolutely dead.
It is on this line that the Class 153 single car units -made from the Class 155's -are due to arrive shortly.
They are already down in Cardiff but ASLEF apparently is objecting to the very small cabs which have been created for the driver at one end.
However, overloading of certain services remains a major problem, and reports have been received of passengers having to stand from Birmingham to Aberystwyth!
Your reporter's family were affected badly on one occasion.
The Class 158 diagram replacing the loco-hauled Cambrian Coast express continues, with green liveried Centro 2 or 3 car sets making up the majority of Cambrian workings.
Loco working to Aberystwyth vanished with the May timetable, but the return of the students to the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth saw the 16.30 arrival in Aberystwyth on Friday, 27 September and on Monday, 30 September.
This train leaving Shrewsbury at 14.27 is one of the trains with persistent loading problems and the use of a loco plus stock was a welcome initiative.
Loco hauling of the Regional Railways Saturday Birmingham-Pwllheli services continued throughout the summer with some motley rolling stock being used.
The derailment at Dovey Junction on the August Bank Holiday Saturday resulted in diversion to Aberystwyth and a change in the services operated by locos.
Loco-hauled trains from Aberystwyth on these Saturdays were at 09.25, 14.50 and 17.42.
Normally only one loco comes west of Shrewsbury on revenue earning services in the week — the Wednesday Stanlow to Aberystwyth tanks which, in the last week of August, turned up on the Thursday to cope with a shortage of fuel in Celtic Oils.
The derailment at Dovey was interesting in that the back bogie of the 37/4 and front bogie of the first coach came off with a bump.
The bridge was under repair and a 5 mph restriction was in force.
A ban on locos was immediately effected but Sunday 13 October saw a 31 working car engineer's train on and around the bridge.
The 13th reform were believed to be sufficient to allow locos to work over the bridge and it is understood that 37/4's will not be allowed over.
The Regional Railways loco-hauled trains in 1992 seem likely to be continued with Class 31's being used -there are 3 Machynlleth drivers trained on them.
The steam excursions on the Cambrian lines proved to be highly successful — they will be featured in the autumn Railscene Video — but they involved a lot of train movements and were expensive to operate — light engine to Salop, the trip and return to Machynlleth late evening.
The September trains ran to and from Aberystwyth and brought the crowds out.
Watering of the services turned out to be a job when the Standard 4 drained the Aberystwyth water tank and it took four trips for the local fire brigade to water Hinton Manor.
Little has been seen or heard of the V of R this year, but apparently there have been something of an upheaval in the Company at the end of the season and few people are now employed.
The last rites of the VORRSA were played out at Welshpool at the end of September, when the assets were transferred to the Welshpool and Llanfair Light Railway.
Stations on the Cambrian Line are now pretty decrepit: Welshpool boarded up and part used by a Catering Contractor with minimal facilities and passenger information but the station is to be done up by the Local Authority: Newtown — possibly manned for only one shift per day; Caersws — very nice with the semaphore signals and signal box still in use.
Caersws station, Llanidloes road level crossing and one crossing up near Criccieth remain semaphore operated; Machynlleth new station plus staff facilities very nice — old station disintegrating; Aberystwyth station yard tidied up after several interesting fires but station is on the whole hardly inspiring and platform staff have been working under considerable uncertainty about their futures.
Red Star facilities still exist at Newtown, Machynlleth and Aberystwyth, but prices are high — 3 parcels — 54 kg total weight, station to station, Aberystwyth to Reading recently cost your writer £85.
The next lots of parcels are being collected by TNT and delivered the next day for £35.
Action on redevelopment at Aberystwyth is imminent and may result in the station being pushed eastwards.
Who will pay for the crossover still in use by the Stanlow tanks each week to be moved so that locos can still be run round trains?
Sectionalisation is a disaster!
NEW BOOK ON THE BCR
Written by John Scott Morgan, published by Irwell Press.
Copies of the book are available from the Hon.
Secretary (address given earlier), price £5.95 plus 75p for postage and packaging.
The book opens with a narrative passage evoking first the scenes in a typical day early this century, leading up to the arrival of the first train at Craven Arms, and then a poignant shorter evocation of the way things looked shortly after the closure.
Mr Scott Morgan gives a generous tribute to the work of Edward Griffith, who wrote the first book on the BCR, and explains that this new work does not replace the earlier one, but compliments it.
The promise is kept; though some overlapping of material is inevitable, usually it appears with a fresh slant on it.
There is also a useful indication of what Mr Scott Morgan regards as the particular strengths of Mr Griffith's book.
The remainder of the book describes various aspects of the whole lifetime of the railway and its death.
Much of the material comes from new research.
I thought the extracts from the diaries of the late S. H. Pearce Higgins very interesting.
He was a fan of the BCR though he came to know it only in the last few years of its life.
The book contains a large number of photographs.
Some are the familiar ones that we have all seen many times, but most will be new to the majority of readers.
The photographs are beautifully produced, a comment that extends to the general layout of the book, which also has an attractive choice of typefaces.
Maps and signalling diagrams are also included.
Personally I would like to see a gradient profile included in later editions and perhaps also an index, though possibly these opinions reflect my own prejudices.
Apart from that, my only quarrel with the production of the book is a number of printing errors, which should be picked up prior to a second edition.
THE WINTER PROGRAMME
The remainder of the programme is 
Remember that the quiz will be a team event, and I shall try to appoint most of our experts as team leaders.
As each question is asked each team goes into a huddle and then writes down its answer.
Even if you don't know many answers yourself it will be an opportunity to learn some interesting facts about railways.
When the weather starts to improve in the New Year, note that we have, by popular request, another talk by Graham Vincent, and talks by John Massey and our own member Len Davies.
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact PAUL LUCAS,— Tel.
No 0588 638446 (BCRS member).
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contract MR M. LAWSON-FINCH, ‘St. Cyres’, 20 Downs View Road, Seaford, E Sussex, BN25 4PT (BCRS member).
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Road, Llwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
[BCRS member]
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
NEW: I am now publishing a new publication as from June 1990 entitled ‘Railway Antiques Monthly’.
Full details on request.
S.W.S.H.A.S. PROGRAMME
We are pleased to include details of the programme of our sister society, the South West Shropshire Historical and Archeological Society (SWSHAS).
These events take place at 7.30 p.m., at the Community College, Bishop's Castle, unless otherwise stated.
AMUSING OCCURRENCE
This could also be entitled Stop Press, for it occurred after I had sent the first draft to the Hon.
Sec. for the production stage.
On Wednesday 20th November I caught the 1540 ex.
London Euston to Shrewsbury.
I began to wonder what was happening when we stood for a long time at Birmingham New Street.
Finally an announcement was made that there was trouble with the rear power car; we were later told that the train would be terminated at Wolverhampton and a bus laid on to take us to Shrewsbury.
We arrived at Wolverhampton a little after 1800.
As I walked out to the front of Wolverhampton station I did wonder a little when I noticed that there was a regular service train on the monitor, due to leave at 1822.
That was nothing to my thoughts two minutes later when I joined the back of a long queue for a bus that already had people standing!
At a guess there were enough people for three buses all told.
Then a ripple of information came down the queue to say that we had been ordered back to the station because there obviously wasn't sufficient bus capacity.
My first thought was that the superintendent had decided to run the InterCity train with one power car.
Not a bit of it!
We were directed to the 1822 Sprinter.
As a matter of interest, though it was well loaded, there were seats free, nobody had to stand.
It left, only about two minutes late.
At about 1910 we arrived at Shrewsbury, secure in the knowledge that the 1850 Aberystwyth train had been held.
The monitor stated that it would leave at approximately 1915.
Came 1915, 1920, 1925 and we were still waiting, and then at 1930 there was an announcement.
‘We apologise to customers’[as they insist on calling us]‘on the delayed 1850 to Aberystwyth.
This is because we are still waiting for the connecting bus from Wolverhampton…‘!
Personally I choose to travel by train, and am prepared to pay a higher fare to do so, because I find it a more comfortable, and usually more enjoyable mode of travel.
How does one convince BR that nobody is going to pay rail fares to travel by bus?
I was at a loss to explain how my little story came about, as was a BR employee I asked, but another friend put his finger on what is almost certainly the reason.
The 1822 Sprinter was a Regional Railways train.
InterCity had to solve the problem of getting its passengers from Wolverhampton to Shrewsbury and chose to do so by hiring a bus rather than paying another railway sector to do the job.
This farce was a result of Sectorisation.
Probably the notorious case of some rail coaches being moved by road came about in the same way.
As a final comment, perhaps Russell Mulford would like to note BR's view of the likely number of passengers between Wolverhampton and Shrewsbury, and the reality, on a perfectly ordinary midweek evening.
For that matter, the difference in performance between road and rail is worth noting too.