

Committee Meeting
Your Committee met on 2 December 1991, when the principal items discussed were the Balance Sheet and the future Museum (see below), the Winter Programme and progress on Glenburrell Bridge.
Balance Sheet
Our newly appointed Treasurer has now prepared a Balance Sheet for the nine months ended 31 December 1991.
A copy is given below:
MUSEUM
Discussions have taken place with the Shropshire County Council Leisure Services Department with regard to the setting up of a Museum and they have given much helpful advice including a visit to the proposed building.
A Planning Application has been submitted to South Shropshire District Council and their decision is expected within a few weeks.
December, January and February Meetings
This has been an experimental year for the social programme, with speakers chosen almost entirely from our own members.
I was encouraged in this by the good result of the experimental members' evening in the 1990-1 programme, when half a dozen members gave excellent short talks.
Part of the experiment was to hold a couple of quizzes at the time of year when we might expect problems with speakers and audience having to travel in bad weather.
I speak from experience, as my wife and I had to turn back and miss the December 1990 meeting.
December
The December meeting consisted of what I call a ‘pub quiz’, since it is a popular event in many pubs.
Impromptu teams are picked on the spot, with a knowledgeable captain to ensure a balance.
My wife and I chose the questions and acted as quizmasters.
The quiz was won by Daisy Nottingham's team, with the able assistance of Len Davies and others.
The Hon.
Sec. 's team made a strong run at the post and just pipped Russell Mulford's team for second place.
Here is a selection of questions (answers at the end of the Journal):—
What is ‘standard gauge’ and how is it measured?
Which of the following list are not current BR stations?
Portmarnock, Ravenglass, Corrour, Rainhill, Clitheroe, Kirkby Stephen, Corby, Caernarfon, Betws-y-Coed, Finchley?
One of the above list is the highest station on the BR network.
Which and what is its height above sea level?
Is it 1234', 1347', 1465' or 1117'?
What was the route mileage of Brunel's broad gauge at its peak?
What did Harold Edmundsen invent, and on which railway was it first used?
Name the BCR engines and give their wheel arrangements.
What was the highest rail speed ever reached by a steam hauled train, in which year and which country?
What was the highest rail speed ever reached by a train with any form of traction, in which year and which country?
What was unusual about the Listowel and Balybunion Railway?
(Test of how much we use our local stations): What are the approximate journey times by the most direct route:—
(a)
from Broome to Llandrindod?(58, 46, 69 or 53 minutes?)
(b)
from Broome to Shrewsbury?(45, 36, 26 or 42 minutes?)
(c)
from Craven Arms to Hereford?(24, 45, 40 or 32 minutes?)
(d)
from Shrewsbury to London?(3:25, 3:45, 3:00 or 2:45?)
(d)
from Newtown to Aberystwyth?(1:40, 1:10, 1:00 or 0:50?)
What are the most northern, eastern, southern and western BR stations?
What is the length of the longest ever recorded freight train?
Was it 2 ½ miles, 4 miles, ¾ miles, or 1 ½ miles?
January
This time we had a slide quiz.
Russell Mulford was quizmaster, and teams were picked on the same principle as before.
Russell showed us some slides from his collection and asked various questions e.g. ‘Where is that?’
Actually I feel too embarrassed to say much about this quiz since both my wife failed to recognise Aberystwyth station — a place we go to about once a week!
February — North Wales Quarries
Our February talk was given by a man who is both a member and a distinguished external speaker — Graham Vincent, a former chairman of the Talyllyn Railway.
The Welsh narrow gauge railways — the Great Little Railways of Wales — are well known as popular tourist attractions, but most were built to provide freight transport from, and within, quarries and mines in difficult terrain.
Graham gave us a judicious mixture of archive material of these railway systems and some modern photographs of survivals and restorations.
The survivals include some surprising places where rails can still, or until very recently could, be found in situ, and the remains of the bizarre means of personal transport once used to convey workers along these rails to and from their place of work.
Keith Lucas
Shropshire County Structure Plan 1991
The following is an extract from the above Plan, setting out their basic policy towards rail transport in the coming years:
Trains
The County Council will seek the retention, improvement and increased use of all existing facilities and services for rail passenger transportion in the County by:
Where appropriate, making grants towards rail improvements.
Encouraging the provision of adequate car parking facilities for railway stations.
Promoting the electrification of the Shrewsbury to Wolverhampton line.
Where appropriate, supporting the opening of new or re-opening of railway stations.
Rail Freight
The County Council will promote the increased use for goods traffic of all railway lines in the County, in particular by encouraging:
New developments which generate freight capable of bulk transport to locate close to rail facilities wherever possible.
Encouraging full use of the potential of the County's rail links with Channel Tunnel rail terminals.
The greater use of existing private sidings and the introduction of new ones.
The provision of freight handling and transport facilities at stations and other locations.
HON.
SEC'S JOTTINGS
New Year's Honours
We wish to extend congrations to mr Jack Bedell upon his award of the MBE in the New Year's Honours List.
Jack is a founder member of the BCRS and he has addressed the members twice on Agriculture and the Bishop's Castle Railway.
Museum
Items are beginning to arrive at my home for display.
also we have had promises of items on loan when we eventually open the Museum.
Some of the items arriving are in connection with the old LNWR and GWR companies.
Thanks to Len Davies for these.
MAIN LINE STEAM 1992
READERS' LETTERS
Dear Members,
On my birthday last year I received some railway birthday cards.
On one of them was ‘MALLARD’ resplendent in LNER garter blue but with the British Railways running number of 60022!! instead of the LNER running number of 4486.
The picture is reproduced by courtesy of Ivan Berryman and printed by J Arthur Dixon Ltd.
Another one is of a ‘Green’ LMS loco.
Number 5041.
I always thought that the LMS colours were black lined red and white or ‘Midland Red’ lined in Gold.
This card is called LMS Mainline and printed by The Ampersand Studio, design by Roy Laming.
Comments please!!!!
’ THE PEPPER BOX’, BISHOP'S CASTLE
This is the second extract from ‘The Pepper Box’ in the form of a letter from R Jasper More, MP in issue no. 2 of ‘The Pepper Box’.
there is a further letter from R Jasper More and one from a local person which I hope to have published in the next Journal.
THE PEPPER BOX
No. 2 BISHOP'S CASTLE, MARCH 28th, 1884.
Price 2d.
THE BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY
To the Editor.
Sir,— I congratulate you on the information you have been good enough to send me of your intention to publish a journal for Bishop's Castle, and I beg leave to offer for your insertion a few remarks on what I think ought to interest your readers — the present position of the question of the extension of the line to your town.
I merely say that I think the question might be expected to interest your readers, but I am by no means confident that they will care much about the matter.
when it was proposed to apply for a bill to make a line from Wolverhampton to Montgomery, and afterwards to abandon the latter part of the line, no meeting was called to ascertain the views of the district on the proposed abandonemtn of the part between Lydham Heath and Montgomery.
Few people believed at that time that a bill would be obtained to make a line down Corvedale.
Now that the necessity of continuing the line to the Cambrian is manifest to the promoters of the rest of the line, the town and neighbourhood of Bishop's Castle, which took no notice of the question at first, has, not unnaturally perhaps, been left wholly out of consideration in the matter.
Whereas the district in which we live is under an agreement between the three great companies — the Midland being one — that not one of them shall promote a railway in the district without the consent of all three companies; the continuation of the Bishop's Castle line is now saddled with the further condition that it shall not be made independently of the Corvedale line, whereas a proposal was made by one of the largest shareholders in the Cambrian to complete it independently of any other line.
The object of a meeting of the neighbourhood attended by those who have had full knowledge of the whole circumstances of the case may now be apparent.
the inhabitants of Montgomery are, I believe, likely to petition against the present arrangement.
Whether, if they do so, it would be to the interest of the Bishop's Castle neighbourhood to offer evidence in favour of the line being completed on its own merits no one person can judge.
The present bill provides for the removal of the station from Lydham Heath to Lydham village, supposing the line to be ever completed under the contemplated arrangements.
If it should be made in conjunction with the Corvedale line, assuming that the capital is raised for that line, it may be too late then to enquire how trains are to run from Lydham village to Bishop's Castle, which now might be placed on the main line, or what expenditure will be necessary to make the roads to Lydham village as suitable for the inhabitants of Norbury, Wentnor, &c., as those over which they at present travel to Lydham Heath.
It would be too late also to consider why, if the Corvedale line has running powers over the new line to Montgomery, that line had equally no running powers over the Bishop's Castle line.
There would be time now to see Mr. Fynney, the chief debenture holder on the line, and take his opinion, which I believe has not been given on the position but he, unfortunately, a short time ago lost his brother, and could not attend to business, and there would be time now to obtain the consideration of the promoters of the points above named, before the bill passes the House of Lords.
I take the opportunity of the publication of your paper to draw attention to these small details, with respect to which I have never moved myself, because until they interest others in the neighbourhood i should be sorry to be supposed to move in them for any interest of my own.
I am personally more interested in the Corvedale line being made.
I fancy, however, in future years, and even if the proposed line should now be hung up as long as the proposed act lasts, the neighbourhood may regret that they let the matter be arranged without any criticism from the locality from which the Act takes its name, for which there is now just time.
But unless anyone takes the trouble to ascertain first what persons would care to attend a meeting, I don't imagine that one could usefully be called.
Of this, however, I leave the public to judge.
—
Your obedient servant, R JASPER MORE York Hotel, Albemarle Street, Mar. 18th, 1884.
We understand that this bill will not come before the House of Lords until after Easter.
-Ed.
P.-B.
MORE AND MORE TICKETS FROM MY COLLECTION.
I could not resist including the Iraq State Railways third class ticket from Cassell's Post to Baghdad.
Perhaps some member knows Cassell's Post and can tell us something.
A visit there at the moment is not recommended.
Another curiosity is the patriotic ‘British Empire Line’, London to the Front, Fighting Class, and dated 1915.
Perhaps old ladies carried a supply in their purses.
A very interesting standard gauge light railway in North Northumberland was the North Sunderland Railway, not to be confued with Sunderland in Co Durham.
this four mile line joined the North Eastern Railway at Chathill, and remained a private company from its opening in 1898 to its closure in October 1951.
The terminus was the fishing port of Seahouses, from where large quantities of fish were landed and sent direct by rail to London, Birmingham and elsewhere.
Despite heavy traffic, it did not fit in with British Railway's policy, and also it suffered from Union intransigency. tickets were printed by the NER and its successors, and followed their standard designs.
Second class fare was charged from Seahouses to Chathill, but all three classes were available between Seahouses and the only intermediate station, North Sunderland.
The pink second class single illustrated was one of several examples of North Eastern Railway tickets still on sale for up to 30 years after that company had passed into history.
The Liverpool Overhead Railway, or the Docker's Umbrella, first opened in 1893.
It ran from Dingle to Seaforth Sands, where it connected with the L & y Railway.
It had perhaps the largest and strangest range of tickets for any railway of its size.
To do the line justice, it would take up the next six issues, so I intend to show you only some of the more interesting such as the First Class blank Privilege Ticket.
Most railways printed a range of tickets for servants entitled ‘to privilege third class travel’, which had quite heavy usage, but servants in higher grades without ‘All Stations’ passes and entitled to First Class travel must have been very few.
The need may have only for servants from ‘foreign’ lines, or dependants.
First class Privilege Tickets are very rare.
There were many through tickets available over L & Y Railway, and successor lines as well as the Mersey Railway.
At peak holiday times, L.O.R. trains worked to Southport.
The First Class single ticket printed as two halves was an interesting economy measure.
Regretfully, mounting costs and diminishing traffic forced the line to liquidate.
Strenuous efforts were made to induce Liverpool Corporation to take over the railway, but unwisely they refused.
it closed on the 30th December 1956.
CAMBRIAN RAILWAYS
In the last issue of the Journal, J Wildig mentioned steam working on the Cambrian Line.
A ‘Steam View’ video Vol. 22 is now available and includes a track giving excellent coverage of ‘Hinton Manor’and BR class 4MT No. 75069 in action on the route from Welshpool to the coast.
Particularly impressive is the climb from Machynlleth to Talerddig summit.
Published by Transport Video Publishing, P O Box 229, Wheathampstead, Herts AL4 8SD — Price £14.95.
STOURBRIDGE LINE USER GROUP (SLUG)
A quartet of committed rail supporters met late in 1990.
Their efforts hatched the Birmingham-Stourbridge-Kidderminster-Worcester line user group.
Assembling quietly in a public house for our third meeting attracted the nucleus of ‘ad hoc’ Committee members.
Why would a thriving line spawn a user group?
We all have our reasons for this initiative.
Three issues occur to me.
Firstly, there is concern about Birmingham city centre stations.
The general travel explosion has swamped New Street.
Historically Snow Hill served this line — now re-connection via Handsworth is sought.
A generation ago these two were roughtly equally important, and walking from one to another was acceptable.
Not today!
Secondly, the half hourly Express Link service introduced in 1983, has become a victim of its own success.
Taking half an hour Birmingham-Kidderminster is fine when all goes smoothly.
However, a degree of overcrowding, cancellation and unpunctuality besets the service.
Thirdly, seven direct trains to/from Cardiff via Gloucester ran for three years.
The promised re-routing on the Bromsgrove Line means that passengers make the connection at Worcester Shrub Hill.
This is never the same as boarding the line's ‘prestige’ service at your own station.
It is not every year that the Regional Railways Manager (East Midlands and Midline) and the Public Affairs Manager of Centro put their heads on the travelling public chopping-block.
They addressed the well-attended Public Meeting held to officially launch the Group at Stourbridge in late summer.
Station monitors probably emerge more readily in a rural catchment area — Womens' Institute support for example— than in the vast amorphous southern Black Country.
Primitive methods yielded profitable results from stands run at the Wyre Forest Green Show — appropriate for our name!— and Stourbridge Canal Arm.
Meeting at a Committee member's house helps solvency.
Shoestring operations include hand and bicycle delivery of membership communications produced on a generous Committee member's word processor.
Envelopes accrued from the disbanded local self-help group of a charity, whilst a career conference foolscap pad serves as ‘Minute Book’.
Ballpoint pen and carbon-paper suffice for ‘one-off’ letters written on donated headed notepaper.
Smile or squirm at the acronym SLUG — there is more to the name than meets the eye.
A Stourbridge resident working in Kidderminster library subsequently told me that The Slug was the nickname for the Stourbridge Town branch train.
We live and learn!
’ Lettuce’hope our first real newsletter can be compiled with what remains from the £1 subscription, before encouraging a good turn-out to our first AGM, dare we hope!
Giles Angell
December 1991.
STEAM TRIALS, MANX ELECTRIC RAILWAY, 5 DECEMBER 1991
The Manx Electric Railway will be celebrating its Centenary in 1993 and to mark the occasion, one of the events planned is STEAM WORKING on the route from Lexey to Dhoon Quarry.
The proposed outing has severe gradients, sharp curves and abrupt points and crossings; it is, after all, part of an inter urban tramway!
Trials to prove the feasability of the project have had to be held and the Government Inspector's approval obtained.
Report on the 1991 Steam Trials.
The steam trial on 5 December was blessed with fine weather, although a little dull.
The occasion was a closely kept secret, but somehow there seemed to be a ‘leak’ as photographers appeared from behind every tree and bush — one was even chased by a bull whilst crossing a field!
A representative from the Bishop's Castle Railway was an invited member of the party of this unique occasion, joining the electric car No I of 1893, which ran on the wrong line just ahead of‘Loch’, which managed the gradients with ease.
At the Dhoon Quarry, where the engine was given a drink from a convenient fire hydrant, the turnround was made using a crossover and helped by a gravity shunt.
The journey back on the four mile journey took 24 minutes against 27 for the outward one, the brakesmen on both bogie trailer cars helping to control the descent.
The Government Railway Inspector was generally satisfied with the trials, and public steam runs can now take place for the centenary of the MER next year.
Those present on this unique occasion were well aware they were making history in riding a steam train on the electric line, the first time since a steam engine was used on the construction of the line in the last century!
Would members be interested in an organised visit to the Island's railways in 1993?
George Hearse.
Members interested in a visit to I O M please let the Soc.
Secretary know as soon as possible.
If sufficient interest is shown, preliminary arrangements can then be made.
DAY TRIP TO CARLISLE
Bill Morris is organizing another diesel hauled charter train to Carlisle — via the Settle-Carlisle line on Saturday, 30 May 1992.
Full details from Bill Morris Coaches, Broadbridge House, Bromyard, Worcester.
Tel. (0885) 482285.
S W S H A S PROGRAMME 1992
(Events at the Community College, Bishop's Castle, unless otherwise stated).
LETTERS TO THE EDITORS
Minsterley, 28.01.92
Dear Mr Young
I feel I would like to write to you on how they are operating the Railway today.
The BR stated that 200 lives were lost thrown out from the carriage door on the ‘Inter City’ trains; this happened on the curve on the track, at this point the speed was 100 mph (suicide).
So I ask them to do the right thing and put a 50 mph speed restriction, together with the CANT of the track and provided the doors are properly shut which is the responsibility of the staff not the passengers, they will have no further trouble.
Mr Young, I would like our 200 membership to know my comments on this subject.
Thank you for your remarks on my talk in the Journal.
Best wishes to you,
Yours sincerely,
Syd (Mr Syd Breeze, retired Engine Driver).
PRESERVATION GROUP NEWSLETTER
Saturday, 1 February 1992, dawned wih a thick fog in he area.
this was the day that members of our group had set for a sponsored walk, the length of the old Bishop's Castle Railway.
Members taking part were: Tim and Steve Wallace, Ron Mardle and myself.
The Society's Vice-Chairman was joining us to walk as far as Horderley (but then had to leave us).
This was due to business committments on Richard's part.
The group assembled at Craven Arms Station at approximately 9.30 am, to be told that a steam loco was supposed to be passing through.
After some discussion as to the walk, by now approaching 10 am, out of the fog was heard the sound of a steam loco and the 8F Severn Valley Engine No 48773 appeared, travelling very slowly with a Birmingham Railway Museum support coach attached.
It appears, from later information, that she was travelling light from London to Blackburn.
She carries the name ‘Lancastrian’.
We eventually started our walk, with the Society's Hon.
Sec., Ken Lucas in support with a car carrying liquid refreshments and first aid kit!
We proceeded from the old bay at Caraven Arms used by the BC Railway and walked by road to the site of the old Strettford Bridge Junction, where we took to the old track bed as far as Glen Burrell Bridge, where we joined the road again, calling in on the Rev. Ray Arnold at Horderley, who was waiting with coffee and biscuits.
After a group photograph, we proceeded by road again to Plowden, Eaton, Lydham Heath and finally, the old station site at Bishop's Castle, Ron Mardle having taken pictures at all of the old station sites.
Altogether we did 8 miles by road and 3 miles on the old trackbed, taking 6 hours in all with stops.
Owing to the thick fog all day long, we had to take extra precautions on the road parts of the walk.
Due to generous sponsorship from local members and local people in Bishop's Castle and Clun, we raised approximately £300 for the Preservation Funds.
A day enjoyed by all who participated.
Paul Lucas.
Mid-Wales Notes
The Vale of Rheidol
Work on the Rheidol river bridge started early in December.
Piling for the new bridge was completed by Christmas.
The rest of the work was finished by the end of January and the Vale of Rheidol permanent way team has been ballasting since then and putting in check rails etc.
Here are some passenger figures which make interesting reading:—
1991
41,000 +
1990
43,601
1989
44,294
1988
53,642
1987
50,407
In recent years, sad to say, a steady decline!
Main Cambrian Lines
These now basically work a routine of Centro sprinters and the Regional Railway Class 158's which make two trips each way every day.
Passenger loadings are fairly reasonable.
As far as freight is concerned, Newtown is no longer a Red Star station.
The weekly petroleum train to Aberystwyth continues, usually hauled by 37430 Cambrian.
Some semaphores still survive — at Caersws and the Llanidloes Road level crossing.
The Aberystwyth layout has undergone further rationalisation.
The two sidings on the north face of the yard — the old Platform 3 and carriage siding — have now been disconnected.
(Platform 3 was used at least once last summer to house Hinton Manor for an hour or two on the wonderful occasions when Aberystwyth saw two standard gauge steam engines — Keith Lucas) Some alterations are being discussed to the run round facilities, which are now only used regularly by the petroleum traffic.
General Observations from Recent Journeys
Red Star parcels traffic has declined markedly.
Salop station at 8 p.m. at night is a shadow of its former self, with very little Post Office activity.
Cambrian Line Speed
Currently 60 mph from Buttington to Aberystwyth, this is to be increased to 75 mph.
An E.E.C.
grant of £415,000 is being used to pay for some of this.
However one hopes that speeds over level crossings will be increased to get the maximum benefit.
John Wildig
Answers to Sample Quiz Questions
4' 8 ½, measured from the inside of one rail to the inside of the other.
Portmarnock, Corby, Caernarfon, Finchley.
Corrour (1347 feet)
1040 miles
Pasteboard ticket, Newcastle and Carlisle Railway.
Bee (0-4-0), Plowden (0-6-0), Perseverance (0-4-2), Progress (2-4-0), Bishop's Castle (2-4-0), No. 1 (0-4-2), Carlisle (0-6-0)
126 mph, 1938, Britain
320.2 mph, 1990, France
It was a monorail.
(a)
58 mins.
(b)
36 mins.
(c)
32 mins.
(d)
3:00 hours.
(e)
1 hour 10 mins.
Thurso, Lowestoft, Penzance, Arisaig (Scotland)
The answer is an amazing 4 miles, on the 15th November 1967, between West Virginia and Ohio, USA.
It was also the heaviest recorded train at 42,000 tons.