

COLIN GARRATT
Once again we must thank Colin Garrett for the superb quality of his show ‘Britain's Railway’ held at the Community College, Bishop's Castle on Friday 7th November 1992.
The event was well supported by both Society members and the general public.
The mind boggles at the complexity of a system using twelve slide projectors producing 4,000 pictures during the 2¼ hour performance.
Commencing with a visit to a scrap yard we then got a glimpse inside the Brush Works, and then covered all aspects of InterCity, Regional Railways, Freight, Parcels mail and, looking to the future the Channel tunnel and its possibilities for Continental travel.
David Young
DECEMBER MEETING QUIZ
As last year we held a team quiz for our December meeting.
Though participants have said that they find these quizzes enjoyable, they have not been well supported by comparison with the more usual lectures and no further quiz is planned for the moment, though I shall try to keep a few questions in hand in case a speaker is delayed or fails to arrive for some reason.
Bridget Nottingham and I were the quizmasters.
Some of the questions were related to previous Society events such as trips, the work on the Clunbury coach or even repeated from last year's quiz.
The idea was to give everybody a reasonable chance of answering some questions, not merely by general railway knowledge, but by dint of having supported Society events.
The ‘A’ team, led by Ron Mardle won the event.
Keith Lucas
The Questions
What is the length of the longest recorded recorded freight train?
What is the usual length of a standard gauge wooden sleeper?
Which BR line is called the Drain?
On knowledge of local services:
(a)
How many weekday trains run over the complete Central Wales line?
(b)
How many weekday trains arrive at Pwllheli?
(c)
How many weekday (Mon-Thu) trains pass through Church Stretton in one direction?
On knowledge of the nearest station to Bishop's Castle:
(a)
What colour could be seen on Broome station platform in December?
(b)
Is the current platform on the up or the down side (up is towards Shrewsbury)?
(c)
If you look in the Hopton Heath direction, is the first bend to the left or the right?
What are the maximum permitted speeds of the following Sprinter classes?
(a)
(a) 150
(b)
(b) 156
(c)
(c) 158
Give the names of the BCR locomotives.
(a)
What is the number of the Clunbury coach?
(b)
What is its approximate length?
(a)
Name two prominent exhibits from the BCRS museum's central display case
(b)
What would you see on the floor of the museum in the corner opposite the door?
(c)
Where is the 4’ gauge model coach displayed?
This question and the five after it are a test on the previous two copies of the Journal.
This one refers to an article by Mr Sydney Breeze on operating practices in the Severn Tunnel in steam days.
(a)
What was the maximum speed through the tunnel?
(b)
What was the method of communication between a broken-down train in the tunnel and the signalmen at either end?
(c)
What was the guard's first action in case of a failure in the tunnel?
(a)
Approximately when was the Liverpool Overhead Railway opened?
(b)
What was the connection between the Railway and the Titanic?
Describe two locomotive workings on the Cambrian lines last summer.
name four classes of Sprinter operating Cambrian line trains.
(a)
What is SLUG?
(b)
Slug was a nickname that was partially responsible for the adoption of the above name.
For what was it a nickname?
Name five of our speakers in the 1990-91 programme.
(Only one is allowed from the members' evening.)
A question restricted to the junior members: what name is applied to the Welsh Narrow gauge railways for publicity purposes?
Why were the Ffestiniog locomotives converted to oil burning?
This question is for the railway specialists, but is also included because quizzes are a way to learn odd railway titbits.
There is a parallel with the BCR here: Which preserved narrow gauge railway was opened in 1876, declared bankrupt in 1877, abandoned in 1912 and has been in the hands of private operators since 1915?
Who opened the preserved Dart Valley Railway in 1969?
Which company operated the Mid-Wales Railway (Moat lane to Three Cocks Junction) before the Grouping?
(a)
What is the name of the NRM's working replica of a Gooch broad gauge single?
(b)
What is the name of the non-working broad gauge replica kept in the Swindon GWR museum?
This question was intended as a thank you to the people who see to the coffee and biscuits at our meetings:
(a)
How many biscuits are eaten at the average BCRS meeting?
(b)
How long does our usual tea urn take to boil?
(c)
How many cups are there to wash up?
Since the current Journal is becoming rather long, the remaining questions will be given in the next one.
The Answers
Four miles (15 Nov 1967 between West Virginia and Ohio)
8′ 6″
Bank to Waterloo
(a) 4,(b) 7,(c) 21 -credit was given for approximate answers to the second and third.
(a) White,(b) up,(c) left
(a) 70 mph,(b) 70 mph,(c) 90 mph
Bee, Plowden, Perseverance, Progress, Bishop's Castle, No. 1 (or ‘Tanky’), Carlisle
(a) 1622,(b) 28′ 2.5″
Various answers were acceptable here.
Possibilities were (a) Carlisle name plate, Stretford Bridge token, Jasper More Collection,(b) chairs and keys,(c) on a shelf in the righthand corner opposite the door.
(a) 75 mph,(b) telegraph wire on the wall of the tunnel,(c) the guard cuts the wire.
(a) In stages 1893–1905,(b) the father of the engineer, one Captain Arthur Rostron, rescued survivors from the Titanic.
Butlins train, Shell oil train
150, 153, 156, 158
(a) Stourbridge Line Users' Group,(b) nickname for the Stourbridge town branch line
Michael Parker, Colin Garratt, Andy Carey, Col. Savill, Russell Mulford, John Horsley Denton, Vic Smith.
At the members' evening: Gordon Gissing, Ron Mardle, Robin Hill, Phil Field, Gerald Castle and Sydney Breeze.
To avoid the risk of forest fires.
The Ravenglass and Eskdale
Dr Richard Beeching
Cambrian Railways
(a) Iron Duke,(b) North Star
MUSEUM
The museum is now closed until Easter 1993 when it will re-open with slightly altered times.
It is now planned to open on Saturdays and Sundays from 2.30 p.m. to 5.30 p.m. with a possible mid-week opening day.
Over 2,000 people passed through the museum during its three month opening period in 1992, so we are encouraged and look forward to seeing a larger number of people pass through during the six month opening period in 1993.
Ken Lucas
PHOTO-COPIES EX N.R.M. YORK
When our chairman, Richard Newcombe, and I visited the N.R.M. York in July 1992 we arranged to have several documents, articles etc. photo-copied for the Society.
I intend over the next Journals to put them on record for all members, who are unable to visit the Museum at Bishop's Castle, to reproduce them for you.
The seal is one of the photo-copied items obtained from the National Railway Museum in York on our visit last year.
To date I have not yet discovered a document with this imprint on, but I live in hope of finding one, some day.
Ken Lucas
THE CLUNBURY COACH
Your Committee has purchased an ex G.W.R. coach which some people believe to have run on the BCR in its last years before it went out of use.
(For further details see the following article.)
The coach has served as a garden shed for many years at Clunbury in Shropshire and consequently is in poor condition and minus its running gear.
It has now been dismantled and removed into storage in a building belonging to Committee member Ron Davies, until such time as the work of restoration can proceed.
Thanks to all members who helped with the removal of the coach, also to Messrs Francis Rudge and Ray Graham who have recorded the proceedings on video and after editing will make a copy available at the Museum for loan to members.
THE SIX-WHEELER DISCOVERED AT CLUNBURY
One Page 6, BCRS Journal No. 10 there is a picture of a six-wheeler in a Clunbury garden.
This coach was ordered on Swindon Lot No. 322 in August 1884.
This lot was for 59 coaches to what became 53, the numbers allocated being 1599–1648 inclusive.
These were ‘renewals’ which in theory meant that they replaced old coaches, possibly ones dating from the start of the ‘narrow’gauge.
The diagram numbering system started about 1906 when the 4/6w Third diagram No. 3 in the S series was allocated to these coaches.
In fact, both 53 and 54 covered these coaches: the original 53 was for six-wheeled versions and 54 for four-wheeled versions altered from the original six.
Coach 1622 was built under the last lot on the diagram.
No. 1622 itself was released to traffic during the week ending 6th December 1884.
It was mounted on an iron underframe with six wheels on a 9′ 6″ + 9′ 6’(19′) wheelbase with 3′ 6″ diameter wheels fitted.
The buffers and draw gear were spring type, as distinct from india rubber as used on some.
Automatic vacuum brakes were fitted from new as was oil lighting to the compartments.
The coach weighed 11T — 3C — 2Q as new.
When built 1622 was equipped with continuous stepboards, which means that it had two stepboards per side to allow for entry from ground level.
In the W.E.
4th April 1898 the lighting was changed to gas at Bridgewater which probably means that it was in service in that area.
The weight then became 11T — 7C — 0Q.
Steam heating was fitted in 1905 during February and then in September 1918 the gas lighting was upgraded to incandescent mantle types.
The coach was condemned in May 1931, as were a lot of its sister coaches from the lot.
Some lasted in revenue service a few more years however.
This date suggests people's memories may be playing tricks with the ‘1920's’ sale date.
The G.W. condemned stock from all its depots, but as no name is quoted the assumption is that it was from Swindon.
The use of these coaches was mainly on secondary services, then branch and local, and in a lot of cases in their last years as workmen's, although 1622's record makes no comment about this.
Jim Russel's Pictorial Record of G.W. coaches Vol. 1 shows two similar coaches on p. 52, Figs. 53 & 54.
Both these show vehicles in departmental use, one as an ex-53, the other ex-54 although the centre wheels could have been removed on introduction to departmental use.
Ray Arnold (with grateful thanks to Barry Scott)
PRESERVATION GROUP
Carriage Report for 1/3/93
We started work on the carriage on the 3rd October 1992.
Stephen and Paul started to move the rubbish out in the morning.
Billy (Nottingham) and I came down in the afternoon to help.
Many handy tools were found in the carriage which are now in the hands of members of the group.
Two skips full of clocks, newspapers, old books and other junk came out.
This took two Saturdays.
There was a lot of undergrowth to be cleared so Stephen and I went down the following Saturday (17/10/92) to cut down and burn the weeds.
The next time (31/10/92) Ron Mardle came to measure and draw, while Keith numbered the parts of the carriage for future identification.
Stephen and Paul finished cleaning the outside.
Thanks to Ray Graham for videoing the day's exploits.
(21/11/92): Four mad men stood in the cold rain taking some of the roof off!
(For posterity, they were Tim and Steve Wallace, Richard Wildig and Keith Lucas.)
The next Saturday (28/11/92) the sun came out.
I went to pick up Keith and Richard from Broome station.
Vic (Smith) spent most of the morning trying to take off a door.
Paul and Stephen removed one Smoking window for safe keeping.
The rest of us worked on the roof.
In the afternoon all of us worked on the roof and also took the seat out of Partition E to make a start on the B end.
Thanks to Francis Rudge for videoing me working!
(12/12/92): We took three doors, two panels, the two remaining roof cross members and the B end off.
(19/12/92): We took all the remaining panels the A end, which was very heavy, and the doors off with the help of the door man Vic!
We stacked up everything to make the site tidy for Christmas.
Thanks again to Francis for videoing.
(28/12/92): Stephen, Richard Newcombe and I went to sum up the move to Ron Davies's barn.
(16/1/93): This was the day of the big move.
Thanks must go to Joe Lawley for the use of his Range Rover and trailer.
The move took two journeys.
Thanks also to Graham Lloyd for being the clerk of the works!
We had to leave the roof on sire because it was too long for the trailer.
Frances was on hand with the video and jokes; thanks to him once again.
(31/1/93): Paul Stephen and I went to Richard Newcombe's to pick up his long ladder to support the roof timbers on Paul's car and then went down to the carriage and put all the roof on his car roof.
We moved the roof to Ron's to be stored with the rest of the carriage.
A BIG thank you must go to Richard Newcombe for all the background work, also to Mike and Avril for the cups of tea and biscuits, to the Nottingham boys and Richard Wildig for their help and to Ron Davies for the use of his barn.
The total hours spent on the carriage so far are 226 hours 30 minutes.
Tim Wallace, Preservation Group Leader.
BCR GOODS WAGON
We are still negotiating on this wagon, which is currently being used for storage purposes at the former Eaton Station.
We are currently examining a possible replacement for the storage facility.
GLENBURRELL BRIDGE PROJECT
Since Stage 1 of the Museum was completed we have been planning to resume work on repairs to the Bridge.
Dismantling the Clunbury coach had to take priority for a while but now our minds are firmly on the bridge project and we would like like to bring it to completion as soon as possible.
Late News
This project was discussed at a recent committee meeting.
Unfortunately it is becoming harder to obtain public liability insurance cover because of the very large amounts awarded nowadays in damage claims.
We cannot take the risk of proceeding without at least third party cover and so the project may suffer a further delay while this is sorted out.
EX L.N.W.R. FOUR-WHEEL CARRIAGE
The BCR acquired early, in its life, several ex L.N.W.R. 4-wheel carriages, fitted with chain brakes and the illustration of one of these carriages is from the Selwyn Pearce Higgins Collection deposited at York.
In the book ‘A Register of West Coast Joint Stock’ by R. N. Casserley and P. A. Millard, published by the Historical Model Railway Society in 1980, there are two photographs of BCR carriages.
The caption on one photograph states that the 4-wheel L.N.W.R. composite carriages were built in 1862.
It is identical to the first carriages provided for the W.C.J.S. and may well be one of them.
Apart from the livery it is unaltered from its original condition.
Its BCR number cannot be identified with certainty, but it may be No. 6.
Ken Lucas
THANKS FOR USE OF POSTERS
We are grateful to Mr Paul G. Gilson for giving us permission to use copies of some posters ‘for Oswestry and London’ in the Journal.
It is intended to accredit these individually as used but we would like to take the opportunity of thanking Mr Gilson now.
B.B.C. RADIO SHROPSHIRE
Ghost Trains of Shropshire
About three years ago Radio Shropshire broadcast a series covering four railways that have ceased to operate.
Early in the summer of 1992 Chris Eldon-Lee, the producer of the programmes, contacted me, with the view that they intended to repeat these four broadcasts with the addition of four more more and the Bishop's Castle Railway would be one of these later four.
So one morning last summer Chris Eldon-Lee and John Horsley Denton, well known in Shropshire for his railway talks and writings, turned up at my home to record this programme.
There was no script, it was planned to start at Craven Arms station and work our way up the course on the old line.
This took about six hours to record, the eventual programme being of 30 minutes duration.
Also taking part in the programme were Flossie and Bill Jarvis, giving their memories of journeys on the railway and the Rev. Ray Arnold, who lives in the former Horderley station bungalow, told about his finds on the site.
In all this was a very enjoyable day recording the programme and what pleased me even more was the producer Chris Eldon Lee's comment in a letter that he wrote to tell me when it was to be broadcast ‘We have kept the Bishop's Castle Railway till last as it is the best of the bunch’.
(Transmitted on 20 September 1992 by Radio Shropshire.)
A copy has been placed in the reference section at the museum, for borrowing purposes.
Note: Through an omission on my part the editors did not receive these notes for inclusion in the last Journal.
Ken Lucas
THE EARLY DAYS OF THE BCR
An Eye-Witness Account from the Journal of Henry Oakeley
In 1976 Mr Gerald Rhodes and his wife bought a large chest in a furniture sale at Craven Arms.
When they got it home to Suffolk, they discovered a small black-bound notebook containing the Diary of Henry Oakeley for the years 1869–1871.
They became interested in the Oakeley Family and did much research for their Introduction, when they published extracts of the diary in 1980.
Further volumes of Henry Oakeley's Journal also turned up in the County Record Office -for the years 1862–1866.
More may yet come to light.
Although his brother, the Rev. Arthur Oakeley (then squire of Lydham) does not appear to have approved of the proposed Bishop's Castle Railway and did not attend the Opening, Commander Henry Oakeley, R.N. (Retd.) was very interested.
At that time he and his family lived at the Roveries, and before the Railway was built, the Oakeleys drove to Craven Arms to catch the train to Ludlow or Shrewsbury.
From then on his Journal shows how he followed the progress of the new Bishop's Castle Line:
31.5.1865
‘Walked to Oakeley, thence about inspecting Railway’.
12.9.1865
‘I saw the Engine on the Railway up as far as Lydham's Heath Pool it was up nearly as far yesterday’.
24.10.1865
‘Drove to B. Castle to see the opening of the Railway .
1 p.m. train arrived.
Self, Mrs., and children except Katarina got into No. 1 1st class carriage just to say we had been there’.
21.12.1865
‘The Government Inspector went over B. C. Railway and did not pass it’.
On 18th December 1865 Henry Oakeley had to send for coal etc. to Montgomery Station: by 22nd January 1866 he was noting ‘Sent for a load of coal to Bishop's Castle Railway Stn ’, and on 29th January 1866 ‘Sent to Bishop's Castle Railway Station for a cask of cider’.
On the 1st February 1866 Henry Oakeley ‘Walked to Lydham Heath Station with Sophy.
Bishop's Castle Railway opened for passenger traffic.
Took the two first first-class tickets for C. Arms from this station numbered respectively 00 and 01.
At C. Arms met Mrs and Katarina who took also the two first from there for Lydham's Heath.
Numbered as above’.
10.2.1866
‘9.15 started to Lydham's Heath Station with Mrs., Arthur and John thence by train to Leominster.
Took the first first-class tickets through for that station being number respectively 00 and 01 ours being returns, Arthur's and John's singles…’.
The very first entry of the part of the Diary 1869–1871 published by Gerald Rhodes mentions the Railway:
1.4.1869
‘Carriage to Station with boys and Gertrude Beale…’
and the last entry, before Henry wrote ‘and so ends this book’ is:
31.7.1871
‘…7, both Carriages to station at Lydham Heath for Sophy and the Johnes's. 10 Cloudy’.
Henry Oakeley, who had succeeded his brother as squire of Lydham and moved to ‘Oakeley Manor’(now Lydham Manor), actually died while enquiring about the Railway, on 12th March 1877, the year in which the Bailiffs Incident occurred.
Gerald Rhodes wrote in the Epilogue to his Extracts: ‘He died on 12th March 1877 at the age of 60 and, as was his wish, was buried in Lydham churchyard alongside his wife, Emily.
The circumstances of his death were graphically recorded in the local press.
The ‘awfully sudden death’ which had cast ‘a great gloom’over the town of Bishop's Castle apparently took place in the office of Thomas Griffiths, solicitor and Town Clerk of the borough since 1851.
According to Mr. Griffiths, Henry had arrived at his office about 10.30 a.m. and was to try a case of housebreaking.
In the interval he seemed particularly cheerful and had asked for news about the Bishop's Castle Railway
‘and shortly after entering the office, while engaged listening to a letter which Mr. Griffiths commenced to read, concerning the Bishop's Castle Railway, he fell back and shortly afterwards breathed his last’.
[Eddowe's Shrewsbury Journal 14th March, 1877]
Dr. Lane of Bishop's Castle gave his opinion at the inquest that he died ‘from an attack of cerebral apoplexy’.
GLYN VALLEY TRAMWAY GROUP
I have just received information from the above-named group that they intend to hold a study day on the Snailbeach District Railway on Saturday 11th September.
The study day will include lectures and remembrances of the line, which finally closed in 1959, a walk along part of the trackbed and a viewing of some of the recently restored buildings of the lead mine which the Railway opened to serve in 1877.
For further information please contact:
Bryan Heatley:
051-336-3569
John White:
081-330-7216
Ken Lucas
YES — MORE TICKETS FROM MY COLLECTION
It's nice to get back to Bishop's Castle Railway tickets, but I am sorry to say these are the last you will see as I have no more suitable for reproduction in the Journal.
You may have seen one or two before, but I make no excuse for showing them again as on the last occasion they did not come out very well.
All stations were well covered from both Bishop's Castle and Craven Arms for Policeman on Duty tickets.
How to get back to either place after making the equivalent response to a 999 call is not clear as no P.O.D.
tickets are known from intermediate stations.
The 2nd class single from Craven Arms to Plowden is another example of repricing in 1915 from 10d to 1s 3d, and later, about 1921 to 1s 2d.
The 1st class return from Bishop's Castle to Plowden although very dirty has come out quite well and is interesting as a late printing.
All surviving ticket numbers of the 1st class singles suggest that few were sold.
The 3rd class Excursion return ticket is also a Parliamentary, ‘Parly’ on the ticket.
All my examples run to quite high numbers, which suggests not only that they were a large early printing, but that they were used as ordinary day returns in later days.
The Golf tickets are of particular interest, the B.C.Rly may have been unique in this respect.
The 3rd class return fare fare from Craven Arms was only 9d, assumed to be a day ticket, at that time a Parliamentary single was 7d, which was good value for the golfers, all of whom came from Craven Arms.
These Golf tickets came in 1st and 2nd class as well, the example I have of the 1st class issue is No. 10, hardly worth printing.
No doubt 1st class golfers would have their own horse conveyance, having an advantage which we today do not enjoy, namely that after ‘refreshment’ in the clubhouse the horse could find its own way home.
A number of unused tickets, from not only the BCR have been turning up with a date in the year 1933.
As the precaution was taken of recording ticket number disposed of, a name has been drawn to the attention of the Hon.
Secretary of the Society, for such action as the Committee may decide.
Any member who has information on this fraud, please contact the Hon.
Secretary.
CARLISLE TO SETTLE RAILWAY
Cheshire Railtours are planning a rail tour up the WCML to Carlisle and return via the S & C on Saturday 17th April 1993, cost £20.
Details from Cheshire Railtours, 53 Vicarage Lane, Sandbach, Cheshire CW11 9LA (Tel. 0270 764758).
CAMBRIAN LINE NOTES
These notes are being written on a gloriously sunny February day which should enliven even the most depressed people.
However with the Daily Telegraph in front of me reporting only three trains each way over the Central Wales line from May this year I find the current railway scene enough to depress anyone!
However let us turn to what has been going on in Mid-Wales:—
The Winter timetable saw some changes and we now have departures from Aberystwyth at 07:00, 08:39, 11:00, 13:10, 15:21, 17:25, 19:26, 21:45 and 23:48.
The last through working from Aberystwyth is at 15:21, the 17:25 and 19:26 giving connections at Machynlleth eastwards.
The appalling layout of the £5.50 public timetable does not make this at all clear and critical correspondence appeared in the railway press.
Of particular note at Aberystwyth has been the redirection on line of Class 158s and 156s with the ubiquitous ‘bubble’ 153s now dominating the service.
Class 158s appear to work only the 07:00, 13:10 and 15:21 services.
On the Cambrian Coast line all would appear well, but closer examination of the timetable reveals some appalling holes.
There remain seven trains a day in and out of Pwllheli.
The 12:42 ex Pwllheli arrives at Dovey Junction at 14:35 and there is no connection eastwards.
With station buildings at Dovey Junction demolished in January, passengers wanting to go eastward are best advised to go first westward to Aberystwyth, arriving at 15:01 and departing eastwards at 15:21!
To date the 1992/3 winter has not been particularly serious and in the main the daily rake of 158s and 153s has run well.
However, the vandalism to the signalling system in the Birmingham area terminated all trains from the Cambrian and Chester/Shrewsbury areas at Wolverhampton for some weeks from Christmas.
The rail privatisation issue and the appalling loss of freight from the railway to road haulage is frightening in its implications.
Early in February it was announced that, from May, oil deliveries to Aberystwyth will be by road.
Joy no doubt to the road haulage industry, but disaster to the railway and the removal of the last revenue-earning freight on the Cambrian system!
The year 1993 will continue to see Class 31 hauled summer Birmingham to Pwllheli train, and after that finishes in September the only locos which will be seen in Mid Wales will be Departmental Class 31s on engineers' trains.
Revenue figures for the winter will be interesting.
At the end of the summer, passenger revenue over the main line was up, but a recent journey eastwards on a Wednesday on the 13:10 started from Aberystwyth with only six passengers.
Red Star parcels are still handled at Aberystwyth and Machynlleth, but even the staple Surridge Dawson newspaper/magazine traffic by rail is getting less.
Turning to the privatised Devil's Bridge line, things have been very quiet since September's end of season.
No. 9 has been on the parent line at Brecon operating Santa Specials, but all that has been seen out in Aberystwyth has been the diesel which has been out most weekdays on engineers' trains.
There is no publicity out yet for the line, but it is said that the 1993 peak season of four trains each way will operate for only five weeks and that at the beginning and end of season there will be no trains on Fridays.
Outwardly the terminus at Devil's Bridge appears little changed from BR days and this is true of the intermediate stations, but track appears to have improved considerably.
John Wildig
Additional Note
With so much gloom on the railways at present it is nice to be able to add one cheerful note.
It has been announced that there are to be steam runs over the Central Wales line this year, the first one on the 16th May.
A note submitted by Russell Mulford follows:
Steam Trains on Heart of Wales Line
A unique programme of steam trains has been organised during May and June to celebrate the 125th anniversary of the Heart of Wales Line.
Additional steam excursions have been arranged in West Wales, so that local people, visitors and enthusiasts alike can not only experience the nostalgia of a bygone age, but also sample the beautiful scenery of Central and West Wales.
This exciting and varied steam programme has been organised by Regional Railways, Flying Scotsman Services and The Steam Locomotives Operators' Association, with sponsorship from local district councils.
Two steam locomotives will be used on the special excursions; the BR Standard Class 4 tank 80079 locomotive is based at the Severn Valley Railway, near Kidderminster, and the Black 5, George Stephenson, 44767 is based at the North Yorkshire Moors Railway.
Both types were associated with the Heart of Wales Line in its steam operating years.
Theo Steel, Director, Regional Railways South Wales and West said, ‘The 125th Anniversary gives us a once only opportunity to bring steam back to this beautiful railway, and celebrate the occasion in style.
Following many requests for the return of steam, I'm particularly pleased that the programme will include special excursions in West Wales.’
The Heart of Wales Line, famous for its beautiful scenic views, was promoted by, amongst others, the London and North Western Railway Company as a means of tapping into the industrial traffic in the Swansea area, with the final section of railway between Builth Road and Llandovery opening in 1868.
Today the railway attracts many tourists to the area, and is very popular with ramblers.
Timings and ticketing arrangements have yet to be finalised and a further announcement will be made in the near future.
Initial enquiries should be made by sending a stamped addressed envelope marked Central Wales Steam to Flying Scotsman Services, PO Box 4472, Lichfield, Staffordshire, WS13 6RU.
An attached note gives further details:—
Sunday, 16 May 1993
Steam Excursion Shrewsbury-Carmarthen Steam Locomotive southbound, return by diesel locomotive (BR Standard Tank 80079, with a Class 37 for the return) Ticketing available as follows: Shrewsbury-Llandrindod Llandrindod-Llandeilo Llandovery-Carmarthen (Three tickets must be purchased for the whole excursion)
This train is intended for Shropshire, Mid and West Wales passengers only.
Sunday, 23 May 1993
Steam Excursion as follows: West Midlands-Shrewsbury (diesel locomotive) Shrewsbury-Carmarthen (steam locomotive, Black 5, 44767) Carmarthen-West Midlands (diesel locomotive)
All tickets will be priced for the through trip.
CENTRAL WALES LINE CAMPAIGN
I have obtained the permission of Mrs Gillian Wright, the Chairman of the Heart of Wales Line Travellers' Association to quote a recent letter explaining the current threat to the Central Wales line and the campaign actions suggested.
The strong but legal protest methods used in recent years in the Stone House and Education campaigns made me very proud to be a Shropshireman.
I hope that we will continue that tradition and give HOWLTA every support in defending the nearest railway line to Bishop's Castle and Clun.
HOWLTA Letter
Dear Member,
The Heart of Wales Line is now under greater threat than it has been for many years, because of financial pressures from British Rail in general and Regional Railways in particular.
We understand that service cuts are planned within the next few months, which we fear will bring a decline in use of the Line, thus leading to a further rundown and closure.
To combat the imminent threat of service cuts, we ask you to write to your MP, local councillors and anyone else with influence to exert pressure on the Government and British Rail to, at the very least, retain existing services.
It is essential that existing use of the line is not only maintained but increased.
To this end, we urge you not only to use the Line yourself for shopping, sightseeing etc., but also to encourage your friends, acquaintances, neighbours and relatives, who may not even know of the existence of the Line, to use it.
Your Committee will, of course, go on working for the continuation of the Line, but we need your help and your influence — GO BY TRAIN, TRAVEL ON THE HEART OF WALES LINE.
We look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
SOCIAL PROGRAMME
2nd Apr 93
John Wildig — BR from Beeching to the Present Day
7th May 93
Mr John Scott Morgan — the Col. Stephens Railways.
3rd Sep 93
John Overton — 70's Reminiscences (Cine films).
1st Oct 93
Col. Savill — The Train Services of 1939
5th Nov 93
Richard Morriss — title to be announced
3rd Dec 93
Mr and Mrs Preshous — local history
7th Jan 94
Ron Davies — Rlys. of the Indian subcontinent
All of these meetings commence at 7.30 p.m. and will be held in the Fletcher Room at the Community College on the first Friday of the month, unless announced otherwise.
Notes
John Wildig is a research agriculturalist and a life-long railway enthusiast who would have been in his late teens during the period of the Beeching closures.
He has sub-titled his talk ‘A Layman's View’, but John has regular conversations with railwaymen.
John Scott Morgan, author and a member of the Society, had to postpone the talk originally arranged for October 1992.
He will give the talk at the AGM, subject to when the AGM is held.
The November and December 1993 talks are intended to be joint meetings with our sister society, SWSHAS, the local history society.
There will be some railway content to both talks.
I personally like the idea of meetings like this, both because of the element of local co-operation and also because we can hear the views of other people, railway sympathisers rather than railway enthusiasts perhaps, on how railways fit into the scene.
I arranged Ron Davies's talk on the Indian sub-continent some time ago and we postponed it because of the African theme.
Only the date has been changed.
THE FIREFLY PROJECT
This project, building a replica of a broad gauge locomotive, was mentioned in the previous issue of the Journal.
I have the permission of the chairman of the Firefly Trust, John Mosse, to quote from their Newsletter.
Some passages are given in full for the benefit of those of our members with a technical bent.
Excerpts from the Newsletter
’ The last year has been one of steady progress.
All six axle boxes have now been machined, scraped in and fitted, so that we now have a ‘running chassis’.
Just one box is a little stiff and requires easing before any weight is put on the frame.
The four inside stays are now being assembled, two are complete and the other two are well advanced.
Once these are fixed, the frame will be complete and we can enter the cylinders into the smoke box.
Both cylinders have been bored and machined together with their valve chests, ready for fixing, and the cylinder covers are waiting to be machined.
The all-up weight of both cylinders and their covers is ½ Tons.
The work of lining up and fixing the cylinders will be taken in hand early this year, and then work will start on the valve gear, which will be of the original ‘gab’ type.
This gives no variable cut-off but there will be provision for lap and lead.’
At this point the direct quote from the Newsletter ceases and the rest of it is summarised.
Further details can be obtained from the Firefly Trust at Didcot.
Mr Mosse goes on to describe fund raising for the boiler.
A reprint of the 1892 Instructions for the conversion of the Broad Gauge between Taunton and Exeter is being sold as a part of this effort.
Other work in hand includes the design of a braking system.
The original engine had none, there were merely screw-down brakes on the tender.
Like ourselves the Firefly Trust seems to be making slow but steady progress and I wish them well.
The biggest gap in the UK preservation scene is a proper representation of the broad gauge, with trains operating regularly on a line of reasonable length.
Unfortunately this would be very expensive since the original hardware no longer exists.
The Firefly Trust's project is a useful step towards it.
Keith Lucas
BCRS JOURNAL
We still need articles for future issues of the Journal.
Just a few jottings on an envelope are better than nothing.
Our very capable editors will tidy it up.