

Kelly prank four confess
MILLIONS of radio listeners have heard how Ulster's TV chat show king Gerry Kelly fell victim to a prank by four young viewers.
For the Newtown abbey four have admitted to bending the truth when psychic Uri Geller was Kelly's TV guest recently.
They rang ‘Kelly’ as the show was being transmitted with a wacky tale of how the lights in their house had suddenly began flickering and a music carousel started playing.
But now the ring leader Smyth Harper, 16, has owned up that they invented the story for a laugh.
And millions of listeners heard his admission on the ‘True Confessions’ spot on Simon Mayo's Radio One breakfast show.
‘We rang up the ‘Kelly’ show just for a joke.
We didn't think we'd even get through.
‘Things got a bit out of hand when they rang back and asked us talk live to Gerry.
I had a hard job keeping my face straight.’
But big-hearted Gerry laughed when he heard of the prank.
‘We expected Uri to bend a few spoons but we didn't expect the viewers to bend the truth,’ he said.
Smyth's fellow jokers were student nurse Leigh Kernoghan, 23, her sister Janice, 15, and Janet McDonald, 15.
A number of other Ulster callers also rang the show that night with amazing stories of strange happenings during Geller's appearance.
Bingo winners
CONGRATULATIONS to the following Game Nine Bingo Winners: £100 — Mrs Leitch of Newtown abbey, Mr Foster of Belfast 6, Mr Weldon of Belfast 13, Mrs McKay of Larne.
£50 — Mr Smyth of Dungannon, Miss Hammond of Craigavon, Mr McKelvey of Newry, Mrs Harris of Belfast 5, Mrs Bell of Lisburn, Mr Neill of Belfast 6, Mrs Doran of Lurgan, Mrs Harris of Holywood, Mr McDonnell of Belfast 11, Mrs Quinn of Magherafelt.
Bomb defused
ARMY bomb disposal experts defused a blast bomb in Dungannon yesterday.
The device was thrown at an army patrol in Shambles Lane, but failed to explode.
Spirit treads the boards
NEWTOWN ABBEY drama festival opens tomorrow night at the Courtyard, Ballyearl, with Bangor Drama Club's production of ‘Blithe Spirit’.
The programme continues at the same venue throughout the week with the curtain up each evening at 8pm and 7.30pm on Saturday.
Alliance raps centre project
IRELAND'S Patron Saint is ‘being flogged to death’ by councillors planning a St Patrick's Heritage Centre in Downpatrick.
Alliance councillor Michael Healy is attacking proposals for a centre which, it is hoped, will attract 7,000 people a week.
He claims the plans are ‘ludicrous’.
‘St Patrick is already very well catered for at the Down County Museum and also by Newry and Mourne Council and especially at Navan Fort outside Armagh,’ he said.
Mr Healy claimed that Down District Council was in danger of spending grant aid and ratepayers' money on a high risk tourist venture and confusing it with economic development.
SINGLED OUT FOR ASSASSINATION
IN a ruthless and bloody eight-year-campaign, the IRA has murdered 25 men for working for the security forces.
Some have been shot dead at their office desks.
Others have been gunned down at home in front of their children.
And some have been blown off the face of the earth in massive bomb attacks such as Teebane in Co Tyrone where seven workmen perished in January 1992 when a land mine exploded under their bus.
The latest victim was killed on Monday when three so-called ‘barrack buster’ Mark 15 mortars exploded inside Keady RUC base, killing 25-year-old crane driver Nigel Thomas James McCollum.
He was the fourth employee of Magherafelt construction company Henry Brothers to be murdered for working on security force contracts since 1988.
But like other companies which have specialised in rebuilding security force bases across Ulster, Henry Brothers have vowed to carry on.
Victims singled out for assassination by the IRA have ranged from senior managers to builder's labourers.
Hughie is a construction worker in one of the most dangerous jobs in the world — fortifying security bases against IRA attack.
Here he tells Neil Mulholland of the almost intolerable pressures of his work and how he survived a direct hit by a Mark 15 ‘barrack buster’ mortar on a border police station.
TOP UDA MEN GO INTO HIDING
LEADING UDA figures in West Belfast have gone into hiding following a police swoop on the organisation's headquarters on the Shankill Road.
The raid by the RUC's C13 anti-racketeering squad last week is understood to have been mounted following a complaint by a businessman that money demands had been made on him.
Conversations between the businessman and people involved in the UDA in North Belfast are understood to have been monitored.
One man is understood to have been arrested in the raid operation, but two leading UDA figures were able to evade arrest — one man slipped from a local club as police arrived to arrest him.
An RUC spokesman confirmed that a police operation was carried out by C13 in the Shankill area after a member of the public alleged that demands for money had been made.
A number of loyalist figures have appeared before the courts already this year charged with making threats and demanding cash from businessmen.
In many of the operations police have fitted businessmen with concealed microphones to record direct conversations with loyalist paramilitaries who have demanded money.
Conversations on home and business telephones are also recorded as part of C13's increasing drive to disrupt the collection of finance by paramilitary organisations.
One Protestant businessman in North Belfast who has rejected paramilitary demands for money said last week: ‘Racketeering isn't anything to do with the cause of Ulster or loyalty.
‘It's to do with people in the two paramilitary organisations fleecing small and medium sized businessmen to line their own pockets and buy good cars and have holidays.’
It is understood businessmen in the Holywood, Bangor and Newtownards areas of North Down are coming under increasing pressure from UVF figures to hand over weekly sums of cash.
Telephone search nets long lost twin sister
AN ULSTER twin has been re-united with her sister after being apart for 35 years.
Pat McCourt of Craigavon and her three sisters were born in Portsmouth, but were placed in care soon after the death of their mother.
Mrs McCourt was subsequently fostered and lost touch with her sisters.
She later married an Ulsterman and moved to live in the province.
Decades later, Pat and husband Gerald decided they would go sister-hunting and after frantic phone-calls all over the South of England, there was a tearful reunion with Pat's sister Hilda at a local hotel.
And to add to her joy, Hilda took her to meet sister Lena as the two had been able to keep in touch.
Now they are searching for the fourth sister Pamela, who walked out at the age of 15 after a row with her father.
Pat said: ‘Things just fell apart after mum died, now we want to get together again, and we won't rest until we find Pamela.’
Anyone who can help Pat can contact Sunday Life and we will be happy to pass on the information.
Couple on terror charge
A HUSBAND and wife have been remanded in custody in connection with the discovery of half a ton of fertiliser suitable for making explosives at a house in West Belfast a week ago.
The fertiliser in ten plastic bags was alleged to have been found in a bedroom of the couple's house in Fallswater Street.
Thirty-two year old David Casey and his 30 year old wife Jacqueline were accused at the Magistrates Court yesterday of conspiring with other people to cause an explosion likely to endanger life.
An RUC officer said they both replied ‘Nothing to say’ when formally charged.
They are to appear in court again on April 21.
RUC move against large IRA gang
Killer squad break through
THE RUC has made a significant breakthrough against a large IRA killer squad operating in North Belfast.
An AK47 assault rifle used in a number of murder bids has been recovered and a number of people are expected to face terrorist charges in the next few days.
The rifle is one of two AK47's used in the attacks carried out by the Ardoyne IRA unit which is believed to number up to 18.
The second AK47 was used in the murder of Norman Truesdale on Wednesday night and in the murders of Royal Irish Regiment soldiers Mervyn Johnston at Highfern Gardens last month and Steven Waller in December.
It was also used in the attack on two loyalists in Berlin Street in the Shankill last Saturday morning.
Searches of houses and other premises in the Ardoyne area are expected to continue until the rifle is located.
The breakthrough against the gang came in the wake of the murder of Mr Truesdale at Oldpark Road.
In a swift follow up operation a number of people were arrested.
It is understood RUC detectives have now been given significant information about the gang.
Detectives now believe that up to eight members of the 18-strong gang are actually killers who have fired fatal bullets in gun attacks in North Belfast.
The remainder are responsible for hijacking vehicles, taking over houses and concealing weapons.
However in South Armagh the security forces are understood to be facing a blank wall in their search for an IRA sniper who has killed three members of the security forces and for the IRA's mortar team.
Senior security sources say they are hampered in their investigations because several of those involved are thought to live across the border outside their jurisdiction.
Riots bring jobs boost to Dublin!
A BLOCKBUSTER movie has brought an amazing cash bonanza to a Dublin city centre jobs black spot — thanks to Ulster-style riots!
More than a week of savage rioting has left locals smiling and pub tills ringing in the Sheriff Street area of the Republic's capital.
For the scenes of wholesale death and destruction were staged during filming of the big new film about the Guildford Four.
Starring Oscar-winning actor Daniel Day Lewis, it is now being shot in Ireland.
Behind the project are two famous Dubliners, ‘My Left Foot’ director Jim Sheridan and Hollywood heart-throb Gabriel Byrne, also turned director for this project.
They decided that they would give as much cash to people in their native Dublin as possible during filming.
Said a movie source: ‘Altogether, 250 people in the Sheriff Street area were hired as extras.
‘It has meant a cash injection of tens of thousands of pounds into a part of the city where there is little work and a lot of despair.
‘The result is that everybody in the area is delighted.’
The source added: ‘Except for those working on the film, nobody has been allowed on the scene.
‘A closed set has been ordered, and this is mainly due to Daniel Day Lewis.’
Another local said: ‘Normally the police have to travel by convoy into the area for the sake of safety.
‘Now, because everybody is busy and has a bit of money, the place is a haven of peace and tranquillity’
The film, provisionally titled ‘In the Name of the Father’, is based on the book ‘Proven Innocent’ by Gerard Conlon, one of the members of the Guildford Four.
Dance champ
IRISH dancers have been left reeling by a fleet-footed Canadian who swept the boards at the All-Ireland Championships in Donegal.
Teenager Stephen McAteer scored a remarkable maximum of 100 points from all five judges to bring the All-Ireland Under-19 title out of the country for the first time.
And Ireland's top traditional dancers are bracing themselves for even more misery at the end of this month when the 18-year-old whizz-kid is due to return for the World Championships in Dublin.
FUN BY THE SEASIDE!!
Blackpool is a firm favourite with Northern Irish holiday makers.
People find that they just don't have time to get bored in a resort that has so much on offer.
From the famous Blackpool Tower to The Sandcastle, a superb indoor leisure complex offering fun for all the family, you'll find lots of things to do and see while you're there.
Over the years Blackpool has earned its reputation of being one of the most famous seaside resorts in England.
There is a wide variety of day and night-time entertainments which are all specially devised to appeal to a broad cross-section of holiday makers.
And that means you'll find something to do even if you have a large family to entertain or young children to keep amused.
But if you simply fancy spoiling yourself and dancing the night away, you'll find discos, nightclubs and dance halls playing music to suit all ages, from 5O's rock'n'roll to modern rave music.
Once you've been to Blackpool you'll find that you want to keep returning again and again.
After all, there are nine theatres, three piers, three casinos, 14 discos and ballrooms as well as an ice rink to visit.
And of course there is the famous Blackpool Pleasure Beach, a 4O acre amusement park, to visit.
In it you'll find more fun and thrill rides than any other amusement park in Europe.
The more adventurous among you can enjoy the ‘white knuckle’ rides like the loop-the-loop roller coaster or water chute.
But there are plenty of rides suitable for children and the less daring, just choose from any number of family rides available in Funshineland.
Most specialist tours to Blackpool usually include an evenings entertainment in with the price.
So that means you will be guaranteed a seat at a top show or cabaret performance.
You could take in the Hot Ice Show ‘93, with international skaters combining their talents to produce a spectacular ice show for all the family to enjoy.
Choosing an all-in package also means that you won't have to worry about finding accommodation once you get there, or trying to book somewhere from home.
And if you go by coach there are often special day trips to places outside Blackpool as well.
Travelling to Blackpool is easy.
You can choose the best way to travel there, either going by aeroplane, boat/coach or car.
Blackpool has its quieter side too, away from the bright lights, which most people don't usually get to see.
There are seven miles of splendid coastline, quiet parks and picturesque countryside around the area.
Brave doctor's battle against cancer
Mother's pride
JUST nine weeks before he died Dr Donal McGettigan proudly walked up the aisle with his new bride, Carmel.
He had fought cancer of the tongue for almost two years before his wedding but his condition had gradually deteriorated.
However the young couple were determined that whatever time they had left together would be as husband and wife.
Even at that late stage in his illness, Donal never gave up hope.
As a doctor he had always been aware of the importance of leading a healthy lifestyle.
He was a non-smoker, kept himself fit and was particular about what he ate.
Yet he still contracted cancer.
His mother Mrs Alice McGettigan said: ‘It could happen to anyone at any time.
That's why it is vital that people support the work of the Ulster Cancer Foundation.
‘One day there will be a breakthrough and people should never give up hope.
I know that Donal didn't.
‘He investigated every possibility and was determined to try to overcome the illness.
‘If he was here today he would be urging everyone to support the research efforts of the Foundation.’
Donal graduated from Queen's University in 1984.
He spent the early part of his short career at the Mater Hospital but eventually was involved in locum work throughout the province.
The first hint of a problem came when he developed a small ulcer on his tongue in 1990.
It was eventually surgically removed although at this stage Donal's mother was not even aware of the situation.
However as a doctor Donal knew of the importance of regular check-ups and in July, 1991, his worst fears were confirmed.
This time the growth on his tongue was malignant and Mrs McGettigan had to be informed.
He had part of his tongue removed in November of that year.
After the surgery Donal had speech therapy and felt able to do some work.
But in July last year he became quite ill and was told the tumour had become ‘aggressive.’
Donal was married on August 29 and shortly afterwards an appointment was made for him at the Royal Marsden Hospital in London.
‘They were going to try a new drug on him which had never been tested on a human being before in an effort to try and stop the progress of the tumour.
‘But one of the leading consultants said his calcium levels were too high and there was a danger that he might slip into a coma.
‘He said if it was his own son he would take him home and make him comfortable,’ said Mrs McGettigan.
‘I can't praise the attention of the medical faculty at Queen's too highly and the care and treatment he received from Belvoir Park hospital was second to none.
‘The support of family, neighbours and friends was also deeply appreciated.
‘It's important when someone close to you gets cancer that you have as much help around you as possible.
‘In the end it was not to be for Donal but hopefully one day they will find a cure.’
The 1,000 mourners that attended Donal's funeral at St Brigid's Church, Derryvolgie, on November 6, was a tribute to his popularity.
Colleagues from the medical profession were joined by local MPs, lawyers, and a wide circle of friends from all over the country and further afield.
‘He had wanted to be a doctor since he asked for a medical bag for Christmas when he was six-years-old.
‘His life, short though it was, was dedicated to caring for others,’ said Mrs McGettigan.
Head the ball
THE St Patrick's Night Ball in Queen's Students' Union promises to be one of the craziest events staged all year.
Topping the bill will be the ugliest band ever to get to No 1 — Dr And The Medics!
The band who were committed to the Abba revival and flares fives years ago have come out of retirement and intend to convert a whole new audience to their zany cocktail of punk, glam and psychedelia.
Also on the bill are The Humpff Family, Blink, 10 Wheels For Jesus, More Power To Your Elbow and a host of traditional session players.
So, if you like your music lively and don't mind walking on a carpet of comatose students — you could do worse.
SPECIAL REPORT ON TRAGEDY OF ARMY WIFE
Parents to sue death doctors
TWO BUNGLING Army doctors whose mistakes cost an Ulster woman her life are to be sued by her heartbroken family.
Jordanstown couple Sean and Patti McMurtry say they will take civil proceedings against the medics, who were found guilty last week of serious professional misconduct by the General Medical Council.
Army wife 27-year-old Shaunagh Craig died in agony in a military camp in Germany 18 months ago five days after sustaining serious injuries.
Her soldier husband Corporal Paul Craig was later court martialled on a charge of manslaughter, but was acquitted.
Two doctors who treated Shaunagh at Gordon Barracks' Garrison Medical Centre at Hamelyn, failed to diagnose a punctured lung even though she was fighting for breath and in serious pain.
One even refused to respond to an urgent call from a nurse two days before Mrs Craig died.
A post-mortem revealed she had one and a half litres of blood in her right lung, which had almost completely collapsed.
Dr Justus Van Lare, an army colonel, and junior medical colleague Captain William Dennes refused to carry out X-rays or prescribe penicillin that would have saved Shaunagh's life.
Last night Shaunagh's father Sean McMurtry said the family was determined to see justice done, and would take a civil prosecution against the two doctors.
‘We want the pair of them struck off to prevent them doing the same thing again,’ he said.
‘We simply cannot understand how the GMC can find these two men guilty of serious professional misconduct, yet allow them off Scot-free.’
He added: ‘Experts testified at the three day hearing that a simple course of anti-biotics would have saved my daughter's life.
‘But Dr Dennes and Dr Van Lare refused to give her the treatment she was entitled to.’
Mrs Craig's children Kelly Ann, 4, and Stephen, 2, are now being raised by Corporal Craig's family in Carrickfergus.
Election first for SDLP chief
FORMER SDLP general secretary Patsy McGlone is to make his first foray into local government.
He plans to contest a seat on Cookstown district council in the May elections.
South gripped by phone sex racket
A FURIOUS storm was raging yesterday after it was revealed that the South's semi-State mobile phone network is being used to peddle vice.
Sexual services are being offered to kinky clients using the Eircell system to avoid detection by Dublin vice cops.
Now there are demands for action to stop mobile phones being used to sell sleaze.
The racket is being run by shadowy agencies who advertise their services in magazines.
One even offers transvestites ‘for that special fantasy’.
The agencies don't list an address, but give an 088 mobile phone number through which potential clients can reach them.
The use of the Eircell system for vice was slammed by the powerful anti-pornography group, Family Solidarity.
Secretary Joe McCarroll said: ‘Eircell is a service provided by Telecom Eireann, a State-sponsored body.
‘It is totally unacceptable that such an organisation should be used to facilitate prostitution and the sexual exploitation of women with its associated high risk of sexually transmitted disease.
‘Family Solidarity is writing to Telecom and to the Minister for Communications asking that the matter be looked into and that the numbers given by these people be immediately disconnected.’
A spokesman for Telecom Eireann said: ‘The law does not provide that we can do anything to stop this.
‘As long as nothing offensive is being said during Eircell mobile phone conversations, we have no power to stop anybody using them for any purpose, however peculiar.’
Courts set for priests' holy battle
TWO of Ireland's best known Catholic priests are set for a bitter and unprecedented court war, it was revealed yesterday.
They are to do battle in one of the most sensational libel cases ever seen in an Irish court.
Rebel priest Fr Pat Buckley of Larne confirmed he has issued writs for libel against Dublin radio show star Fr Michael Clery.
The proceedings arise out of Fr Clery's top-rated nightly programme on the city's Classic Hits 98FM station.
At the centre of the row is Fr Buckley's action in travelling Ireland to wed couples banned from marriage by the Catholic Church.
They involve men and women who have previously married and whose relationships have broken down.
The Catholic Church refuses to re-marry such men and women unless they are among the minority who secure rare Church nullity decrees of their previous marriages.
During one of his shows on Classic Hits in August 1991, bearded Fr Clery, who is the Church's ‘ambassador’ to Ireland's youth, commented in detail on Fr Buckley's actions in marrying such couples.
It is those remarks that form the basis of the libel action.
Fr Buckley has retained the services of barrister Michael McDowell, senior counsel, as his lawyer.
Mr McDowell is also chairman of the Progressive Democrat party.
Yesterday Fr Buckley said: ‘I can confirm that my solicitors have issued writs for libel against Fr Clery.
Because proceedings are now pending, I obviously cannot comment any further.’
At his home in Dublin, Fr Clery said: ‘I understand that the lawyers for Classic Hits have been in receipt of correspondence from Fr Buckley.
‘Naturally, I do not wish to discuss the matter further at this time.’
It is believed no date has yet been fixed for the hearing of the action.
Puppy sparks blaze at flat
A MAN was left homeless yesterday after his pet Jack Russell puppy Sam started a fire at his flat.
Firemen believe the dog chewed a box of matches and sparked the blaze, which caused damage running into thousands of pounds to Ray Hobley's council flat in West Bromwich, West Midlands.
Retired labourer Mr Hobley (62), who was out when the fire started in St John's House, Lyttleton Street on Friday night, will have to be re-housed by Sandwell Council.
Neighbours called the fire brigade, who battled through thick smoke to find Sam behind the fridge in the kitchen.
They put out the blaze and cared for Sam until Hobley returned.
Firemen think Sam somehow caused the matches to ignite his basket and a blanket.
Station officer Peter Smith of West Bromwich Fire Station said: ‘We believe the puppy chewed through a box of matches, played with the matches and caused friction which started the fire.
‘The blaze was confined to the kitchen.
Fortunately the council had installed a fire alarm which alerted neighbours.’
Charlie's taking a different direction
SO IT'S hail and farewell to Charlie Nowozielski, the artistic director of Belfast's Lyric Theatre, who quits his post at the end of this month.
In that lovely euphemism, frequently employed at such times, the theatre has announced that his contract is to be terminated ‘…by mutual consent’.
It is well known that the volatile Nowozielski has had more than the normal share of ups and downs with the notoriously conservative Board of the Lyric.
But there was widespread feeling that his current production of ‘The Tempest’, panned by the critics, could turn out to be his last.
And indeed, with the final two shows of the current season due to be directed by Roy Heayberd and Joe Devlin, there seemed no reason why the evidently unhappy incumbent should remain in place for much longer.
But there is no doubt that the charismatic, rugby-crazy Scotsman will be missed.
In the year and a half he has been at the Lyric he has established himself as something of a ‘character’ and has chalked up a number of box office successes.
He is reported to be in the process of responding to offers of employment from other theatres in Ireland and across the water, and to be keen to return to the Lyric from time to time.
We wish him, his actress wife Anne Lennan and their little daughter Anna, every success.
Meanwhile, the Lyric is preparing for its first tour in five years.
The company will go on the road next Monday, 22 March, with the highly-praised production of ‘Great Expectations’, which ran at the theatre during February.
Directed by Benjamin Twist, who, incidentally, is one of the names being mentioned as a possible successor to Nowozielski, the production is a delightfully theatrical retelling of Dicken's famous novel.
It travels to the Bardic Theatre, Donaghmore on the 22nd, Craigavon Civic Centre on the 23rd, Ballee High School in Ballymena on 24th, Newry's Sacred Heart Grammar School on the 25th March and the Ardhowen Theatre in Enniskillen on 26th and 27th March.
Replay Productions pause briefly in their hectic schedule to perform their excellent ‘Don't Look Down’ at the Old Museum Arts Centre in Belfast and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum at Cultra for two successive weeks beginning tomorrow.
The play, by Belfast writer Maria Jones, is aimed at children with special needs, and the production has been nominated for a Belfast Telegraph EMA Award for best production of 1992.
All set for spell in NY
CRUMLIN'S Nuala Clenaghan certainly minds her Ps and Qs!
The 32-year-old Carrick bank official spelled her way to the Northern Ireland scrabble championship last week winning a place in the World Scrabble Championship in New York in August.
Nuala beat off the opposition at the Racquets Club in Lisburn and her highest scoring word was ‘freakish’ which scored her 118 points in one game.
She will join a 14 strong team from all over the UK which will be competing against 22 countries worldwide.
THE Mark 15 ‘Barrack Buster’ mortar (pictured above), is the latest and most potent weapon in the IRA's arsenal.
The terrorists first attempted to use it in December in an unsuccessful attack on Ballygawley police station, when the mortar failed to fire.
In January it was successfully used in an attack on Clogher RUC station, which caused extensive damage.
In a display of bravado, the IRA staged a publicity stunt, showing off the new device to two freelance journalists.
Just 24 hours later, it was used again, to cause extensive damage to Bessbrook RUC station in south Armagh.
The blast wrecked 100 houses and injured 11 civilians, belying the Provos' claim the mortar caused ‘minimum lateral damage’.
All dressed up for a good cause
ROISIN Walsh-Dunseith of the House of De Courcy in Downpatrick models one of the exclusive Chacok outfits which will be on show at a Fashion Banquet later this month.
In aid of the Flax Trust, the formal event at the Europa Hotel on March 23 promises to be a gala occasion.
The evening will be hosted by Pamela Ballentine and will feature a fashion show, four course meal and entertainment by the Lansdowne Jazz Band.
Tickets, priced at £30, are available from the Flax Trust (telephone 0232 742070).
A highlight of the evening will be the presentation of a special award to a local designer.
The Flax Trust was established in 1977 and works as a registered charity to promote inter-community reconciliation through economic and social development.
As well as the fashion design award, the Trust will also make an award to a local school for business enterprise.
And a scholarship will be given to a specially gifted child from a deprived area.
Curtains for bombers
THE CURTAIN goes up tomorrow night on the show the bombers couldn't close.
Belfast Operatic Company were to have staged Sigmund Romberg's romantic musical ‘The Desert Song’ at the city's Grand Opera House last March.
But repairs to the Great Victoria Street theatre after the IRA's bomb blast in December 1991, ruled the production out.
But the east Belfast based group vowed the show would go ahead — even if it did take some time.
Now, almost a year to the day later the show will finally go ahead at the Frank Matcham designed theatre.
Dublin-based director Brian Merriman has re-written the famous old show, strengthening some roles and re-shaping others to suit modern tastes.
It's also shorter than the original version.
Michael McAdoo, the company's chairman, said: ‘We had put a lot of effort into the project before the theatre was bombed.
‘Many people who had planned to take part last year are not currently available but we've overcome all the problems.’
The show runs until next Saturday night.
Tight security at inquest into deaths of terrorists
FOUR soldiers will give evidence tomorrow at inquests into the deaths of three top IRA men ambushed by the SAS.
Security at Enniskillen Courthouse will be tight as the army witnesses, identified only as solders N, M, K and L give evidence into the deaths of the three armed terrorists.
IRA men Gerard Harte, his brother Martin, and Brian Mullin were ambushed by undercover soldiers outside Omagh in August, 1988 — just 10 days after an IRA bomb killed eight soldiers on a bus at nearby Ballygawley.
According to later reports Gerard Harte was suspected of triggering the Ballygawley bomb.
The trio, who were linked on security force computers to 32 murders, were killed as they apparently tried to murder a retired UDR man on a remote Co Tyrone road.
According to a book by Sunday Times journalists, an SAS soldier posed as the ex-UDR man after security forces learned he was on the IRA's hit list.
The journalists claim in ‘Ambush: The War Between The SAS and the IRA’ that the SAS man drove a lorry identical to the ex-UDR man's and pretended to break down on a lonely Tyrone road.
After breaking into two local homes and hi-jacking the occupants' cars the IRA launched their attack on the apparently vulnerable target only to be ambushed themselves by the SAS.
Gerard Harte, 29, was described by the RUC as the Provisional IRA's commanding officer in mid-Tyrone and a ‘ruthless and dedicated terrorist’.
But locals maintained he was not so senior.
It was Brian Mullin, 25, who was reputed locally to be the real IRA commander in mid-Tyrone.
Martin Harte, 22, was said to be the brigade's intelligence officer and responsible for ‘targeting’ policemen and soldiers.
Two Kalashnikov AK-47 rifles and a .38 Webley revolver were taken from the scene.
At Enniskillen Courthhouse tomorrow 31 witnesses, including four soldiers, will give evidence at the inquest into the three IRA men's deaths.
Bloody Sunday grant blasted
DERRY'S Ulster Unionist alderman John Adams has attacked the council's decision to donate £16,000 to the Bloody Sunday Initiative.
Mr Adams said the decision was in stark contrast to its refusal to give £800 to the RUC's cross-community ramble scheme.
‘The Bloody Sunday grant has more to do with vote catching in the Bogside and Creggan in May,’ claimed Mr Adams.
Firebombers hit store
IRA firebombers returned to Derry yesterday, targeting a furniture store in the Waterside area.
An incendiary device exploded setting fire to furniture, but the blaze was brought under control.
A second firebomb was found in a follow-up search, and the RUC warned shopkeepers to beware of further devices.
Feeney faces battle over plans to quit
OUTSPOKEN SDLP councillor Brian Feeney returns from the United States today to face a concerted bid by his party colleagues to persuade him not to quit his City Hall seat.
Last week Dr Feeney, who has just completed a lecture tour of the States, let it be known he would not be seeking the SDLP nomination to contest the Oldpark ward in North Belfast.
He is reported to believe that the City Council should be shut down immediately and replaced by an appointed commission to oversee local government in the city.
He is said to be blaming ‘Unionists’ intransigence’for creating an atmosphere of hopelessness in City Hall.
Dr Feeney made it clear he was not resigning from either active politics or the SDLP.
However some colleagues fear his decision not to seek re-election illustrates a deep unhappiness within middle ranks of the party.
Clinton plans Irish visit
PLANS are being drawn up by President Bill Clinton for a dramatic visit to Ire land.
The President wants to travel to the Republic for a very special day.
It is the official opening of a holiday camp for critically-ill children being set up by his close friend, Hollywood star Paul Newman.
Last week it was announced that the £4m camp is to be established at Barrettstown Castle in Co.
Kildare, which has been handed over to Paul by the Irish Government for his famous Hole in the Wall Gang charity.
The camp was discussed informally at the White House between President Clinton and Irish Premier Albert Reynolds at their St. Patrick's Day summit ten days ago.
Afterwards, Mr. Reynolds announced that the President would be visiting Ireland in the not too distant future.
Now the belief is growing that the visit is being planned to coincide with the high-profile opening of the camp.
The President has already visited a similar camp run by Paul Newman in Connecticut.
A top source said in Dublin: ‘It would make sense for the President to time his visit to coincide with the opening of Barrettstown Castle as Paul's first camp in Europe.
‘He, Mr. Reynolds and Paul Newman see eye to eye, especially on the question of support for the camp project, and it would be an ideal occasion for such a visit.’
John Major — under threat.
Plot to oust PM
TORY Euro rebels are hatching a secret plot to oust Premier John Major.
They plan to field a ‘stalking-horse candidate’ from their own ranks to force leadership elections later this year.
And that would pave the way for a more heavyweight challenger later — tactics which were successfully used to dump Mrs Thatcher.
The rebels believe that Mr Major's credibility is in tatters after a series of defeats and retreats as the Maastricht Bill lumbers through Parliament.
Leading anti-European John Carlisle said: ‘The PM has lost control.
Another rebel said: ‘He has tunnel vision and can only see the Maastricht Treaty.
He doesn't understand the Tory Party is about to be split wide open.’
Even some loyalists and Cabinet members believe that a referendum on Europe may eventually prove the only way to stop the Conservative benches splintering.
But such a massive U-turn — Mr Major has always rejected a public vote — would be seen as giving in to the rebels.
Once the Budget debates are out of the way the Government may simply clear the Commons of all other business and concentrate on Maastricht day by day, night by night, until the Bill is through.
Mr Major is furious at the rebels' tactics in gleefully voting with Labour and the Liberal Democrats when it suits them.
Unionists failing to win support: Adams
SINN Fein President Gerry Adams has claimed there is little active support internationally for the Unionist cause.
He told yesterday's conference of party councillors and election organisers: ‘The potential internationally favours a democratic resolution to the conflict and an end to British rule in Ireland.
‘Irish political parties, and this includes Sinn Fein, must be prepared to assist the British to face up to their responsibilities regarding the Unionists and to face up to our responsibilities towards them also.
‘A change of policy by the British Government is a pre-requisite to such movement.’
Ulster Unionist Party secretary Reg Empey has labelled Mr Adams' remarks as ‘nothing short of a clarion call for an outright sectarian onslaught on the pro-Union community in Northern Ireland’.
He added: ‘The IRA, for too long, has been able to conceal its real sectarianism but recently the mask has begun to slip as they become more desperate for political success.’
Couple may hold clues to Bangor blast
A COUPLE standing in a shop doorway could provide vital clues about the bomb which wrecked Bangor last Sunday morning.
Earlier today police mounted a reconstruction of what they believe happened in the seaside town's Upper Main Street in the hours before the terrorist explosion.
It is now believed that a young man and woman stood in the exact spot where the car bomb was parked — just minutes before it was detonated.
Witnesses have already given descriptions of the pair who were seen having what appeared to be a heated argument.
A courting couple were also spotted in the nearby Abbey Street car park, from where it is thought the remote controlled explosion was detonated.
And there is speculation that crucial evidence may also be gleaned from a security camera in operation close to the scene.
Police have refused to comment on any of these claims.
But they are still urging witnesses to come forward.
In the early hours of this morning RUC officers swarmed the streets of Bangor handing out leaflets to motorists and passers-by regarding the bombing.
They particularly want to trace the movements of the black Ford Orion car — registration XIA 9225 — used to carry the bomb.
Investigations have established that the car was sold in Holywood on January 26.
Anyone who knows of the vehicle's whereabouts from that date until March 7 is asked to contact detectives at Bangor police station (tel: 0247 454444).
One of the four police officers injured in the explosion has been discharged from hospital.
The other three are still detained.
Their conditions are described as serious but comfortable.
Although shops were wrecked in the attack, it is now clear that the bomb was aimed at the security forces rather than commercial properties.
It is believed that a transit van, which often ferried RUC officers to and from their Saturday night duties, was the intended target.
OVER THE MOON!
SOCCER legend George Best is on the verge of a new TV career.
The ex-football star, who was back in his native Belfast this weekend, has revealed that offers of television work are flooding in.
And the chances are that Best will be teaming up with another hero of the game, Rodney Marsh, for a double act that could rival the popular Saint and Greavsie.
Marsh and Best are currently on a sell-out UK tour telling hilarious tales of their on pitch and off pitch antics at the height of their careers.
‘This has really taken off for us in a big way,’ George told Sunday Life after a sports luncheon at Belfast's Europa Hotel on Friday.
‘Offers are rolling in.
‘At the moment we are talking to TV, radio and even some promoters in the States about us doing work there.’
But Best's lucrative after-dinner speaking engagements are more about fun than the money involved, he insists.
‘I am honestly not that bothered about the finances of it all,’ he said.
‘I do it because I enjoy it.
And coming back to Northern Ireland is a real bonus.
‘I always get a warm response here.
I am coming home, I suppose.
‘It is interesting when I bring someone like Rodney Marsh here for the first time to see his reaction.
‘He is a straightforward guy who says exactly what he thinks.
‘I know he is impressed by the warmth of the reception Belfast has given him.’
Bestie and Marsh were joined by ex-Manchester United boss, Wilf McGuinness, at Friday's sporting luncheon when 350 fans paid out £25 each for the privilege of hearing their idols speak.
And as the trio signed hundreds of autographs after the show, George was already planning a return visit.
‘We'll be back in November for another performance but the next time it will be a bigger venue — the Ulster Hall — and more of a cabaret performance,’ he added.
‘We can hardly wait.
The people here are a different class.
It is my pleasure to come back.’
A Man Utd fan dies and goes to heaven but before he goes through the pearly gates he has to pass a test.
He's told he has to use a bucket and spade to empty the Atlantic ocean in 24 hours.
Either that or go down there to this guy with black hair and a big beard and stop him womanising, gambling and drinking.
The fan thinks for a second or two and then says ‘OK where's the bucket and spade’.’
On his fee: ‘I told the organisers today not to worry about my fee, just make sure I have enough to drink during the lunch.
They rang back and said: ‘George, for f…‘s sake take the fee!’.’
On Tommy Docherty: ‘I only wish he'd run off with my wife.’
On Gazza: ‘He's a f…ing nutter, isn't he?
The number 10 on his back isn't his position, it's his IQ’.
On his much publicised appearance on the Wogan show: ‘I got a phone call from Alex Higgins who had been watching television with his pal, Oliver Reed.
Alex said: ‘Bestie, don't worry.
You looked alright to us’.’
On his ex-girlfriends: ‘I've had four Miss Worlds.
Should have been seven — but I didn't turn up for three.’
Hunt for Strabane bomber
THE MAIN Post Office in Strabane was damaged in a bomb attack yesterday.
Shoppers fled after a man carried the device into the post office in Castle Street and left it on the counter.
Police evacuated the area before the bomb exploded, causing only minor damage.
Last night police were hunting the bomber, who was wearing a green rubber coat and carrying a red, blue and yellow shoulder bag.
LEAVE OUR PAPERS ALONE
THERE are obvious arguments against imposing VAT on the printed word.
One is simply commercial.
Experience has shown that increases in the cost of newspapers, magazines or books leads to a reduction in sales.
An independent survey by accountancy firm Price Waterhouse suggested that the imposition of VAT would force the closure of 20pc of regional newspapers — probably eight or nine in Northern Ireland.
Figures suggest the government expects to pull in around £1bn from adding on VAT at 17.5pc.
But that figure could be cut by half if falling sales and paper closures are brought into the equation.
A second and equally valid argument is that the publishing world is an invaluable source of knowledge.
Publishers of important academic books and research material would find the cost of production prohibitive if this tax were introduced.
VAT would undoubtedly diminish the range of material available.
Of course, newspapers have a vested interest in opposing VAT on the written word.
But remember it is your right to information which is under threat from Mr Lamont.
A tax on knowledge hits everyone.
Discount shop plan worries traders
A MAJOR new name in ‘discount warehousing’ in Great Britain is set to open a branch in Northern Ireland, and the move is already worrying existing traders.
MAKRO, which is owned by Dutch company, SHV, and is based in Manchester, runs cash and carry operations for independent retailers and caterers, claiming around five percent of the overall UK cash and carry trade.
According to commentators, despite being billed as ‘wholesale only’, MAKRO has a reputation for issuing membership ‘passports’ to large numbers of people.
Staff are already being interviewed for the 40,000 sq.
ft store which opens at Dunmurry in late October.
Among staff being sought are ‘recruitment teams’ who will flood industrial and commercial locations, signing-up white collar workers for membership, quickly building up a large customer base in the vital pre-Christmas trading period.
One senior representative of an existing cash & carry said that MAKRO will ‘obviously pose a threat’, not only to that trade but also to supermarkets, which will be hit by trade being diverted into the MARKO ‘discounting’— through holding one of the membership passports.
DONAL'S WAR FUN BY THE SEASIDE HEAD THE BALL
A Statement of Affairs, spread over two nights on the ITV Network, proved an elegant thriller.
Not only did it contain riveting performances from David Threlfall and our own Adrian Dunbar, it also delivered a fast-moving plot involving more twists than Chubby Checker.
Again, beautifully rounded characters which established themselves at a leisurely pace are the secret of its appeal.
Controversial news boss on home visit
THE man once described as Australian media tycoon Rupert Murdoch's ‘chief pornographer’ was back in his native Ulster this week — to address a church meeting!
David Montgomery, chief executive of Mirror Group Newspapers, was guest speaker at a Faith Share meeting organised by his old church.
Members of the congregation of Hamilton Road Presbyterian in Bangor joined a waiting list
LOYALISTS USING DEADLY NEW BOMB
LOYALIST terrorists used a new type of explosive device in the UFF attack on Sinn Fein councillor Gerard McGuigan's home last week.
The makeshift bomb lobbed into an upstairs bedroom was packed with nuts, bolts and glass in an attempt to kill or maim anyone in the room.
Loyalists are now using ‘black powder’ taken from shotgun cartridges, according to security sources, to put together frightening blast type bombs packed with shrapnel.
The UVF also used the black explosive shotgun powder last week in an attack which injured a building worker in North Belfast and also in a bomb that was attached to a car in the New Lodge area.
A small armaments industry is now well underway in the Loyalist paramilitary world and security chiefs fear that large fertiliser based bombs similar to those constructed by the IRA will soon be left on streets in Nationalist areas.
The commitment to armaments development is matched by a fearsome degree of hatred for Nationalists held by UFF and UVF activists particularly in the Shankill area.
One leading UFF figure in the area last week referred to a gun attack on a house in Jamaica Street in the Ardoyne area on St. Patrick's night and said it was the intention to kill anyone in the house.
The family dog was killed in the late night attack but the Loyalist activist said he understood that those who were ordered to fire the rifle bullets through front windows had instructions to kill anything that moved.
The man, who police believe is instrumental in many UFF attacks, said the organisation had been flooded with young people wanting to join since the UDA was banned last August and said that only one major UFF terrorist unit had been lost in security force operations in the last two years.
Senior security sources confirm that little success has been achieved against the UDA/UFF element in terms of arrests and that its killer units are largely intact.
Para critic for high jump…!
THE Paras have gained an unlikely recruit.
One of the crack British Army regiment's most fervent critics has joined up!
Vincent Currie, the SDLP vice-chairman of Dungannon District Council, was outspoken in his criticism of the behaviour of members of the regiment in Coalisland last year.
Now he has joined the Paras…but not the famous Regiment.
High-flying Currie has completed a course in parachuting, and he's due to make a charity jump at Garvagh today, when he hopes to raise up to £1,000 to help the fight to save the South Tyrone Hospital's maternity unit from closure.
Firefighter survives 25ft fall
FIREFIGHTER Gary Madill is lucky to be alive after crashing through a roof and smashing 25 feet to the ground.
Gary broke a bone in his back, split his lip and sustained several cuts and bruises when trying to douse a blaze started by vandals in the quiet County Armagh village of Laurelvale.
Another officer, Kevin Magee, also fell through the roof of the derelict house but managed to grab a purlin and hang on until rescued by the rest of the crew.
Gary's broken bone is within centimetres of his spinal cord and he is likely to be in hospital for at least a fortnight.
True-life fatal attraction
ONE case of erotomania led to an Ulster woman appearing in court.
‘Sometimes the only way to deal with the condition is to allow the legal process to take effect,’ said Dr McGarry.
Throughout the years a number of cases have been documented to aid the study of Clerambault's Syndrome.
These include:
A 53-year-old woman believed for 10 years that King George V was in love with her.
She was convinced that sailors and tourists she saw were his emissaries, sent to proclaim his love for her.
She frequently waited for the King outside Buckingham Palace, even though he did not even know of her existence.
When she saw a curtain move in one of the palace windows, she believed it was a signal of love from the King.
An unhappily married 26-year-old woman developed an ardent passion for a married doctor who attended her abortion.
She constantly pestered him with telephone calls, messages and even turned up at his home.
A 19-year-old single girl took an overdose of tablets after claiming to be in love with a priest — despite the fact she had not spoken to him for four years.
She even considered becoming a nun.
American woman Diane Schaeffer was the case which actress Catherine Cussack read up on for her role as Carmel.
Forty two-year-old Diane was a medical writer who became obsessed with Dr Murray Brennan and pursued him and his wife in a relentless eight year campaign.
She even broke into his home and, dressed in a see-though negligee, waited for him.
Eventually she was sentenced to two years in jail.
Army workers living in in fear of the bombers
THE DAY after Patsy Gillespie was turned into a ‘human bomb’ and forced to drive to his death at a border checkpoint on October 24 1990 at a border checkpoint, the Army commander in Derry personally thanked every civilian ancillary worker in Fort George army camp.
He shook hands with scores of clerks, cooks and cleaners who had overcome feelings of revulsion and fear to turn up for work after the brutal and ghastly murder of their friend and colleague, who had been chained to a 1,000lb bomb.
Civil servants employed at Fort George and Ebrington Barracks were warmly congratulated for defying the IRA by reporting for duty.
They were told that they were the ‘backbone and unsung heroes’ of the Army.
It was not the first time they had been told this.
More than a decade previously Northern Ireland Office Minister Stanley Orme had made an impassioned plea to civilian workers here not to quit their jobs after a similar murder.
Civilian employees of the Army are prime targets for the IRA.
There are more than 1,500 employed by the Ministry of Defence at military bases across Northern Ireland, and at least five of them have been murdered.
Unlike contractors who are paid danger money, MoD civil servants are paid a flat wage; their average take-home pay is just £120 a week.
The only financial bonus for the dangers they face is an environmental allowance of £1.14p a day.
They are a mixed workforce, recruited from local Catholics and Protestants who live in the community, and they say they are afforded no protection whatsoever by the security forces.
On numerous occasions direct threats have been issued against them by the IRA in local newspapers.
Nowhere is this pressure more intense than in the North West.
Some of these same men now say the Army is treating them like ‘dirt’ and is trying to force them out of a job.
They feel bitter and disillusioned by the conditions they say they are forced to endure, under direct threat of assassination.
‘Since Patsy's murder there has been a sea change in attitude towards us by the military,’ said Alec, a 45-year-old Catholic who has worked for the MoD since before the Troubles.
‘All the back-slapping and thanks at the time have been forgotten.
They now view us as a security risk.
I think they would like to get rid of us all.’
Alec says he lives in constant fear of the IRA, a danger he claims the MoD refuses to recognise.
‘My children are shunned at school and every member of my family has had to become an accomplished liar,’ he said.
‘No matter where you go, when you are shopping or socialising, you are constantly looking over your shoulder.
‘I have had phone calls to the house warning me to stop work or else, but the Army couldn't care less.
‘They have offered me no protection and told me bluntly if I don't like the job I can quit.’
Alec and his colleagues believe the military would laugh at them if they asked for personal protection weapons.
‘They have issued personal protection weapons to construction workers, yet most of them only face danger for the short-term duration of their contracts,’ he said.
‘We face the same risks day in day out for years on end.’
Alec says that two years ago one of his closest colleagues was dragged from his home at gunpoint and threatened by the IRA.
When the military found out, they sacked him.
‘His pass was confiscated the next day and that meant he couldn't get into the base to work and lost his job.
He was paid off eventually, supposedly on medical grounds,’ he said.
‘He's still living in Derry and is still at risk, but the MoD have washed their hands of him.’
CIVILIANS IN THE FIRING LINE
STANDING in the doorway of his neat £40,000 home in a secluded cul-de-sac in Brandon, Father John Butler spoke publicly for the first time.
‘I am a man of my word.
I want to set the record straight.
I want to see justice done.
‘Our next door neighbours know our story and they are very supportive’.
Fr Butler, one of five boys from a quiet country family in Bohergloss, Kilkenny, added: ‘I am out of work.
It is very hard to find a job.
My first concern is to find work and look after my family’.
The couple have not turned their back on their Catholic faith.
The living room and window-sill are dotted with religious statues.
And in the pine-clad kitchen littered with baby's bottles, an icon of Jesus hangs on the wall.
Rachel fled with Fr Butler on the eve of his return to Kilkenny last June.
He called at her home to say goodbye.
She went for a last walk with him — and they never returned.
Fr Butler told his bosses that he no longer wanted to be a priest, but he has still not formally quit.
Baby Liam was born in Dryburn Hospital, Durham on October 25.
The official birth certificate shows he was registered as Liam Butler.
His parents are listed as John Martin Butler, ‘care worker’ and Rachel Ann Baker.
The certificate reveals that the couple made the registration together.
Fr Butler was ordained in Ireland in June 1990 and sent to work as a curate in Consett as part of a two-year exchange scheme between the Dioceses of Ossory and Hewxham and Newcastle.
Back in Fr Butler's home parish of St Lachtain in Freshford, Kilkenny, Fr Seamus Henry said: ‘I haven't been in touch with John for some months but I am supporting him in a pastoral way.
‘I know his mother Mary would love to see him again.
She is an open-minded lady and has coped well with this heart-breaking situation’.
Church man is living with his schoolgirl lover
RUNAWAY PRIEST IN BABY DRAMA
A RUNAWAY Irish priest and his schoolgirl sweetheart have set up home with their love child.
Father John Butler (27) and shy teenager Rachel Baker are sharing a hideaway love-nest in the North of England.
Their baby son, Liam, was born four months after the love-struck pair shocked friends and family by running away from their close-knit parish.
Fr Butler was due to return to Ireland after two years as a priest, but he fell for Rachel, a 17-year-old church organist.
They are now living on DSS handouts in a two-bedroomed house in Brandon, Co Durham, while Father Butler looks for work.
But last night his church boss, Dr Laurence Forristal, Bishop of Ossory in the Republic, urged him to dump his lover and their baby, and return home to the priesthood.
The bishop said: ‘I think Rachel and the child should return to her family and he should return to Ireland.
‘He still has obligations to them but he could still become a priest again.
Rachel, who is now 18, was in the lower sixth form at a Catholic comprehensive in Durham.
Romance blossomed after she offered to play the organ at choir practice and at Masses at St Patrick's Church, Consett, two miles from her family home.
A family friend said: ‘Rachel's parents are devout Catholics and this is their worst nightmare come true.
I don't know if they have even seen the baby’.
Trail of death
PATSY Gillespie was the last MoD civilian employee murdered by the IRA on October 24 1990.
He was forced to drive a huge van bomb to a border checkpoint on the Bundoran Road outside Derry, chained to the driver's seat.
Unable to escape, the Fort George catering worker died instantly when the bomb exploded, demolishing the checkpoint and killing five soldiers.
Two cleaners from Ebrington Barracks in Derry were also killed by an IRA booby trap bomb.
John Dunn, 46, was giving a driving lesson to 53-year-old Cecilia Byrne when a 50lb bomb exploded underneath their car on the Limerick Road on January 11 1974, killing them instantly.
In June 1973 Noor Baz Khan, a 45-year old from Pashewar who operated a tea concession at Army barracks in Derry, was captured by the IRA and shot dead.
Ten months later 18-year-old teaboy Abdul Khalid was riddled with bullets as he sat in his car at Silverbridge in south Armagh.
SPOTLIGHT ON MAN OF PEACE
THE most impressive television, last week, sprang from deeply obscene events which cruelly and senselessly destroyed young lives.
In the wake of Warrington, the simple dignity of Colin Parry, as he told how his son, Tim, died when his life support machine was switched off, was branded instantly upon the brain of the nation.
And watching Gordon Wilson's maiden speech to the Dublin Senate, one reflected that he is probably the only man in Ulster who is able to announce his intention to talk to the IRA and who no-one would dare to denounce.
Even though he uttered the ultimate Unionist political blasphemy (and the ultimate exposition of Christianity) that he intended to speak them: ‘As one human being to another’— a theme taken up by Lara McIlroy of the Alliance Party in Thursday's Spotlight.
In the course of examining how film-makers portrayed Northern Ireland, Spotlight treated four local politicians to bushels of popcorn in what used to be known as the one-and-nines, as they witnessed a screening of The Crying Game.
Did the fact that the film presented the IRA man (played by Stephen Rea) as a complex character with a conscience, and contained fast action scenes, glamorize or hold any brief for terrorism?
Mr William Ross feared that it might.
But Ms McIlroy grasped the nub and crux of the matter.
Could it be, she asked, that Mr Ross was reluctant to think of terrorists as human?
If that is the case, Mr Ross has my sympathy.
My knee-jerk reaction, too, is to regard the people who murdered Marie Wilson and Tim Parry as monsters.
But I also know that Gordon Wilson's view is the only one worth aspiring to.
Deny the humanity of any man — even when he commits inhuman acts — and you diminish your own.
In denying his humanity you become, in however diluted a form, like him when he denied the humanity of those he killed.
Few of us have the courage or simplicity to confront these obvious truths in the way that Gordon Wilson does.
He was, he informed us in his speech to the senate, fully aware that he may be accused of being naive.
But I would dearly love to be a fly on the wall during his meeting with ‘The Godfathers’ to hear what answers they can dredge from their souls when faced with the ruthless and uncompromising compassion of that awesome man.
Glebe's a site for sore eyes
SITUATED on one of the best sites in Glengormley is Glebe Manor, a development of luxury detached homes.
The houses are built to a high specification by D.P. Patton Homes one of the Provinces most reputable building firms and winners of the Pride of the Job award (1989 & 1991) and designed by a leading firm of Northern Ireland Architects, The Boyd Partnership.
Superb panoramic views of Cavehill and Belfast Lough are enhanced by an elevated site, offering rural tranquillity with city convenience; schools and shops are within easy walking distance.
This Development reflects the usual D.P. Patton Homes quality, both in external appearance and internal finish.
These traditionally built homes are designed with comfort and convenience in mind.
Glebe Manor went on release with Halifax Property Services around August 1992 and has proved to be a most successful and sought after development.
A show house is now open featuring the ‘Bush’ design which you can view today between 2 pm and 4 pm.
Show house staff will be available to deal with inquiries.
The interior has been designed by Mrs Liz Jameson (Carrickfergus) and it gives potential buyers an idea of how their new home could look.
The full colour brochure about Glebe Manor containing floor-plans and other details of each of the three designs available may be obtained from Halifax Property Services, 8 Carnmoney Road, Glengormley (0232)
On the scent of an Oscar — again
THE BROODING, lidded eyes look over the coffee cup.
Al Pacino sips one of the endless cups of coffee downed during a day filming.
After paying the price of fame brought by The Godfather and beating the booze Al Capuccino — as he's known on set — says his three-year-old daughter has given him a new meaning to life.
He says the little girl called Julie, the love-child of his fling with a New York drama teacher, gives him a sense of being alive.
Filming Scent of a Woman he had a scene in which he stepped straight out into the speeding traffic.
Then he went white.
‘I can't believe I did that,’ he gasped.
‘I remember thinking…
Gee, I have a child.
‘Marty, the director, was very wise to wait until the end of filming because he never told me he wanted me to do it.
‘At that time I would have done anything to finish the film.
But I can tell you this — I'll never do anything like it again.
‘Having a child makes you see things differently, your view of things changes in many ways and that's major.
‘You don't take that turn at 80 miles an hour, you slow down.
‘I don't have many pockets of enjoyment, so it's nice.
Fatherhood has changed me.
‘With my own child now, it makes life more liveable.
‘Something comes up and you say ‘What would my daughter think?’
‘I don't live with my daughter but I see her because I live in New York and she lives with her mother.
‘When I'm away for more than six or seven days, the pang starts and I need to see her’.
Pacino lives alone in his New York apartment with five dogs.
He keeps his daughter's toys and finger-paintings and has a room for her to visit.
Born Alfredo James Pacino he is still haunted by memories of growing up on the mean streets of New York's South Bronx where his street gang pals called him The Actor.
He says he will never move from his roots: ‘Basically New York is where I'm from.
I was born in Manhattan, I've lived in the south Bronx as a child.
‘And I like cities, pretty much any city I go through.
But New York has my friends and now it's got my kid.
So I'm always gonna want to be there.
It's home — it's that simple’.
He is a star who takes himself seriously and his method-acting technique of thinking himself into the part is legendary.
He lived the part of a blind man so much so that he tripped and fell after leaving the set and damaged the cornea of his eye because he had trained himself not to blink!
Talking about his Oscar nomination Pacino says: ‘I've experienced having lost four years in a row.
‘You feel good being nominated for an Oscar, then you get turned into some kind of a loser when you don't win.
‘It's real strange but I don't feel cheated or that I deserved something and didn't get it’.
TAKING IT EASY
ADRIAN is a frequent traveller between London and Enniskillen, returning often to see his mum, four sisters and two brothers.
He's just finished a stint as Edmund in King Lear at the Royal Court Theatre and is looking forward to a holiday in Wales with his actress wife, six-year-old daughter and teenage stepson.
‘I don't want to do theatre again for a long time,’ he said.
‘It's a bit like being kept in after school.
You know that every day after about three in the afternoon, that's it.
You can't organise to go out anywhere or do anything because you have a performance that night.’
TV work, on the other hand, he loves.
His recent lead role in the much-acclaimed mini-series ‘Statement of Affairs’ he described as ‘enormous fun’.
And of his steamy sex scenes with actress Frances Barber, he added: ‘What can I say.
It was such hard work.
Lying there naked with Frances on top of me.
‘Well, someone had to do it!
‘The most bizarre part of the whole scenario was when Frances meticulously applied tooth paste to her nipples before the cameras started to roll.
‘Her boyfriend is a photographer and apparently the old toothpaste on the nipples routine is a trick of the trade to keep them hard.
Well, now we know.’
His next project is a film — Sam and the Sergeant — which will start shooting in September in exotic locations such as Switzerland and Los Angeles as well as the south east of England.
And, however nonchalant Dunbar appears to be about the future, he is obviously keen to notch up yet another success.
‘People tend to think that success is an overnight thing — and it isn't,’ he said.
‘You don't come to prominence through one film alone.
I've been away for 10 years now and I've been doing good work and making the right decisions about the work I do.
‘I've laid the foundations.
Success is 99 per cent perspiration and one per cent inspiration.’
Adrian shuns life in the fast lane for the green grass of home
HEART-THROB Adrian Dunbar claims to lead his life by a simple motto: ‘Never run when you can crawl’!
The quip typifies the Co Fermanagh actor's refreshingly down-to-earth attitude about his career.
Currently the toast of the movie industry for his roles in the BAFTA nominated, Hear My Song, and the Oscar nominated The Crying Game, Dunbar is amazingly laid back about his future prospects.
And — unlike many of his peers — he doesn't hanker after the approval of the Hollywood set.
‘I've been offered work in the States but unfortunately nothing I actually wanted to do,’ the 34-year-old said.
‘A lot of what is on offer means moving out there lock, stock and barrel.
That just wouldn't suit me.
‘I wouldn't mind going out there for two or three months at a time but not permanently.’
He added: ‘I'm a bit of a ‘hick’ really.
I never run when I know I could crawl.’
And there's nowhere he'd rather be than back in his native Enniskillen — where he can unashamedly lead life at a crawling pace.
‘It's great to be back,’ Adrian confessed during a two-day stay this week prompted by an invite to open Fermanagh's new Tourist Information Centre.
‘There's something that happens to me when I come back home,’ he says.
‘I don't really know what or why, but I'm much more obliging and accommodating towards others on home territory.
I'm happy to put myself out for people here.’
What he misses most about ‘home’ is the fresh air — and large measures!
Sipping a gin and tonic and lighting up another Camel cigarette, he says: ‘It's almost impossible to find a decent barman in England.
‘Most of them are 16-year-old Kiwis who haven't an idea how to pull a decent pint of Guinness.’
But, that niggle aside, London is where he will remain for the foreseeable future.
‘Quite simply that's where the work is.
It makes sense to live there.’
Don't die for a fry
How to eat well and stay healthy!
A HEARTY APPETITE FOR LIFE!
SOMEONE in the UK dies prematurely every three minutes of every day, and the cause is heart disease.
That's the same as a full jumbo jet crashing at Heathrow every day of the week and two on Sunday.
Yet this epidemic of self-inflicted slaughter seems to pass us by with little front page news in the national Press.
Cooking for a healthy heart is easy and just as delicious as doing things the ‘coronary’ way.
If you don't want yourself, or anyone else in the family, to be one of those statistics in the next three minutes, then the answer lies in your own hands.
And now supermarkets throughout the country are helping the shopper to make more informed choices.
Smoking is probably the major factor causing heart disease.
Excessive alcohol, obesity, lack of exercise and stress are other important factors and if any of them apply to you, you're at risk.
Any combination of these factors increases the risk dramatically.
Healthier eating will help control your weight and reduce your cholesterol levels, so the simple message is: Eat less fat and more fibre.
There are two sorts of fat; saturated and unsaturated (including polyunsaturated).
The amount and type of fat that you eat can seriously affect your heart health.
Olive oil in a mono-unsaturated fat which the Mediterraneans consider to be a marvellous food medicine.
It is a powerful protective antioxidant and lavish amounts of the best quality olive oil can be consumed without risk.
It even helps the body to get rid of cholesterol!
Other foods which help remove cholesterol from the blood stream are garlic, oats, beans, apples, pears and all the wholegrain cereals.
Saturated fat is the main source of cholesterol, which, when there is too much in your blood, can cause a waxy deposit in the arteries supplying the heart.
Saturated fat comes mainly from animal sources like; fatty meat,(and even in the leaner cuts of red meat), butter, lard, cheese, cream, whole milk, hard margarines and cooking fats, meat products,(sausages, pies, hamburger, pates, salami, luncheon meat, pasties and mince), chocolate, cakes and biscuits.
Unsaturated fats are found in vegetable oils — olive, sunflower, safflower, corn and rapeseed oils, soft margarines which are labelled as ‘high in polyunsaturates’, nuts and seeds.
Oily fish like mackerel, salmon, tuna, herrings, anchovy and sardines contain high levels of Omega-3 fatty acids, essential to healthy cell function.
Use fish, skinless poultry,(most of the fat is just under the skin), leaner cuts of meat, semi-skimmed milk, low fat spreads and cheeses, low fat yogurt instead of cream or salad dressing.
These simple changes will make a significant reduction in the fat content of your diet.
Food for the heart also means an increase in the consumption of fibre-rich starchy foods.
These are cheap, nourishing and delicious.
Bread, potatoes, rice, pasta, beans and sugar free breakfast cereals, should all feature as major players in this game.
They supply energy, essential protein, vitamins, minerals and bulk, and it is only what you do to them, that adds on the calories and fats.
Success in a blink
HAVE you heard the one about the Irish band who were the talk of New York BEFORE they were even formed?
It may sound far fetched, but it's true.
Blink are the band in question and guitarist/vocalist Dermot Lambert the man responsible for this most Irish of tales.
After a previous band split up Dermot and a few mates recorded a track for a US compilation CD, called themselves Blink and thought no more about it.
But Blink's song ‘Happy Day’ attracted all the interest Stateside, and soon the phone wires were humming across the Atlantic.
A full-time Blink line-up of Dermot, Robbie Sexton (keyboards), Brian McLoughlin (bass) and Barry Campbell (drums) was put together — and then the fun began.
Early live shows won rave notices and by February of last year A&R men — two dozen attended one Dublin show — were falling over themselves to sign the band.
Blink eventually signed with EMI offshoot Lime — just four months after their live debut.
It sounds like a meteoric rise, but Dermot says: ‘We've all paid our dues in other bands so it's not quite as spectacular as it looks.’
Having got signed in a hurry, Blink wisely decided to take their time and get their first records right.
Their debut single ‘Going To Nepal’ crashed into the Irish charts on release last month, and actually sold out its initial pressing, much to the embarrassment of their record company.
‘None of us expected the single to take off the way it did,’ adds Dermot.
‘It sold two and a half thousand copies very quickly and Lime had to get more pressed.
‘It's a great feeling, knowing that somebody outside our family and friends actually likes what we're doing.’
And despite it's nonsense lyrics that name-check Betty Boo, Mr Magoo and Major Tom, ‘Going To Nepal’, a heady guitar/pop brew, was inspired by a real life experience.
Dermot says: ‘My brother Ken was on a round the world trip and went to Nepal after spending some time in India.
‘Both countries are really poverty stricken but Ken was knocked out by the generosity of the Nepalese people.
‘People barely had enough food to live on, but thought nothing of bringing him into their homes and feeding him and giving him somewhere to sleep.
He ended up staying a couple of months.’
The single was produced by ex-Undertones and That Petrol Emotion guitarist Sean O'Neill, now working at the Derry Musicians Collective.
He is also in the chair for the second single, due in May, and the debut album which is pencilled in for an August release.
‘It might seem like an awful long time to be working on a debut album, but we're weren't going to be rushed,’ says Dermot.
‘I'm tired of reading and hearing about bands who do nothing but slag off their first record, and blame the producer for not getting it right.
‘We want to be proud of this album when it comes out and be able to stand over it.’
CHILDREN'S CRUSADER
A YOUNG Ulster woman is sharing the burdens of the Romanian people in a bid to find foster homes for abandoned children.
Clare Cunning (25), pictured right, from Belfast, has spent the past year working as a Social Work volunteer with the Romanian Orphanage Trust in Brasov.
The team is based in a local government building, bugged during Ceaucescu's reign of terror.
Despite having few home comforts, Clare is totally committed to what she is doing.
‘I have already been involved with placing two Romanian children with families,’ she told SUNDAY LIFE.
‘It is very rewarding, I love the place and I love the people I'm working with.’
‘Fostering is not something Romania is used to.
But if the ‘orphanage culture’ is to be broken, family placement will have to become the norm rather than the exception.’
If you would like to know more about the work of the Romanian Orphanage Trust, contact them on 071–248 5423.
LABOUR OF LOVE
LIBBY Henry and Simonica Ruzsa are virtually mother and daughter.
But they are separated by thousands of miles of land, sea — and bureaucratic red tape.
For the Ulster woman has spent the past year trying to adopt the pretty five-year-old she met in the dark and desolate corridors of a Romanian orphanage.
Libby, a PE teacher from Ballymena, first met Simonica in January 1992, when she visited the Brasov-based Marianna's orphanage on a trip organised by School Aid Romania.
Although they have only spent a matter of weeks together, a strong spiritual bond exists between them.
‘She was four and a half when I first saw her,’ explained Libby.
‘She hadn't even been taught to talk but she was immediately drawn to me, and I to her.
All she wanted to do was to sit on my knee and touch my face.’
Libby is being assisted in her bid to adopt Simonica (known affectionately as ‘the wee one’) by friends living in Brasov.
Doina Fienta, an English teacher there, brings Simonica out of the orphanage every weekend.
Simonica will be six years old this June.
Her development since that first meeting has been quite remarkable.
‘I speak to her every Sunday on the telephone,’ said Libby.
‘She can now speak quite a bit of English as well as Romanian.
She says ‘My name is Simonica Henry’ and talks about coming to ‘Irlanda’.
It's wonderful just to hear her voice.
She calls me Libby and my husband ‘Daddy Eric’.’
But talking on the telephone is no substitute for holding the little girl Libby loves so much.
Knowing that Simonica is still in the orphanage is literally tearing her apart.
‘The orphanage is a hateful place,’ she said.
‘It really breaks my heart to think of Simonica having to stay there.
We love her so much and want to give her a lovely home.
If we can't find Simonica's mum we must prove that we made very effort to.
After that, the Romanian authorities should let the adoption go ahead,’ said Libby.
‘The child doesn't really understand the distance between us.
She might think we're just around the corner and that we're not coming to see her.
That makes it worse, I suppose.’
Libby and Eric are going out to Romania for three weeks in July.
They hope by that time the adoption will have been finalised.
‘Our intention is to take Simonica to the Black Sea for a holiday.
If we can bring her home with us we will.
If we can't, at least she will have had a holiday and it won't be too long until the Christmas break and we can go over to see her again.’
ARIES This week you find your thoughts turning to personal matters!
You need to push ahead with private plans.
you're in a position to do so.
TAURUS This is likely to be a fairly quiet week for you.
And it's just as well, because you're going to want more time to yourself.
GEMINI You are at your happiest at the moment in the company of good friends.
Like minded people have plenty to say — and most of it is useful!
CANCER The career sector of your chart is strongly highlighted this week.
And it's a good time to discuss career matters.
LEO You are bound to find yourself thinking about all sorts of future possibilities now!
Your life is opening up more through travel or education.
VIRGO Turn your attention this week to money related matters, particularly where other people's money is involved!
This is a good time to seek funding.
LIBRA Partnerships are well highlighted now.
You would be wise to bring out into the open anything that you feel needs serious discussion with your partner.
SCORPIO You are entering a very busy phase where work matters are concerned.
It would be wise to start rallying around for some back up!
SAGITTARIUS You are entering a rather happy go lucky phase now.
Though you're going to need more time and space to yourself though.
CAPRICORN There's likely to be more contact from family members this week, as you feel the urge to be closer to home.
AQUARIUS You can't go far wrong this week when it comes to expressing yourself.
Though you spend more time than usual gossiping!
PISCES Financial affairs are important this week.
And it looks as though it would be helpful to speak with an expert about important money issues.
Man held after finds
SECURITY Forces uncovered over a ton of fertiliser during a major arms search in west Belfast yesterday.
Fertiliser is often used in the manufacture of large bombs and police believe the finds may have saved lives.
The fertiliser was discovered in two seizures, one in Anderstown and one off the Falls Road.
A man was arrested during the searches.
Talks are dead, says Molyneaux
ULSTER Unionist leader Jim Molyneaux urged the British government yesterday to accept that the talks framework is dead.
And he warned that no more talks between local parties and the British and Irish governments could take place until Dublin dropped its territorial claim on Ulster.
Speaking to his party conference he urged purely internal talks involving local parties.
But dismissing the SDLP's idea of commissions to govern Ulster he warned them: ‘Don't be too greedy.
Don't push your luck.’
Surgeons fought back tears
WARRINGTON General Hospital consultant Barry Taylor shook with emotion as he described the savage injuries of the bomb wounded.
A 12-year-old boy had most of his face blown away.
A young woman would have to have her foot reconstructed.
Mr Taylor was close to tears as he said: ‘There is a mood of disbelief at the hospital.
‘We have contingency plans for a major incident like this but when it happens it is very difficult to cope.
‘The hospital staff are finding it very hard, very difficult.
‘But everyone is just trying to cope the best way they can with the injuries before them.
‘The reality will hit them later.’
The consultant was visibly shaking as he described how the 12-year-old victim had sustained severe head and facial injuries.
Most of his face had been blown away and he had fractures of his skull, said Mr Taylor.
The man is in the hospital's intensive care unit and his condition was very serious.
The surgeon also described how two young women were brought in with soft tissue injuries to their lower limbs, and a little girl he had seen had sustained injuries to her abdomen.
A man had serious injuries with pelvic fractures, and six or seven others with relatively minor injuries would be requiring surgery for shrapnel damage, Mr Taylor said.
A young woman would have to have her foot reconstructed, and she faced the possibility of amputation.
He said plastic surgeons were working close with the surgery team.
There were seven or eight consultant surgeons, 12 junior surgeons and four or five anaesthetists on emergency duties at the hospital.
Extra supplies of blood were needed.
Warrington General hospital spokesman Trevor Buckley confirmed only one person, the four-year-old boy, had been killed.
He said a second person, who had been reported dead, had in fact been brought into the hospital alive and was currently undergoing treatment.
He said 56 people had treatment at the hospital, mostly for shrapnel wounds.
Of these, 21 were admitted.
Weekend toll of death on the roads
A 13-year-old boy was killed in a road accident in Newtownards last night — the fourth victim on the province's roads within 24 hours.
The boy was struck by a Renault 19 car on the Circular Road shortly before 6.30pm.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the accident in particular a person who gave first aid to the boy and the occupants of car in front of the Renault.
Earlier yesterday morning 17-year-old Donacloney motorcylist John Mawhinney from Gablestown Road died after hitting a lamp post on Lurgan Road, Banbridge.
Also yesterday morning a man was killed when his car struck a telephone poll on the Shore Road, Greenisland.
In the afternoon a 74-year-old woman was killed when her car collided with another vehicle on Ballydougan Road, Downpatrick.
UDA threat to families
LOYALISTS PLAN POLICE ATTACKS
LOYALIST terrorists are planning to carry out attacks on the homes of RUC officers because of alleged harassment of women and children during recent house searches and arrest operations.
The latest twist in a deteriorating relationship between police and loyalist activists was contained in a statement issued to Sunday Life yesterday.
Sources close to the now banned UDA said the families of RUC officers would suffer ‘if heavy handed police tactics continued.’
The figures said resentment about the treatment of families of UDA members during police raids across Belfast had reached boiling point.
And they warned that the RUC would face a ‘1986 situation’, when police homes were attacked in the aftermath of the signing of the Anglo-Irish Agreement, if the present situation continued.
The men claimed that for the last six weeks women and children had been ‘assaulted and humiliated’ during raids on houses in loyalist areas.
In an incident on the Shankill over a week ago, loyalist sources claim the wife of a prominent UDA man was forced to kneel in pouring rain in her back yard while an RUC officer held a gun to her head.
A number of men were arrested at the house but later released without charge.
Another woman was thrown to the ground and a child slightly injured with a rifle butt in a nearby house during the arrest operation, it was claimed.
The RUC has vehemently rejected allegations of harassment on the Shankill, pointing out that their role is to enforce the law and protect law-abiding citizens irrespective of their religion.
But the man said he ‘understood’ a decision had been taken by the leadership of the UDA/ UFF to raid the homes of RUC officers in loyalist areas and ‘subject their wives and children to similar treatment.’
The man declined to specify exactly what this would mean.
YESTERDAY'S explosions follow months of intense activity by the IRA on the mainland.
Saturday, February 27 — Device goes off in Camden High Street, north London.
18 injured, two seriously.
Friday, February 26 — Three bombs planted at Warrington's gas works.
One exploded destroying a gas holder near houses.
Earlier in the day, a police officer was shot and wounded during a routine check on a van;
Wednesday, February 3 — Bomb exploded on the 9.05 Victoria to Ramsgate train.
A second explosion came several hours later on the platform of the South Kensington Underground station.
No injuries in either attack;
Thursday, January 28 — Device exploded outside London's Harrods department store, four people slightly injured;
1992 Tuesday, December 22 — Bomb exploded at Hampstead Undergound station at start of rush hour.
No injuries.
Wednesday, December 16 — Two bombs go off in London's West End.
First in John Lewis in Oxford Street, second in waste bin in Cavendish Square.
Thursday, December 10 — Two devices exploded outside Wood Green shopping centre in north London, injuring eight.
Wednesday, December 9 — Bomb planted in van exploded outside Woodside Park Underground station in north London after telephone warning.
No injuries;
Thursday, December 3 — 64 people injured after two blasts in Manchester city centre which caused estimated £13 million damage to buildings and trade.
Third IRA attack on city in 20 months.
Tuesday, December 1 — Bomb attack in West End foiled when police discovered Ford Transit van packed with explosive off London's Tottenham Court Road.
Sunday, November 15 — Bomb attack on Canary Wharf, Isle of Dogs, foiled after van laden with ton of explosives spotted by two security guards.
Detonator exploded but failed to set off main charge.
BOMBERS' TIMETABLE OF TERROR
RUTHLESS IRA bombers murdered a child yesterday — their Mother's Day gift to an English town.
The terrorists brought mayhem to the crowded shopping centre of Warrington, injuring scores of people including other children.
Eyewitnesses told of the horror as shrapnel rained down on shoppers from two devices placed in cast-litter bins less than ten yards apart.
The bombs went off at lunch-time near a busy Boots chemist and a McDonalds hamburger restaurant packed with children and teenagers.
One shocked shopper, who miraculously escaped injury, described the attack as ‘a cold-blooded massacre’.
And last night it was revealed that the murdered child's body lay at the scene for over four hours because of fears of another blast.
One shopper, 53-year-old housewife, Joan Thompson, described her ‘lucky escape’.
Speaking from her hospital bed, with 24 stitches in a face wound, Mrs Thompson said: ‘I didn't see the explosion.
I just felt a burning sensation on my cheek and the next thing there was just blood.
‘What can you say about whoever did this?
They are utter bastards, aren't they?’
Police said a warning given 30 minutes before the explosions identified Liverpool and not Warrington as the target.
Blast horror for shoppers
AS THE rest of the country prepared to celebrate Mother's Day, the IRA yesterday deprived one mother of her son.
The four-year-old was murdered in the crowded shopping centre of Warrington in a blast that injured scores of people including other children.
There was mayhem as shrapnel rained down on shoppers from devices placed in cast-iron litter bins less than ten yards apart.
One eyewitness described the attack — the second time the Cheshire town has been targeted — as ‘a cold-blooded massacre’.
The Prime Minister, John Major, condemned the outrage as ‘wickedness that defies belief’.
And last night it was revealed that the murdered child's body had lain at the scene for over four hours because of fears of another blast.
Less than 30 minutes before the blasts, a Samaritans office on Merseyside received a coded message from a man with an Irish accent.
He reportedly warned of a bomb placed at an unspecified Boots store in Liverpool.
Cheshire police said that message was relayed to them as the bombs exploded in Warrington's Bridge Street at about 12.25pm.
The explosions were close to a Boots chemist and a McDonalds restaurant which was crowded with youngsters.
Police said today's bombing looked like the work of the IRA although no admission had yet been received.
John Major, speaking from his Huntingdon constituency, said: ‘The purpose was to kill and to maim.
Tragically that is what happened.
‘News of this latest attack on men, women and children going innocently about their business on a spring saturday will be met everywhere with sorrow and revulsion.’
Former Greater Manchester deputy chief constable John Stalker said he believed Warrington was chosen as a target because it was the scene of an attack a few weeks ago which resulted in arrests.
‘This is a statement of defiance to say the arrests have made absolutely no difference to them and Warrington is as vulnerable as it ever was,’ he told Sky News.
Cheshire assistant chief constable Brian Baister said that the code used in the warning received on Merseyside was not one recognised by police.
He said Merseyside police had acted ‘very quickly’, checking local branches of Boots and informing neighbouring forces.
‘At the time the message was received here at Warrington the explosions were taking place,’ Mr Baister told reporters.
Somme centre go ahead
PLANNERS hoping to build a £1m Somme Heritage Centre are expected to be given the green light at Ards Borough Council meeting tomorrow night.
The Newtownards based project, to be completed by the end of this year, will include an audio visual theatre, a reconstruction of Great War trenches and two exhibition halls.
And it will be sited on land troops trained on before going off to fight in the Somme.
A walkway is also to be constructed around the centre, passing Helen's Tower in Clandeboye Estate, the last landmark the troops saw before leaving for the Somme.
A replica of the tower has been built at Thiepval as a tribute to Ulster soldiers killed in the battle.
Big Jack hopes to land cup
THE Republic's ‘adopted’ soccer supremo, Jack Charlton, is to lead an English team AGAINST the Irish next week-end.
But the divided loyalties won't bother the Irish because Jack, whose second passion is fishing, will be bringing cheer to Ireland's anglers who suffer physical disability.
He is leading an English team to compete in the first ever Irish staging of the Jack Charlton Trout Cup — an event which will take place at a lake near Bantry in County Cork on March 29 and 30.
The competition is attracting a number of Ulster anglers.
The English sponsors, Northern Bait Farms, are putting up £5,000 for the event and the Irish organisers have obtained sponsorship from both sides of the border.
Farmers' fury at DoE land deal profits
THE GOVERNMENT has sold land at 500 times the price it paid angry farmers when vesting for Ulster's new city.
The land on the outskirts of Portadown changed hands this week at £125,000 an acre, compared with the £250 an acre given to local farmers who did not want to sell.
And furious farmers were powerless to do anything about the handsome profits their former land fetched for the Department of the Environment, who took it over in the mid-1960s.
One ex-farmer told the Sunday Life.
‘This is typical of the way we have been treated since the days of mass vesting of land, much of which was surplus to requirements.’
Sites at Ballyhannon have caused the greatest furore, with five acres being sold a few weeks ago for £250,000.
Said a spokesman for the DoE, ‘We have no idea the land would appreciate so much, and you have to consider the sites are now fully serviced for water, electricity and sewerage.
‘We vested at the agricultural prices pertaining at the time — but now this is prime building land.’
Ex-Irish soldier is IRA sniper suspect
A FORMER soldier who lives in the Republic is high on the list of suspects drawn up by intelligence analysts hunting an IRA sniping team operating along the border.
The man who served in the Irish Army is one of a number of men suspected of involvement in the deaths of four members of the security forces murdered in single shot attacks since last August.
And informed Ulster security sources say there is no evidence that the fatal shots have been fired by a specially trained marksman or mercenary brought in by the IRA or that only one or two men has carried out all the attacks.
One security source said: ‘Whether it is one man or two or even three, they have displayed a knowledge of rifle fire targeting.
‘But if you examine the shot range involved there has been no demonstration of exceptional marksmanship.’
The latest victim of the IRA's border sniping, lance corporal Lawrence Dickson, was hit from a distance of just 200 metres, while it is estimated private Paul Turner, killed in Crossmaglen last August, was hit from just 125 metres.
One former soldier explained: ‘A Royal Marine is required to strike a target from over 900 metres to achieve his marksmanship standard.
‘Even 500 metres distance is no more than a good shot, it isn't marksman or sniper qualification.’
But it is acknowledged in security circles that whoever fired the shots that killed the two soldiers and constables Alan Corbett in Belcoo, Fermanagh, and Jonathan Reid in Crossmaglen last month, has received army training in handling firearms and is a cool operator.
A Barrett Light Fifty rifle, which fires a huge armour-piercing half inch diameter shell, has been used in one and possibly two of the attacks as Sunday Life first revealed last year.
But it remains unclear what type of rifle was used in the two most recent murders in Forkhill and Crossmaglen.
The RUC and Army Press Office say they cannot confirm reports circulating within the security forces that single 7.62 shells were found after both attacks.
The 7.62 round is used in American and European bolt action hunting rifles which are regarded as more suitable for sniper attacks than the AK47 assault rifle which fires a similar round.
Security and nationalist sources discount the suggestion of an American or other foreign national acting as a mercenary paid by the IRA for each fatal attack on the security forces.
Norman leaves Ulster out in the cold
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont will cold-shoulder Northern Ireland when he delivers aid to poorer families hit by VAT on home heating.
Treasury insiders insist there will be no special deal for Ulster, Scotland and the North of England where colder weather means higher fuel bills.
And in any case the cash payments are set to be in pennies rather than pounds.
The Government last week avoided a Tory revolt over Mr Lamont's budget eight percent tax on domestic fuel to be introduced next year.
Ministers pledged extra help for up to ten million needy pensioners and families over and above inflation-linked benefits.
But a top source said that the cost of the new benefits package, to be unveiled next November, would be ‘nowhere near’ the £800m estimate circulating in Westminster.
And it would be probably less than £500m which means less than £1 a week for the average family on income-related benefits.
Yet their fuel bills will rise by an average of £2 a week and more in the colder areas.
Mr Lamont is determined that any payments will be spread equally across the UK and there will be no sliding scale for colder regions.
BLOOMIN' DAFT!
Gardener told to dig up ‘danger flowers’
ENVIRONMENT chiefs told an Ulsterman to dig up his roadside garden — because his daffodils were a ‘hazard’ to drivers.
The dazzling display of blooms took 18 months hard work to create and cost Newtownabbey man Edward Cooke £500.
But now spoil-sport officials in the Roads Service have ordered him to remove them, claiming they could cause an accident.
The Glengomley father of three transformed a wilderness beside his home at Mill Grange into a delightful flower bed.
Neighbours and passers-by poured compliments on his handiwork, and even the local council's parks department were impressed.
But Edward was stunned last week to receive an abrupt letter from the DoE accusing him of ‘damaging’ their land and threatening to take him to court.
Lands officers in the Road Service division objected because they claimed the one foot high flower beds could restrict a driver's vision.
The letter claimed Edward's daffodils ‘impeded the visibility splays’ on the carriageway.
It ordered Edward to destroy what he has laboured so hard to create, and restore the narrow strip of land to its original condition within 28 days and close a gateway onto the road.
‘This is blooming daft,’ said a gob-smacked Edward last week.
‘I have spent over £500 in shrubs plants and bulbs, and put in a great deal of time collecting rocks and weeding and feeding the plants’.
Edward insisted: ‘They have accused me of damaging land owned by the DoE, but in fact I have improved it.
‘Everybody who has seen it has admired it.
It gives a great deal of pleasure of motorists and passers-by.
‘There's no way these daffodils could possibly restrict a driver's vision — unless he was six inches high.
The idea is nonsense.’
A DoE spokeswoman said the land had been acquired to improve sight distance on the road, which was due to be widened in the near future.
However she said the Department would not insist on the flowerbeds being removed.
‘We have no objection to low planting,’ she said.
Bell tolls for rural schools
THE last hope has gone for the eight small rural schools facing closure in the south of the province.
It was reported this week that the Southern Education Board could not afford to transfer the children elsewhere.
But a spokesman for the board said they could no longer afford the costs of the small schools and the transfer charges were the lesser of the two.
The schools affected are — Ahorey (Portadown), Kinnego (Loughgall), Ballykeel, Shin, Donaghamore (All Newry), Tullyhogue (Cookstown), Mullycar (Dungannon) and Ballinderry (Magherafelt).
Youth on bag snatch charge
AN 18-year-old Belfast youth has been remanded in custody charged with attempting to snatch a woman's purse in a telephone box on Belfast's Lisburn Road on Friday night.
Unemployed Mark Tate from Tavanagh Street was alleged to have used a hammer in the attempted robbery.
He had ‘nothing to say’ when arrested and is to appear in court again in Belfast on April 16.
Police gun in arms haul
ONE of the guns found in West Belfast recently had been stolen from a police inspector in 1988.
The Ruger pistol was part of a haul of guns and ammunition discovered in Queensland Street off the Shankill Road on February 18.
The gun had been taken from the RUC officer in Dundonald in 1988.
It has not been used since.
The haul seized in Queensland Street included a home-made sub-machine-gun, a scanner, 140 rounds of assorted ammunition, boiler-suits, gloves and Balaclavas.
Royal recipe for relaxation
PRINCESS Diana has revealed the secret of how she keeps smiling despite the break-up of her marriage to Prince Charles.
She calms her shattered nerves with the music of top Co Donegal-born singing star Enya.
Di revealed her recipe for relaxation when she met Enya in London recently.
It was their second get-together, and the two have now become firm friends.
The Princess discussed Enya's music with her in detail, and told her that she is a big fan.
‘At their first meeting together, Enya was pleasantly surprised to discover that Princess Diana just loves her music,’ said a source close to Enya.
‘She not only knew of her big hits, but also about lots of other numbers on her various albums.
‘She had a very detailed knowledge of Enya's music, and it was obvious that she plays it a lot.’
The source added: ‘Di told Enya that she is her number one fan, and they have since met again and have now become quite good friends.’
It was also revealed yesterday that Enya has now become the biggest-selling international star in Spain.
She is already a megastar in Japan, where she makes frequent visits for personal and TV appearances.
RAIN affecting parts of the southeast will die out well before midday.
Then all areas will have prolonged periods of sunshine.
A few showers are likely along the North Coast and in the far West of Tyrone and Fermanagh.
The temperature will rise to a maximum of about nine degrees Celsius, about normal for the time of year.
Rainfall probabilities: Belfast — light rain, 20pc; heavy rain, nil.
Londonderry — light rain, 10pc; heavy rain, nil.
TONIGHT: With almost clear skies and very little wind, the temperature will fall sharply this evening.
Ground frost will become widespread before the arrival of occasional showers later in the night.
There is a risk of icy patches forming on some roads towards the morning.
The lowest air temperature will be only one or two degrees above freezing point.
UFF in ruthless gun attack
‘KILL ANYBODY IN THE HOUSE’
LOYALIST gunmen were ordered to kill anyone who happened to be in a particular house attacked in Belfast last week.
The gun attack in which around 20 high velocity shots were fired was in retaliation for an IRA gun attack a fortnight ago in the Shankill area, according to loyalist sources.
A pet dog was killed in the Oldpark attack carried out by the outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters shortly before midnight on St Patrick's night.
The house in Jamaica Street was targeted because the address was given in court when a man appeared on a charge connected with an attack on two loyalists in Berlin Street.
And loyalist sources on the Shankill say the intention was to kill anyone who happened to be there.
The ruthless scenario was outlined by one hardline loyalist figure last week.
The man, who is known to police as a leading paramilitary figure, said future IRA attacks on the Shankill would be matched on a scale similar to the Jamaica Street incident.
‘There is real anger on the Shankill Road and IRA gun attacks here and bombings where loyalists homes are destroyed will be avenged,’ the man added.
And while loyalists claim their movements are more restricted by the security force presence on the Shankill, the Jamaica Street shooting and the attack on the Orient Bar prove that ‘total security’ is impossible.
One senior RUC officer said: ‘We are putting a lot of effort into stopping these gunmen on both sides from moving out of their areas and killing.
‘The loyalists got out to Jamaica Street and launched a major attack.
The threat from the UFF is a very grave one at the moment.’
Parish unites after blaze horror
CHURCH RISES OUT OF ASHES
FOUR years after it was burned it to the ground in a disastrous fire, a Catholic church is rising from the ashes.
The blaze that destroyed St Colmcille's Parish Church in Holywood left the 125 year old building a charred ruin.
Only the spire of the church could be saved, and today it stands as a stark reminder of that devastating night in August 1989.
But the Scrabo stone that was salvaged from the fire is to be re-used to face the new free standing church that is being built alongside the tower.
The new building, which is expected to cost £1.25m, will double St Colmcille's seating capacity to 550.
‘We have tried to strike a balance between replacing what was there originally while looking to the future,’ said curate, Fr Anthony O'Connor.
‘The original walls were so badly damaged they could not be saved and had to be pulled down because the stone had become non load-bearing.
‘However after a great deal of consultation with the Historical Monuments Commission and Planning Department, we decided to use it to face the new church, harmonising the old with the new.
‘While we want to preserve the best of the past, we do not want to build a monument to it.’
While the Scrabo stone facing and new stained glass windows will ensure the new church blends in to its surroundings, the interior design will be ultra modern.
‘A lot of thought and planning has gone into this project,’ said Fr O'Connor.
‘A lot of people in Holywood have an affinity with the church and I'm delighted to say the entire community has been very supportive.’
Restoration work on the spire is now almost completed, and preparatory ground work has begun on construction of the new church, which is expected to be completed by autumn 1995.
Secrets of arms dump to surface
IRA chiefs desperate bid to stem leaks to police
SPYCATCHER TRAP FOR TERROR TOUTS
THE IRA's top ‘spycatcher’ has been sent to North Belfast in a desperate bid to halt the flow of top grade information going to the RUC, according to leading Republicans in the city.
IRA ‘tout trackers’ believe the security forces have infiltrated their organisation in the New Lodge and Ardoyne areas and that a well placed mole is feeding them the names of IRA operatives and the location of ‘safe houses’.
Republicans believe that intelligence passed on by the RUC special branch insider led to the arrest of several of their members recently on serious criminal charges.
Now the boss of the provisionals' counter intelligence department nicknamed ‘the headhunters’ has called a temporary halt to operations in North Belfast until the leak can be stemmed.
However according to one Sinn Fein member recent RUC successes have sent shock waves through the IRA and could result in the murder of informers in this part of the city.
‘The IRA are sure that somebody in the organisation is talking and it's really put the wind up some people.
They usually shoot people who do this,’ he said.
Security force infiltration of the IRA has reached such alarming proportions that Sinn Fein have launched a major drive to stop people giving information to the police.
The organisation is to give out 100,000 anti-informer leaflets in nationalist areas of Northern Ireland warning people to stay away from the RUC stating such a move, ‘could save a life, including your own’.
HAPPY COUPLE: Cathy Hall and Alan O'Connor
All is revealed!
Millions have wondered what a Scotsman wears under his kilt.
On St. Patrick's Day we found out =.
nothing!
The secret was revealed at the wedding reception of Cathy Hall (24), and Alan O'Connor (36) at the Culloden Hotel, Cultra.
Best man John Penticost from Falkirk showed more than he expected when groom Alan hoisted his kilt to reveal all.
It happened as bride Cathy and her sister Andree from Holywood were going for some official pictures for their album.
Cathy is the daughter of local Magistrate Harry Hall and the wedding party all saw the funny side of it.
Double take
A Co Armagh shop was robbed of £25,000 worth of goods this week — days after a copy-cat-raid at the same shop failed.
Kenny Anderson of Furnitureland in Portadown said he advised the police of the first raid.
This time, thieves succeeded in getting away with goods in the firm's van, which was found abandoned at Templepatrick.
AIDS DOC PATIENTS FEAR DEADLY LEGACY
WORRIED health chiefs are trawling through hundreds of medical records trying to track down Ulster patients treated by a doctor who died of AIDS.
Staff at South Tyrone Hospital are now combing through all their patients' files over a three year period between 1988 and 1990.
They want to identify every patient who was operated on by Dr Yarub Almahawi in Dungannon before he was diagnosed HIV positive in February 1990.
The Southern Health Board says the painstaking search is necessary to track down every patient who underwent invasive surgery by the junior houseman, who assisted at dozens of operations.
‘It is a big job, but we want to contact every single patient,’ said a Board spokesman.
‘Every one will be offered individual counselling.’
The spokesman stressed that the risk to former patients at South Tyrone Hospital was ‘minimal’.
‘He was only a very junior doctor and the risk of infection is negligible.
But we want to reassure all our former patients that they are not in any danger.’
He added: ‘But if they want an AIDS test they can have one.’
While the Board believes its patients were not put in jeopardy by the HIV doctor, his many sexual partners — both male and female — could be in real danger.
Dr Almahawi's bisexuality was an open secret in gay circles around Dungannon, but was not known to the many women, including several nurses, with whom he slept.
A Board spokesman admitted it would be virtually impossible to track down all the Iraqi's sexual partners.
A special freephone advice line was opened up last Tuesday and was swamped by hundreds of callers.
It is understood both men and women friends of the bisexual Iraqi have contacted the advice line.
£500 sock shocker!
A BELFAST housewife really put her foot in it when she decided to clear out her husband's old socks.
For dumped along with several worn and odd socks was £500 he had hidden in the foot of one pair!
The man's wife had wasted no time going through his closets picking up worn and odd pairs.
Then after filling a plastic bag she popped the lot in the bin.
But when her hubby heard of her endeavours he hotfooted it upstairs only to discover that the sock where he had hidden £500 was gone.
And worse still the binman had also been and gone.
The couple, who live in the north of the city, were too embarrassed to talk about the missing nestegg.
But a neighbour told us last night: ‘It's the talk of the estate.
‘I think relations were strained to the limit for a few days.
‘It was a very expensive clear-out and must have come as quite a shock when the penny dropped.
‘Men do put money in some funny places — particularly when they don't want their wives to know about it.’
Game-for-a-laugh Heather Murray came clean when she contacted Sunday Life last week to solve the mystery.
‘Although you didn't mention any names last week I knew it had to be me,’ said Heather.
Heather hit the headlines last week when we revealed she had dumped several pairs of her husband's old socks, only to learn later he had hidden £500 in the sole of one.
But that was not the first time her husband's penchant for hiding cash had nearly cost her dearly.
‘I gave away a Moses basket to my sister-in-law without realising he had planked £1,000 under the mattress.
‘Luckily, as it was a relative, the money was returned and we can see the funny side of it.
‘But I'm afraid it seems the sock money has gone for good.
It was £500 in one pounds notes which was given to my husband in exchange for a car.
‘I think it's probably just rat food on the council tip by now!’
Heather puts the loss of the money down to pure bad luck.
‘My husband got about seven new pairs of socks for Christmas.
I decided to have a clear out and throw out the same number of old pairs.
‘There must have been about 30 pairs in the drawer but I just happened to pick the one with the money.
Alarm bells ring in Street drama
Taking the wraps off dear Diana
BARING ALL IN ROYAL ADULATION
TO SOMEONE who has, in the past, had her intelligence insulted by experts, it presented no problem at all, last week, to respond to two programme makers with a sceptical, ‘Pull the other one, dear, it plays The Bells Of St Mary's.’
Thus, on Sunday, I hooted in disbelief when A Year In Provence focused on the natives' preoccupation with hunting a local, woodland fungus which sells for £100 a pound.
Peter Mayle, the sophisticated advertising executive, you will recall, had already emigrated to the South of France without bothering to learn the language, research the climate or check the plumbing.
In episode three, the script required this seasoned gourmet to turn to his wife with the wide-eyed enquiry: ‘Annie, what exactly IS a truffle?’ before scampering to open a reference book on the kitchen table so that the camera could zoom in on the illustration.
This was a sort of Blue Peter for the gastronomically challenged for the clumsy truth is, of course, that either Mr Mayle or the adaptor of his book feared that WE wouldn't recognise a truffle if it crawled up our trouser leg.
The resulting pains to enlighten us were, to say the least, patronising.
Similarly, I found it hard to believe that Neil Morrissey, as Danny in the Comedy Playhouse pilot Stuck On You, was a sports journalist when he seemed able to fulfil all his professional obligations without leaving his flat.
Television critic, I am here to tell you, is the only job in journalism I know which obviates the need to ever get out of bed.
Stuck On You, though, proved the most promising bet so far, in this procession of eight sitcom try-outs.
Elsewhere, in Coronation Street Catherine Cusack is presently giving her role as the nanny from hell some considerable welly, using it as a showcase for what promises to be her considerable talent.
I can't recall, before, having had to peep through my fingers at Coronation Street as I did on Wednesday when Carmel, at the end of a riveting confrontation with Gail, plummeted down the stairs.
THE Princess of Wales, in that famous photograph taken against the sun with a toddler on her hip, was, of course, the girl who put the Di in diaphanous.
So why on earth she objected to the brief and fairly innocuous cartoons which portrayed her as scantily clad in Tuesday's Without Walls, is beyond me.
For the rest of the programme was sheer hagiography.
Subtitled Diana Unclothed, it compared her to the Lady of Shallott, Greta Garbo, Sleeping Beauty and Mother Theresa.
Chief gusher was American author, Camille Paglia, who described her as ‘one of the most complex personalities of the 20th century.’
This premium blonde, we were told, ‘floats in a realm of her own consciousness’, whatever that means.
There's little doubt that where public relations is concerned this Lady of Shallott surely knows her onions and if I were she, I would sue Channel 4 over one of Ms Paglia's implications.
She maintained that: ‘What appears to be passivity in the Sleeping Beauty motif is, in fact, a representation of woman's auto-eroticism.’
Did she really mean us to infer, I wonder, that Her Royal Highness indulges in a certain filthy habit which, one feels sure, would never be adopted by Mother Theresa?
Dream come true as music girl lands leading role in new film
KARA ‘S A STAR
BY STEPHEN GORDON
AN 11-year-old Ulster girl who has never acted before has landed the starring role in a new £500,000 film.
It's a dream come true for little Kara Bowman from Toomebridge who beat 250 other hopefuls for the lead in a BBC drama to be screened UK-wide this summer.
Other more experienced young actresses were auditioned but the part is tailor-made for Kara, the UK accordion champion at her age group.
The comedy drama, called Henri, is about the adventures of a brilliant young accordion player from a small rural town who wins a place at a Belfast music school.
‘Hugh Wilkinson, who owns the music shop in Cullybackey where I got my accordion, suggested I try for the part,’ said Kara.
‘But I didn't really think I had a chance because I haven't acted before,’ she said.
Friends at Groggan Primary School have been teasing her about how much she will earn and are envious that she will be off school for four or five weeks.
Having a Saturday off is also important because mid-way through filming Kara and her band, the Killycoogan Accordion Band, head to Scarborough to defend their UK titles.
Director Simon Shore reckons Kara's a natural.
‘There were never any doubts about her musical ability.
The question was — could she act?
‘With adults the process of acting is about the losing of inhibitions.
Children don't have as many inhibitions and for them acting is an innate ability.
‘So what you look for in a child is intelligence.
They have got to be able to understand what the script is about.
Kara is very intelligent.’
Filming in Belfast and in other parts of Ulster starts on April 12 and the first two weeks coincide with Kara's Easter holidays.
Henri will be shown this summer on BBC2's Screenplay series.
The producer is Colin Tucker (Poldark, Portrait of a Marriage).
Executive-producer is Robert Cooper (Truly, Madly, Deeply, Force of Duty).
Get on down at gigs
ANOTHER golden opportunity for local musos comes from M8 Magazine, who will be releasing a compilation tape featuring Northern Ireland bands with their May issue.
Meanwhile, Leatherface, who last played in Belfast in the somewhat dubious company of Loud, make a return visit to the Limelight on Tuesday.
Thankfully, this time they'll be headlining in their own right and given the success of their current single ‘Do The Right Thing’ they should be assured of a half-decent crowd.
I went to see the W.C.W. Wrestlers at the Kings Hall on Tuesday and it was…well, it was an experience.
Fans of Sting, Henry Van Hammer & Co get the chance to hear their heroes on my Downtown show tonight at 11 pm.
I'll also be hosting a phone-in on wrestling, is it a sham?
Is it for real?
Does it matter?
Dee-hee as Jack pulls up in city
JACK Dee had tried for a while to make people laugh with a totally put-on chirpy delivery.
He was so unsuccessful that he came close to packing it in until he allowed his gloomy demeanour to shine on stage.
The rest, as they say, is history.
Dee now has his own TV series and is one of Britain's most popular comics.
Given the current demand for comedy his visit here will no doubt be a sell-out.
Book your tickets now for the Ulster Hall on Monday 19th April.
MANIACS IN MEAN MOOD
THE Electric Light Orchestra gig in Ballymena Showgrounds is definitely on!
Despite claims by some that they play ‘The Devil's music’, the band has been able to confirm its gig on Friday 21st May.
A full supporting line up will be announced shortly and any local bands wishing to be considered can contact me.
‘We are the answer to the prayers of Northern Ireland's heavy metal fans!’
So says the modest Press release from local long haired weirdos Maniac (pictured left), formed by ex-members of Panic, Triple X and Emerald.
You can catch their live debut at Spud's, Portstewart on April 3rd, and if confidence equals ability, your're in for a cracker!
‘Talk Dirty To Me’, ‘Unskinny Bop’ and ‘Every Rose was its Thorn’are just a few of the hits enjoyed by modern day glam rockers Poison.
Although hardly challenging lyrically and far too glossy for most rock purists, they have to date sold 15 million albums worldwide.
Musical snobbery aside, their live show is a bit special.
We get our chance to see it in the Ulster Hall on Wednesday 14th April.
Just a reminder that Blues legend Chris Smither plays at The Rotterdam on Thursday.
Don't Miss!
TAURUS You are going to have to put your mind to solve problems at the moment.
Try to keep a balance between work and relaxation.
GEMINI You seem to have been concentrating more on group than individual efforts lately.
But express more of your own unique talents as well!
CANCER The past is something you can't just shake off.
Neither can do without some comfort and support in your life.
Address these issues now.
LEO Time spent with those close to you should be productive now.
And you may have some catching up to do.
Move ahead gradually!
VIRGO You really can't ignore what's happening with your personal finances.
You seem to be looking outside for a solution.
LIBRA You are not considered to be a selfish person by nature.
But it's obvious at the moment that you need to be more self centred.
SCORPIO It's a difficult time at the moment.
You need a lot of time to yourself in order to explore your dreams, rather than being pinned to the work place.
SAGITTARIUS You are into doing your own thing at the moment and exploring your own creativity.
But if you want to develop your talents further, get involved in a group effort.
CAPRICORN Issues to do with your career and reputation need to be addressed.
And the question of whose authority to follow looms large!
AQUARIUS You should really be aiming at new and exciting projects now!
You are making good local contracts, which should be making you feel prosperous.
PISCES Whether or not you are going to be able to fully exercise your ability to earn a high income is likely to be revealed this week!
Board appeals in minutes mystery
HEALTH Board officials in Belfast are trying to solve a hospital mystery.
Historic documents relating to the building of the Royal Victoria Hospital have gone missing.
Anyone with information on the whereabouts of the original minutes of the Construction Committee who built the hospital should contact the Office of Archives at the Royal.
TODAY: A dry start to the day with some hazy sunshine in eastern districts.
However, thicker cloud with outbreaks of rain will soon reach counties Fermanagh, Tyrone and Londonderry from the west.
As the morning progresses the rain will spread eastwards becoming persistent and locally heavy and will reach the eastern coastal districts of Antrim and Down by early afternoon.
Brighter showery weather will replace the rain in the west and by evening this brighter weather will be over all parts of Northern Ireland.
Rainfall probabilities: Belfast:— Light Rain 100 pc, Heavy Rain 30 pc.
Londonderry:— Light Rain 100 pc, Heavy Rain 30 pc.
TONIGHT: All counties will have clear spells and showers.
The showers fairly widespread at first, will tend to become confined to the western counties by the early hours of Monday.
Bin snatching on the increase
THE RUC has warned Ulster householders to beware of phantom bin snatchers!
Police have recently been receiving an increasing number of calls from householders reporting the theft of ‘wheelie bins’.
It costs around £40 for a replacement bin and police say tenants should take steps to make sure theirs is easily identified.
A TREASURED memory of his good friend Benny Hill is a fax Frank Carson sent to the star three days before his death.
‘I sent him a message saying ‘Get well soon.
From your Irish uncle.
PS Send on the list of your TV dates you can't do’.
‘I was told by others that Benny really laughed when he got that fax.
He was a brilliant man.
‘Benny Hill, Frankie Howerd and Tommy Cooper were the last great characters in this business.
There are very few characters left now.’
Among the highlights of his showbiz career Frank lists working with stars like Spike Milligan, Ben Kingsley, Michael Crawford and Howard Keel.
And spotting talent — like Jim Bowen, the Bachelors, Roger Whittaker, Adrian Walsh and Rose Marie — is another satisfying aspect of four decades in the entertainment world.
‘Helping others get a start has made it all worthwhile,’ he added.
WE ARE NOT AMUSED
American TV coup for Ulster guitar firm
AN ULSTER-made guitar is being used in an advertisement promoting a slimming food on networked American television!
The Lowden guitar, which is made in Newtownards, is played by top US country star Ricky Scaggs, in an advertisement for Nutra Systems, a slimming aid.
The ad appears on all major channels, giving it an audience of millions.
It is a major publicity coup for the Ulster company, which sells its hand-made guitars all over the world.
Top star Scaggs has been playing a Lowden since last year, when it was introduced to him after a concert and he was so taken by it, that he has now persuaded fellow stars Glenn Campbell and Charlie Daniels to buy them as well.
Shirley Lorimer of Lowdens says: ‘He invited all his friends round for a party and Glenn and Charlie were so enthralled with the Lowden guitars that they bought one each.
‘Ricky Scaggs very much believes in our guitars and he now owns two.
‘We are very pleased about this as it opens up the entire country music market for us.
‘The TV ad is excellent and gives us a massive target audience who can see and hear a top class guitar.’
Scaggs and his country friends join a long line of top performers who are Lowden fans — Bob Dylan, James Taylor, Van Morrison, Elvis Costello, Mark Knopfler, Andrew Strong and Paul Brady.
Another boost for the Newtownards firm was revealed last week — all the acoustic guitars on the Hothouse Flowers' new album, Songs From the Rain, which is currently riding high at No 7 in the charts — are exclusively Lowden!
Ireland's stars of the Guinness Book of Records
IT'S a crazy, crazy world and there are few places crazier than Ireland.
From record pancake tossers and bubblegum blowers to an Ulster woman who was still working at 107 — they all get a mention in the book that is second only to the Bible in the best sellers list.
SUNDAY LIFE has been looking at some of the Irish people and places which get a mention in the 1993 edition of the Guinness Book of Records.
And some records are more wacky than others.
For example there's Vincent Pilkington of Cootehill, Co Cavan, who killed and plucked 100 turkeys in 7hr 32min in 1978 to set a bizarre record.
At 60 years old, French heart-throb Sacha Distel is taking singing lessons
TEACHING AN OLD FROG NEW TRICKS
Singing Sacha's star facts
WHEN it comes to eternal youth Cliff Richards just isn't in the frame.
The real star from the showbiz academy for Peter Pans of Pop is vintage French heart-throb Sacha Distel.
Suave and sophisticated at 60, it's hard to believe that it's 23 years since he first wooed a generation with Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head.
And, he says, he's still taking singing lessons.
Sacha reveals: ‘It was only a year ago that I found somebody to teach me how to sing.
I am self-taught — I discovered everything by listening.
‘I met thousands of people who pretended they could teach me how to do it.
But it didn't work, I was not progressing enough.
‘Then I met this American in Paris called Skyler Hamilton who Pavarotti calls for help when he has a singing problem.
‘I went to meet him and he took me on — now I go for lessons twice a week.’
He says the expert tuition has enabled him to reach new notes — and opened up a whole new repertoire.
‘On my tour I'm going to sing My Funny Valentine and Some Enchanted Evening — songs which I would never have tackled before.
‘Now when I do a routine I feel so proud.
It's like being born again it's a lovely feeling.
I think artistically I'm probably in better form than I ever was.’
His eldest son Laurent is 28 — yet the singing star could by mistaken for an older brother.
The only snag in his life is everybody expects him to live up to his heart-throb image.
His women fans still remember he had an affair with screen goddess Brigitte Bardot before he met and fell in love with Olympic skier Francine Bound.
Even after 30 years of marriage to Francine, Sacha says he still finds the heart-throb label difficult to live with.
He explains: ‘It sticks like glue but it is better than being Frankenstein — I'm not really complaining.’
And Sacha says his marriage has survived because his wife has no time for the hype.
He says: ‘Francine is not interested in show business at all.
I respect that, I don't expect her to follow me all over the place and be knitting until the show has finished.
‘She loves going off on adventures, like trekking in Nepal or somewhere.’
He adds: ‘We trust each other an awful lot.
But after 30 years we are getting used to the idea that we might finish our lives together.’
Sacha was a victim of skin cancer early in his career and suffered from cancer of the thyroid in 1971.
He kept his secret even from his closest friends and checked into a clinic for an operation under an assumed name.
But it was Francine's devotion which saw him through.
‘I realised that I needed someone strong who was next to me and she is it,’ says Sacha.
And Sacha says that staying close to his two sons Laurent, 28, and 25-year-old Julien helps him stay young.
He explains: My boys are grown up — or they think they are.
They don't drink, they don't smoke, they don't take drugs and they like women.
What more can I ask for?
‘They both love sport and have no time for show business — except sometimes they like to come and hear me sing.
‘They are not married yet — although they have steady girlfriends — and there are no grandchildren.’
Sacha says he has put the traumas in his life firmly in the past.
‘Raindrops had to fall on my head for real like everybody else — I don't really wish to talk about those things, now we are over it.
‘My job is to go on stage and make people forget about their problems — I don't want to tell them about mine.’
Dementia help
READERS who care for a dementia sufferer may like to know that Counsel & Care has just published a fact sheet which could be of considerable help to them.
Contrary to the widely believed myth, dementia can strike people of any age and is not confined to older people.
It affects the ability to remember, hear, think and reason.
The fact sheet describes the mental conditions that categorise dementia, provides advice for carers and relatives, and what to do if care at home is no longer possible.
If any reader would like a copy, write to the address below enclosing a 9 X 6 stamped addressed envelope (18 or 24p).
Maureen Jackson, Dementia Fact Sheet 17, Department D, Counsel & Care, 16 Bonny Street, London NW1 9PG.
Great Irish hope
Engine Alley firing on all cylinders
LIVING up to great expectations shouldn't be a problem for Engine Alley.
The young Dubliners are the latest Irish band to threaten a major breakthrough outside these shores.
They recently decamped to London to launch a concerted assault on the British market.
Armed with an excellent debut album, ‘A Sonic Holiday’(due for UK release soon), a sense of humour, a glam image and just a trace of youthful cockiness, this is a band to watch.
They've already cleaned up in consecutive Hot Press polls, winning the ‘most promising act’ category last year, and ‘best Irish album’this year.
Expect the UK to succumb in the same way, then watch the band set their sights on America.
Singer Canice Kenealy says: ‘Now is the right time for us to move to London.
‘There is only so much you can do in Dublin.
We felt we had done all we could there for the moment and didn't want to get lazy.
‘In a way it's like going back to square one, and starting from scratch again, but it's what we have to do.’
Canice and older brother Brian (guitars) formed the band in 1989, hooking up with bass player Eamonn Byrne and ‘one man orchestra’ Kenneth Rice.
The line up was completed when drummer Emmaline Duffy-Fallon was recruited through an ad.
A handful of thundering live shows, demos, radio and TV sessions later and they had a deal with U2's Mother Records.
They take their name from a street in Dublin's Liberties district, yet their most appealing trait is their un-Irishness.
Their sharp, spiky pop songs, peopled with all sorts of weird and wonderful characters, are a breath of fresh air, and a world away from the usual guitar heavy U2ish or folksy influenced Irish offerings.
But most impressive is the band's clear headed realism about where they're going and what they're doing.
Canice added: ‘I don't see us staying together for ten or 15 years — we all want to do different things.
‘But we do want to leave a legacy, and that means recording five really good albums.
‘Records are the most important thing, the only things that are going to survive when we're gone.’
Adventures — luscious harmonies.
Echoes of classic 60s pop
THE ADVENTURES — Lions And Tigers And Bears (Polydor): Who says they don't make records like they used to?
Our very own Adventures deal in all the things that seemed to go AWOL in the late 80s — luscious harmonies, strong guitar driven songs with big big choruses, all topped with strong echoes of classic 60s pop.
This is their most consistent offering to date and ‘Marianne’ would make a great single.
But so would three or four other songs — here's hoping they're not too good for the charts.
RADIOHEAD — Pablo Honey (Parlophone): At last!
A new British guitar band able to compete with the Yanks on their terms.
Radiohead, from Oxford, are like a supercharged version of the House of Love, whipping up a storm then slowing things down, often in the same song (the brilliant ‘Blow Up’ and ‘Stop Whispering’).
Essential.
FRANK BLACK — Frank Black (4AD): Better known as Black Francis of the Pixies, this is an intriguing solo debut.
As you'd expect strong traces of the surging Pixies sound remain, but they're delivered with a more melodic, playful edge, almost as if splitting up the band has allowed the real Black to emerge.
SUPERCHUNK — On The Mouth (City Slang): Superchunk check in somewhere between the Pixies and the Buzzcocks with a bit of grunge topping.
Some of the material goes nowhere fast, but when the quality of the songs matches the intensity of the playing —‘Precision Auto’ for example— this is very good indeed.
VAN MORRISON — Best Of Volume Two (Polydor): I'm no Morrison fan, but even I know this is a duff collection.
Disregarding a couple of old Them tracks, this is culled from the mid to late 80s, meaning lots of dreamy atmosphere but next to nothing in the way of great songs.
LINEN MIX WON'T CREASE YOU UP!
As pure as pure can be
LINEN worries people.
They know it must be wonderful to wear but panic about creases and clothes looking crumpled.
Worries can be forgotten this season, as long as a few simple guidelines are followed.
The best pure linen, which will always looks good, is going to be expensive, but new linen mixes are much easier on the eye and the pocket.
The Irish Linen Guild, usually associated with household linens but also with a strong, innovative clothing section, is working on ways to help consumers understand how to get the best out of linen.
‘Linen is very popular today and it seems certain that trend will remain for years’, says the Guild's spokeswoman Rita Vail.
‘One reason is that linen is an ecologically sound product and nothing is wasted from the plant.
‘If worn unbleached, it's pure as pure can be!
‘Linen is very comfortable to wear.
It absorbs up to a fifth of its dry weight of water without feeling damp, she says.
Blends are also popular in natural colours like white and beige.
Linen and silk seems to be a winner, blending two fibres to produce garments which are luxurious to the touch and have a subtle sheen.
Not quite so easily found just yet, but proving popular, are linen-Lycra mixes, often in knitwear rather than woven fabrics.
Rita Vail explains: ‘They overcome the creasing problem and introduce people gently to the luxury of pure linen.
If you are shy of creasing clothes, wear a pure linen jacket with a linen blend skirt.
‘Wear a long flowing linen dress rather than a short straight one that will show creases.’
Caring for linen is really simple.
It's the strongest natural fabric and can stand very high temperatures and be machine washed.
Linen dries quickly and should be ironed while still quite damp, first on the wrong side to remove creases, then on the right side to enhance its natural sheen.
TREAT YOUR MUM
Passion Fruit Mousse
5 egg yolks
5 egg whites beaten, lemoned and sweetened
half pint cream
half glass white wine
1 large spoonful sugar, plus 200g sugar
2 leaves of gelatine
half ping passion fruit puree
Method:
1
Put egg yolks, wine and sugar in saucepan and heat over very low heat until thick and creamy.
2
Place warm mixture in mixer and beat until it is cold.
3
Soak gelatine in cold water.
4
Heat passion fruit juice in a pot and add gelatine.
5
Add passion fruit mixture to egg and wine mixture.
Leave in cool place to set.
6
Whisk cream with 200g sugar and add to mixture which should be starting to set.
7
Fold the whipped egg whites gently into the mousse.
8
Place in fridge for 3 hours to set.
Grilled Fillet of Salmon with a Saffron Sauce
Half bottle dry white wine
half chopped onion
1 pint cream
6 ozs butter
2 packets saffron
8 fillets of salmon
Method:—
1
Bring the wine with the onions to the boil and reduce by half.
2
Remove onions and add cream and saffron.
Bring to boil and reduce by half.
3
Take saucepan off heat and add butter a little at a time while stirring the sauce.
4
Butter a baking tray and lay out the seasoned salmon.
5
Bake in oven at 200c or gas mark 7 for 12 minutes.
6
Spread sauce evenly over the plate.
Add salmon.
7
Serve with fresh asparagus or broccoli for colour contrast.
Salad with Marinated Beef in a Honey and Thyme Dressing
1.5lbs strips of beef fillet
Variety of lettuces
half chopped onion
1 clove chopped garlic
1 pint olive oil
1 Port glass tarragon vinegar
1 fresh thyme
2 spoons honey
salt and pepper
Method
1
Mix all ingredients together into a dressing.
2
Add strips of beef and leave to marinate for 24 hours.
3
Fry off the beef in its own marinade.
4
Toss salad in dressing and place on plate.
5
Add beef strips.
Decorate with cherry tomatoes and thyme.
TODAY families all over Northern Ireland celebrate Mother's Day.
But making a fuss of Mum shouldn't be restricted to just one day of the year!
That's why we've asked a top local chef to provide a special menu so that you can host a family celebration fit for the table of any top restaurant:
LE Restaurant Sante is one of only a handful of Ulster inclusions in the just published 1993 Guide to ‘The 100 Best Restaurants in Ireland’.
The Holywood restaurant is run and owned by Dutch chef, Bartjan Brave, who set up home in Northern Ireland eight years ago.
He worked in a number of Michelin-star kitchens in Amsterdam and also trained as a teacher before leaving his native land — knowledge he now puts to good use in local schools.
‘My enthusiasm for my cooking spills over into the restaurant,’ he said.
‘I like to go out among the diners and discuss the menu with them.
I encourage them to be more adventurous.’
And in keeping with that philosophy, Sante offers a ‘Surprise Menu’(£20.95) to complement their three course table d'hote(£19.95).
As a special Mother's Day treat, Bartjan is revealing his secret recipes for a delicious three-course meal to serve eight people:
Weekly papers cannot bear the burden
FIRST published last September, the Down Democrat represents a success story in weekly newspaper terms.
Set up with the expertise of committed, professional staff, the Democrat's weekly sales of over 9,000 makes it one of the fastest growing weekly papers in the British Isles.
Weekly and community-based papers have an extremely important role to play in society.
They act as a counter balance to the national and global news conveyed by the major publishing empires.
Chancellor Lamont's Tuesday Budget will put at risk many hundreds of small weekly newspapers across the United Kingdom.
His proposed implementation of VAT on the published word is much more than a tax on learning.
It strikes at the very fundamentals of a free press, by placing a cost barrier on access to information.
In one broad sweep many thousands of jobs in direct and indirect labour will be put in jeopardy, with an estimated 300 weekly and community papers facing the bleak prospect of closure.
Newspapers in Britain represent the best value in Europe.
We have a population which has benefited from being able to tap into a wide and diverse range of information through the printed word.
From Tuesday weekly newspapers may be left with a burden which, sadly, many will be unable to carry.
The net losers will be society as a whole.
Terry McLaughlin, a former deputy Editor of the Irish News, is one of four journalists behind the setting up of the Down Democrat.
Teen girls missing
POLICE in Craigavon are searching for two teenage girls who have been missing for five days.
Donna Nobbs, 13, and her chum Dympna Dynes, 16, vanished from the Burnside estate on Tuesday.
Donna, who is 5ft 3in tall with short black hair and glasses, was on crutches at the time and may be limping.
She was wearing blue jeans, a black coat and pink and white trainers.
Dympna Dynes is 5ft 5in tall, of slim build with dirty fair hair and was wearing light blue jeans, blue T-shirt black jacket and DM boots.
Anyone who has seen them or knows their whereabouts is asked to contact detectives at Craigavon 325144.
They defied IRA death threats and continued to refurbish and rebuild bombed security bases.
No amount of wages would pay you for doing such dangerous work.
But every day hundreds of ordinary workers dice with death to complete these essential tasks.
The dramatic account of how one of them survived an IRA ‘barrack buster’ mortar blitz is printed exclusively in this newspaper today.
His description of how he watched helplessly as one of the deadly missiles thundered towards him makes chilling reading.
But, equally, his determination to see the job through to the end is typical of Ulster true grit in the face of naked terror.
‘I will never give up.
I won't let those bastards stop me,’ he declares.
This country is full of unsung heroes.
Thousands are in uniform but many are not.
So far 3045 men women and children have died at the hands of terrorists from both sides of the sectarian divide.
We owe it to them never to surrender this country to those whose motive for murder is your place of work.
And the spirit and courage of the men who continue to toil in the shadow of the gunman is one way of ensuring that will never happen.
Flower power
THIS week 300,000 silk daffodils go on sale in Northern Ireland.
They will cost £1 each and the cash will be used in the fight against a killer disease.
The Ulster Cancer Foundation is marking its silver anniversary by holding special Daffodil Days on Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
To date the foundation has sunk £5.5m into research projects.
It aims to donate another £2m in the next two years.
So buy a daffodil…and give a new meaning to flower power.
Two arrested
POLICE arrested two men in Dungannon last night after stopping a car on the Cookstown Road at around 7.45pm.
An RUC spokesperson said terrorist equipment was recovered from the car and a follow-up operation was being carried out.
Provo hit team targets loyalists
A SPECIAL hit-squad has been set up by the IRA to target top loyalists, according to the RUC.
The INLA has also revamped in the past two months and is posing a new threat in North Belfast, where 80 RUC officers have been drafted in to halt the escalating spiral of violence.
The latest victim Norman Truesdale, who was shot dead by the IRA in his shop in Century Street off the Oldpark Road on Wednesday night, was buried yesterday.
In a attempt to reduce sectarian attacks by the three known UFF units in the Shankill area, up to a dozen policemen have been instructed shadow top loyalist suspects round the clock.
By monitoring their movements 18 hours a day, stopping and searching their cars and raiding their homes, the RUC believe they have already cut down the number of attacks on Catholics in North Belfast.
NORM TARGETS SMOKERS
SMOKERS and motorists are set to be hit hardest in Norman Lamont's Tuesday Budget.
But drinkers will get off reasonably lightly, according to reliable Westminster sources.
The Chancellor needs to raise indirect taxes by over £2b to deliver a job-spinning statement.
Top target is likely to be cigarettes and extra tax could push the price up by between 12 and 15p a packet.
Such a clobbering would be sold to the public as part of a health and environmental package.
Petrol will increase by around 11p a gallon with annual road tax rising from £110 to £130.
Alcohol is expected to increase by the rate of inflation ‘plus a little bit more’.
That would suggest 25p on a bottle of spirits and 2p on a pint of beer.
Mr Lamont knows he must produce a confident up-beat budget if he is to avoid being sacked in the next Cabinet reshuffle.
Treasury insiders insist it will be a ‘neutral and cautious Budget’.
Some MPs expect Mr Lamont to widen the 20p income tax band introduced last year from the first £2,000 of earnings to £3,000.
That would take more low-paid workers out of the tax net and encourage more part-time work.
It could be paid for by a freeze on upper tax thresholds and personal allowances which would save the Treasury over £850m.
Other measures which Mr Lamont could unveil include:
Five percent VAT on gas, electricity and water adding £2 a week to average household bills
A similar VAT level for luxury foods and some up-market goods.
Bigger tax concessions to persuade the public to buy Government Bonds
And a new tax bonus to boost the film industry and encourage more movie-making throughout the UK.
No seat for McGimpsey
A CO Down businessman who played a key role in the inter-party talks at Stormont has failed to win a Unionist Party nomination to stand in East Belfast in May's local government elections.
But all is not yet lost for Michael McGimpsey, a 44-year-old building contractor, who may now seek nomination in another ward.
Mr McGimpsey had planned to stand in the seven-seat Victoria ward where the UUP holds three seats.
But the constituency association again endorsed two sitting members, former Lord Mayor Tommy Patton and Dr Ian Adamson.
The third sitting member, Alan Montgomery, made it clear that he would not be running, but Mr McGimpsey was squeezed out for one of the other two Unionist nominations.
Instead they went to East Belfast Unionist chairman Jim Rodgers and local businessman John Norris.
Mr McGimpsey, whose brother Chris will be standing as an Ulster Unionist candidate in the Court ward, admitted last night: ‘It is a bit of a blow.
‘But I have been approached to consider seeking a nomination in another ward and I am giving that some consideration.
‘The battle is not yet lost.’
The McGimpsey brothers hit the headlines when they took the Irish government to court over the Republic's constitutional claim to Northern Ireland.
They were hoping to create a little election history in Belfast, where brothers have never been elected to the city council at the same time.
Overdose boy still in intensive care
A DISTRAUGHT mother is keeping a bedside vigil on her teenage son who is in a critical condition after overdosing on a cocktail of illegal drugs.
The 18-year-old, from Dunmurry, collapsed last Saturday while on a night out with friends at a disco in Kelly's Hotel, Portrush.
He is in still in Intensive Care at Coleraine Hospital.
But the management of Kelly's have hit back at what they feel is unwarranted criticism.
A spokesperson for Kelly's alleged that a member of the club's staff who visited the teenager in hospital was told by his mother that she blamed the ‘pushers’ not Kelly's for her son's condition.
‘By lambasting Kelly's, people are attacking the symptoms not the root cause of the problem,’ a spokesperson for the public relations company representing Kelly's told Sunday Life.
‘We are deeply saddened by this terrible incident and the young man presently in hospital, and his family, have our sympathy’.
Kelly's management say they will continue with measures to eradicate drug abuse on the premises and that following the incident they would be stepping up their own security.
‘The problem of drug taking is on the increase and we have taken every precaution to prevent it’.
Kelly's claim there is little more they can do.
They already have 30 or more security staff on duty and anti-drug literature in the form of over 6,500 fliers calling for club goers to ‘Choose Life Not Drugs’.
‘We have ejected people in the past who were suspected of selling or taking drugs but you cannot expect our security staff to make arrests,’ said the spokesperson.
‘The onus is on the authorities to counteract this social problem which affects the whole province’.
Kelly's are also planning to increase their existing co-operation with the police and a further meeting is planned this week with Chief Inspector Alan Green of the RUC Drugs Squad.
‘Thousands of people pass through our doors every night and whilst we continue to do our best to combat the problem we cannot be held responsible for the actions and intentions of each individual’.
Pharmacist rapped over ‘miracle’ cure
A CO Fermanagh pharmacist believed he had found a breakthrough in the treatment of psoriasis — the skin disease highlighted in the Singing Detective.
He witnessed the success of Dermovate cream in one sufferer and even went to see a Harley Street physician.
When Kevin O'Reilly, who runs the only pharmacy in Ederney, returned to the province, he made up the product for one psoriasis victim.
Within two weeks the skin disease had cleared and Mr O'Reilly then began to retail the cream when word of its powers spread.
But a disciplinary hearing of the Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland was told he sold the product without a prescription.
A lawyer for the Society said Mr O'Reilly was guilty of professional misconduct because the cream, which contained the ‘very potent’ steroid Closbetason, was a prescription-only product.
It could only be given to a child in very mild doses because excessive use could cause ‘retard growth and lasting disfiguration’.
The Department of Health was alerted last year when it was revealed that the mother of one child, aged just two and a half, had made purchases without prescription from Mr O'Reilly's pharmacy.
An inspector said he believed 150 tubs of the cream were sold in Fermanagh and Tyrone without prescription over a five-month period ending April 1992.
A lawyer for Mr O'Reilly said the chemist had believed that by diluting the cream it removed the necessity for a prescription.
‘It was done with the best of motives.
It was a mistake made in the context of over-enthusiasm for a solution to what is a nasty condition for a number of people,’ he said.
The pharmacist saw it as a breakthrough and it was not done for personal profit, said the lawyer.
He added that Mr O'Reilly had been a pharmacist for 42 years and was ‘genuinely although misguidedly attempting to help people suffering from this terrible condition’.
Society chairman Tim Ferris said the product had been sold on a ‘repetitive basis and in not insignificant quantities.
‘The view of this committee is that this is a very serious matter.
There were serious risks to child users,’ he said.
But he added that while the committee considered striking Mr O'Reilly off the register, they had agreed to adjourn the hearing for six months.
‘We will review the matter at that stage’ he said, adding that ‘henceforth Mr O'Reilly will conduct his business within the rules and regulations and acquaint himself with these regulations.’
IRA car bomb raids costing Ulster £50m
THE COMPENSATION bill for the IRA's car bomb campaign over the past year is likely to top the £50m mark.
Last week's outrage in Bangor was the 10th major attack by bombers within 12 months, and the second in the seaside town.
Estimates for the latest attack put the cost of damage at nearly £2m.
Since a massive IRA bomb wrecked the centre of Lurgan on March 5 1992, the bombers have systematically targeted commercial targets, switching from Belfast city centre to outlying Ulster towns.
Already more than £8m has been paid out by the Compensation Agency, but claims totalling a further £38m are yet to be processed.
By far the most devastation was caused in Coleraine on October 30 last, when £14m damage was caused by a car bomb that left a swathe of the town centre in ruins.
Compensation for the cost of rebuilding damaged and destroyed property is only released when work begins, which explains the relatively small amounts paid compared to the estimated cost of damage.
Gardiner heads off to ban in good mood
CRUSADERS 1 TOWN 0
STRIKER Jim Gardiner is content to serve a two match ban after heading a couple of splendid goals yesterday which kept Crusaders still on target in their title chase.
Gardiner said: ‘I'll be happy to be back in time for the climax.’
Jim struck just before half-time for his first goal, and got his second three minutes from the finish.
Midfielder Michael Cash had put Crusaders ahead in the 19th minute.
But the Crues eased up alarmingly in the second-half to give an out-of-touch Newry side far too much room.
Roy McDonald, deputising for manager Roy Walker who was in Scotland on business, admitted: ‘It was a confident performance.
‘But we took the foot off the pedal in the second half, and with so much at stake that's not good enough.’
Newry only had a couple of first half chances, with big Barry Hunter cancelling out the first when he intercepted a Gary Hughes shot.
Newry manager Terry Nicholson said: ‘We would have been in the game with a better chance if we had taken the two chances that came our way early on.
‘But we just missed out, and Crusaders can't be feeling too happy.
Frankly, I thought their three goals were sloppy.’
But Crusaders played with confidence in the second half.
Newtownards referee Frank Hiles, who was handling only his third senior game of the season, did an expert job to keep play flowing.
He was on the mark with a double booking midway through the second half after a scuffle between Crusaders right back Dave Mallon and Newry's John White.
Crusaders made all the running, but it was surprising they didn't score more goals and improve their goal difference.
And with a possible place in Europe at stake, to say nothing about the title, even the slightest mistake in the closing stages could be costly.
Bangor Grammar School 19, Antrim Grammar School 0.
THE schools team needed to call on all their experience to fight off a spirited challenge the youth side at Templeville Road where they won 32–7.
The youth team, despite several late call-offs, put up a great performance especially in the second half when the schools needed two late tries to pull clear.
The schoolboys built up an early lead with first half tries from lock Owen Redmond, full-back John Ennis, scrum-half Brian O'Meara and wing forward Derek Suffern.
Centre Richard Governey was successful with one conversion.
The schools dominated in the loose and the youth side showed their inexperience at this type of play.
The youth team, all drawn from non-rugby playing schools, improved greatly after half-time and spent long periods pressing on the schools' line.
They had excellent players in top forward Alan Young and his Limavady clubmate hooker Robert McCarrigal.
Their extended pressure, however, only brought one try midway through the half from centre Richard Larkin.
Full-back Brian Roach kicked the conversion but was wide with several penalty attempts.
Methody winger Richard McCluskey showed great pace and balance running in for two late tries as the youth team tired.
After the game the Irish selectors named locks Robbie Powell (Kings Hospital), John Ryan (Blackrock College) and open side flanker Kieran Dawson (Bangor GS) to fill the vacancies on the A team to play Wales in Ebbw Vale on April 3.
Ards make Dungannon work hard
ARDS 3 DUNGANNON 32
CUP favourites Dungannon got a harder battle than they might have expected at Ards.
Ards haven't had their sorrows to seek this season, but they went out to enjoy themselves against Ulster's big guns.
Dungannon may have been disjointed at times, and this isn't a performance they will remember, but even an off colour display was more than good enough to keep their Cup hopes alive.
They had the match sewn up by half-time.
Ronnie Carey made the breakthrough on 16 minutes after a Jeremy Hastings break, and Ashley Blair added the first of three superb conversions.
Blair kicked a penalty five minutes later, and five minutes before half-time Hastings scored the easiest of pushover tries after centre Paul Archer had initially been held up on the line.
Blair again converted, and just after the break out half Keith Megarry took over the kicking duties to put Dungannon 20 points clear with a penalty.
Ards then enjoyed a 20 minute spell of pressure, inspired by their promising young half backs, Kyle Montgomery and 18-year-old out half Gareth Fry.
But a 25th minute penalty from Fry was all they could manage in scoring terms.
Dungannon put the lid on things with a double strike from centre John Gamble in the closing ten minutes, Blair adding his third conversion.
HORSE RACING
ULSTER horse The Committee, one of the fancied runners in the Grand National, will be ridden by English-based jockey Norman Williamson.
Irish champion Charlie Swann had been approached by trainer Homer Scott to ride the horse but Swann has been claimed for Cahervillahow trained by Mouse Morris.
Meanwhile, Richard Dunwoody has confirmed that he will ride Won't Be Gone Long for Nicky Henderson in the big race.
Bangor come on strong
COLLEGIANS 0 BANGOR 25
Neil McKay reports
BANGOR finished with a flourish, but for an hour this First Trust Senior Cup tie was as dreary and depressing as the weather.
Passes were spilled or knocked on, and kicks flew straight into touch as both sides failed to inject any pace, or play to any sort of pattern.
It all seemed to emphasise that, in the era of the All Ireland League, the Senior Cup just doesn't matter as much as it used to.
Bangor finally shook themselves to run in three tries, helped enormously by some comical Collegians defending.
And it was no surprise that Bangor waxed strongest in the final quarter when Ireland A forward Stephen McKinty finally stamped his class on the match.
He indirectly set up the first try for Kenny Hooks, and his catching and powerful driving off the tail of the line out kept Collegians on the back foot.
Twenty two points in the final quarter underlined Bangor's superiority, but did scant justice to a gutsy defensive show by Collegians in the first half.
Bangor dominated the entire 40 minutes, pegging Collegians back in their own 22, but all they had to show for their pressure was a Terry McMaster penalty on the half hour.
Collegians had a slight breeze behind them in the second half, but weren't able to take control.
They threatened on a couple of occasions, but their work became increasingly ragged as the game wore on.
The score that opened the floodgates came out of nothing after 62 minutes.
McKinty hacked through a loose ball to set up a line out just inside the Collegians half which skipper Don Whittle won.
A slick transfer put Hooks clear 40 metres out and he swerved inside one defender, and ran straight through two powder puff tacks to score under the posts for Mark McCall to convert.
McCall kicked a penalty five minutes from time to make sure for Bangor, who then added two tries as Collegians faded.
A comedy of errors as Collegians tried to clear from a defensive line out presented McCall with the simplest of scores.
And right at the death, when Bangor were down to 14 men with scrum half Stephen Matchett receiving treatment, McMaster finished off a fine move sparked by McCall's half break.
McCall added the conversion.
Ritchie Kelly's North West sports round-up
Jim McCloskey
Liam Coyle — considering move
…but don't rule out Party Politics and Zeta's Lad
Chatam gives Scu a National chance
CHATAM may give trainer Martin Pipe and jockey Peter Scudamore their first Grand National winner by scoring in the Martell sponsored spectacular at Liverpool next Saturday.
Chatam, who was narrowly beaten by Jodami in the Hennessy Cognac Irish Gold Cup at Leopardstown, has been lightly raced this year and is not yet a certain runner.
But the wide expanses of Aintree should suit his type of jumping and if he produces the form he showed at Leopardstown then he'll take all the beating.
Scudamore said afterwards that the Leopardstown run was his best ever regarding his jumping, and although Chatam later flopped in the Cheltenham Gold Cup won by Jodami he was never going on the fast ground and the slower pace of the National should suit him.
Scudamore has tried for years to win the National.
His best placing was third on Corbiere in 1985 and it would be ironic if this season, when arch rival Richard Dunwoody is leading the jockeys championship, Scudamore should win two of the big three races — he also took the Champion Hurdle on Granville Again.
A horse who has to be lightly raced, Chatam has only had three runs this season.
He had earlier finished fourth in the Newbury Hennessy Gold Cup.
Party Politics, who won last year's National, must have a life again for he galloped the opposition into the ground when winning last time out at Haydock.
Still, only Red Rum has won the race in successive years since the Second World War and Party Politics has a lot to do.
He would, however, be my choice if Chatam were taken out this week.
Towcester trainer John Upson is an ebullient type who is in no doubt that his horse Zeta's Lad will win.
‘I honestly can't see him being beaten,’ he said.
‘He is remarkably well handicapped on 10st four, and if he were to be handicapped again he would go up another stone.
To me he looks the one they all have to beat.
‘After all, the National fences are not what they were.
There are only two major obstacles — Becher's and the Chair.
The remainder have had their teeth drawn.’
I'm inclined to agree with Upson, whose last National tilt was when Over The Road finished fourth two years ago.
Zeta's Lad, who has won five chases in a row this season, certainly looks the part and although he is no ‘good thing’ I feel he has the form to win the race given a clear round.
His last appearance was in the Racing Post Chase which Rhyme ‘n’ Reason won on his way to National glory.
Zeta's Lad put in a smooth performance to beat Docklands Express (fourth in the National last year) and Bradbury Star with Royal Athlete fourth.
Royal Athlete later went on to run a cracking race into third in the Cheltenham Gold Cup and must have a marvellous chance at the weights.
A horse who has had his problems, Royal Athlete was off for two seasons, but in 1990 he won over the Mildmay fences at Liverpool after having fallen when backed favourite at Cheltenham.
A horse with class, Royal Athlete is trained by Jenny Pitman who won the race with Corbiere and would be a worthy favourite.
Romany King was a good second to Party Politics last year and has been trained for the race.
In addition he will have Adrian Maguire on board and that's worth a stone to any trainer.
Romany King has done nothing this year but the fact that he ran so well last time at Aintree has kept him short in the market.
Garrison Savannah is bidding to go one better than when runner-up to Seagram two years ago.
He missed most of last season but has run well this term and was certainly going as strongly as anything before making a mistake at the third last in the Gold Cup.
I wouldn't rule him out, although he isn't getting any younger and might have missed his chance two years ago.
On The Other Hand used to be with Downpatrick trainer Jeremy Maxwell and is now with National expert Gordon Richards who bought him out of John Mulherne's yard recently.
He promptly obliged by winning the Grand Military Gold Cup at Sandown and must be a ‘live’ National outsider at odds of around 50/1.
Willsford, Riverside Boy and Richard Dunwoody's expected mount Won't be Gone Long are others to look at but I feel that the class of Chatam could make him the bet of the race.
DREAM WIN FOR THE QUIET MAN
TO actually win a European title in Italy is bordering on a miracle.
But listen to big Ray Close and he would have you believe that it was no big deal, just another fight and a chance to earn the kind of money he used to dream of as an amateur with Ledley Hall.
His stunning inside the distance victory over the Italian southpaw Vincenzo Nardiello was accompanied by the inevitable controversy and chaos.
Typically throughout it all the new European super middleweight champion remained unruffled and unmoved as the highly partisan Italians became increasingly restless.
Making light of what was a potentially ugly situation Ray said: ‘It was mainly the champion's brother who was causing all the trouble.
‘He took it really bad.
He threw a chair into the ring and then afterwards he did his best to get into the dressing room.
‘The police eventually came along and escorted him away, but other than everything else was fine.
It was a hard enough fight, but I'm not marked and ideally I would like to fight fairly soon again.’
Close's achievement must rank as one of the great sporting upsets of recent years.
Eight months earlier he made an abortive attempt for the title, then held by the Frenchman Franck Nicotra, only to be stopped for the first time in his professional career.
But it was a temporary setback that made him even more determined to achieve his boyhood dream.
He said: ‘In the early days I always dreamed of going to the Olympics, doing well and then eventually turning professional.
‘I missed out on the Olympics, but that made me even more determined to join the paid ranks.’
Close must rank as one of the most unassuming characters in a sport that breeds egotists and exhibitionists.
He rubs shoulders in the Eastwood gym with a variety of champions that include Paul Hodkinson and Crisanto Espana.
It would have been the easiest thing in the world for the softly spoken champ to have been intimidated by such surroundings.
But Ray insists that appearances are often deceptive.
‘I was always pretty confident and never lacked belief in my own ability,’ he said.
‘But I don't always speak up or shout from the roof tops.
I've been called the quiet man and I wouldn't argue with that.’
Explaining the philosophy which has been his strength from his earliest days in the Ledley Hall club with Herbie Young and his former employer Bill Robson he said: ‘If you want anything from this sport you have to work exceedingly hard for it.
‘Nothing will be handed to you on a plate.’
‘Two weeks before the European title fight I packed in my job and it was the best move I ever made.
‘I went into the fight against Nardiello sharper and stronger than I had ever been before.’
Victory in Italy against all the odds offers the new champ all kinds of exciting possibilities.
Both Nigel Benn and Chris Eubank have been touted as possible opponents.
Either would do.
When you have just captured a European title in Italy nothing else comes close!
Five bid for fame and glory
THE new British motor racing season moves up a gear at Silverstone today with the first big meeting of the year — and five young Ulster drivers will be part of it.
The ‘double-header’ meeting at Britain's grand prix circuit features both the British championships in Vauxhall Lotus and Formula Ford — two of the main stepping stones to racing stardom.
In fact just to race at this level means setting up base in England and giving full commitment to the sport.
Thoughts of finding a job are out, unless on a flexible part-time basis, and most of the time between races is spent testing, hanging around garages and seeking out potential sponsors.
‘We're ideal gofors,’ says Andrew McAuley, the former NI Formula Ford champion, who starts his third cross-channel season in the British FF1800 championship for the new Olympic Vector team.
‘If there is a driving job to be done, we get it.’
McAuley, who has driven for the factory teams of Swift and Van Diemen over the past two years, had hoped to graduate to Formula Three this season, but was unable to raise the £150,000 budget.
So he has accepted an offer to drive the new Vector at Silverstone, but insists at the moment it is for this race only.
‘We haven't worked out a deal yet, but I said I would drive the car this weekend and then we'll talk about it again next week.’
McAuley will see how the Vortec shapes up against the Swifts and Van Diemens — and against his Comber neighbour Johnny Kane.
The reigning Irish champion has joined the Swift factory this year after impressing in the British series last season.
A first round victory caught everyone's attention, and Swift kept close tabs on him for the rest of the year, even fielding a car for him in the 25th anniversary race at Silverstone and again in the Irish Festival.
It was inevitable when he moved to England he would join them.
Now he faces McAuley in the opening round of the series which this year features the new 1800cc Ford Zeta engines.
Meanwhile, three Ulster drivers, including another McAuley — Andrew's younger brother Owen — are in the Vauxhall Lotus line-up.
The former kart champion has elected to skip Formula Ford and jump straight in at the deep end with Martin Donnelly's team.
It's thanks to a hefty sponsorship package from Village Homes that he has been able to make the move after only one full season of FF1600 racing in Ireland.
But ex-Lotus grand prix driver Donnelly stresses that it will be ‘a learning year’ for Owen.
‘He is a talented young lad but give him time to find his feet,’ says Martin, whose team will be headed by Jason Plato.
For Dino Morelli and Kevin McGarrity it is a make-or-break year.
They go into their second season of FVL racing knowing they have to put the disappointments of last year behind them.
Morelli has moved from Donnelly Racing to join the championship-winning David Sears team, and McGarrity is returning to Luby Racing, the team he started with last year before switching to Venom.
Fans bid to block move
COLERAINE are facing fan pressure to block any move by highly-rated keeper Davy O'Hare to another Irish League club.
And they are insisting that any cross-channel transfer fee for O'Hare or winger Johnny McIvor be ploughed back into strengthening the team locally.
O'Hare (21) is interesting First Division 5 Barnsley while Scottish clubs Partick Thistle and Hamilton are monitoring McIvor's progress.
O'Hare has also been linked with Portadown after two starring performances against the Mid-Ulster club inside six weeks.
That sparked the supporter unrest with fans fearing that the club would opt for a local sell-off to ease their financial problems if a cross-channel bid failed to materialise.
Coleraine secretary Freddie Monahan stressed however: ‘No official 5 approaches have been made for either player though we are aware they are being watched.’
The Committee is Ulster's best bet
JIMMY WALKER assesses the prospects of a home grown winner
THE Ulster roar, which nearly tore the roof off at Cheltenham as Rhythm Section won the Tote Festival Bumper, will be just a whisper compared to the reception The Committee will receive if he wins next Saturday's Aintree showpiece.
The Committee is also Ulster owned and his trainer is the man who also saddled Rhythm Section, Ulster exile Homer Scott who now operates from Kildare.
Rhythm Section, who scored at 16/1, is owned by Scott's brother-in-law Robert Sinclair, a Belfast solicitor, but The Committee is owned by Corcrain Enterprises — Dominic Quinn from Banbridge and John Bailie from Lurgan.
‘It would be marvellous if The Committee were to win the National,’ Scott said, ‘for the two owners have been immensely patient and have let me get on with bringing the horse back to his best after he had been off the course for two and a half years.’
At one time among Ireland's best novice chasers, The Committee was runner up to subsequent Gold Cup winner Garrison Savannah in the Sun Alliance Novices Chase at Cheltenham in 1990.
But after having been short headed by On The Other Hand in the Punchestown Festival Handicap in April of that year, The Committee developed a ‘leg’ after having been struck into.
It appeared as though his way back would be painful to say the least but the owners let Homer get on with it and The Committee reappeared last November.
Since then he has failed to win but he did show signs of his old ability when third in the Kim Muir at Cheltenham under Ulster's Paddy Graffin and the connections are hopeful that he will run a big race at Aintree.
‘It's not beyond the bounds of possibility,’ Homer said, ‘for he has the class.’
Another horse with a lot going for him is Cahervillahow who two years ago was being touted as a future winner of the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
However a fax message which went wrong meant he missed the 1991 Gold Cup and then later that season he was disqualified after winning the Whitbread Gold Cup at Sandown.
Cahervillahow, who is trained by Mouse Morris, missed all of last year because of a foot injury and has failed to show his old sparkle this term.
However Morris believes the National won't take a great deal of winning and reckons that Cahervillahow is one of the best handicapped horses in the race on 10st 11.
Laura's Beau ran third in the race last year but again he has had his problems, the main one being a low blood count.
New Mill House represents the stable of Arthur Moore which usually scores in the supporting races at Aintree.
I can't see New Mill House, a long time out of the winners enclosure, being anything special on this occasion.
The Gooser represents Paddy Mullins who ten years ago was something of an Aintree specialist.
Dawn Run (twice) Street Angel and Atha Cliath were all Mullins winners there but he never had much luck in the National.
The Gooser won the Galway Plate last July but is an inconsistent sort, although the big race may bring out the best in him.
Of the Irish contingent, The Committee on recent form stands out but if Cahervillahow were to recapture if only fleetingly the form of two years ago you need look no further for the winner.
Homer Scott
World's best for Belfast
THE best quality field ever assembled here will spearhead the Green Gate sponsored 10k event in Belfast on the 17th of next month.
That's the promise from NIAAF spokesman Brian Hill.
He said: ‘Around 20 of the best road runners currently based in the UK and the Republic will compete.’
Heading the influx will be Kenyan star William Koech, seventh in the Barcelona Olympics 10,000 metres, GB international Billy Dee, number two in the UK 3,000 metres rankings last year, and Noel Berkeley from South Dublin.
Dee, fourth in the English Cross Country Championships recently, also has impressive credentials in a range of events including 5,000 and 10,000 metres.
Berkeley (28), who races for Dundrum, is the reigning Irish half marathon champion.
Britain's Suzanne Rigg, the UK Cross Country champion, currently tops the women's guest list.
She's in Spain this weekend racing in the World Cross Country Championships where she will clash with another Green Gate bound athlete Theresa Duffy from Beechmount Harriers.
The local men will be led by the talented trio of Davy Wilson and Dermott Donnelly (Annadale Striders) and North Belfast's ace John Ferrin.
All three are in tip top form.
Wilson, the reigning 800 metres track champion, is particularly sharp at present judging from his victory at Ballyclare last weekend.
Queen's student Donnelly excelled at Lurgan and won his first Northern Ireland Cross Country title a few weeks ago, but is still not fully fit, although he could be by the time of the Belfast race.
Ferrin, the Northern Ireland 10,000 metres champion, has been impressing in half marathons recently and although he only finished third at Ballyclare he has the pedigree to sustain a challenge from early in the race.
The prize list promises awards in excess of £1,000, while for the locals an extensive sponsorship deal will ensure there are prizes all through the field.
In terms of value for money it's an unbeatable deal.
For an entry fee of £4 all finishers get a T-shirt plus a £5 voucher for Lifestyle Sport Shops.
‘Billy can motivate players better than anyone I know…’
BANK ON BILLY FOR ANOTHER MIRACLE
NORMAN Whiteside makes his debut as a TV expert on Wednesday, backing Billy Bingham to pull off another World Cup miracle.
The former Manchester United and Everton star joins UTV's studio team for the big clash from Lansdowne Road, desperately hoping for a Northern Ireland win.
It would help dispel unhappy memories for Whiteside who made the last of his 38 Northern Ireland appearances in a 3–0 Dublin defeat in 1989 before injury cruelly ended his career at just 26.
He admitted last night: ‘We will do well to come away with a point this time.
‘But if anyone can mastermind a win in Dublin, it's Billy Bingham.
He can motivate players better than any manager I know.’
It will be Bingham's greatest-ever triumph against the odds if his re-emerging team manage to put the brakes on Jack Charlton's drive to the United States finals next year.
But Whiteside points out: ‘Remember how we qualified for Mexico in 1986?
‘We weren't given a chance with our last two games away to England and Romania.
‘Yet we won in Bucharest with a great Jimmy Quinn goal and earned the point we needed in our last game at Wembley to go through — thanks to a brilliant goalkeeping display from Pat Jennings.
‘The inspiration behind those tremendous performances came from Billy Bingham.’
Whiteside served under Premier League title contenders Ron Atkinson and Alex Ferguson — plus Howard Kendall, twice a championship winner for Everton.
And he insisted: ‘Billy Bingham provided the greatest motivation.
‘We were almost always the underdogs, like the lads in Dublin on Wednesday.
‘But Billy fired us up by appealing to our patriotism.
He made sure we appreciated who we were playing for — our country and our fans.
‘I never played alongside the new, younger lads in the present team.
‘But knowing Billy he will send them out bursting with pride in the jersey.
‘It's just a pity the Windsor Park crowd won't be there to cheer them on.
‘I played in the last Dublin game and the atmosphere was incredible.
Our supporters were vastly outnumbered but at least we could hear them.
‘This one will be like a Manchester or Merseyside derby — with one set of fans missing.
‘That's another advantage for the Republic who have become one of the most feared and respected teams in Europe since Jack Charlton took over.’
Whiteside insisted however: ‘The faces may have changed since my last game for Northern Ireland game but one thing hasn't.
We never give up without a fight.
‘A draw would keep us in with an outside chance of going to the States.
But defeat will spell the end of our World Cup hopes.
‘Billy Bingham has been in this position so many times before and come up smiling.
That's why I wouldn't bet against him nicking that point.’
Norman on his way back home
NORMAN Whiteside is on his way back to Northern Ireland.
He starts a four year physiotherapy course at the Ulster University, Jordanstown later this year.
And he hopes it will lead to a full-time soccer comeback — as a physio at a top club.
The former Old Trafford favourite hasn't been idle since a knee injury forced him to quit the game nearly two years ago.
He immediately began studying for a new career in the treatment room.
And lately, he made a successful debut as an after-dinner speaker on the north of England circuit.
‘I've enjoyed speaking to audiences about my experiences in the game,’ he said.
‘Hopefully I will be able to continue with a few engagements when I return to Northern Ireland.’
TYRONE and Armagh have something to prove when they clash today in the Dr McKenna Cup at Dungannon.
It's an ideal opportunity to prove their league form was too bad to be true, and that in the weeks ahead they are capable of mounting a serious challenge for championship honours.
For Armagh it's crucial they build on a series of heart-warming displays since the Christmas break.
Kieran McGeeney, Cathal O'Rourke and Paul McGrane are all available again after their successful exploits with Queen's in the Sigerson Cup.
Three seasons ago Armagh beat Tyrone in the McKenna Cup final by a single point.
But Tyrone took the honours earlier this season when they met in the league at the Athletic Grounds.
Plunkett Donaghy's return after a serious shoulder injury is a timely boost for a side which has Galbally's Colin Hetherington making his senior debut.
Other changes see regular keeper Finbar McConnell resume in place of Martin McCrory, while Barry McGinn is preferred to Paul Devlin in the right corner of the defence.
McKillen holds key for Antrim
PAUL McKillen finds himself back centre stage this afternoon.
Antrim step up their bid for a place in the Royal Liver League quarter-finals when they cross swords with Limerick at Parnell Park.
Earlier this month the sides played a draw in Limerick, the big Ballycastle clubman stealing the show with a virtuoso display in the middle of the field.
On current form he's one of the top three midfielders in the country, a view endorsed by Antrim boss Jim Nelson.
He said: ‘Paul has never played better.
He's fitter and sharper than he has been at any stage of his career, and he's now playing to his full potential.
‘By nature Paul is a quiet, unassuming lad, but this season he has really come out of his shell and his game has improved no end.
‘When we played Limerick in the drawn game he was absolutely superb, and he was again outstanding last Sunday against Tipperary.’
Antrim lost to Tipperary principally because of their failure to translate possession into scores, but in fairness full forward John Paul McKillop was a notable exception.
He gave Tipperary's vastly experienced full back Noel Sheehy a real roasting en-route to scoring two smashing goals and three points.
That day Antrim were forced to play without the injured Terence McNaughton, and he's again a reluctant spectator today, though he could be pressed into action at some stage.
Dunloy's Gregory O'Kane comes into the side at right half forward, with Paddy Walsh moving from the attack to midfield where he partners Paul McKillen in place of Paul Jennings who departed to America during the week.
Aidan McAteer is listed among the substitutes, but will line out in the left corner of the attack providing he comes through a late fitness test.
It's indicative of the changing face of Antrim hurling that today's side only includes five of the side that lost to Tipperary in the 1989 All Ireland final, Dominic McMullan, James McNaughton, Dominic McKinley, Gary O'Kane and Paul McKillen.
The emergence of such players as Gregory O'Kane, John Paul McKillop and Allister Elliot represent the future for Antrim hurling.
Victory this afternoon in Parnell Park, Antrim's home from home, would guarantee them a place in the lucrative knock-out stages, while offering the younger players a chance to display their considerable talents.
But Limerick are the current league champions and Jim Nelson's men can't afford to take anything for granted.
Only last Sunday the Royal Liver League champions scored an impressive 3–15 against Offaly to keep their league hopes alive, while at the same time reminding everyone they are in no mood to relinquish their crown.
Jim Nelson
‘I needed a complete break from the game and wanted to devote more time to my family and business.
Some people claimed that I had another job lined up but time has proved them wrong.
‘I know it was a shock for the club but I wouldn't have gone if it meant leaving them in the lurch.
‘I knew I was leaving them with the basis of a good side and a first-rate manager in Nigel Best.
‘His name and face wouldn't have been familiar to the majority of Irish League fans and he still doesn't look for a high media profile.
‘But I had worked closely with him for five years and knew he had the qualities to become a top boss.
Lansdowne heroes roar into Lions contention as England are routed
IRELAND'S SIX OF THE BEST!
IRELAND'S comprehensive 17–3 demolition of England at Lansdowne Road yesterday will boost their representation on the Lions party to New Zealand later in the year.
The 30-man squad will be announced tomorrow and Irish manager Noel Murphy said he felt the Irish were now entitled to a minimum of six representatives.
Irish try scoring hero Michael Galwey was reluctant to dwell on his own prospects of making the trip.
But both the try and the victory itself were sweet moments for a player who earlier this season was advised to quit the sport after being injured in an All Ireland league match against Ballymena.
The 26-year-old Shannon clubman, an inspirational figure in Irish rugby's long overdue renaissance said: ‘It was great to get the try, but it has been a 15 man effort all along the line.
We were always convinced we were in there with a chance.
‘The turning point was the penalty immediately after half-time and then again when we went 12–3 ahead.
They then needed two scores to take the lead.’
Irish hooker Terry Kingston is unavailable for the trip Down Under because of work commitments.
But, in addition to Galwey, Peter Clohessey, Nick Popplewell, Brian Robinson, Pat O'Hara and Eric Elwood yesterday all emerged with genuine claims for inclusion.
England's much vaunted pack was firmly put in its place and this result raises serious question marks over such notables as Mike Teague, Wade Dooley and No 8 Ben Clarke, who was comprehensively outplayed by Robinson.
It's a defeat that could well determine that Scotland's Gavin Hastings will lead the side to New Zealand after England's Will Carling had an indecisive and undistinguished 80 minutes.
Ireland's timing was perfect in that they produced such a stunning performance in front of three of the four Lions selectors, Ken Reid, Derek Morgan and Bob Munro.
England and Lions manager Geoff Cooke must have left Lansdowne Road with mixed emotions, but was magnanimous in defeat.
He said: ‘On the day we were well beaten.
All credit to Ireland, it was a magnificent performance especially by the forwards.
‘The game was well balanced at half-time, but Ireland got the crucial scores immediately after half-time.
‘Thereafter we were always chasing the match and late on we gave a try away after attempting to break out of defence.’
Reflecting on what effect Ireland's victory might have on the make up of the Lions party he was more guarded in his assessment.
He said: ‘The Irish players were magnificent, but we now have to put that into perspective.
‘It's now a totally different ball game.
We're now sitting down to pick a squad for New Zealand where things will be different in so many respects.’
This was Ireland's first win over England since 1987.
In the subsequent years England had amassed 149 points to Ireland's 32, winning the try count 22–4.
Irish manager Noel Murphy said: ‘We've had our victories down the years, but anyone who is here today will never forget this one.
‘It showed everything that's good in Irish rugby.
We've had our bad times, but the players and the management have worked extremely hard and all credit to Gerry Murphy and Willie Anderson.
‘Our back row was quite superb and pound for pound we've some tremendous players.
‘Irish rugby is something special and down the years we've proved we're always capable of producing something like this.’
A delighted Irish captain Michael Bradley said: ‘We went out prepared to tackle and tackle and everything went according to plan.
‘We got our scores at crucial stages and it was always difficult for England when they were only level at half-time having played with the breeze.
‘In the second half it became increasingly difficult for them and we simply capitalised on our chances.’
English captain Will Carling said: ‘They took their chances and we didn't and it's always easier to keep the momentum going when you're ahead.
‘You can only dictate the game if you're getting quality ball but at stages we were relying on scraps.’
NETBALL
THE power base of local schools netball took another shift towards the North West when St Brigid's, Omagh and their namesakes from Co Derry lifted titles at the Coca-Cola Plate Finals at Shankill Leisure Centre.
St Malachy's (Castlewellan) defeated St Louise's 31–27 in the senior decider, helped by a series of late scores from Aveen Sloan, but the Belfast school had some consolation with a 20–17 success over Fivemiletown High in the junior final.
Harvey keeps his promise
SCOTTISH striker Graham Harvey promised Linfield a debut goal — and came up trumps with a 36-minute hat-trick in the 5–2 win over Larne that keeps the Blues a point clear at the top of the table.
Harvey, on loan from Airdrie, revealed later: ‘I told Trevor Anderson I would score and it wasn't an idle boast.
‘I've scored debut goals for all my clubs including Hibs and Dundee.
I was determined to keep up my record.’
The 30-year-old goal ace limped off with a foot injury but should be fit for Tuesday's League Cup semi-final revenge bid against Bangor.
Blues manager Anderson hailed Harvey's sensational entrance as ‘Roy of the Rovers stuff.’
But he added: ‘I wasn't too surprised.
We did our homework on the player and knew he could score goals.
‘We have him for the last five games of the League run-in.
We are still in the driving seat in the League and if we win those games, we win the title.’
Larne boss Gary Erwin had threatened to quit after a midweek Irish Cup exit to Cliftonville.
But last night he vowed to soldier on, saying: ‘I was encouraged by telephone messages of support from other managers, including my predecessor Paul Malone.’
Glasgow Celtic scout John Kelman will watch Bangor midfielder Paul Byrne against Linfield at The Oval on Tuesday night.
Kelman missed a masterly performance by Byrne against the Blues in the Irish Cup last week — due to a mix-up in flight arrangements.
Bangor will want around £60,000 but Byrne goes nowhere while the Seasiders are in the League and Cup running.
TABLE TENNIS
ULSTER retained the Irish Senior Inter-provincial table tennis title in Galway last night beating Leinster 6–5 in a nail-biting climax to the tournament.
With the match level at 5–5, Andrew Dennison who was unbeaten throughout the championship and Jonathan Cowan won the crucial doubles to give Ulster their ninth victory in a row.
The Ulster veterans also retained their title beating Leinster 5–2 in the final match but the U-21 squad lost 6–0 to Leinster and finished in second place.
MOTORCYCLING
A HAPPY Joey Dunlop opened his 1993 racing year with a win and a second place in the 250 races at yesterdays Road Racing Club Short Circuit meeting at Aghadowey.
Dunlop, giving his new Honda: which only came out of the crate on Thursday: its first run, finished second to Paul Harbinson in the first race before beating Stephen Farmer and Gary Dynes in the second race.
Johnny Rea won the opening 750 race when he beat race two winner Ian King and Dwyer Agnew.
Maurice Ruddock had a double in the super sport 400 races and Ron Hamilton was a two time winner in the B events.
Terry Nicholson's side had conceded eight goals in two previous defeats by the Co Antrim Shield holders.
But elated Nicholson said: ‘It was a battling performance.
We have made steady progress since the New Year — we have tightened up the defence and now we're getting a little bit of luck.’
Carrick enjoyed the early pressure but the breakthrough for Newry came after 39 minutes.
Ralph, just inside the area, knocked the ball across goal for Whelan to steer it home past Moore.
Newry clinched the points with almost the last kick of the game, Ralph scoring after sub Gary Hughes put him clear.
SUPER SUB Ronny Rosenthal was the toast of the Kop after stealing Liverpool's last gasp derby winner.
In recent years it has been Ian Rush who has been the scourge of Everton but this time he turned provider to send the Israeli international through a dumbfounded Everton defence.
He calmly controlled the ball before lashing an angled drive past Neville Southall to put 11 points of daylight between Liverpool and the relegation zone.
It was a tragedy for Everton because the concentration which had hallmarked a disciplined defensive performance, lapsed for one fatal moment.
One of their defenders stayed back making a mockery of their appeals for offside.
Victory in the 148th league derby on Merseyside was no more than Liverpool deserved for they did the lions share of the attacking while Everton were content to rely on defence and counter attacks in a bid for a hit and run triumph.
Yet it was Everton who had the clearer second half opportunities after manager Howard Kendall had gambled on the pace of substitute Stuart Barlow by introducing him as early as the 50th minute.
Three times astute passes by Tony Cottee, Gary Ablett and Peter Beardsley ripped through the Liverpool defence but three times with only the goalkeeper to beat, Barlow failed even to hit the target.
He admitted sadly: ‘I'm gutted and I've got to say sorry to the fans.
‘I should have won it for Everton.
I should have been the hero of the game but I will always be known as the one who lost it.
‘I had three chances and it will be a long time before I forget today.
It should have been the best day of my career but it turned into a nightmare.’
Rosenthal, who had only been on the field 15 minutes, made Barlow pay in full for his wastefulness yet Liverpool should not have had to wait so long to get their noses in front.
Despite losing defensive kingpin Mark Wright with a knee injury after only 10 minutes and being forced to use substitute Jan Molby as an emergency centre-half, they dominated the game with Don Hutchison outstanding in midfield.
Despite Everton's stubborn defence, Liverpool had their chances but Steve McManaman was as frivolous as Barlow with his finishing before giving way to Rosenthal.
Defeat left Everton with a far from comfortable eight point cushion above the relegation zone and Kendall said: ‘We defended well most of the time but let ourselves down in injury time.
It was desperately disappointing to lose a derby game in the last minute.
‘I thought Stuart Barlow's pace could make the difference and he had the chances.
On another day he could have gone home with the match ball.’
ATHLETICS
ANNADALE Striders track ace Davy Wilson raced to a superb victory in the Mackey Shield Road 10K at Ballyclare, in a record time of 28.53.
Wilson's pace brought him triple joy, the individual prize, victory over team-mate and newly-crowned cross-country champion Dermot Donnelly in second place, and success for Striders in a fascinating team battle.
Fast starting John Ferrin (North Belfast) set the previous record of 29.16 last year but yesterday it was Larne man Wilson who took the lead after only 800 metres and led all the way.
Behind him the lanky, long striding Donnelly crossed the line in 29.07, while Ferrin finished a gallant third just one second outside his own best time.
The tussle for the team award has rarely been tighter and with four to count Striders were clear winners with Sammy Doherty finishing fourth.
There was then a nervous wait for Ray Younger who finished in 35th place as fourth scorer to give them victory by two points over North Belfast with Albertville a further two points adrift.
Lisburn's Anne Terek won the ladies' section from Avril Magee (Annadale Striders) with new mum Ursula McGloin making a return to racing and finishing an excellent third.
Sally Patrick (Albertville) took the women's veterans prize while the winners in the men's category were:
40: Alan Keys; 45: Jim Patterson, individual; 50: Jim Platt, East Antrim; 55: Ken Hawtin, North Down; 60: Bobby Booth, East Antrim; 65: Matt McCullough, Duncairn Nomads.
Canavan the hero
ST MARY'S set up a mouthwatering final with Queen's after a spirited victory over UCG at St Paul's.
And the underdogs fully deserved their win over the Galway men.
Tenacious tackling and a great display from Peter Canavan at full forward, ensured the Ranch always held the upper hand.
St Mary's had notched up three points before the Westerners could reply and, at times playing inspired football, they raced into a 0–6 0–3 lead.
Then just on half time the Ranch landed the blow from which UCG never recovered.
A Canavan free was floated into the square, where corner forward Stephen Ramsey rose to fist the ball to the net, leaving the scores at the break St Marys 1–6 UCG 0–3.
UCG rallied at the beginning of the second half, Lorcan Dowd scoring a great goal, and Tony Maher then cutting the deficit to two points.
But this was as close as they got, and a brilliant display from St Mary's in the last 20 minutes, with Canavan adding on five points from frees, saw the Belfast team through.
The win sets up a repeat of the Sigerson final in Trinity three years ago.
Paul Curran —title pointer
VETERAN keeper Declan McIntyre hit back last night at the Finn Harps boo-boys.
McIntyre landed in hot water for an alleged V-sign to the fans after last week's disappointing home draw with Athlone Town.
But he protested: ‘Nobody goes out to play badly and sometimes mistakes are made.
‘I don't mind being criticised for my football nor indeed do the other players but personal abuse is something else.
‘Some of the things that were said last Sunday were the most severe I've heard in my life.
‘Ninety nine per cent of the fans are OK.
The barracking comes from a small minority and it's hard to take.
‘It's reached a stage lately where the players look forward with relish to away games.’
Harps face UCD in a crunch match at Belfield in Dublin today.
And McIntyre said: ‘The people who travel with us are genuine fans so we'll be more relaxed.
I don't think we have anything to fear from UCD.’
Harps, fifth in the First Division, but just a point behind today's second-placed opponents, cannot afford to lose.
Defeat would leave the Donegal men three points adrift and with three difficult fixtures remaining, they would most certainly be facing the grim prospect of another year in the lower division.
Life hasn't been easy for Patsy McGowan's troops of late.
It's more than a month since they conjured up a victory.
FORMER Irish League goalkeeper, turned BBC commentator, Bobby Carlisle, is lending a helping hand in one of the most remarkable runs in Junior Cup history.
The Lisburn teacher coaches Churches League third division side Village Star, a team who have never won a trophy and, until this year, never got past the second round of junior soccer's top competition.
But manager Gerry Murphy reckons their first ever piece of silverware will be the Junior Cup and says Carlisle's coaching is one of the reasons why.
Star have defied the odds to reach the semi-finals of this year's Stena Sealink-sponsored competition and face Lurgan side Hill Street at Ballyskeagh tomorrow night.
Hill Street are favourites to progress to make it an all-Lurgan final against Oxford United (they entertain Carnbane League side Windmill Stars in the second semi-final at Shamrock Park on April 1).
However, Murphy believes his Lisburn side can end hopes of a Mid-Ulster final.
‘Hill Street are a good side, but I think our name is on the trophy,’ he says.
‘We've come through against all predictions, winning five away games in a row.
‘Bobby trains us once a week at the local leisure centre and we've really progressed this season under his supervision.’
Scouts watch Coleraine duo
CROSS-channel scouts will swell the attendance at Wednesday's League Cup semi-final at Ballymena Showgrounds.
But for once the spotlight won't be on Paul Malone's form team Ards, chasing a League Cup and Bass Cup double.
Coleraine's highly-rated young keeper Davy O'Hare and wing wizard Johnny McIvor are the targets.
O'Hare, a 21-year-old from Newry, was the hero of Coleraine's penalty shoot-out wins over big guns Portadown and Glentoran in the earlier rounds.
And if McIvor hits his true form up front, another upset could be on the cards.
McIvor, from Newbuildings, outside Londonderry, has already caught the eye of Billy Bingham.
He was called into the Northern Ireland manager's U-21 training squad last summer.
His dazzling left wing runs are bringing back memories of a glorious era for Coleraine fans when Ray McCoy starred in the super side of the Eighties.
Add to that McIvor's powerful shooting and it's easy to see why the Coleraine faithful are pinning their hopes on him.
‘When Johnny is on song he is fabulous.
If he sets his mind to it he could make it in the cross-channel game,’ says Scottish goal scoring ace Derek Cook, who himself will pose a considerable threat to Ards.
Having lost twice to Ards this season, manager Billy Sinclair knows his improving side will be up against it.
But confident McIvor points out: ‘We've got this far the hard way with penalty shoot-outs in every round.
We've matched Portadown and Glentoran over 120 minutes so we know we are in with a chance.
‘There's too much to lose now and we owe it to our fans to do well.
‘After such a disappointing season it's great to be involved in a semi-final.
It's given everyone at the club a lift.’
Mystery man Best has the Midas touch
NIGEL BEST, the mystery manager of Irish League football, is unmasked today as a man with the Midas touch.
His Bangor forerunner John Flanagan stunned the club and sent shock waves through the Irish League with his sudden resignation last October.
And Flanagan raised even more eyebrows when he recommended Best, his unknown assistant, as his successor.
But Flanagan said: ‘I had no hesitation in advising the board to promote Nigel to the job — and his results have proved me right.
‘He looks like bringing more success to Bangor than I ever achieved.
And far from being envious, it is giving me the greatest pleasure.’
Flanagan began the big Bangor revival, winning the Ulster Cup and taking the club into Europe for the only time in their history as League runners-up two years ago.
Now he's backing Best to go one better and lead Bangor back to Europe as winners.
‘Nigel has two chances of Europe — through the League and Irish Cup.
Hopefully they will go there as champions but I would love to see them win the Irish Cup,’ said Flanagan.
Bangor's brilliant Bass Cup quarter-final win over Linfield sent a buzz through a town notorious for it's apathy towards the local soccer club.
All week Bangor folk have been stopping Flanagan on the streets of his home town to ask: ‘Aren't you sorry now you left?’
But Flanagan insists: ‘I have no regrets.
‘I needed a complete break from the game and wanted to devote more time to my family and business.
Some people claimed that I had another job lined up but time has proved them wrong.
‘I know it was a shock for the club but I wouldn't have gone if it meant leaving them in the lurch.
‘I knew I was leaving them with the basis of a good side and a first-rate manager in Nigel Best.
‘His name and face wouldn't have been familiar to the majority of Irish League fans and he still doesn't look for a high media profile.
‘But I had worked closely with him for five years and knew he had the qualities to become a top boss.
‘His strengths are in his coaching skills — training methods, tactics and motivation.
‘But, equally important, he has the contacts you need to be a success in this game.’
Flanagan may have secured Bangor's biggest asset when he signed Dublin midfield star Paul Byrne on a free from Oxford United.
But he revealed: ‘It was Nigel who found Paul Byrne through his southern contacts.
‘Those same contacts put him in touch with Ricky McAvoy, another star of last week's win over Linfield.’
And Flanagan, a close friend of Best, added: ‘I am delighted at the way things have worked out for Nigel — because the fans don't realise how much pressure he was under when he took the job.
‘He was a new name taking over a side whose fans were expecting big things.
‘I played my part in building up that side but Nigel has improved it.
‘There was never much money available at Bangor.
We always depended on free transfers and Nigel has made some super captures.
‘Michael Surgeon, Conor McCaffrey, Johnny Magee and Ricky McAvoy are good signings.
‘Like me, he has a first class assistant boss in Colin McCurdy.
‘But unlike me, he has managed to land the type of player my teams always lacked — a 25-goals a season striker.
‘David McCallen has been the big difference to Bangor.
Paul Byrne is sheer quality but it doesn't matter how well a team are playing if they don't have someone to put the ball in the net.’
Flanagan now believes his old club are one major signing away from becoming a dominant force in Irish football.
But he fears it could be at the expense of star turn Byrne.
He said: ‘I've always maintained that Paul Byrne is too good for the Irish League.
He can be a bit lazy but ability-wise he is in a class of his own.
‘Bangor could use the money to recruit a couple of top players locally in his place.
The board bent over backwards to help me raise funds for players and it's been the same for Nigel Best.
‘But unless they get the crowds who turn out for the visits of Linfield and Portadown, every week, cash will always be in short supply.’
THE Exiles lost out to Ulster earlier this week without a ball being kicked.
They had hoped to have had both Matthew Dobson and Richie Hunter on board for last Friday night's game with Ulster.
Six players had dual qualification and the Exiles were prepared to settle for Dobson and Hunter, but they met with a blanket refusal from the Ulster Branch.
Exiles secretary John Hunter said last night: ‘We felt we were reasonable in only asking for two players out of a possible six.
‘But we didn't even get an official reply.
It was only through the players themselves that we got the news.
‘If someone had rung myself or Walter Jones I could have accepted that, but they didn't.’
Neither Dobson nor Hunter is eligible to play for Ulster in next season's inter pros, but they could line out with the Exiles Under-21s.
Both boys see their long-term future across the Irish Sea, and playing with the Exiles seemed the most natural thing in the world.
Making no attempt to disguise his anger at the Ulster decision John Hunter added: ‘The fact that it was a blanket no, and that it wasn't even person to person, made it all the more galling.’
ALL Ireland champions Donegal ring the changes for this afternoon's Dr McKenna Cup meeting with Derry at Ballybofey.
In the absence of the injured Matt Gallagher, Brian Murray switches to full back with Anthony Molloy and Barry Cunningham teaming up in the middle of the field.
There was a time last season when manager Brian McEniff contemplated playing Murray on the edge of the square, but then along came Matt Gallagher and the rest is history.
The versatile Noel Hegarty, an outstanding corner back when the county lifted the Sam Maguire, will play on the ‘40’ with the emerging and gifted John Duffy in the right corner of the attack.
League champions Derry are resigned to being without Bank of Ireland All Star defender Tony Scullion, until the championship at the earliest.
But the unexpected return of Enda Gormley last weekend after serious injury is a decided plus.
Donegal haven't lost a game in 12 months, while Derry have only lost three times in 27 months, so it should be quite a struggle.
Antrim, who face defending champions Down at Casement Park, bring in Tony McCrudden for Andy Healy, while Enda McAtamney returns to the squad after a three months suspension.
Olcan injury a major blow
OLCAN McFetridge's planned comeback lies in ruins.
Antrim's former Bank of Ireland All Star had hoped to line out this afternoon against Tipperary in Thurles, but earlier this week he suffered a recurrence of a serious back injury.
Over a year ago he had surgery on the back and was advised by a leading specialist to forget about playing contact sport.
But such is his love for the game he has adorned for close on a decade that he never gave up hope of a return to the big time.
Antrim manager Jim Nelson said last night: ‘It's a terrible setback for the lad.
He had been looking forward to playing.
‘He wasn't 100 per cent fit, but you could never write him off.
‘The doctor had told him contact sport was out, but he was determined to hang in there.
‘I never attempted to put any pressure on him one way or the other.
‘It was purely his own decision, and his health has to be the prime consideration.’
Two weeks ago Antrim exceeded even their own expectations by drawing with league champions Limerick in their own backyard.
Not surprisingly Antrim will be relying on the same side that finished that day.
This means Dominic McKinley is preferred to Eoin McCloskey.
Reflecting on that marvellous performance Jim Nelson said: ‘With five minutes to go we were trailing by four points and I was more than happy to get a share of the points.
‘You have to remember they are the current league champions and had been training three nights a week.
‘Tipperary are already through to the knock-out stages of the league and can't be caught, but mindful of their pride and arrogance they won't be doing us too many favours.’
Antrim went into the Limerick match with a restructured attack, and it paid dividends with centre half forward Gary O'Kane and Terence McNaughton hurling superbly, and Paul McKillen stealing the show in midfield.
LINFIELD have asked Ballymena to name their price for Scottish striker Neil Candlish.
The Blues were chasing Candlish before yesterday's Bass Irish Cup knockout by Bangor.
Now manager Trevor Anderson looks set to step up his interest in an all-or-nothing bid for League title glory.
Ards striker Darren Erskine was put under the spotlight by Sheffield United in yesterday's scoreless Bass Irish Cup draw with Distillery.
But the watching scout only saw 27-goal Erskine carried off with suspected knee ligament damage.
Striking partner Harry McCourt could also miss the replay.
A date will be fixed by the Irish FA tomorrow.
MID-ULSTER LEAGUE
TWO-GOAL Billy McConnell took on the role of super sub at Olympia yesterday as Holywood dramatically overturned a 2–1 deficit to move within sight of the Harp Senior League title with a 6–2 hammering of Annadale.
The former international, plagued by injury this season, was on the pitch for just 18 minutes but by the time he returned to the bench Holywood were home and dry.
After Richard Eaton had cancelled out a second minute opener from Kenny Morris on 20 minutes, John Stephens shot Annadale into the lead with a superb finish to two minutes into the second period.
Norman Crawford then pulled off a master stroke, introducing McConnell, and he set up Mark Burns for a short corner strike in the 46th minute before adding two goals himself in the space of five minutes to leave Holywood 4–2 ahead.
McConnell's ex-international colleague Morris then took over, increasing his season's tally to 41 by completing his hat-trick with two goals in the final seven minutes.
Penalty row but Glens are just too good
DUNDELA boss Mervyn Bell wasn't a happy man after his side's Bass Irish Cup defeat at the hands of Glentoran.
He thinks his team were robbed of a penalty which could have meant a replay.
Bell said: ‘My only complaint about the game was that we should have had the penalty before Glentoran scored.
‘George Neill pushed Gary Quinn inside the box and I was surprised that it wasn't given.
A goal then might have made a big difference.
‘Maybe my players were overawed by the packed crowd — our best ever.
Maybe they were intimidated by the atmosphere.’
Certainly, Dundela took an eternity to produce anything like their best form.
Glentoran settled much quicker and, despite their fortunate penalty escape, were well worth their two-goal interval lead.
A Stephen Douglas goal in 28 minutes had Glentoran on their way.
After that it looked like they would trample all over their local rivals.
Douglas headed in from close range after Kevin McKeever's inviting nod down from Raymond Campbell's left-wing free.
Campbell was involved again when Glentoran made it 2–0.
He was fouled by Michael Goddard in the box and Barney Bowers duly obliged from the penalty spot.
It was a case of the cock and hens of Glentoran playing rooster at Dundela's hen run.
John Coey in the Dundela goal made a number of fine saves in a busy first half.
One, from a McKeever header, was particularly outstanding, the Duns keeper throwing himself to his right and managing to hold on to the ball.
Dundela got it together in the second half and it was Dean Smyth's turn to save his side.
Goddard and Stephen Hanvey tested Deano soon after the interval but the Glens' two-goal cushion stayed intact until injury-time.
Then substitute Mark Snodden hit a goal after a mix-up in the Glentoran defence, but by then it was far too late.
Glentoran boss Tommy Jackson said: ‘We had loads of early chances and missed.
But we are still in the semi-finals and that's all that counts.
‘We did some homework on their side but we know them so well it was hardly needed.’
ARCHERY
BANBRIDGE youngster Peter Mulligan set a possible British record when he won the junior gents barebow category in yesterday's NI Indoor Target Championships at Craigavon Leisure Centre.
Overall winners — Girls', freestyle: C Hanna (Bangor & District) 491 pts.
Barebow: C Cunningham (Scarva Road) 385.
Boys', Freestyle: S McGreevy (Scarva Road) 550.
Barebow: P Mulligan (Banbridge) 545.
BADMINTON
IRELAND'S Bruce Topping and Michael Watt both qualified yesterday for the semi finals of the prestigious Glasgow Open Badminton Championship.
The Irish challenge is further strengthened by the enforced absence due to injury of the top two seeds, Kenny Middlemass and Bruce Flockhart.
Topping faces Craig Roberton in his semi final while Watt meets local lad Steven Clark in the other.
TONY COTTEE grabbed two goals as Everton over ran Forest, but he was left kicking himself for not completing the hat-trick that was up for grabs.
Everton, inspired throughout by Peter Beardsley, killed off the game by romping into a 3–0 lead in 38 minutes and could easily have doubled it.
It took Everton only 15 minutes to get their noses in front when Mark Ward made the opening for Matt Jackson to burst between two defenders and pull the ball back for Cottee to steer it wide of the helpless Mark Crossley.
Cottee grabbed his second from a glancing header after 26 minutes.
Everton's third came in bizarre fashion after 38 minutes when Crossley was punished under the new laws for handling Carl Tiler's back pass.
As Forest formed a human barricade on their goal line Andy Hinchcliffe picked out the only available scoring spot.
MOTOR SPORT
REIGNING champion Sam Bowden suffered a rare defeat in the second round of the NI Autotest Championship at Ballymena yesterday.
Bowden was beaten into second place by Dublin's Eamonn Byrne after he suffered a line penalty on the seventh test.
Norman Ferguson slotted into third place, ahead of former Northern Ireland champion Robert Dickson.
Peter Grimes was fifth and Patrick Power was sixth, all were driving Mini Specials.
Larne saved as Manley strike ruled offside
REDS FURY OVER ‘WINNER’
LARNE had a controversial decision by referee Leslie Irvine in the dying minutes to thank for keeping their Cup hopes alive.
For he ensured a replay at Inver Park on Tuesday night by ruling out a Ron Manley effort two minutes from time.
The Cliftonville players and fans were still celebrating when Irvine spotted the raised flag of a linesman and cut their party short.
He sparked furious protests when he awarded the visitors a free kick for offside.
The decision was a cruel blow for Manley, who was outstanding for most of the game, and the controversy continued after the final whistle.
Reds boss Frankie Parkes made no secret of the fact that he disagreed with the man in black.
‘It seemed to me, and the team, that the flag only went up after the ball hit the back of the net,’ he said.
‘I don't want to criticise the officials and we have to abide by what they say, but from where we were sitting it looked like a strange decision.’
The uncertainty was fuelled further when Larne boss Gary Irwin admitted that he thought the goal had been disallowed for a foul on goalkeeper Graeme McConnell.
But the officials were adamant that a Cliftonville player was offside during the move that preceded the goal.
Larne spent most of the first half on the rack, but took a shock lead three minutes from the break when Tom McCourt grabbed his 22nd goal of the season.
Marty Tabb almost grabbed an immediate equaliser when he rattled the crossbar from 18 yards, but the Reds had to wait until the 55th minute to get back on level terms.
It was a quality goal from Jim McFadden, who held off four defenders before firing home from the edge of the box.
His strike inspired Cliftonville to step it up a gear, but the visitors defence put up the shutters and survived — despite the last-gasp controversy.
Larne twice came close to stealing a second goal but seemed content to play for a draw.
Injury scare for Wright
IAN Wright's name duly went into referee David Allison's book — but it will not cost him his FA Cup semi-final place against Tottenham next month.
For Allison was simply recording Wright's 26th goal of the season, and not writing out a booking that would have put the £2.5 million England star over 21 disciplinary points and a Wembley semi-final ban.
Wright struck just 52 seconds after Kevin Campbell had given Arsenal the lead in a dismal match at Highfield Road.
Coventry were so poor there was nothing for Wright to get excited about.
In fact City handed him his goal on a plate as defenders Peter Atherton and David Busst left a long clearance to each other, and Wright stole in to clinch the outcome.
England star Wright though is facing a fitness fight for the FA Cup semi-final.
George Graham's gamble on playing his £2.5 million striker backfired as he aggravated a groin injury in the 64th minute and had to limp off.
It's the latest setback for Wright amid fears that he could be sidelined with a hernia.
Highbury boss Graham said afterwards: ‘He first picked up the injury against Nottingham Forest, then aggravated it with England and he's aggravated it again.
‘It's something he's had for some time, but I was always going to play him despite the trouble and the fact he's one booking away from a ban.’
Phillip the hero
GOALKEEPER Phillip Gorrell was the Magherafelt hero with a last minute penalty save which clinched the McLarnon Cup.
Brian Roper's unsuccessful spot kick perpetuated the agony for the Donegal boys who had once again come so near and yet so far, losing their third final in a row.
They should have done much better as they dominated for long spells, but failed miserably in the art of scoring.
St Mary's led by three points at half-time despite the assistance of a strong breeze, but De La Salle managed to score only twice in the second-half when it was their turn to enjoy wind advantage.
Their forwards took too much out of the ball when the simple option would have been more productive, but all credit must go to a well-drilled St Mary's defence in which full back Sean McIvor was outstanding.
The De La Salle rearguard looked less disciplined, and it was the free kicks they conceded in the first-half which proved their downfall.
Damien Robb was in superb form from placed balls, converting five frees and making an immense contribution to his side's victory.
His three first-half points helped Magherafelt to a 0–6 to 0–3 interval lead, and the defence did the rest.
De La Salle drove forward in the second-half, with captain Anthony McGrath prompting from midfield, and little Brian Roper always eager to take on defenders.
But Roper was the only Ballyshannon attacker to get his name on the score sheet, and when he failed to tie the game up with that late penalty the misery was complete for De La Salle.
PATCHED up Instonians failed by a whisker to become the first team in five seasons to complete a home and away Harp Senior League double over Lisnagarvey.
But what their 1–1 draw at Olympia Leisure Centre yesterday did signify was that the champions reign throughout that period is finally drawing to an end.
Watched by the players from Holywood — who later went on to beat Annadale 6–2 to strengthen their title credentials — Garvey started tentatively, fell behind early on and were then left to chase it.
But the outright victory Garvey required to keep their championship flame alive eluded them, and the league battle has been reduced to a two-horse race.
Neil Cooke, operating effectively behind the central midfield position, fired Instonians into a sixth minute lead from his side's third corner.
Garvey's best spell afterwards saw Jimmy Kirkwood blaze wide, Peter Richardson hit the sideboards and Daniel Clarke rattle the post.
But generally the home defence were superbly marshalled by Kenny Rutherford.
The one exception came just seconds from half-time when the defence was slow to mop up the danger when Richardson's corner was only parried, and Alan Dowd was in the right place to equalise.
Right at the end Inst coach Denis Guiler, forced into coming on as a 50th minute substitute so depleted were his side's ranks, almost stole the headlines with the winner, but his effort was brilliantly saved by goalkeeper Raymond Geddis.
Garvey now need to beat Banbridge on March 25, and then hope Bann can beat Holywood two days later to force a title play-off.
Kevin goes back to go forward
KEVIN McGARRITY is going back to the British Vauxhall Lotus championship — and back to the team he quit midway through last season.
The 20-year-old Belfast driver has signed to race with the Kurt Luby team in this year's series after parting company with them when things started to go badly wrong in 1992.
‘I didn't walk out on them or anything like that,’ says McGarrity.
‘We were in a no-win situation and when I was offered the chance to go to another team I took it.
But there were no hard feelings.
I went with the blessing of Jim and Kurt Luby.
‘Basically the problem was the team ran out of money.
That was the root of the whole trouble.
We didn't have the finances to run a proper test programme and we were just falling behind the other teams.
‘But there have been major changes for 1993.
In fact there has been a radical shake up and I'm confident we can do a much better job this time.
‘Kurt will be playing a more active role rather than racing himself and new mechanics have been brought in, including Paul Leach who will engineer my car.
‘He looked after Scott Lakin for Venom Racing last year.
But the most important factor is that the team is properly funded this time.’
Kevin's car will run in the colours of Budweiser, and his sponsorship comes from Gilbeys NI who have been associated with him in the past.
The Luby stable, based in Bolton, will run two other drivers — Mark Peters and Bart Hayden.
Kevin, son of former Phoenix Park Grand Prix winner Harold McGarrity, came close to landing the No 1 seat with the championship-winning David Sears team, but in the end that went to another Ulster driver, Dino Morelli.
‘Yes, I would have liked to have joined Sears,’ says Kevin, ‘but I'm happy with the way things have worked out.
And I'm looking forward to taking on Dino.’
It will be McGarrity's third season with Luby Racing.
He joined them when he first moved to England in 1991 to contest the Vauxhall junior championship, a series he led for much of the season.
Owen McAuley will be the third Ulster driver in the British series.
The young Comber driver has joined Martin Donnelly Racing and will be based in Norfolk.
Henry bloomer!
NORWICH moved to within a point of the top of the table in a scrappy match against relegation-haunted Oldham — but looked a long way short of genuine championship class.
Their winner, an own goal from Nick Henry in the 13th minute, had more than a shade of good fortune about it.
David Phillips' shot from the right seemed to be well covered by Paul Gerrard until Henry, attempting to clear, only managed to head firmly into the ground, and the ball bounced agonizingly over the stranded Oldham keeper.
Norwich did have other chances, top scorer Mark Robins seeing a superb volley ruled out for offside — but most of those came towards the end of the game as desperate Oldham charged forward in a vain attempt to gain a point.
Rocky's famine is over
DAVID Rocastle's first league goal for over 13 months finally banished any lingering relegation fears for Leeds.
Rocastle, whose career has nose-dived since his £2 million move to Leeds from Arsenal in the summer, struck his first competitive goal for the Yorkshiremen after only 11 minutes — and it was enough to settle a disappointing clash.
The former England midfielder capitalised on a blunder by City defender Keith Curle, who could only nod Steve Hodge's cross out to him — and he promptly half-volleyed a magnificent swerving shot into the back of the City net.
With £500,000 full-back David Kerslake, signed in midweek from Swindon, making a satisfactory debut, it was a good day for Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson.
But he will have been worried that it took four fine saves from John Lukic to keep City out.
After Rocastle's early strike, Norwegian Frank Strandli should have added a second but blazed wide.
And then Lukic performed his first rescue act with a fine dive to tip Niall Quinn's shot round the post.
Quinn, who had a disappointing game despite those two efforts on goal, was taken off after 70 minutes to be replaced by Mike Sheron as City tried to save the game.
Collegians up!
QUEEN'S 8 COLLEGIANS 25
COLLEGIANS will play their rugby in Division Three of the All Ireland League next season after this emphatic win which ended Queen's hopes of sneaking up.
On yesterday's anaemic display they didn't deserve to as Collegians dominated throughout and scored five tries.
With so much at stake the first-half was a barren, passionless affair.
Collegians, with wind advantage, had trouble converting their pressure into points and led just 8–0 on the stroke of half-time.
But a very well worked try by New Zealand winger Ritchie Stevens just before the interval put daylight between the teams.
Stevens was put clear by No 8 Mark Watson's excellent floated pass after a five metre scrum, and scored unopposed.
Earlier, scrum half Davy Emerson had touched down after a bout of pressure on the Queen's line, and full-back Trevor McKeown kicked a simple penalty.
Collegians scored three tries in a blistering 12 minute spell early in the second-half to kill the match.
Emerson got a carbon copy of his first try after a swift counter attack, Stevens, came across from his wing into the centre to slice through the defence for a fine individual score, and left winger Paul McAteer raced in from 20 metres.
Queen's finally began to play in the final quarter, but had only a consolation try from Ireland A out-half Davy Humphreys right on full-time to show for their efforts.
Gift goal for Earle
SUBSTITUTE goalkeeper Jan Stejskal completed a day of misery for injury-hit Queen's Park Rangers by gifting Wimbledon's winner to Robbie Earle 11 minutes from time at Loftus Road.
The Czech, who had replaced a concussed Tony Roberts after 17 minutes, hesitated over a Neal Ardley cross and was left stranded as Earle looped a header over him and into an empty net.
The game had started well for QPR when England striker Les Ferdinand waltzed in for his 15th goal of the season after three minutes.
Four minutes later John Fashanu poked home a Wimbledon equaliser after a corner and then Roberts, left dizzy and with a sore head, was led off — to be joined in the dressing room eight minutes later by the limping Ferdinand.
Young Gers earn praise from Smith
RANGERS boss Walter Smith praised his young side as they easily overcame Hibs to set up an important week with forthcoming matches against Club Bruges and Celtic.
‘It was a big game for us,’ he said, ‘And I was delighted at the way the youngsters acquitted themselves — not just in terms of their ability, but also in terms of their temperament.
I think John McGregor and Billy Kirkwood deserve a lot of credit for the work they have done with them.’
In a side which included three players under 20, it was 19-year-old David Hagan who stole the points and the glory, with a brilliant goal in a match which saw Hibs offer little resistance.
After a dull opening 40 minutes Hagan took centre stage when he cut in from the right, chipped over Joe Tortolano, brought the ball down and then blasted beyond John Burridge.
With the visitors defence still in disarray, Mark Hateley added a second one minute later.
Stuart McCall worked a one-two with Ian Durrant, whose cross left Hateley with an easy task.
The second-half saw Ranger's stand-in keeper, Ally Maxwell at the centre of things — firstly coming out his box in the 60th minute to bring down Gareth Evans — and then producing a marvellous save from Darren Jackson's header from the resultant free kick.
Five minutes later Hibs Gordon Hunter was dismissed for a foul on Hateley, leaving Rangers with a comfortable last 25 minutes.
Ally McCoist added to his impressive tally of 45 goals this season when he turned Hagan's cross into the roof of the net six minutes from the end of what, by his standards, had been a quiet match.
Unfortunately for Rangers, Smith reported that David Robertson joins Richard Geogh, Ian Ferguson and Gary Stevens as doubtful for Wednesday's match.
Malone blast
TWENTY nine points without reply in the final quarter secured both Digital league points for Malone at Chambers Park yesterday.
Malone finished the match with 13 players after number eight Ken Tuta was sent off and centre Bill Harbinson retired through injury early in the second-half.
Even in the absence of Peter Logan and Ernie Liggett, who pulled out of the match through injury, the home pack played splendidly.
So much so in fact that 20 minutes into the second-half they led 16–12 before they eventually succumbed to a Malone scoring spree — gifting Malone two late tries after foolishly attempting to run poor quality ball from deep inside their own 25.
The league champions could scarcely believe their luck as they then moved into overdrive scoring four tries in the final quarter without reply.
Within seven minutes Portadown were ahead with an Ian Brown drop goal before Malone seized the initiative with two tries in a 15 minute spell — McAllister with Wilkinson converting and John McDonald adding the second before an Ian Brown penalty left Portadown six points in arrears at the interval 12–6.
Seven minutes into the second-half Alan Hunter's try, with Ian Brown adding the conversion, made it 13–12.
Ian Brown's drop goal increased the lead to four points, but the last quarter belonged exclusively to the visitors with Stephen Cowan, Maurice Field, Richard Cullen, Colin Wilkinson and Graeme Copeland all getting in for tries from which full-back Colin Wilkinson converted two of them.
SHARP RUSH ON TARGET
MASTER marksman Ian Rush scored his third goal in three games and then revealed he's not certain of his place in the Liverpool line-up.
Anfield's most prolific marksman was axed by Graeme Souness three games ago, but since his return, has been showing the sharpness that has terrified top defences for a decade.
But the striker admitted after his 80th minute winner had plunged Middlesborough deep into relegation trouble:
‘I am playing to keep my place in the side.
If we had lost I'm not guaranteed to stay in, so it is important I keep scoring goals.
‘We are not out of trouble yet but this win helps our confidence.’
Don Hutchison put Liverpool ahead after just 10 minutes.
It was a sharp strike which made it a dream return to his native North East following his £175,000 move to Merseyside in November 1991.
The former Hartlepool player provided the vital touch after Ironside had parried John Barnes shot.
But Middlesbrough quickly equalised through an own-goal by Steve Nicol.
Trying to clear Jimmy Phillips's free-kick, Nicol lobbed the ball over his own goalkeeper David James.
Six players were booked in an ill-tempered second-half though the referee took no action against Liverpool defender Mark Wright following a foul on striker Paul Wilkinson.
But Ayresome Park boss Lennie Lawrence was far from happy with his side and stormed: ‘We are such a soft touch it's unbelievable,’ he said.
‘Their first goal was down to a mistake and the second was so easy for them it defies belief.
‘If we continue like this we'll just go down and down and down.’
For Liverpool, this season's troubles have seen them in an unfamiliar battle to avoid being sucked into the relegation fight but Souness admitted: ‘It was a good game for us to win.
‘Rush was one of the few out there who did himself credit.
‘I thought we started well and that first goal should have settled us.
‘The own goal opened the game up and I thought it was scrappy after that.’
But the Liverpool man — a player with Middlesbrough 15 years ago, and still with a soft spot for the Teesiders, had a message of hope.
He said: ‘Middlesbrough to their credit, worked very hard and we were fortunate to get the break and go on and win.
‘Obviously having been a player here I desperately hope the club can pull out of trouble.’
GAULD GIVES DERRY HOPE
Penalty king grabs a point in Dublin duel
DERRY City stayed firmly in the race for the tightest League of Ireland Championship in years with a hard-earned 1–1 draw at Dalymount Park against Bohemians.
With a lot at stake for both sides the game began at a frantic pace with a goal arriving at each end in the first ten minutes.
Derry made a disappointing start — keeper Dermot O'Neill dropped Tommy Byrne's harmless cross after five minutes, and Tony O'Connor couldn't believe his luck as he lobbed the ball into the unprotected goal.
Four and a half minutes later the Brandywell club were level.
Declan Geoghegan made a high challenge on Mark Ennis just inside the area and Derry's penalty specialist Stuart Gauld — he's missed just one in eight seasons — fired the ball low to the goalkeeper's right.
City had a great chance to go ahead after 33 minutes but Carlyle, with only the keeper to beat, shot weakly at a grateful Henderson.
The Dubliners' were desperately keen to make home advantage pay.
They pinned the Derry side back in their own half for long periods during the latter stages.
But Roy Coyle's mean defence, which has conceded only 19 league goals in 28 games, stubbornly refused to yield with centre-backs Gauld and Curran in particularly defiant mood.
However, despite Bohemians late second-half domination, Derry almost snatched victory with a grandstand finish.
With only three minutes remaining Paul Mooney's corner produced a powerful header from Paul Curran which thundered back off the Bohemians' woodwork.
And in injury time, substitute Paul Trainor — who had replaced Arsenal's John Bacon in the Derry attack — could only watch in amazement as Bohemians keeper Dave Henderson flung himself across goal to turn away a header that looked to have decided the contest.
In a fiercely competitive match two Derry players were booked.
Colin Loss and Peter Hutton both went into the referee's notebook for late challenges.
McCallan and Byrne claim Blues' scalp
BANGOR HITMEN
BANGOR'S Stephen Eachus and Paul Byrne turned up at Windsor Park with their heads shaved for Comic Relief.
But former Blueman David McCallan had the last laugh on Linfield with a brilliant winner four minutes from time to put Bangor into the Bass Irish Cup semi-finals for the first time in 25 years.
The last time Bangor reached the last four was in 1968 when they lost to Crusaders.
Now they look to have a side which could go all the way for the first time.
They knocked out the favourites with a superb display of attacking football — coming from behind to score their first ever Irish Cup win over the Blues.
McCallan was their hero, scoring his 28th goal of the season to pay the Blues back for rejecting him on his return from Australia two seasons ago.
But the mastermind of Bangor's victory was midfielder Byrne.
Glasgow Celtic are reported to be keen on the Dublin-based player.
If Liam Brady had been at Windsor Park yesterday he wouldn't have hesitated to reach for his cheque-book.
Byrne was simply superb, making everything happen for Bangor and setting up their winner.
He picked up the ball on the edge of his penalty area, pushed it to Ricky McAvoy who laid on the chance for McCallan to drill his shot past Wesley Lamont.
Did Bangor deserve to win?
Linfield fans booed their team off the pitch and applauded Bangor.
That says it all.
It's the league or nothing now for the Blues, beaten for the second week running and suffering their first defeat at Windsor Park since last December 16.
Bangor came to Windsor Park intent on winning, and carried the game to Linfield.
The irrepressible Byrne curled a free kick round the Linfield wall after 15 minutes, but Lamont was equal to it.
And Canning's 37th minute shot just glanced a post.
Linfield had the best chance of the half, however, Eachus making a stunning save from a Johnston shot.
The Bangor fans in the Railway Stand had every reason to feel confident about the second-half.
But they weren't aware of a dressing-room drama as John Muldoon failed to respond to treatment for a hamstring injury.
That forced Bangor to bring on Michael Surgeon and drop Ray Hill back into the defence.
The Seasiders still hadn't adjusted as Linfield surged ahead 49 seconds into the second-half.
Lee Doherty set up Johnston for a right-wing cross and Gorman ghosted between two Bangor defenders to keep up his record of scoring in every round.
But his headed goal failed to stop Bangor.
The substitution worked both ways as Surgeon drove in a low cross for Canning to crash home a spectacular equaliser in the 64th minute.
McCallan's winner was even better — one of the goals of the season.
It was never anything but a sporting contest, yet four players were booked — Muldoon and McGuinness of Bangor along with Linfield's Johnstone and McCoosh.
CHAMPIONS!
RANDALSTOWN completed a superb double winning season when they added the Renault Senior League title to the Winemark Ulster Shield.
They defeated Victorians 7–0 with their GB international Jackie McWilliams scoring a hat-trick at Antrim Forum yesterday.
Ironically when Randalstown first won the league title two seasons Victorians again held the key to their title victory.
But Victorians, who are the yo-yo team of senior hockey, again plunge back to Section Two hockey next season.
In fairness to this young and skilful Victorians side they just didn't count yesterday as Randalstown were a class apart.
Randalstown are the side everyone tipped for league glory.
And they only faltered once to Portadown, who pushed them hard all season.
Two weeks ago Randalstown lost to Old Alexandra in the All Ireland Cup, but that was due to fatigue as the previous weekend they had been involved in the European Indoor Club Championship.
In the first minute of the game Jackie McWilliams scored her 40th goal of the season, easily lobbing the ball over Sharon Rowe in the Victorians goal from the edge of the circle.
This signalled the start of the victory celebrations as Randalstown swamped the Victorians circle.
In the 15th minute came a carbon copy to her first goal as Jackie McWilliams increased Randalstown's lead.
Ten minutes later captain Andrea McLean blasted home their seventh short corner.
With only a minute to half-time Carol Burns made it four, and just into the second-half Rhoda Campbell added another.
In the 43rd minute Jackie McWilliams scored her inevitable hat-trick, and five minutes later Mary King completed the rout.
Split at the highest level!
WHAT is happening in the corridors of power in the MCUI at Ulster Centre and at FMN level?
First the Killinchy Club are awarded a date in 1994 to run a World Championship 500 Motocross Grand Prix, and are then told by the Ulster Centre chairman that this is not on.
Reason?
It may clash with the international North West ‘200’ road race.
Killinchy Club spokesman George McCann said they originally wanted a date later in the year.
‘We went through the proper channels with our application,’ he said, ‘following the pattern that was used when we ran the 125 and 250 World Championships.
‘Having had some experience of the workings of the FIM in the past we accepted the date granted to us.
‘Usually you have no real choice in the matter, and anyhow, nobody knows what date will be given, or even chosen by the Coleraine Club for the North West.
‘To ask us to approach the ACU in Britain about an alternative date seems totally contrary to the accepted procedures.
‘Clubs never had the authority to negotiate World Championship dates before.’
If the problem is to be resolved now, the only option open to the Killinchy Club is to try for a date outside of the month of May 1994, which would leave all the options open for any North West date.
I reckon the chances of a completely different month are slim.
The second administrative problem within the governing body is the Irish Superbike round at Brands Hatch on Good Friday, April 9.
The idea of running a world round at Brands was announced at the Inter-Centre Conference in Belfast.
Because we do not have a suitable track on which to run a World Superbike round, the idea of running one in England under the Irish flag of convenience was hailed as a lucrative alternative, beneficial to the ACU and MCUI.
At one time a sum of £20,000 was mentioned, but seemingly has never materialised.
Yet the Irish Superbike round at Brands is a reality — but at what price?
A proposal to disclose details of the Brands deal was defeated on the casting vote of the Chairman at a meeting this week.
The Ulster Centre delegates promptly walked out in protest.
The Union is basically split in two at the highest level.
And to me this is much more important, and has far greater consequences for the sport here, then any fine print in the Brands Hatch disaster.
GOLF
SWEDE Anders Gillner ambled into the lead in the Turespana Balearic Open in Majorca yesterday — after being asked to slow down to accommodate television schedules.
The unknown 25-year-old fired a five under par 67 in the third round at Santa Ponsa to carry a one-stroke advantage into the final 18 holes tomorrow.
Gillner leads on 207, nine under par, with Bristol's Andrew Sherborne and halfway leader Steen Tinning just one stroke adrift.
Sherborne, twice a winner in Spain, compiled a best-of-the-day 66 with six birdies and no bogies to make his charge towards the leaders.
But the most surprised man in the field was Gillner when he was approached by a PGA European Tour official on the 13th and politely asked to take his time.
The Swede, playing in the penultimate group, finished his round just as Spanish television came on the air and the situation embarrassed tournament director David Probyn.
Malone must begin the defence of their AIB Senior Cup next Saturday week with a severely depleted side.
The Digital League champions overwhelmed Portadown at Chambers Park yesterday 41–16, but finished the match with only 13 men.
Centre Bill Harbinson went off early in the second half with a groin injury and could miss the rest of the season.
Number eight forward Ken Tuta finds himself out of bounds after being sent off along with Portadown centre Michael Daly in yesterday's match.
Malone are already resigned to being without Stuart Duncan and regular number eight Scott Kirkpatrick until next season.
Despite losing to Malone, Portadown are in pole position to join North, City of Derry and Collegians in Division 3 in next season's All Ireland League.
Queen's, who lost to Collegians yesterday still have a mathematical chance.
They are two points behind Portadown and would need to beat City of Derry by a landslide in their final match.
Across the water London Irish, watched by national coach Gerry Murphy, guaranteed themselves Courage League Division One rugby next season by beating West Hartlepool 25–13 at Sunbury.
Providing they beat both Saracens and London Scottish in their remaining two games they can finish as high as fifth in the Premier Division.
Irish international Simon Geoghegan rounded off the victory with a smashing late try, but Nial Malone was a reluctant spectator after Paul Burke had been preferred at outhalf.
BADMINTON
WALLACE High School defeated RBAI 8–7 in the Sprite Ulster Schools Minor Championship final at BRA to reach the All-Ireland play-offs in a fortnight's time.
The Lisburn school went on to complete a hat-trick of successes, winning the Under-12 decider and Minor girls final with 6–0 whitewashes over Ballyclare and Sullivan respectively.
Fergie and Ron have united aim
RON Atkinson and Alex Ferguson spent the Eighties trying to break Merseyside's stranglehold on the title.
Now, with both Liverpool and Everton among the also-rans the two men find themselves in the ironic position of standing in each others' way with the Premier League championship up for grabs.
Atkinson, Ferguson's predecessor at Old Trafford returns to the place where his United side were usually thereabouts — but never there.
Ferguson got closest last season, his team finally running out of steam at, of all places, Liverpool.
And with Atkinson's rebuilt Aston Villa the visitors to Old Trafford for today's title showdown, the irony goes on.
Atkinson has a lethal weapon in Dean Saunders — recruited from Liverpool — who is aiming to wreck United's dream.
And Ferguson brings back Brian Robson, the most significant of all Atkinson's Old Trafford recruits.
Robson is, however, unlikely to start the game as both sides aim to put some daylight between themselves at the top of the table.
Eric Cantona is available again so Andrej Kanchelskis will step down with Robson on the bench.
‘Cantona has been making things happen for us since he arrived here,’ said Ferguson, who believes United will bounce back from their surprise reverse at Oldham.
Atkinson meanwhile feels Saunders will be out to prove a point.
‘He seemed to have more chances in our draw with Spurs than the rest of the season put together,’ said Big Ron.
‘I wouldn't bet against him getting just one against United and burying it.’
With both sides failing to take advantage of each other 's slip-ups so far this season, today's game is unlikely to decide the championship.
But the losing manager will probably court the transfer market again.
‘What I'd really like is a new set of knees for Paul McGrath,’ said Atkinson — who of course‘made’the big Irishman at United before Fergie sold him.
BOXING
ULSTER boxers made a strong claim for an monopoly of the titles in the Maxol National Junior championship semi-finals at the National Stadium last night.
Oliver Duddy of Coleraine, Noel Monteith of Carrickmore, Richard Brannigan of Dockers and Brian Magee of Holy Trinity were good examples of the Ulster dominance.
Duddy, a flyweight, was a 16–6 winner over the talented Ken Andrews of St Matthew's but then came a shock in the division when Paddy Brown of Holy Trinity Belfast was beaten.
Brown was expected to reach next Friday's finals at least considering his gold medal success in his inaugural European Youth's tournament last October.
However, he went down to a promising Dubliner Noel Higgins of Glasnevin 13–11.
Monteith at featherweight was a 12–6 winner over Keith Butler of Killymount and Brian Magee atoned for his clubmate Frances Webb's defeat with a 12–4 win over Thomas Donnelly of Kildress.
Brannigan had perhaps the most convincing win in that he beat Darren Devers the strong Ballina boxer 10–4 to reach the light welter final.
He meets Mark Wickham of St Patrick's Enniscorthy and the Wexford boy gave suitable warning to Brannigan by accounting for Ronauld Heagney of Kildress 8–3.
Byrne stays as long as Bangor are still in cup
GLASGOW Celtic chief scout John Kelman missed the plane on a planned spying mission to watch Bangor midfield star Paul Byrne at Windsor Park yesterday.
Now Celtic may have missed the boat!
Byrne was outstanding as Bangor dumped hot favourites Linfield out of the Bass Irish Cup.
A local Celtic representative was there to see Byrne inspire Bangor to a thrilling 2–1 win.
But Byrne said afterwards: ‘I won't be going anywhere while Bangor are still in the Irish Cup.’
Republic of Ireland U-21 player Byrne, from Dublin, was the star of the show as Bangor scored their first ever Irish Cup win over Linfield to reach the semis for the first time in 25 years.
He turned up at the game with his head shaven, Gazza style, to raise money for a children's cancer charity as part of Friday's Comic Relief day.
Then he turned on the style to sink Linfield.
Byrne said later: ‘The local Celtic scout said he would have signed me on the spot.
‘Our manager Nigel Best told me a Celtic representative from Scotland would be watching me.
But I believe he missed the plane.
‘I would jump at the chance of a move because it would be big step in my own career at 20, and a financial boost for Bangor.
‘But I want to stay now and help the club win the Irish Cup.’
Even Linfield manager Trevor Anderson admitted plucky Bangor deserved to wreck his well-laid plans.
He said: ‘They deserved to win and we didn't because we didn't play at all.
‘It was disappointing to say the least.’
Bangor boss Nigel Best enthused: ‘We gave everything and Paul Byrne was outstanding.
‘Dave McCallan took his winner with style, but I was impressed too by Tony Canning.’
McCallan said: ‘I may not have been in the game a lot until I got my goal, but that made it up for it.’
Tony takes his treble chance in fine style
JOCKEY Tony Martin and trainer Billy Rock scored a quick treble at the East Down Foxhounds Point-to-Point at Tyrella yesterday.
Martin, who is now the leading jockey on the Ulster circuit, scored on Joey Kelly in the open race which formed the middle leg of his three-timer.
The other wins were on Moylena in the Mares Maiden, and Killymaddy in the Four and Five Year Old Maiden.
Joey Kelly has become something of a racing machine for he was only beaten a short head at Enniskillen last Saturday, then won at Dromore on Wednesday before being turned out again yesterday.
At the finish he had plenty to spare over It's Tough with Moving Statue, who had looked dangerous at one stage, in third place.
Ulster champion jockey Paddy Graffin was taken to hospital with an injured hand after Late Stretch had fallen in the Mares Race, but he returned in time to ride Glenmavis in the final race.
Paul McMahon took the race on Moorechurch Glen for his second success since returning from England.
McMahon was successful on Another Machine for Dromore's Tom Wilson on Wednesday and the same connections were responsible for Moorechurch Glen.
Schools FA in semi plea
SCHOOLS FA officials will this week ask the IFA to switch the Ards-Cliftonville Bass Irish Cup semi-final from Friday, April 2 to the next day.
The Friday date clashes with a prestige Northern Ireland v England schools' international at Ards' Castlereagh Park ground.
A Schools FA spokesman said: ‘It's an unfortunate clash of dates.
All our plans could be wrecked.
‘We have recruited turnstile men, car park attendants and programme sellers from the Ards supporters clubs.
‘If the semi-final goes ahead on Friday night we will lose them.
‘No-one from Ards will be there to provide a reception.
The attendance will also be hit.’
CYCLING
BRENDAN Graham (O'Rourkes Coal), winner at Bangor last Saturday, won again yesterday at Kilroot in the Team Madigan 100km road race.
With the race being the first nominated for the Commonwealth Games panel to ride, the 80-strong field contained a big 21 contingent of top riders and they closely marked each other for most of the race.
Over the first two of three laps, there were continual attacks but all were chased down.
On the final lap, Mark Smyth (O'Rourkes Coal) opened a small gap just before the climb and he was joined first by Graham, then Alastair Martin (Ardsike the Bike) and Gerald Irvine (Toyota North Down) with Cormac McCann (Phoenix) the last to make a successful effort to bridge 21 the gap.
When these five worked together, they soon opened a 30-second gap and, despite all the efforts of the field, they stayed together to the finish where Graham won the sprint from Martin with all five times equal.
The chasers were led in by Norman Campbell (unattached) 20 seconds behind.
Gary Scott out-sprinted his Newry Haldane Fisher teammate Barry Monaghan and Clann Eireann's Kieran Downey at the finish of the 80km Cicli Sport Grand Prix, promoted by the RT Autoparts East Tyrone CC at Moneymore.
There were seven riders in the scratch group which started two minutes behind the 60-strong first group and they had eliminated this handicap by the second of five laps.
Then scratchmen Scott and Monaghan, along with Downey (Clann Eireann), broke clear and opened a small gap.
There was a strong chase behind and the leaders never got more than a 25-second gap but they held on to the finish where Scott was strongest up the hill to 21 win by a second with Downey a further 14 seconds back.
ATHLETICS
THE 11th annual Lisburn half marathon and fun run, scheduled for Wednesday June 16, should again attract upwards of 3,000 runners.
Sponsored by Coca-Cola there are substantial awards on offer in the 13 and a half miles race, plus additional prizes for new course records.
These currently stand at 64.10 to Dubliner Roy Dooney, and 76.38 to Moira O'Neill.
The Lisburn event traditionally draws big names, as a glance through the previous winners list confirms.
They include Dooney, Maghera man Tommy Hughes, County Armagh's Terry Greene, and last year's winner Dublin ace Jerry Kiernan.
Kiernan, always a popular visitor here, and winner of last year's Dublin marathon, looks to be the man to beat this year also.
The women's category has also attracted many of Ireland's top stars, with in addition to Moira O'Neill, we have Theresa Duffy and Theresa Kidd.
June's event takes on a new prize category, a team award.
‘Clubs are free to enter as many runners as they wish,’ said organiser Paul Whitten.
‘The first three members to cross the line will score points, it's that simple.’
Not so simple — or cheap — will be late entries, a nuisance which frustrates race organisers.
‘There should be no excuse for entering late,’ Whitten, sports development Officer for Lisburn Borough Council emphasised.
‘Entry forms are available now, closing date is June 7, and anyone not entered by then will have to pay substantially more than the £4.50 for the half marathon and £3.50 for the fun run fees now in force.’
The charity to benefit this year is Leukaemia Research, and Lisburn's own golden girl Mary Peters has made a plea for runners to help the valuable work of this group by obtaining sponsorship.
GERRY CARSON
Repeat action from Limeridge
JIMMY WALKER REPORTS
LIMERIDGE, repeated his win of last year when taking the Open Race at the Mid-Antrim Hunt Point-to-Point at Ballymena yesterday.
Owned and ridden by Graeme Martin, Limeridge was winning his second point-to-point of the season, and his fifth in all.
He also was successful in a hurdle race at Down Royal.
Always lying handy as Coco Dancer led for most of the trip, Limeridge took up the running from Coco Dancer going to the last fence and at this stage was hotly pursued by the favourite Canute Express.
Then on the tight turn before the finish when Limeridge was clear, Coco Dancer slipped and dislodged his jockey Colin McBratney who was unhurt.
Canute Express finished second and Jimmy's Double third.
Tony Martin increased his lead in the Ulster jockeys championship when he made all the running on Bye For Now to take a division of the Mares Maiden Race.
Majestic Irish rise to the occasion
ROSE CRUSHED UNDER FOOT BY MURPHY'S HEROES
IRELAND 17 ENGLAND 3
IRELAND cut the blooming English rose down to size at Lansdowne Road yesterday with a majestic performance of heroic proportions.
This was one of the truly great days of Irish sport, one to enrich the memory and one to savour long after other matches have been consigned to the record books.
From an early stage the atmosphere was electric, and as the match progressed the Irish players were caught up on one big roller coaster of unrivalled passion and emotion.
Who even in their wildest dreams could have anticipated such a victory only nine weeks after the same side had been overwhelmed 15–3 by Scotland at Murrayfield.
The transition in coach Gerry Murphy's side in the subsequent weeks has been quite astonishing.
It's a striking testimony to the unstinting efforts of everyone involved, primarily the players and management who have had to contend with criticism that too often was both vindictive and personalised.
By the finish Ireland had 14 points to spare, their winning margin large enough to dispel all doubts and arguments at one of the greatest upsets in recent times.
If ever there was a team performance this was it, with the most striking feature the absolute and total commitment of an inspirational Irish side which simply left England reeling.
Ireland's pack rightfully deserves all the superlatives.
Both in rucking and mauling they were the complete masters.
In the tight, the front row of Popplewell, Kingston and Clohessey gave Ireland a decisive edge.
In the line outs, so well did the Irish vary their throws that England's much greater height advantage was nullified to a large degree through the efforts of Johns and Galwey, with the former having his best ever match in the Irish jersey.
The back row simply carried on where it left off against the Welsh with the indestructible McBride, Robinson and O'Hara repeatedly first to the breakdown.
When England threatened to produce the magic that dazzled Scotland the back row stood defiant to a man, covering and tackling with fanatical commitment and dedication.
It was only his second international but again out half Eric Elwood stole the show with a marvellous and mature performance.
He was responsible for 12 of Ireland's 17 points, comprised of two penalties and two drop goals.
But those statistics alone don't tell the full story, for throughout the match he totally out played his opposite number Stuart Barnes and literally never put a foot wrong.
Captain and scrum half Michael Bradley was also a major influence with a steady, measured and controlled performance that always had the pack going forwards.
The three quarters, too, made telling contributions, in particular centres Cunningham and Danaher who repeatedly defied England with a series of bone crushing tackles.
England will look back with regret on a first half which saw them produce only one score, and that a debatable penalty seven minutes before the interval.
They had won the toss, but even with wind advantage were unable to impose their authority such was the tenacity, commitment and determination of the Ireland pack.
But midway through the first half, with England for once turning the screw, Rory Underwood was denied a try by Denis McBride's crunching tackle that wrenched the ball from the flying winger's grasp.
McBride's intervention at such a crucial stage visibly lifted the Irish and six minutes later Elwood was on target with the first of his penalties.
England then equalised with a controversial Webb penalty seven minutes before the break to leave it 3–3 at the interval.
Two minutes into the second half Elwood's drop goal reinforced Ireland's victory push and within minutes the same player was on target with a penalty to open up a six point gap.
In the final quarter England threatened to snatch the lead with a movement from deep within their own half, Jeremy Guscott knocking on just yards from the line after Rory Underwood's fine touchline run.
But four minutes from the finish Elwood's second drop goal offered Ireland some much need breathing space.
With the game going into added time Michael Galwey, after good work by Geoghegan, Clarke and Bradley, got in for an Irish try.
It was partially borne of English desperation, Will Carling's pass flying behind his support allowing the Irish to swarm through and complete a memorable chapter in the resurgence of Irish rugby.
Sean McCague — welcomes move
League crunch for Down
THERE'S never any danger of familiarity breeding contempt as far as the footballers of Down and Meath are concerned.
Eighteen months ago Down captured their fourth Sam Maguire with victory over Meath in an absorbing and memorable All Ireland decider.
Prior to that Meath had come off best when they accounted for Down in the 1990 league decider.
More recently they shared the points when they came face to face in the league opener at Newry.
Regardless of the competition, or the time of year, matches between these two counties are invariably crunch confrontations.
Now they find themselves pitched together again at Castleblayney this afternoon in a play-off to determine who makes it through to the quarter-final stages of the National League.
Down are going through something of an identity crisis in that their form fluctuates wildly from week to week.
There were times in the second-half against Monaghan when they looked formidable, with Ross Carr in particular in fine scoring form.
But then against Clare they flattered to deceive and were ultimately found wanting in the second-half, prompting manager Peter McGrath to question the attitude of many of his squad.
The indestructible D J Kane, one of the most competitive players in the sport, accepts that the manager's criticism was justified.
He said: ‘We should have killed off Clare in the second-half when we had wind advantage and an extra man, but we failed to do so.
‘People wouldn't read too much into our last victory over Waterford, but scoring 20 points was a fair achievement and quite a confidence booster.
‘Traditionally games against Meath are always close, and I wouldn't expect this one to be any different.’
Reflecting on Down's immediate future he adds: ‘You have to remember that the championship is only eight or nine weeks away so the more competitive football we get the better.
‘Training is an integral part of any side's preparation, but there's no substitute for competitive games.’
It's difficult to envisage a Down side without his cutting and competitive edge.
He is firmly established in the half back line, which allows him the luxury of being able to press forward in support of his attacking colleagues.
With his club Newry Shamrocks he's equally at home at centre half back.
And as they prepare for first division football he's relishing another challenge, just as he's looking forward to renewing acquaintances with certain Meath players today.
Meath are very much at a transitional stage.
Mick Lyons has departed the scene, All Ireland captain Liam Hayes is still recovering from a broken arm, although one of the sport's enduring personalities Colm O'Rourke has rejoined the squad after a 10 month absence.
Finalists deserve credit
TWENTY years on the All Ireland club competitions continue to enjoy unrivalled popularity.
The double-header at Croke Park on St Patrick's Day featuring both the football and hurling finals attracted a crowd in excess of 20,000.
With the football decider having ended in deadlock Carlow champions Eire Og and O'Donovan Rossa of Cork must meet again this afternoon at the Gaelic Grounds Limerick to decide which side lifts the prestigious trophy for a first time.
Eleven days ago these sides contrived to conjure up one of the really memorable Croke Park finals that won't be easily forgotten by those fortunate enough to have been present.
On reflection Eire Og will probably feel they should have come up trumps, but they were never able to put enough daylight between themselves and their opponents.
The Carlow men, ahead two goals and three points to five points within sight of half-time, had to settle for being level at the break after Mick McCarthy's well struck goal.
Regardless of the outcome both clubs deserve tremendous credit for their efforts in the drawn game, and for ensuring the competition gets the headlines for all the right reasons.
Ronan's double delight
COLLEGES star Ronan Hamill is a winner twice over.
He led St Colman's College to victory over old adversaries St Pat's, Maghera in the MacRory Cup final with a marvellous individual performance that saw him become the first winner of the Iggy Jones Memorial Trophy.
He said: ‘It's an unbelievable feeling.
I would have gladly settled for winning a MacRory Cup medal, but to be captain and Man-of-the-match is fantastic.’
The superb Tyrone Crystal trophy, donated by the Dungannon Clarkes club to the Man-of-the-match in the MacRory Cup decider, is a fitting memorial to one of the greatest ever colleges players.
Jones first grabbed the sporting headlines in the 1946 Hogan Cup final when St Pat's, Armagh captured the trophy for the first time.
He produced a performance of rare and unrivalled sporting excellence scoring three goals and six points which guaranteed his place in colleges folklore.
Earlier in 1946 Jones's brilliance had cut short St Colman's brave bid to capture their first MacRory Cup, but they persevered and three years later captained by Sean Blaney, Greg's father, they won their first MacRory.
Also on that side were the late John Joe Sands, Martin Walsh, the Down team doctor for the past three decades, and Malachy Finnegan, a former President of the College.
It was quite a year for the affable and unassuming Sean Blaney, who within months had led his native Armagh to their one and only All Ireland minor success.
Now the Newry boys are back on the Hogan Cup trail preparing to face to St Pats, Navan in next months semi-final, but without four of their MacRory Cup winning side, Charlie Pat McCartan, Declan Toner, Michael McVerry and Tony Fearon.
Bajan Blues is pick of the crop
DOWN Royal have received an unusually high number of entries for their meeting next Saturday which clashes with the Grand National.
There is a gap in the middle of the day for the National to be viewed.
After the mixed card on St Patrick's Day we are back to an all National Hunt affair and the main race, the Sportsman Hunter Chase, may go to Bajan Blues who almost brought off the shock defeat of Matt Reid at the last meeting.
Bajan Blues, owned by Dr Fitz Gillespie and trained by his son Pat, has won two point to points this year and is useful to say the least.
Helynsar ran well in the later stages of her race at the last meeting when Treat Me Good scored and she may be worth following against a moderate lot in the Moira Novices Chase.
Fun ‘N Games, who finished third to Tartan Tyrant at Ayr, could get into it and Carton has been running well enough lately to merit an interest.
He would be my choice in the absence of Helynsar, who on her hurdling form would romp this.
Cloughtaney is a name from the past.
A former winner of the Bishops Cleeve Hurdle at Cheltenham's January meeting he also took the Soudevar Hurdle at Down Royal when in his prime.
Now 12 years old he carries top weight in the Maze Handicap Hurdle.
This is a highly interesting race for top chaser River Tarquin, who was entered by Jim Dreaper for the Grand National, is also in the line-up.
Khazari won here for the Triple Diamond Syndicate and would deserve a chance, but perhaps another course winner Titian Blonde may be the right one.
Physio Millar keeps Ards fit for Cup glory
UNSUNG HERO
IF Ards win the Bass Irish Cup, they will strike an extra medal for physio Jim Millar.
Magic sponge man Millar is the unsung hero behind Ards’ run to Friday's semi-final.
Manager Paul Malone surveyed another packed treatment room after yesterday's game with Linfield and said: ‘We've suffered a bad run of injuries over the last month.
‘Jim has been patching players up to keep them going from week to week.
‘Our top four scorers, Darren Erskine, Harry McCourt, Andy Beattie and Tommy McDonald will all need treatment this week.
‘And Brian Campbell is almost certainly ruled out with a chipped bone.
‘It might mean overtime for the physio but we need all our strikers fit to face the Reds.’
Ards were the form side when the Cup kicked off in January and my dark horses for the final.
They have suffered a few setbacks since clinching their place in the last four, including a midweek League Cup semi-final knockout by Coleraine.
But defiant Malone insisted last night: ‘We will be fired up to reach our first final since 1974.
‘Ards have been out of the picture since then but I've enjoyed a good Irish Cup record at my other clubs, getting to the final three times as a player and twice as Larne's manager.
‘Unfortunately that's where my luck usually ran out.
I was a winner just once with Ballymena in ‘81.
‘But I believe the omens are on my side this time.
When I took Larne to the ‘87 final against Glentoran we defeated Cliftonville in a semi-final replay.
‘An Ards-Glentoran final is my prediction.’
Dublin airport worker Mark Gill is the man who could leave Malone grounded.
Former Shelbourne striker Gill has hammered in five goals to help end a Cliftonville famine since moving north last month — eight in partnership with former Glentoran Cup veteran Ron Manley.
The pair had never met before teaming up in a new-look Reds attack.
But manager Frankie Parks said last night: ‘You would think they had been pals all their life.
‘They've not only developed a great understanding on the pitch.
You rarely see them apart before and after games.
‘All the time they are talking about how they can boost their goals tally.
‘I would like them to score a few more — preferably against Ards on Friday.’
Parks will be elevated to folk hero status by Cliftonville's fanatical fans if he delivers the Cup to Solitude for the first time since 1979.
He admitted last night: ‘It would be incredible if we pulled it off after all the upheaval at the club this season.
‘If anyone had told me when I took over in November that we would be in the Irish Cup semi-final, I wouldn't have believed it.
‘My priority was to blend new faces into the team and we have succeeded on that score.
But we are far from the finished article.
‘And while the Cup is important, we also owe the fans good league performances.
‘All four remaining sides are capable of winning the trophy.
For the sake of our fans who stood by us through the lean years, I would love to bring it to Cliftonville.’
Jim stuck in the middle
GLENTORAN v BANGOR
THE McCloskey clan from Bangor have pencilled in May 1 for a family day out at the Bass Cup Final.
But first there's the small matter of a semi-final clash that has split the household down the middle.
Dad Jim McCloskey senior, Bangor's youth team coach, will rush from his side's morning match to see son Jim junior stride out at Windsor Park in the colours of Glentoran.
And it's not just father and son who are on opposite sides.
Mum Ann, east Belfast born and bred, is hoping her boy helps the Glens to victory.
Girlfriend Shirley, a Bangor fan, will be cheering for the Seasiders.
And a battle is on for the divided loyalties of the younger McCloskey brothers, Jonathon and Martin.
‘The banter in the house hasn't stopped since the draw was made,’ says Glentoran's Jim.
‘The younger lads are the only ones not sure who to support.
They used to be Bangor fans but I think I have won them over to Glentoran.’
The tall 21-year-old striker used to be a Bangor favourite himself.
He scored a bagful of goals to help the club book their first passport to Europe two years ago and went on to star in their Ulster Cup winning team the next season.
Then he caused a shock on the club and home front by switching to Glentoran.
‘Bangor had a bad run after coming back from Europe — 13 games without a win,’ he recalls.
‘John Flanagan decided changes were needed and I lost my place.
‘I was brought back eventually but by then I felt I needed a change as well.
‘It was an amicable move.
There was no fall-out with anyone at Bangor.
It's not that type of club.
‘I left with a lot of respect for John Flanagan and his coach Nigel Best who's now the manager.
‘And he has inspired some impressive results.
‘When I played for Bangor we loved putting one over on Linfield or Glentoran — and nothing seems to have changed.
‘But Glentoran are playing well again and I am confident our Cup tradition will stand by us.
‘Whatever happens, the whole family will be at the final — hopefully to cheer me on.
But if the worst happens, I will join my dad and Shirley in hoping for a Bangor win.’
Big chance for stars of the future
THE province's young emerging stars of the future have a chance to enhance their reputations still further when the Ulster development side face their Leinster counterparts at Donnybrook on Easter Tuesday.
Manager Andy Crawford, successfully carrying on the work instigated initially by Syd Millar three seasons ago, is delighted at the progress so far.
He said: ‘We don't judge our progress by the results we achieve, rather by the number of players who eventually go on to play for the full Ulster side.
‘Obviously we were thrilled that 12 of the Ulster team that beat the Saltires last month first cut their teeth with the development side.
‘Our main thrust is to improve individual as well as team skills through work at squad sessions.’
Already this season Ulster have beaten Ireland U-21s and an Australian outback Barbarians side.
In the last week of the season they are scheduled to face an Ulster Presidents XV, which is in essence an official trial.
New clubs to cure problem with injury
Vibrations are good for Clarke
DERIC HENDERSON REPORTS
ULSTER'S Darren Clarke hopes to be free of a wrist injury by the time he catches a flight for France tomorrow.
Physiotherapy and anti-inflammatory tablets are helping to clear up tendonitis which forced him to return home early from Majorca earlier this month.
New clubs with special shafts have now been bought in an effort to prevent fresh trouble with the right wrist.
Clarke (24), who suffered from this ailment before, says he isn't unduly worried.
Too many hours hitting practice shots on hard ground aggravated the old problem.
He missed the Kronenbourg Open in Italy, but is all set for Oilette d'Anthon, the next stage of the European PGA tour and the £250,000 Lyon Open which begins on Thursday.
The new clubs are vital to his rate of recovery.
Darren explained: ‘They have graphite shafts which react in the same way as steel, but when you strike the ball they absorb the vibration.
‘Your forearms are not under the same sort of strain.
‘Players with bad wrists use them.
The vibration is much, much less.
‘I'm not that concerned.
The problem will go away again.
‘It's just a question of time.
I was ready to go to Italy this week, but was advised not to.
The rest should help considerably.
The scramble for Ryder Cup points has intensified.
But even though he is still very much in the running for a place at The Belfry in September Clarke refuses to get carried away.
His first triumph in Europe ramins the No 1 aim once he can keep his game together for all four rounds, instead of going off the rails at a crucial stage.
He said: ‘There are so many tournaments to go before the Ryder Cup, and quite honestly I'm not looking that far forward.
‘I want to keep playing well, and if I can't make the team then I want to be in a position to give myself a real chance in America in two years time.’
Darren is in 20th position in the qualifying points table, one behind Ronan Rafferty.
David Feherty is 14th.
He added: ‘Winning in Europe sometime in the near future is a much greater priority.
I have been playing well, but the consistency isn't what it might be.
‘The wrong shot can mean a treble bogey, and then it's a struggle trying to catch up.
You find yourself working too hard, and then playing another bad shot.’
Clarke is now tournament professional at the K-Club, Straffan, County Kildare — he has just switched from the equally fashionable Mount Julliet, County Kilkenny — and manager Andrew Chandler believes a European victory is definitely on the cards for Ulster's emerging star.
He said: ‘This problem with his wrist is an irritation and inconvenience, but maybe a blessing in disguise.
‘He has been having a good rest, and by the time the middle of next month comes round when the big money tournaments start, he won't be knackered like some of the others.
‘It'll be very disappointing if Darren doesn't win one this season.
The guy's potential is enormous.
He's already had a few chances, but his time will come…bank on it.’
LIONS CALL THE PERFECT BOOST
Galwey gets just reward
NO Hollywood script writer could have conjured up a story to compare with the one Michael Galwey has produced and starred in.
How appropriate that it was his try which sealed Ireland's glorious victory over England at Lansdowne Road last Saturday.
For the big Shannon man, more than anyone else, epitomises the new, vibrant and resurgent mood of Irish rugby.
It was fitting that he was last to leave the Lansdowne Road arena.
The day belonged to Ireland, and in particular to the big-hearted Kerryman.
The contrast with the situation six weeks earlier could scarcely have been greater.
Then he lay in a Dublin hospital bed with his neck in a brace, his rugby future hanging by the merest thread.
He had in fact been told his days in the sport were over.
For 96 hours he waited for someone to explain the shadow on his X-ray.
Then out of the blue he was given the go-ahead to play again.
There was no time for recriminations or second thoughts.
Within an hour he had gone from a hospital ward to the training pitch.
Reflecting on the most traumatic period of his life, let alone his rugby career, he said: ‘I just felt like a man reprieved.
‘It really didn't look too good at first.
I honestly felt I was finished.’
But within a week of leaving a Dublin hospital Galwey was named at No 8 on the Irish team to face France at Lansdowne Road.
His late try, which inflicted even greater embarrassment on Geoff Cooke's flawed England, will long be cherished as the perfect signature on an extraordinary Irish triumph.
Philip Danaher's persistence forced Will Carling to spill his pass, Eric Elwood flipping the ball to full back Ciaran Clarke, who in turn fed scrum half and captain Michael Bradley.
Who else but Galwey should arrive full steam at his shoulder, outpacing even Simon Geoghegan in his hunger for the ball.
Nobody had a chance of stopping him, least of all Tony Underwood.
As the roars of approval reverberated around the ground he grinned an uncomfortable grin, almost one of embarrassment.
You knew though that his day was made.
From the moment Galwey won his first international cap against Namibia two years ago the experts claimed he was too short for an international lock forward, too slow to be an effective No 8.
Regardless of what Nick Popplewell and he might achieve in the months ahead with the Lions last Saturday will never leave him.
Typically on hearing the news of his Lions selection his first thoughts were for others.
He said: ‘I'm terribly disappointed that only two of us are making the trip.
‘My priority had always been to get back into the Irish side, and I was never prepared to look any further than that.
‘Being chosen for the Lions is an unexpected bonus.’
The inclusion of only two Irish players though in the touring party is a downright disgrace.
Prop Peter Clohessey, hooker Terry Kingston, and No 8 Brian Robinson can feel especially aggrieved.
Lynsey gets dream call for Ireland
THIS is one season 19-year-old Lynsey McVicker won't forget in a hurry.
Lynsey, a former Dalriada schoolgirl, has been included in the Irish senior squad for the Home Countries Championships in Wales next month.
This is her first season with Senior League side Portadown and she has already established a regular place on the firsts, developing at the same time into one of the most promising players in the country.
Lynsey has come through the ranks from Ulster Under-16 level, to the Under-21s, before gaining selection for the Ulster senior squad.
But she suffered a setback when a bout of glandular fever looked like bringing her season to an abrupt halt.
Thankfully she made a quick and full recovery, and was outstanding for the Irish Under-21s at last month's Home Countries Championships.
Now comes selection for the full Irish side.
Her rise through the ranks has surprised her.
She said: ‘I still can't believe so much has happened.
My hockey has improved since I joined Portadown from Ballymoney, they are a great club.
‘The players are fantastic to play with and are always encouraging me.
‘It has been a marvellous season for me and everyone has been really pleased with my progress.
I think my mum is still in a state of shock after I told her about my Irish selection.’
Sporting success though runs in the McVicker family.
Lynsey's grandfather was Dr James McVicker from Ballymoney, and he toured with the British Lions rugby side that went to South Africa in 1924.
Her aunt Moyra McElderry captained the Irish hockey side in the 1960s.
And mum Arlene was a member of the Northern Ireland athletics team, and held the NI record for the 800 metres.
Two years ago Lynsey was also selected as a 100 metre runner for the Northern Ireland athletics team to face Canada.
At 19, therefore, Lynsey has already achieved more than most sportsmen and sportswomen dream of.
She now has every chance of being included in the Ireland World Cup squad.
‘I would love to be included,’ she said.
‘But we will have to just wait and see.’
Cees plans a new look
AFTER finishing 12th in the last World Cup in Lahore coach Cees Koppelaar pledged to ‘create a new Ireland.’
Next weekend in Dublin Ulster bid for a record sixth successive inter-provincial crown — their 12th title in 13 years.
And afterwards they expect to form the nucleus of the ‘new’ Ireland built for Poland and August's Inter Continental Cup.
Such has been the volume of turnover in personnel from Pakistan that even Ulster's two inter-pro debutantes at Whitechurch Park can harbour claims for an Ireland place.
Julian Stevenson (21) and Errol Lutton (22) have experienced agonies and ecstasies in the last fortnight at club level.
The former has watched his Garvey side fall from grace in the Harp Senior League championship, while Lutton's Newry outfit ensured Section One survival.
Stevenson, likely to jostle only with Jimmy Kirkwood as Garvey's Player-of-the-year, ought to win his first Ulster senior cap against Munster on Friday night.
‘I've been biding my time waiting for this Ulster call, and was delighted when John Clarke gave me the nod,’ he said.
‘I got to Holland and Belgium last August with the Ireland training panel but failed to win my first cap, but helping Ulster to another Leinster Regiment Cup may be just the springboard this time.’
Lutton, reasonably happy with his performance in last weekend's Irish trials in Dublin, accepts he may have to wait that little bit longer to gain Irish recognition.
‘Winning a first Ulster senior cap next weekend will be a nice stepping stone, although the Inter Continental Cup seems a long way off,’ says Lutton.
Ulster coach John Clarke welcomes back Holywood pair John McKee and Mark Burns, who both missed last year's series, while Marty Sloan and Jimmy Kirkwood complete an experienced quartet boasting over 400 Ireland caps between them.
Ulster squad: Mark Burns, John McKee, Kyle Thompson (all Holywood), Dan Clarke, Julian Stevenson, Jimmy Kirkwood, Raymond Geddis, Peter Richardson, Alan Dowd (all Lisnagarvey).
Marty Sloan (captain), Geoffrey Hamilton (both Cookstown), Errol Lutton (Newry), David McAnulty (Banbridge), Greg Sterrit (Cliftonville), Paul Hollway (Instonians), Robin Madeley (Three Rock Rovers).
Booth one to watch
NEIL Booth may not have won any silverware in Swansea.
But the Irish Under-25 and Open singles champion did earn a place in the record books.
He was the first bowler to compete in both the Under-25 and Open Singles semi-finals at the British Isles Indoor Championship.
And Booth did enough to suggest it will only be a matter of time before he is crowned national champion.
There has been a shortage of top class Irish singles players — outdoor and indoor — over the past few years.
Booth will be hoping for a Private Greens league singles championship, and then an Irish one to put him in the frame for Commonwealth Games selection.
Alex Lightbody, the reigning Irish champion, will also do his cause a power of good if he does well at the British Isles Championship in Worthing.
The international team will be selected after the Inter-Association series in Dublin, and shortly after the Worthing event in July the Commonwealth Games team for Vancouver Island will be named.
Republic on edge
EVEN great Dane, Michael Laudrup, couldn't do it.
Nor the Spaniard with the silky touches, Martin Vasquez.
That's score a goal against the Republic in the present World Cup.
Naturally, Albania and Latvia failed as well.
Four qualifiers gone, and not a goal given away.
No wonder Jack Charlton thinks the world of his defenders.
But anxiety has been flickering across their faces since they heard about Northern Ireland's triumph in Albania.
Big Alan Kernaghan sums up: ‘Scoring twice there was some going.
To get one goal away from home in the World Cup is good.
To hit two is brilliant.
‘Northern Ireland hadn't managed that years earlier when they went there with George Best in their team.
‘So they'll be coming to Lansdowne Road really fancying their chances.’
Hearing Kernaghan's Bangor accent run through the Republic's chances sounds so odd, though.
His folks still stay there, his wife's as well.
He married a girl from the Co Down town where he grew up and went to school.
Weird and wonderful international rules, however, decreed that Billy Bingham couldn't pick him, but Jack Charlton could.
But the strapping Middlesbrough centre half insists: ‘There's no tug of loyalties over Wednesday's game.
‘Jack Charlton's totally committed to getting the Republic into the Finals next summer.
And so am I.
‘I would just love it though if Northern Ireland could get there along with us.
‘But their chances won't look so good if they lose in Dublin.
And I think the Republic have the edge.
‘Especially in midfield.
Look at the class there with Roy Keane, Ray Houghton, Andy Townsend and Ronnie Whelan.
All of them are top Premier League stars.’
Kernaghan and his mates are amazed that Northern Ireland won't be sending Danny Wilson into this combat zone.
‘Everybody rates Danny.
It's so strange he never gets selected now.
There's a rumour goes round that it's because of something he's said.
But I find it hard to believe there could be such a petty reason.’
The Republic have goal poacher John Aldridge missing.
That's because of injury, though, and Kernaghan observes:
‘Still leaves us with Niall Quinn and David Kelly who has scored over two dozen for Newcastle, doesn't it?’
There's just that ripple of concern that has washed in from Albania.
And tips about North's mystery man, Philip ‘Tippy’ Gray are being scrounged.
Premier League men like Kernaghan, Kevin Moran and Paul McGrath can't even recall seeing Bingie's new striker from Luton before.
‘He must be good to have scored so many in a struggling side.
And so many Premier League sides are after him.
Mine is apparently amongst them.
‘Big Iain Dowie is a handful now as well.
He really puts himself about.
‘Then there's Jimmy Quinn.
He's made a habit of nicking match winners all his career.’
SHAMROCK ROVERS boss Ray Treacy arrives at the Brandywell today vowing to attack Roy Coyle's Derry in their FAI Cup quarter-final.
‘I want to see my team play good football and I'm not stepping aside from that.
I know we have the ability to attack Derry — it's the only way we can play,’ he insists.
Treacy goes into today's game with only tradition on his side.
Rovers have won the Cup a record 22 times.
But they are currently going through one of the worst spells in their history and slumped to an all-time low last Sunday, losing 3–0 at home to fellow relegation strugglers Drogheda United.
Former Republic international Treacy labelled that performance ‘a disgrace’.
In sharp contrast, Derry are chasing a League and Cup double.
But despite the vast difference in form between the teams, Treacy refuses to budge from his principles.
‘I expect to stay in the competition — Derry are favourites but Cup football all about shocks,’ he warns.
Treacy is pinning his hopes on Derry again falling victim to a goal famine of crisis proportions.
City's goals tally is the lowest among the six clubs in the elite group scrapping for the title.
And that weakness was further underlined last Sunday when enough chances to win several matches were squandered against Limerick.
However a glimmer of hope has appeared on the horizon.
The form of the on-loan Arsenal forward John Bacon, who has scored a couple of crucial goals in recent weeks, and Stuart Gauld's uncanny accuracy from penalties and free kicks, are potentially lethal weapons in the Derry armoury.
And a solid defence has kept Derry's challenge alive in the tightest finish ever to a League of Ireland season.
Manager Coyle, understandably, refuses to discuss the possibility of a double triumph.
The official line is: ‘We are just happy to still be involved in two major competitions.’
The ex-Linfield boss has instilled good organisation and a never-say-die attitude into a squad still short of a couple of quality players.
And no-one is more aware of the side's shortcomings than Coyle.
He said last night: ‘Our inability to put away chances is obviously a problem but I don't want to dwell too much on it.
‘I don't want the players to drop their heads — we're in with a chance in two competitions and that's not bad at this stage of the season.
‘We'll keep battling away and hope that the goals start to flow again.’
Feast of salmon!
GAME fish catches throughout Ireland are on the up.
A total of 25 salmon for 222lbs were taken from Lough Leane last week.
The best weighed in at 12lb 8ozs and was landed by Pat Callaghan, who also took three other fish on the troll.
The highlight of the week on Lough Owel was the magnificent wild trout of 9lb 9ozs taken on a Mepps near Srudarra Island by Richard Malone, Portarlington.
Mick Dunne landed three weighing 3lb 14ozs, 3lbs and 2lbs on a Bibio, and Mick Yeats and Sean Morgan each used a Black Pennell to take trout of 3lb 4ozs and 3lb 12ozs respectively.
In all 15 anglers took 27 trout for 68lb 12ozs.
At Lough Conn, however, water levels are still low and few anglers have ventured out.
Rivers in Donegal also need a lot more rain to bring the fresh fish in.
Johnny Holmes, Letterkenny, landed an excellent specimen sea trot of 9lbs from Glen Lake.
Water levels on the Drowes are at summer level and 124 salmon were reported.
Among the lucky anglers were Paul McGivern, Belfast, with one of 10lbs on a Garry Dog Tube Fly; Denis Brennan, Cookstown, one of 12lbs on a Red Shrimp and Billy Ray, Belfast, who took a nice brace at 12lbs and 8lbs also on the shrimp.
A party of Northern Ireland anglers led by Robert Donaldson, Enniskillen, boat fished in Killala Bay.
High spot was the fine specimen pollack of 12lb 8ozs taken by Robert, the first recorded there in 1993.
Tom McConaghy, Ballymena and Davy Cupples, Antrim, each topped the weights at Tildarg this week with three trout for 16lb 4ozs.
William Graham, Portadown had three for 12lb 9ozs; James Marcus, Larne, three for 9lb 15ozs and Andrew Millar, Ballymena, three for 9lb 14ozs.
Unipork AC, Cookstown enjoyed their day at the Straid Fishery with Sam Newell taking seven trout and Tom Taylor six.
Ken Waterworth, Carrickfergus, took the best fish of the week at 9lb 12ozs using an Orange Sleech and floating line.
Rovers boss out to spring shock
STING RAY
LIAM Coyle could be on his way from Omagh Town after a successful comeback from the knee injury that threatened to end his career.
The former Derry City striker set his sights on a move to a bigger club when his Omagh contract runs out at the end of the season.
The ex-Northern Ireland international — a star of Derry's 1989 League and Cup double team — believes he is well and truly back in business after hitting 18 goals in a struggling Omagh side.
Coyle also picked up a Guinness Player of the Month award from the Northern Ireland Football Writers.
He said last night: ‘I think I've proved that I still have a lot to offer at senior level.
I've played well against the better teams and the better players.
‘I'm grateful to Omagh and Roy McCreadie for giving me an opportunity to get back into senior soccer.
‘But when my contract expires at the end of the season I'll be keeping my fingers crossed that one of the top clubs will be interested in signing me.
‘My next move is an important one and I'll be giving it plenty of thought.’
Coyle insists he has had no trouble this season with his suspect knee but said: ‘I would be prepared to risk it anyway to remain in senior soccer.’
Coyle (24) looks remarkably trim but admits to being over his ideal playing weight.
‘I was too thin when I played for Derry.
Now I want to lose a few pounds,’ he says.
The 64,000 dollar question is, of course, whether he would be prepared to return to his old stomping ground in the Brandywell?
‘I would have no problems about playing for Derry City again,’ he said.
‘I'm just interested in joining a big club again.
If it's Derry or somewhere else I don't mind as long as the move is right for me.
‘It's really up to others now.
I've proved I can still hold my own with the best.’
Stephen chases British titles
STEPHEN FARMER, a cousin of Mark, is aiming high this season.
His sights are set on the British Supercup and British Championship in 1993, riding an ex-Niall Mackenzie 250 Yamaha, which has been purchased by Charlie Smiley of Carrickfergus.
This machine, which was raced in only three races, took Mackenzie to victory in the Sunflower International meeting at Kirkistown in October.
Last year Farmer finished runner up in both the 125 and 250 Irish Short Circuit Championships, and had selected outings on Smiley's 600 Yamaha.
Farmer's commitment to a mainland racing programme will restrict his racing at home to short circuits, when time will permit.
He will take in the Cookstown 100, as he has a very strong supporters club there, and the North West 200, provided he can fit in the following day's Donington Park meeting.
Before setting off to the British circuits Stephen will take in the Enkalon meeting at Aghadowey on Easter Saturday, and at end of the season will ride in the Hillsborough Sunflower International.
He said: ‘I would love to have raced at Mondello Park in the European series, but it clashes with the opening round of the British Championship at Knockhill in Scotland and my priority is to learn the British tracks as quickly as possible.
‘I feel I owe it to my sponsor Charlie Smiley, and to Joe Millar, of Millar Transport, who arrange a tremendous product package for me, without which the programme would not have been possible.’
NORTH 0 MALONE 18
MALONE opened their defence of the First Trust Senior Cup with an easy victory over North at Ormeau yesterday.
Even without skipper Denis McBride, Scott Kirkpatrick and Stuart Duncan in the pack, and scrum half Stevie Cowan and centre Bill Harbinson, Malone proved much too strong for ineffective North in a repeat of last year's final.
North out half Derek Wilson had the sort of day he will want to forget.
He was off target with four penalty attempts and it was his mistake that presented Malone with the second of their two tries.
Malone took immediate control on a mud bath pitch, Richard Cullen kicking a fourth minute penalty.
Wilson had a good chance to level after six minutes but completely mishit his kick.
Cullen showed him how to do it after 15 minutes to extend his side's lead.
Malone continued to dominate with Colin Morrison cleaning up at the line out and Colin Wilkinson orchestrating things in the back line.
North rarely threatened and after 24 minutes the game was put virtually beyond their reach.
Cullen was the architect with a blindside break from a scrum on the 22, and centre Maurice Field was on hand to add the finishing touch.
North responded and both Colin Christie and winger David McClelland went close to the vital breakthrough.
The home side enjoyed territorial advantage in the second period but never looked like penetrating a well organised Malone defence.
Wilson's misery continued as he missed two more straightforward penalties.
Malone weathered the storm and broke out to seal the match after 69 minutes.
Wilson's attempted clearance on his own 22 was charged down by centre Graeme Copeland who ran on unopposed to touch down, with Cullen adding the conversion.
CYCLING
WITH only one event in the north yesterday, there was a huge entry for Newmills CC's 50 miles Killyman Handicap.
The winner was Barry Fullerton of Ballymena Scott Rooftiles, who with Harold Brennan (CB Hire/Kings Moss CC) just held off the big bunch by 28 two seconds.
There were 16 riders in the scratch group giving away handicaps of four and seven minutes.
By the end of the fifth of seven laps the first two groups had come together and at this stage Albert Shaw (CB Hire/Kings Moss) and veteran Eddie Crory (Whirline West Down) broke away and opened up a 40-second lead.
The scratchmen caught the bunch at the start of the final lap 28 and, with their increased pace, the two fugitives were soon brought back and the race stayed together until near the finish.
EQUESTRIAN
ULSTER horsewoman Gilly Bell was the best of the Irish at Glenluce Horse Trials in Scotland this weekend, recording two wins in two novice classes with young horses.
The Moira-based rider won Novice Section A with Ballykeel owned by Mr John Fryers of Hillsborough, finishing on 42 points ahead of Margaret Barr from Lanarkshire and top British rider Karen Dixon on her talented new young horse Get Sharpe.
In Section B Gilly rode her own Cool Grange to finish 42 points ahead of Susan Ward from Ayrshire with Hold The Fort and Mark Holliday from Selkirk riding Chill Out.
Meanwhile, Lady Perdita Blackwood's mare Fru ridden by Catherine Keenan, from Banbridge, was fourth in Novice Section C despite strong competition.
Catherine finished on 39 points behind Andrew Jessiman from Kirkcudbright and Sue Stanton from Northumberland on 37 points.
The winner, Miss Paddy Muir from Cleveland, took the red rosette on 36 points.
A large continent of Ulster riders competed at the trials including Sonya Rowe from Portadown, Claire Gilpin from Tandragee, Stephen Smith from Gilford, Jane Harrison from Richhill and Margaret Creighton from Lisburn.
Former Moy girl Frances Mullan, now living in Edinburgh, last year's Scottish points champion, also competed with her Chestnut gelding Kilcoran.
Holywood's title thanks to Morris
KENNY IS KING!
KENNY MORRIS starred in his own version of ‘Lethal Weapon’ in front of the cameras yesterday as Holywood clinched the Harp Senior League Championship for the first time since they changed their name from Belfast YMCA in 1987.
The former Irish international, acting skipper for the day in the absence of Jeffrey Clarke, blasted a stunning hat-trick in 17 first-half minutes in the title decider against Banbridge at Olympia.
This brought his personal tally for the season to 44, and inspired his charges to a 6–2 victory.
That Banbridge put themselves within touching distance of their first title since 1988 owes much to their battling qualities.
But even though they made the ideal start yesterday, taking a third minute lead through David McAnulty, they had no answer to Holywood's class.
On 11 minutes though, from Holywood's third corner, Morris equalised.
And from the next corner a couple of minutes later he repeated the dose.
Bann fell further behind after 28 minutes when Morris connected to a Stephen Smyrl cross and squeezed the ball home.
A 44th minute goalmouth melee in which Colin Allister and Norman McGladdery were both denied was the nearest Bann came to giving themselves a glimmer of hope.
Morris then turned provider for Colin Irwin to make it 4–1 after 51 minutes.
With Morris brought off for a deserved breather, Mark Burns took over the duty of penalty taker after 58 minutes, the award coming after a Nigel Allister stick chop, and it was 5–1.
All credit to Bann, though for not shutting-up-shop on an already lost cause as Mark Carson pegged it back.
But Martin Deery weighed in with number six in the closing minutes, fittingly being set up by club captain Clarke, who was brought on along with Holywood's other French players to savour their historic championship moment.
Euro boost for Celtic
CELTIC boosted their chances of grabbing a UEFA Cup place next season with this narrow win at Tannadice.
For long spells Celtic ran the show, with John Collins and Paul McStay pulling the strings in midfield, ably supported by the lively Stuart Slator on the right flank.
Celtic made the breakthrough in the 11th minute when the recalled Charlie Nicholas was first presented with an opening six yards from goal but hesitated, leaving the chance to his striking partner, Frank McAvennie, who appeared at the far post to squeeze the ball in.
United staged a fight-back that almost brought them a point.
It took defender Mike Galloway, with a powerful header from a Wdowczyk free kick in 59 minutes to put the proper reflection on the match.
But after this it was United who took the initiative as they sought to get back into the game.
They were gifted a goal six minutes later when a John Clark free-kick was touched on by Ferguson and Paddy Connolly nipped in through the static Celtic defence to lift the ball over Pat Bonner.
However, their good work at this stage was undone 11 minutes from time when a slip by veteran defender David Narey was enough to wrap up the points for the visitors.
McAvennie pounced on this blunder to race in on Main, and his cutback was met perfectly by Collins who crashed the ball home from three yards.
With the last action of the match Ferguson reduced the deficit when he headed powerfully past Bonner, but Celtic were not to be denied a deserved victory.
Rangers do enough
A DEFEAT at the hands of old rivals Celtic never goes down well at Ibrox.
But with Rangers comfortable win over Dundee yesterday, Walter Smith's men erased some of the memories of last week.
Rangers didn't play well, but they did enough.
Dundee opened brightly, harbouring thoughts of an upset, but when Pittman shot wide in seven minutes, their best chance of the match had been squandered.
The Ibrox side managed to break through after 15 minutes when McCall, a brave soldier in any match, headed home McPherson's cross.
The rest of the first-half saw Rangers produce several good moves, but the killer instinct was lacking.
One minute before the break Dundee had a great chance to equalise when Dodds broke through, but Maxwell got a hand to the attempted lob.
For a side challenging in Europe Rangers performance was disappointing, but manager Smith fired up the troops at half-time.
On 52 minutes Trevor Steven floated a ball towards the head of Hateley, and his cutback was bundled over by Ally McCoist, his 50th goal of the season.
Nine minutes later the score was 3–0 as John Brown broke into the penalty box and set up Ian Ferguson to fire home.
The rest of the match saw Rangers push for more goals, and Gough hit the bar and Hateley and McCoist both saw shots fly wide.
The final whistle was greeted with cheers from both sets of supporters, but the Rangers fans were happier as they saw their heroes edge closer to the title.
GAA
All-Ireland Under-21 champions Tyrone made a convincing start to the defence of their crown when they overwhelmed a poor Monaghan side at Omagh yesterday.
Two goals just after half-time by Sean McLoughlin and the exciting Ciaran McBride effectively demolished the Monaghan challenge.
It was a performance which oozed confidence despite an uncertain start, with midfielder Seamus McCallen, centre forward Colm Donnelly and full forward McBride simply outstanding while, in defence, Chris Lawn, Michael Slevin and JJ Kavanagh performed brilliantly.
After a shaky start, Tyrone moved into top gear and led by five points at half-time with a series of spectacular points by Ciaran McBride, Colm Donnelly and Brian Catterson.
CI shocked by juniors Banbridge
JUNIOR club Banbridge sent CIYMS crashing out of the First Trust Senior Cup yesterday — and now play host to Ballymena in the quarter-finals.
The giant-killers heaped more misery on CI's nightmare season with a 21–8 victory.
CI winger Jim Cowden will today be ruing his first minute gaffe when he threw away a try by trying to run under the posts.
He lost the ball in a tackle and so spilled CI's chances of a perfect start.
Rampant Banbridge never looked back after this early let-off and second-half tries from scrum half Neil Thompson and flanker Derek Muirhead secured victory.
Out half Ian Wray kicked 11 points just to make sure.
The tie of next Saturday's second round will be the clash between Bangor and holders Malone.
However, there is likely to be just as close a contest at Chambers Park where Portadown face Queen's University.
Portadown won the local derby against Armagh 20–6 yesterday and will be thankful for another home draw.
Queen's had no bother in disposing of juniors Coleraine 35–7 at the Dub, scoring five tries.
The draw that no-one wanted — away to Dungannon — fell to City of Derry.
News of their ill-luck may have dampened the post-match celebrations at Branch Road last night after Derry rattled up the highest score of the round, 61–17 against north west neighbours Omagh.
Sinead does the trick for Ports
SINEAD Donaghy couldn't have chosen a better time to score her first goal of the season.
With only three minutes remaining in their Sharwood's Irish Senior Cup semi-final clash against Pegasus, Sinead, who had only come on at the start of the second-half, popped up to score the only goal of the game.
And it's a goal that sends the Ports into the final in Dublin next month.
Portadown will have to wait and see who their opponents will be as the other all-Dublin semi between Old Alexandra and Loreto ended scoreless after extra time.
The replay takes place next Saturday.
This game wasn't a classic between two sides who have won the cup 14 times between them, but the adverse conditions under foot did not allow for a lot of skilful hockey.
In fact both teams seem to lack ideas on how to prise open two watertight defences.
Former Great Britain international Violet McBride, in an unusual role as sweeper, was outstanding as she snuffed out the Pegasus threat with ease.
After Nadine Long went close in the second minute for Pegasus, Portadown completely dominated the remainder of the first-half with Glenda McKee and Judith Chapman going close.
Pegasus didn't win their first short corner of the game until the 28th minute, and that was down to Nadine Long, who at times was the only forward prepared to take on the Portadown defence.
With conditions worsening by the minute Maggie Orr replaced Joanne Campbell for Pegasus and for Portadown, Sinead Donaghy replaced Julie Anne Black.
With only five minutes remaining Claire McMahon could have wrapped it up for Pegasus when she gave herself room, but blasted the ball off the post.
Then with three minutes remaining Super-sub Sinead Donaghy scored the all-important winner when she managed to touch the ball home from close in.
It took ages to cross the line with the Pegasus players frozen in disbelief.
So Portadown, last season's runners-up, return to Dublin where they last won the cup two years ago with a classic 4–2 triumph over Muckross.
Unlucky Down lose out again at Castlerock
DOWN failed again yesterday to win the All Ireland Inter County Golf Championship at Castlerock.
Bangor's Garth McGimpsey was in sparkling form, but it still wasn't good enough to overcome Cork in the final, going down 3–2.
Conditions were tough and the afternoon wind and rain made scoring difficult but Ulster's representatives still look clear favourites to bring the title North for the first time since 1981.
They beat Mayo 4–1 in the semi final when McGimpsey came from two down with four to play to birdie 15, 16 and 17.
Pat Killen halved the match however with a birdie at 18.
Cork defeated Louth 3–1 in the other semi.
Final result: Down 2 Cork 3: McGimpsey beat John Morris, 1-up; Neil Anderson lost 2 and 1 to Brian Kelleher; Dale Baker beat Derek Maguire 3 and 2; Philip Purdy lost 6 and 5 to Mark Collins and David Gibson lost 3 and 2 to Kieran O'Flaherty.
ATHLETICS
WILLOWFIELD ace Paul Rowan cruised to a comfortable win in the Conlig Six-mile Road Race organised by Pyramid AC.
The Willowfield international clocked 29.44 for the three laps of the village circuit leading all the way.
At the start North Down man Ian Lyle shadowed Rowan but after two miles he lost contact and Albertville's Paddy Branagh took up the pursuit, moving to within 30 metres of Rowan.
But the Willowfield man was not to be caught and Paddy had to be content with second place with Lyle fading to finish fourth some 15 seconds behind third-placed man Greg Luke (North Belfast).
Annadale Strider Alan Keys won a tight battle for the veteran's prize clocking 31.34 while Children's Hospital nurse Finnoula McCourt (Dub) easily won the women's section in 39.50.
This was one of the truly great days of Irish sport, one to enrich the memory and one to savour long after other matches have been consigned to the record books.
From an early stage the atmosphere was electric, and as the match progressed the Irish players were caught up on one big -ENG roller coaster of unrivalled passion and emotion.
Who even in their wildest dreams could have anticipated such a victory only nine weeks after the same side had been overwhelmed 15–3 by Scotland at Murrayfield.
The transition in coach Gerry Murphy's side in the subsequent weeks has been quite astonishing.
It's a striking testimony to the unstinting efforts of everyone involved, primarily the players and management who have had to contend with criticism that too often was both vindictive and personalised.
-ENG
By the finish Ireland had 14 points to spare, their winning margin large enough to dispel all doubts and arguments at one of the greatest upsets in recent times.
If ever there was a team performance this was it, with the most striking feature the absolute and total commitment of an inspirational Irish side which simply left England reeling.
SUSPENSION THREAT FOR FOUL PLAY
BROUGHT TO BOOK!
PLAYERS booked or cautioned more than three times in a season could find themselves banned if a motion to Congress gets the green light.
Welcoming such a move Sean McCague, Chairman of the Games Administration Committee, said: ‘I would be delighted if there was a structure put in place, at least within certain competitions, whereby a player could be suspended if booked on a certain number of occasions.
‘It's a complex issue because of the number of players involved in different competitions ranging from minor, U-21, to senior level with both club and county.
‘It's a problem we've got to address without any further delay as it's the same players who are being booked in practically every other game.
‘At the moment you can have a prominent player being fouled repeatedly by three different opponents which defeats the whole purpose of personal fouling.’
But the former Monaghan manager remains convinced that there is little wrong with the game itself as it stands, providing the rules are enforced.
‘The breaches that concern me most at the moment are off the ball incidents, dangerously high tackles and illegal use of the elbow,’ he added.
‘Any player guilty of such offences should never get away with the minimum penalty.’
Endorsing those sentiments Kerry Chairman Sean Kelly will be supporting the call for change.
He said: ‘It would cut out the persistent sneaky fouling which has become far too common.
‘Often you will find players being sent off after retaliating to such fouls.
Such a change of rule would act as a great deterrent to those guilty of such offences on a regular basis.
‘The present system of booking is nothing short of a joke.
‘Players have their name taken, but once the match is over it doesn't count any more.’
As Chairman of the Games Administration Committee Sean McCague is determined to meet breaches of discipline head on.
There will be no fudging, no equivocation.
With as many as 16 games some Sundays he readily concedes there will always be some degree of controversy, but he remains defiantly optimistic and upbeat.
‘I'm not suggesting we don't have problems,’ he said.
‘But I can assure you we will be backing our referees all the way.’
ATHLETICS
ANNADALE Striders dominated the senior men's event at the NIAAF Road Racing Championships at a rain-lashed Ormeay Park, Belfast.
Striders fielded an impressive all international line-up which, in spite of the absence of track ace Davy Wilson, racing in America, ADD01 simply left the rest fighting for the runner-up positions.
Annadale completed the five stage race in 55.49 — over one minute ahead of second-placed Willowfield.
Sparta had the distinction of retaining their women's championship with a fine 39.15 but Dromore, in second place, produced the fastest stage runner in Jill Bruce, who clocked 9.16.
In the age group championships Sparta and Annadale ADD01 Striders each picked up double victories, where, in the individuals stages, one of the fastest young athletes on show was Beechmount's Cathy O'Neill.
The young St Dominic's student smashed the stage record in the Under-17 race by a massive 28 seconds, clocking 8.77 for her 2400 metres race around the park.
ROWING
CAMBRIDGE swept to decisive victory in the 139th University Boat Race yesterday — condemning Oxford's rich array of Olympians and internationals to unexpected and crushing defeat.
The spectacular charge of the Light Blue Brigade from stakeboat to finish line con founded the bookies and the Tideway pundits who gave them no chance against Barcelona gold medallist Matthew Pinsent and his crew.
But Pinsent was the first to concede after the comprehensive three and a half lengths reverse: ‘The best team won.
Cambridge took the race to us and destroyed everything we tried to put together.
They were outstanding.’
Victory for Cambridge president James Behrens and his crew — lighter, younger and less experienced than their rivals — arrested a miserable run of six successive defeats and 16 losses in the last 17 years and consolidated the victors' all-time lead at 70 wins to 68.
Behrens declared: ‘This is the beginning of a new era for Cambridge.
I expect to see us dominating this event for the next few years.’
Oxford, as unfamiliar with failure as Cambridge are to success, left it to president Pinsent to face the instant inquests following the four and a half mile slog from Putney to Mortlake.
But the 22-year-old, whose triumph with Steve Redgrave in the Olympic coxless pairs last August suddenly seemed light years away, refused to blame Oxford errors for their surprise humiliation.
Ref crisis in Youth League
CLUBS are seeing red over a shortage of referees in the KY Youth League.
The lack of men in black means top young players are involved in highly competitive games week in week out, without the protection of an official.
‘It's an unsatisfactory situation,’ said Denis Shields, manager of Glentoran Colts and the Northern Ireland U-18 team.
‘Certain teams can be physical and some of the youngsters dread playing without an official in charge.’
‘It's a disgrace,’ says Barry McCullough, manager of title-chasing Portadown Thirds.
‘There are so many talented players who should have the protection of an official referee — not just now and again, but every week.
‘We are told there just aren't enough to go around, but surely youngsters like that should get priority after the Irish League and B Division.
‘In a recent match, we were kicked off the park by the opposition but there's very little we can do about it.
The unofficial referee just didn't want to know.’
Jackie Delaney, manager of Glenavon Thirds, says: ‘We need official referees and assessors, there's too much cheating going on.’
So what's the solution?
Back to Denis Shields again.
‘The Youth League is the ideal place to introduce new referees to the game,’ he says.
‘They can learn the ropes for a season or two — and they won't get the stick they have to take in other leagues.’
Years of loyal service
THE search is about to start for a new Ulster Branch secretary.
Alfie Collis, who has held the full-time post for 14 years, is retiring in September.
Branch officials looking for a replacement for their office in Holywood are to advertise the position in Britain as well.
Mr Collis,(70), a former captain at Holywood, has been an officer with the branch for 25 years.
He will stay on in a consultancy role for a few months until his successor settles into the job.
The numbers playing in Ulster has increased by an estimated 40 per cent in the last decade or so.
There are now 94 clubs in the province.
Murphy pays credit to back row
‘It showed everything that's good in Irish rugby.
We've had our bad times, but the players and the management have worked extremely hard and all credit to Gerry Murphy and Willie Anderson.
‘Our back row was quite superb and pound for pound we've some tremendous players.
‘Irish rugby is something special and down the years we've proved we're always capable of producing something like this.’
A delighted Irish captain Michael Bradley said: ‘We went out prepared to tackle and tackle and everything went according to plan.
‘We got our scores at crucial stages and it was always difficult for England when they were only level at half-time having played with the breeze.
‘In the second half it became increasingly difficult for them and we simply capitalised on our chances.’
English captain Will Carling said: ‘They took their chances and we didn't and it's always easier to keep the momentum going when you're ahead.
‘You can only dictate the game if you're getting quality ball but at stages we were relying on scraps.’
ARE TOPS VILLA ACES
Revenge for Terry's boys
NEWRY tore up the form book with this comfortable win.
Terry Nicholson's side had conceded eight goals in two previous defeats by the Co Antrim Shield holders.
But elated Nicholson said: ‘It was a battling performance.
We have made steady progress since the New Year — we have tightened up the defence and now we're getting a little bit of luck.’
Carrick enjoyed the early pressure but the breakthrough for Newry came after 39 minutes.
Ralph, just inside the area, knocked the ball across goal for Whelan to steer it home past Moore.
Newry clinched the points with almost the last kick of the game, Ralph scoring after sub Gary Hughes put him clear.
Celtic goal hero John Collins hurdles Scott Nisbett of Rangers in yesterday's Old Firm clash at Parkhead
ROCKY REDS OFF THE MARK
TITLE chasing United manager Alex Ferguson saw the result of the 118th Manchester Derby as two points lost.
But, when the championship reckoning takes place in May, he could well look on this Maine Road result as a point gained.
City had the greater possession, yet it was United who created the more clear-cut chances.
United also might have had a penalty in the second half when City skipper, Keith Curle, appeared to push striker Mark Hughes over in his box, but referee Robert Hart, waved play on.
Ryan Giggs missed three chances while Brian McClair and Hughes were unable to find a way through a well organised City defence.
The first half produced only one real chance when City goalkeeper Tony Coton kept out Eric Cantona's header in the 28th minute.
City took the lead after 57 minutes when Eire international striker Niall Quinn leapt above the United defence to head in Rick Holden's cross from the left.
That lead was not to last with United levelling 11 minutes later.
Hughes robbed Michael Vonk yards inside the City half and sent Lee Sharpe racing away down the left.
Sharpe's cross was met by Cantona as he raced into the City box.
United's heart missed a beat three minutes later when City striker Mike Sheron hit the outside of a post with his shot from the edge of the box.
United manager Ferguson said: ‘The game ebbed and flowed very well.
‘It was a derby which City did not want to lose and we were left to make the running a lot of the time.
‘If we had scored first, it would have been a better game because it would have forced them to come at us.
‘Any team in the race for the championship at this stage of the season sees a draw as being points lost’.
Talking about the penalty that never was, Ferguson added: ‘It looked a clear penalty to me, but it is hard to get penalties in big games’.
City skipper Curle said: ‘I caught Mark Hughes when he was going to strike the ball.
‘He was off balance and I did not think it was a penalty.’
Hughes and Curle were both booked along with City player-manager Peter Reid.
First class Dons
THE high flying Canaries were knocked off their perch by an in-form Wimbledon side which produced a classy display.
Wimbledon took the lead in the 16th minute when skipper John Fashanu crossed for Dean Holdsworth to head home.
They increased their lead seven minutes later when Jones' long throw was flicked on for Neal Ardley to bundle the ball home.
The victory was sealed in the 83rd minute when Jones found Holdsworth in the box and he turned and shot past keeper Bryan Gunn.
EQUESTRIAN
COUNTY Antrim horseman Harry Marshall dominated the prizes at last week's Cape Town Horse Show in South Africa.
The Ballyclare man, riding South African showjumpers, won two jump-off classes and a speed event.
He was narrowly pipped at the post on time in the prestigious Derby event and also took runner-up in another speed event.
Bann in calm before storm
MEN'S HOCKEY
An afternoon off was just the tonic for Banbridge hockey players yesterday!
They took full advantage of the opportunity to unwind after a torrid few weeks.
First came a Burney Cup defeat for the Academy schoolboys, then the Norman McGladdery suspension affair followed by defeat in the Anderson Cup final.
But after the calm comes the storm.
Bann have the two best teams in Ireland chasing their scalp in the next six days.
The closest Harp Senior League race in recent memory is set for a thrilling climax with Bann playing an central role.
And despite Wednesday's 2–0 cup collapse to Cookstown, coach Mark Sinnamon insists his young warriors can come through their toughest test since the 1986 Irish Senior Cup final when they pulled themselves up by the bootlaces to beat Three Rock Rovers.
The title permutations remain complex, with Bann and Lisnagarvey mathematically still in the hunt with just three games remaining involving the leading trio.
Bann face Garvey at Blaris on Wednesday night (8pm) and Holywood at Olympia next Saturday, needing two outright wins to secure them the honours.
Should Holywood take even a point from the second game, the crown is theirs.
There the simplicity ends, for if Garvey triumph over Bann and Cookstown — then Bann beat Holywood — a play-off will ensue.
Sinnamon, no stranger to crucial play-offs, can't remember such a tight league finish.
But he also insisted: ‘I've never seen such confidence in our camp either.’
And he added: ‘If we get a result against Garvey on Wednesday night, then I would fancy our chances in a one-off ‘cup final’ situation in Belfast on Saturday.’
Yesterday's quiet day is therefore merely the prelude to a forthcoming hockey explosion!
DERRY City can set up a grandstand finish to the closest fought League of Ireland title race in its 71 year history if they beat Limerick at the Brandywell this afternoon.
Derry's unfancied squad, written off by a lot of football pundits, are so keen to prove their detractors wrong, that they've set themselves a demanding series of targets for the remaining four matches.
Today's Limerick game is Derry's second last home League fixture and with just one point separating the top five challengers, a win is vital if Roy Coyle's men are to figure in the final shakedown.
That's the view of a man now arguably playing the best football of his career.
Experienced centre back Paul Curran said last night: ‘We have to win — even a draw could rule us out.’
And the tall central defender, one of three survivors from the famous treble winning team of 1988–89, has set his colleagues a remarkable target if the League pennant is to flutter over Brandywell next season.
Curran said: ‘I'm convinced that to finish top of the table we must win our remaining two home games with at least a victory and a draw needed in the away ties.
‘Anything less than seven points could mean a play-off or indeed nothing at all because so many teams still have a chance.’
Curran also revealed that the Dublin soccer writers, most of whom appear to have written-off Derry's challenge, have provided the motivation that might just make the difference.
Derry are clearly seen as the bridesmaids among the five clubs battling frantically for European football next season.
‘We don't mind what they're saying but we'll be trying damn hard to prove them wrong,’ vowed Curran.
The gloomy assessment of Derry's chances is based on the poorest goal scoring record of any team in the top six — City have averaged less than a goal game from 28 League outings.
Only Sligo and Bray, who are battling against relegation, have worse records.
But for Stuart Gault's priceless accuracy from the penalty spot, Derry's cause would now almost certainly be lost.
A superbly organised defence has been the key factor so far and even now at the zero hour, the men at the back are steeling themselves for a final defiant gesture.
Curran reveals: ‘We've set ourselves a target of four clean sheets for the last four matches — if we can achieve that we're certain of at least four points.’
Ladies' Hockey
A GOAL from Alison Mills gave Pegasus II victory over Portadown 2As in the McConnell Shield final yesterday.
Pegasus have won the shield twice in the last three years and will now play for the White Cup in the All Ireland play-offs late next month.
GOLF
SAM Torrance finished three shots ahead of his nearest challenger after the third round of the Kronenbourg Open at Salo but came off the last green a disappointed man.
Torrance had battled against a blustery wind to shoot a one-over-par 73 for a 54 holes aggregate of 210.
Yet it should have been better for, needing only to hit the 18th green with a sand wedge he went into a bunker, failed to get up and down and ended with a bogey five.
That was bad enough but Italian Constantino Rocca, who had been five shots behind the 39-year-old Scot coming up the last, sank a six feet putt for a birdie three to close the gap by two.
So Torrance, seeking his first tournament victory since winning the Jersey Open nearly two years ago, goes into today's final round three clear of Rocca, four ahead of fellow Scot Stephen McAllister and five up on former Walker Cup player Craig Cassells and Sweden's Gabriel Hjerstedt.
SWIMMING
SHARLENE Brown produced some great swimming yesterday in the Ulster Championships at the Grove Centre, collecting the 200 individual medley and 50m breaststroke titles.
Brown had to be at her very best in the breaststroke event as Emma Robinson of Coleraine pushed her all the way, finishing just 0.6 secs behind in the runner-up spot.
Brown went on to complete her personal double triumph in the 200m individual medley with consummate ease as she completed the event in 2.23.87 with Gail Hamilton of Ards a massive five-and-a-half seconds behind.
However, Hamilton's day ended on a high as she set a new Ulster Junior and Senior record in the 100m backstroke and lifted the O'Neill Tray.
Hamilton's new record of 1.06.98 eclipsed the time set by Marion Madine by 0.09 secs.
Meantime, Brian Bell of Bangor scored an impressive victory in the men's 100m freestyle with a time of 52.70.
ROWING
GALWAY'S Head Of The River has certainly proved once again to be one of the leading events in the Irish rowing calender.
Tribesmen Rowing Club attracted a huge entry of 248 crews from north and south to the River Corrib.
EQUESTRIAN
PORTADOWN pony international rider Roger McCrea has bought the 148cm European team gold champion pony Dunmacreena Davy, formerly jumped by Alan Griffin of Galway.
The 16-year-old pony is well known on the Irish circuit and Roger is looking forward to the 1993 season with his new purchase.
He was recently honoured by Dungannon Council for his successes last year with his 138cm ponies, Little Logic and Omagh Candy.
NETBALL
THORNHILL College, Londonderry, won the All-Ireland Senior Netball Title for the eighth time yesterday when they defeated Mount Anvil, Dublin, 30–20 at Shankill Leisure Centre.
Inspired by Under-21 player Julie Ferry, Thornhill pulled away in the closing stages with some sharp shooting from sisters Suzanne and Elaine McLaughlin.
Local teams confirmed their strength by notching up three of the four titles, with Lismore romping to a 38–9 win in the intermediate decider and Loreto, Omagh, retaining their crown with a 21–14 win over St Michaels.
Lismore's minor outfit were beaten 21–14 by Notra Dame to destroy chances of a clean sweep.
SQUASH
THE Ulster veteran's ladies chances of recapturing the Interprovincial crown were dashed in Cork last night with a 4–1 defeat against holders Leinster.
Earlier 3–2 wins over Connacht and Munster have left the locals needing a 4–1 success but Antrim's Denise Brown, who defeated Lily McKeown in four games, was the only winner.
NO SCORE BORE
TOO much at stake was the message from both camps after an edgy Bass Cup quarter-final which Ards front man Harry McCourt almost settled four minutes from time.
McCourt scissor-kicked a Tom McDonald cross from the left by-line onto the inside of the Distillery goalpost but justice was done when the ball rebounded to safety.
No-one deserved to win this uninspiring game!
McCourt's late show was a piece of rare excitement in a tense affair with the teams treating the ball like a hot potato.
Ards now have Erskine, Bustard and McCourt doubtful for the replay with injuries.
Against the breeze, Ards didn't create any danger round the packed Distillery goal and it was no surprise when half-time arrived scoreless with little goalmouth excitement for the fans.
That first-half had been injury strewn with almost seven minutes of extra time being played and that certainly didn't create much flowing football or incidents.
The second half was much of the same with neither side being able to carve out clear cut chances.
Distillery boss Billy Hamilton conceded: ‘It wasn't a great game.
Too many players were frightened of making mistakes.
‘Neither team had a lot to offer when they reached the 18-yard line and I can't really see the replay being much different.’
Distillery sub Philip Dykes probably had the visitors best chance to score in the 66th minute but he headed a Tom Cleland cross well past when he should have done better.
Ards manager Paul Malone said later: ‘It looked like a draw from the word go.
It was a very scrappy game, a Cup tie with lots of effort but I am quite happy to go to Distillery for the replay because we seem to play better away from home.
‘Perhaps we could have won in the end but I am sure we can finish the job this week.’
Ulster juniors fall to sturdy Scotland
NORTHERN Ireland's junior 11 went down by 4–1 against a strong Scottish junior side.
Scotland went ahead as early as the ninth minute when George Gemmell crashed the ball home after Tom Brown's cut-back.
Peter Moran, one of five Limavady United players in the Irish side, scored Ireland's equaliser two minutes later with a fine glancing header after a cross from the left from Linfield Swifts' Mark Anderson.
Scotland regained the lead through Colin Harkness after a mistake by Limavady's Damien Mullan let Kenny Patterson through.
David McCartney scored a fine goal for Scotland in the 40th minute to make the half-time score 3–1.
The Scots' skipper, Raymond Day, completed the scoring in the 47th minute with a great left-footed drive from fully 25 yards.
Top Premium
LYNDA Ramsden pulled off a tremendous training performance when saddling High Premium to win the William Hill Lincoln, and Will of Steel to finish third, at Doncaster today.
High Premium, 16–1, swept home on the far rails under Kieran Fallon to beat gallant top weight Mizaaya half a length.
It was three-quarters of a length back to his stablemate, a 40–1 chance, and the first six home were all drawn low.
The first woman to train the winner of the race, Mrs Ramsden was bringing High Premium back for his first race since June.
The Thirsk trainer said: ‘Everything went wrong with High Premium last year, and we were able to give him only three races.
‘He pulled a muscle just before last year's Lincoln, and picked up a virus later on.
Then he developed a foot infection after running at Ascot.’
Fallon, also enjoying the most important success of his career, said: ‘The stands’ side led us for a furlong, but our side was in command after that.’
Last year's winner Frank Fennell heads the entry list in the historic section of the Circuit of Ireland.
Dublin photographer Fennell will again drive a Mini Cooper S and will be up against Mervyn Johnston, the Ulster driver who finished second last time.
Johnston, fresh from his victory on the Galway International, will also drive a Mini Cooper.
More than 20 cars will contest the historic category and this year the old cars will run at the front of the field.
Honours to a degree
THE Irish Federation of Sea Anglers could do much more to publicise its work, aims and objectives, according to Sean Doherty, President of the Federation's Ulster Provincial Council.
Writing in the latest issue of the Federation's magazine GAFF, Doherty proposes that the organisation should institute its own honours system which would recognise both anglers and clubs.
He says the publicity would raise public awareness to the Federation's work in highlighting such areas as over-fishing, pollution and illegal netting, resulting in a better understanding of the IFSA and more public support.
Individual anglers, he says, should be rewarded.
Clubs could nominate anglers for their individual achievements, their contribution to their club's success and perhaps for their encouragement towards young anglers.
He also suggests a recognition for clubs who, he says, could nominate themselves for achievements in promoting angling, fostering community relations and generally promoting their own region for angling tourism.
Individual boatmen should also be honoured through clubs nominating skippers for their ability to find fish and their helpfulness towards anglers.
Doherty says everyone in the community should have a hand in nominating people and clubs for such awards — local tourism organisations, hotels and guest houses and others who benefit from angling tourism.
The Federation's central council would organise a panel of judges and there would be a special, high-profile awards ceremony.
Writing in the same magazine, the Federation's chairman Brian Prendergast asks whether the organisation should continue to exist in its present form with provincial councils reporting to a central council responsible for formulating the sport's policies throughout Ireland.
He suggests that the Federation is a captive of its own structures.
He says: ‘I suggest it is time to examine the structure of the Federation.
When formed in 1953 the central council comprised of nationally elected officers and two delegates from each affiliated club.
‘The Federation grew so quickly that in 1962 provincial councils were established to cater for the influx of new clubs.
‘These provincial councils were meant to act as part of central council within their own area, but they have grown more independent and now we have a situation where there is both competition and conflict between them and a reluctance to accept the authority of central council.’
Complaining with a smile
SO, is the survey right?
Are Belfast shoppers reluctant to moan to shops?
We tackled some people in the shopping centre and this is what they had to say:
Bus inspector Jim Dobbin said he would return any shoddy goods he bought.
‘I bought some gloves recently and the seam on them went very quickly.
When I returned them they were exchanged with no problem at all.’
Housewife Betty Miller said she would also return anything below standard.
‘Stuff is too dear now.
You can't just let it be and put it in the bin and forget about it.’
Ethna Smyth said she had never returned anything of her own, even when it was shoddy or faulty.
‘I would bring something back for someone else but I would not bring it back for myself.
I never have but I don't know why.’
Jimmy Gibson said Northern Ireland people had the tendency to ‘complain with a smile’.
We caught him as he was on his way to pick up a faulty music amplifier he was getting fixed.
He said: ‘I took it in yesterday and asked for it to be repaired as soon as possible.
I'm just on my way now to pick it up.
They have been very good about it.
‘But I think people here aren't into heavy complaining.
They complain with a smile.’
Among the specified matters covered by the new laws are:
Location, view, outlook or environment;
Availability and nature of services, facilities or amenities;
Accommodation, measurements or sizes;
Fixtures and fittings;
Physical or structural characteristics, form of construction or condition;
Cost of any service or maintenance charge, or liability for common repairs; and
Existence or nature of any planning permission or proposals for development, construction or change of use.
Chris's physiognomy shows Botham lines
AT first glance, who would you say this gent looks like?
Yes, that's what I thought too.
In profile, he's an absolute ringer for the cricketer Ian Botham — moustache and all.
In fact, their respective worlds could hardly be further apart.
He is Christopher Bowers-Broadbent, one of England's leading organists, who will be in Belfast next Monday to give a recital on the Mulholland grand organ in the Ulster Hall (7.45 pm).
On this, his first visit to Belfast for five years, his programme will be a blend of old and contemporary organ pieces.
He's a real all-rounder is Chris.
And no, his agents tell me, he is not troubled by autograph-hunters seeking the Botham signature.
But he is a keen cricket fan.
Chris Bowers-Broadbent: Musical innings.
Smuggling ‘red’ alert
CUSTOMS and Excise officials are on the look-out for cross-border diesel smugglers.
Red diesel is being bought in Northern Ireland and taken into Donegal.
The Republic's Customs officials are embroiled in an ‘active campaign’ to try to thwart the illicit practice.
Earlier this week, Donegal farmers were warned not to become involved in the smuggling.
A senior member of the Donegal executive of the Irish Farmers Association told farmers that they should only buy diesel from a legitimate source.
It is believed Custom and Excise officials are particularly active in the county at present.
A Customs spokesman in Dublin said: ‘We have an ongoing campaign to ensure that marked diesel oil is only used for its intended purpose and that hydro-carbon oil is not imported from the North.’
The alert from the Irish Farmers' Association is in line with the Republic's rules governing the sale of diesel for commercial use.
The problem for Customs staff is that it is impossible to check every cross-border vehicle for illegal diesel.
Changing shape
AFTER 99 years, Ulster's favourite sporting paper, the ‘Pink’, is about to shrink — and get bigger.
For tomorrow, little more than a year from its centenary, the ISN will appear as a 32 page tabloid.
The look will be different, but the content, the coverage and the crack will be just the same.
So an era ends and a new one begins for the newspaper which became as much a part of the Ulster Saturday as the bar, the bookie's and the bath.
It began its life on the evening of Saturday, November 17, 1894.
When the first edition rolled off the presses for the waiting newsboys, there were hansom cabs and gas lights on the streets of Belfast.
In its early years it was called the Ulster Saturday Night, but this was soon extended to its present title Ireland's Saturday Night.
Throughout Northern Ireland, however, very few buyers bothered with the three words.
They asked — and continue to ask — either for the ‘Ulster’ or the ‘Pink’, splendidly disregarding the fact that 76 years have passed since it last appeared on pink newsprint.
Over the years, it carried the news, often before anyone else, of hundreds of famous sporting occasions.
My colleague, soccer writer Malcolm Brodie, who edited the paper from the mid 50's until his retirement in 1991, recalls two of his personal highlights.
One, he says, was the World Cup final in 1966 when, in the last nail biting minutes of extra time, he had to leave the Wembley Press box and find another phone because the noise of the crowd was so deafening that his copytaker back in Belfast could not hear him.
His other abiding memory is a harrowing one.
It was on January 2, 1971, the day of the Ibrox Park disaster when 66 fans died leaving the ground when a crush barrier collapsed.
He had lent his telephone to a colleague, and so was the last to leave the Press box as he transmitted his Rangers-Celtic match report.
On the way out, a policeman told him about the tragedy that was unfolding at the far end of the ground.
Back in Belfast, it was getting close to printing time, but men who thought they had finished work for the day were summoned from the former Brown Horse pub across the street and the result was that the ISN was the first paper in the world to carry the tragic story.
‘It is a unique paper,’ he says, ‘and it is held in such affection because, no matter where Ulster people are, it is the one which keeps them in touch with ALL the local sport, whether its football and rugby or darts and pigeon racing.’
Ballyearl stay in top form
THE curtain fell on the 1992–93 Guinness Ulster Squash League this week after a hectic campaign.
In Division One Windsor lost to the League champions Ballyearl 1–4 (5–17).
Simon Rankin lost 5–9 4–9 6–9 to Duncan Cameron but David Gotto ended his injury-hit season with a victory over Billy White who retired injured in the third set.
Magherafelt confirmed their third place with a maximum points 5–0 (20–5) win over the Boat Club.
Raymond Hogg overcame Brendan Mellor in five sets 4–9 9–3 5–9 9–6 9–0 and Jeremy Hastings defeated Craig Mahoney in straight sets 9–2 9–1 9–1.
Jeff Hearst defeated Paul Irwin 9–6 9–1 9–7 as Crawfordsburn scraped home 3–2 (15–6) winners over bottom-placed team CIYMS.
Sean McKee slumped to a 2–9 2–9 3–9 defeat to Uel Maguire but his Civil Service team defeated Covehill 4–1 (17–5).
Post and Telecom's convincing start to the season had fizzled out due to injury.
Despite home advantage they went down to UUJ 1–4 (7–17).
John Curley, their five sets specialist, succumbed to Stanley Campbell 4–9 in the fifth set.
The second-placed team, North, travelled to Gransha to gain maximum points.
Ballyearl finished on 385 points with North on 362, Magherafelt 318, Windsor 287, UUJ 288 and Civil Service 280.
In Division Two Windsor B lost to Boat Club B 1–4 (8–10), Post and Telecom B lost to Northern Telecom 2–3 (6–16), Civil Service B lost to Seven Towers 0–5 (1–20), and Lisburn Racquets lost to Warrenpoint 3–2 (16–8).
Annie and the bishop
FORBIDDEN FRUIT: The True Story of my Secret Love for the Bishop of Galway.
By ANNIE MURPHY with Peter De Rosa (Little, Brown, £15.99 UK)
SINCE news broke of his secret love affair with Annie Murphy, tales about Eamonn Casey, the former Bishop of Galway rival those told about the unfrocked Vicar of Bray.
That benighted member of the Established Church of England ended up in a barrel on an English pier.
Whatever fate now awaits him, the Friar-Tuck figure of Casey would find it physically hard to emulate the vicar.
My contribution to the Casey affair dates from 1986, when I wrote a book, Desire and Denial.
Its theme was considered daring.
The sub-title said it all: Celibacy and the Church.
My enterprising publishers, the same Little, Brown, thought it a good idea for me to present copies to Roman Catholic opinion makers.
Bishop Casey was an obvious choice, given his high profile.
He had been warm-up man for the Pope on his tour of the Republic; he was always on Irish radio and television.
He had a view on everything.
The man would surely welcome the debate I hoped my book would launch.
I travelled to Galway and took tea with the bishop.
He offered me brandy with the cream buns (drink, as we shall see, plays an important part in his life).
He accepted a copy of the book with words which have remained with me — and may well have come to haunt Casey wherever he now is.
‘Well now,’ he said, skimming the pages.
‘This is an interesting theme, right enough.
But not one I can readily identify with.
Celibacy has never been a problem for me.’
I now know — having read this account of clerical passion — that Bishop Casey's own son, Peter, was already 10 years old.
Lying, both with Annie and to the world at large, is one of the underlying themes of this intensely touching and often searing account of the shameful treatment by a prince of the Church of a woman whose only sin was to fall hopelessly in love with him.
Whatever you may have read or heard about their relationship still cannot prepare you for her own account.
The juxtaposition of their love-making against Bishop Casey performing his sacred duties will do more than shock.
It will scandalise and offend not only the Catholic faithful.
THEY, I predict, will fall back on the last line of defence.
How can Annie Murphy remember in such intimate detail things which happened 18 years ago?
Recall that moment Casey first held her hand?
Brushed her hair?
When, as they moved towards their first coupling, ‘it was as if the whole of myself, body and spirit, even parts of me I never knew existed, came alive at his touch’?
Or: ‘The swift blinking of his eyes and the trembling of his sensitive hands…aroused feelings in him that he had not ever owned up to even to himself’?
Her critics — and they will be many — will say all this is at best manufactured recollections, the distorted memories of a bitter and angry woman who had her fling with a priest, and has paid the price.
A careful read of this book will show that underpinning it is a terrible truth.
That what happened to Annie Murphy burnt itself into her mind, Casey was the grand passion of her life.
Here she was, a trusting 25-year-old American, newly divorced and out of therapy, sent by her doctor father to Ireland to ‘forget the bad things…a dead childhood, a dead marriage, dead dreams, dead me.’
Who better to help her than her father's old friend and distant relative, Eamonn Casey?
And help her he did — into his bed.
Here he is, in 370 stunning pages, the youngest member of the Irish Hierarchy, by day ‘looking truly magnificent in his episcopal robes’, by night naked except for his bishop's ring, making love on an expensive Afghan rug.
In their encounters, between saying Mass, Confirmations, funerals and weddings, he was like a man who had suddenly discovered the joys of sex.
The profanity of his behaviour is captured in an incident when Casey — having just made love again to Annie — invites her to witness ‘the power and majesty of the Church and the sacrifices it demands of us priests’.
From her vantage point in Galway Cathedral she watched him ordain a priest into the celibate life.
Afterwards, in the security of his palace, they once more go to it.
The book is filled with such incidents.
That they are all told from Annie's standpoint does not diminish their impact.
Yet the sex is only a part of it.
What emerges is a staggering portrait of one Catholic bishop's life.
Annie paints a picture of a man who rejoiced in the power of being called ‘My Lord’, who swept through his diocese in a fast car, who behaved in a more cavalier way than any English feudal landlord.
His spiritual power is total.
He is the Pope's man-on-the-spot.
The forelock tugging Casey expected from others in between the randy nights with Annie runs through this book — tainting its pages with cant and hypocrisy.
Green Baize surge ahead
IN the Willie Duffy North-West Premier Snooker Scratch League, leaders Green Baize (Eglinton) took their unbeaten run to 20 matches with a 4–2 away win over St Johnston.
Green Baize are 10 points above last year's winners 720 Snooker Club A, who scored a 5–1 away win over Greene's Bar B. AOH dropped back after a 3-all draw with Greene's Bar A.
Best breaks Sean Deeney (Greene's Bar B)(40); Raymond Doherty (720 A)(44); Martin Whoriskey (720 A)(40) and (37).
Leading positions all played twenty matches Green Baize (Eglinton) 98pts; 720 Snooker Club A 88pts; AOH 84pts.
In the Raymond Burke Trophy Paul King (Green Baize) on 36 frames leads the title race, two frames ahead of Seamus Gallagher (720 SC A) and Colm McConomy (Green Baize) with St Johnston's William Porter fourth on 30 frames.
Two more titles were decided this week.
720 Stars won the Division Two handicap league with the line-up of Vincent McCaffrey, Paul Ramsey, Alan Healy, Ciaran O'Hara, and Hughie Brady (Jun), while strand player Willie Hamilton lifted the North-West Junior billiards Division Two title by defeating Leo McCauley.
Hand it to Richards, he knows the score
GORDON Richards wouldn't be in the least surprised if On The Other Hand were to win the National.
The Penrith trainer, who always answers a question by asking another question told me ‘Has he not got the class to win it?
Would you not agree that he appears to be back to the form of two years ago?’
Well, of course Gordon has the sort of Liverpool record which one has to respect and he is certainly not the man to argue with.
Winner of the great race in 1978 with Lucius and then with Hallo Dandy in 1984, Richards knows what it takes to win round Liverpool and don't forget he was successful with The Antartex over the Aintree fences last year.
On The Other hand is one of two Richards winners in the race.
The other is Four Trix owned by Mrs Stewart Catherwood from Doagh, whose last runner was also with Richards, the ill-fated Dark Ivy.
Gordon appeared to be in two minds about the chances of Four Trix who is doubtful after pulling up slightly sore recently and is rated only 50–50 to run.
Four Trix is a former winner of the Scottish National and has inconsistent form but Richards is more keen on the chance of On The Other Hand whom he bought out of the John Mulhern stable at the end of last month.
Mulhern doesn't sell horses but he was partly influenced this time by Jeremy Maxwell who used to train On the Other Hand and he eventually agreed to part with the gelding to Robert Ogden with a view to running in the Grand Military Gold Cup at Sandown.
On The Other Hand was ridden by the owner's son Adam and promptly won rather snugly from The Queen Mother's Norman Conqueror at 12–1.
‘The horse is new to me and I am in the process of sweetening him up,’ Richards said, ‘so it is impossible to rate him with my other winners.
‘But he is in good form and I certainly wouldn't receive a severe shock if he were to win even though he is a long way out of the handicap.
Neale Doughty rides and he has a marvellous record in the race.’
On The Other Hand was always a bold front running type when with Mulhern and turned in two top class performances during his stay with the Curragh trainer.
He won the Harold Clarke Leopardstown Chase in 1991 beating Mweenish by a length and the year before, was one of Ireland's top novices when he won the Arkle Chase at Leopardstown in between two other victories which included one in the Punchestown Festival Handicap Chase where he beat The Committee by a short head with Feroda third.
This turned out to be the last time The Committee saw a race course until this season and On The Other Hand then lost his form after his Leopardstown Chase win.
However, a third place in the Findus Chase behind River Tarquin at Leopardstown last Christmas showed him coming back to something like his old form and he certainly lost no admirers through his performance at Sandown.
Norman Williamson who rode him at Leopardstown, observed afterwards that he was a National horse when talking to Richard Dunwoody about the race and if Richards has retained his old magic, then there could quite well be another National winner destined to return home in triumph to his Lake District stables.
Scottish Grand National winner tipped for Liverpool's big day
Try ‘Captain' at Aintree
Scottish Grand National is my choice for a tricky looking Martell Grand National at Liverpool next Saturday.
Trained by the man in form Nigel Twiston-Davies, who had a double at Cheltenham, Captain Dibble has been laid out for the race and hasn't run since January when he finished third behind Very Very Ordinary carrying 12 stone at Ascot.
On his previous appearance at the Berkshire course in December he won the valuable SGB Chase, staying on well to beat the luckless Minnehoma.
But it is his run at Ayr last April which puts him in the picture for it showed that he had no trouble with a marathon trip as he stayed on strongly to beat Dalkey Sound carrying 11 stone in the Scottish National.
His weight next Saturday of 10–8 makes Captain Dibble an attractive looking investment.
One of his main rivals is Royal Athlete who was off for two seasons before returning this term and running a tremendous race when third in the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
Richard Dunwoody and Gordon Richards both reckon that this will be the one to beat and they know more about this race than most these days for both have a fine record in the big chase.
Richards' main runner is On The Other Hand who was bought recently out of the John Mulhern stable after having been with Jeremy Maxwell in his early days.
On The Other Hand won the Grand Military Gold Cup at Sandown on his first outing for Richards earlier this month and he should have improved even more since then.
One for the short list, as they say.
John Upson who trains near Towcester won't hear of defeat for Zeta's Lad who has won five chases this season and whose success last time out in the Racing Post Chaser at Kempton was arguably the best National trial so far.
Zeta's Lad beat Docklands Express, Bradbury Star and Royal Athlete that day and must have a chance on this sort of form.
However he acts best on soft ground and he is unlikely to find that at Liverpool.
Party Politics looked to be a back number after having won the National last year but he was then tubed for his wind and ran a storming race to take the Greenall Chase at Haydock at the end of February.
Laura's Beau was third last year but has been in rotten form since then having been plagued by blood trouble.
Trainer Frank Berry reckons he is now in the clear but he hasn't the form to recommend him.
Romany King who was second has a great chance for he has been trained for the race by Toby Balding and will have the assistance of Adrian Maguire the big race specialist.
Chatam may run for Martin Pipe and if so would have a big chance on the strength of that close second at Leopardstown to subsequent Gold Cup winner Jodami.
Garrison Savannah who almost won the National two years ago appears to have returned to his old form if you take his Gold Cup run on board for he was always in touch before blundering and losing his chance late in the race, but he may not stay the trip as happened two years ago when he was beaten by Seagram.
Givus A Buck is not out of it having won the Ritz Club Handicap Chase at Cheltenham.
This is the race which Seagram won before his National triumph, beating Cahervillahow who, if he runs next Saturday, would certainly be the classiest Irish entry for many years.
Cahervillahow ran no race in the Gold Cup but he might be turned on by the National as was the case with Attitude Adjuster who was also trained by Mouse Morris.
If so he would give them all plenty to do off 10–11.
In fact he must be the best handicapped horse in the race.
The Committee is an Ulster horse bidding to follow up on Rhythm Section's win at Cheltenham.
Rhythm Section and The Committee are both trained by Homer Scott although The Committee, who was third in the Kim Muir Chase at Cheltenham, is owned by Dominic Quinn and John Bailie under the name of Corcrain Enterprises.
Galway Plate winner The Gooser runs for Paddy Mullins who hadn't a great record in the race while Arthur Moore who is something of a specialist in the other Liverpool races can't have very high hopes of New Mill House.
It appears to me as though Captain Diobble has been laid out for the race and although there are no such things as a certainty in a National, I feel he may be the right one.
The big race at the meeting apart from the National is the Martell Aintree Hurdle and here the Downpatrick connections of Novello Allegro will be hoping for a cut in the ground.
If this is the case he will run a big race for trainer Noel Meade who was forced to take him out of the Champion Hurdle at Cheltenham.
Charlie Swan rides Novello Allegro and also Castlina, a recent Navan winner who goes for the three miles handicap hurdle on the opening day.
He might have an each way chance.
On the local front Down Royal is also on next Saturday and there are huge fields despite the clash with the National.
Bajan Blues looks the part in the Sportsman Hunter Chase, Fly By North may solve the Maze Handicap Hurdle and Carton may take the Moira Novice Chase.
What a Guy, it's strike number 40
GUY Whittingham scored his 40th goal of the season to push Portsmouth into second place in the First Division.
But Jim Smith's side owed a huge debt of gratitude to Oxford defender Les Robinson.
Whittingham scored in the 65th minute to give Portsmouth the three goals they needed to rise above West Ham.
But it was Robinson's outrageous own goal in the 49th minute which set Portsmouth on their way to an important victory.
Paul Walsh floated in a dangerous cross which the hapless Robinson diverted into his own net with a powerful diving header any striker would have been proud of.
In the 59th minute Eire international Alan McLoughlin added his 11th goal of the season with a finish of pure class.
He lobbed keeper Reece from the edge of the area with a delicate chip to increase Portsmouth's lead.
Then Whittingham put the finishing touch to team-mate Warren Aspinall's firmly struck shot which was parried by Reece.
Result: Portsmouth 3, Oxford United 0.
Paddy all steamed up
PATRICK Johns, one of Ireland's heroes in the Five Nations victory over England last Saturday, is feeling the heat already as he prepares for tomorrow's opening salvoes in the Cathay Pacific Hong Kong Sevens.
Johns is one of five current full internationals poised to take on the host country in their opening group game as Ireland contest one of the major sporting titles in the world, albeit in the abridged version.
But more than anything it's the climate that could see Ireland suffer in the initial stages.
In their group they not only face Hong Kong, who won the plate competition last season, but also Italy who are one of the eight seeded teams.
‘The heat is one thing, but the humidity and the steamy atmosphere is another,’ said Johns.
‘We've had little time to rest since Saturday, and with the temperature soaring past the mid-eighties, the training has been quite tough and very exhausting.
‘At least none of us had carried over any problems from the England game.
Indeed the only real drawback, if you can call it that, is that people are continually coming up and congratulating us on our victory over England.’
This is Ireland's first official participation in the prestigious competition which involves 24 nations, and they are naturally hoping to find some sort of coordination and rhythm in the run-up to the World Cup Sevens in Edinburgh on April 16–18.’
Ireland are likely to employ Johns, Mick Galwey and Denis McBride as the forward trio, with skipper Alain Rolland, Eric Elwood, Vincent Cunningham and Richard Wallace in the backs.
Ireland's 10-man squad is complimented by Wanderers flanker Jonathan Garth, Skerries hooker Bill Mulcahy, and late replacement Brian Glennon of Lansdowne.
Once again, Fiji are favourites to win the cup with Australia and New Zealand, who have their full squads on show, likely to be their biggest danger.
Almost a double ton
JOY and disappointment were the order of the day in the Cossack Victoria League this week.
It was joy for QE1 player Davy Clements who knocked in a 100 clearance in his B Division match against Centre Spot's Mal Aiken while in the A Division Ballygomartin's Billy Millar potted what can only be described as a wonder blue, pink and then missed a straight black for a similar break.
Meanwhile with Maple Leaf having a bye this week Strandtown's 4–0 win away to Holywood sees them join their ‘next door’ neighbours at the top of the table.
Gold
GOLD was fixed this morning at 332.70 dollars an ounce, compared with 332.00 dollars at the previous close.
Top man: Michael Duffy, Northern Ireland's top ranked player was in fine form in the Rathkenny Open Classic in Ballymena this week with a 127 clearance.
Julian Logue of Coleraine was also in form with a 110 break the same evening.
ALTHOUGH I promised you last week that I'd bring details of the all Ireland Schools teams competition this week, I'm afraid that I don't have full details to hand as yet, so I'll hold it over to next week.
My hand today comes from a duplicate pairs game played at the St Malachy's club earlier this week.
It features a well thought out line of play which reaped a just reward.
Sitting South, playing pairs at love all, you hold AQ7 K965 932 1096.
North deals and opens one club, East passes and you respond one heart.
West butts in with a bid of three spades — weak — and North bids four hearts.
East considers that briefly but passes, as do you and West.
Hanley refuses to reveal report
STORMONT Minister Jeremy Hanley today refused to unveil a secret report into the management of the Department of Education.
The schools chief said the 1986 ‘Top Structure Review’ by Coopers and Lybrand was an internal administration document which would not be published.
In a written Parliamentary answer to East Belfast MP Peter Robinson, who has demanded the release of the report, Mr Hanley disclosed that one recommendation in it was not implemented.
This was a suggestion that the divisional structure of the Department should reflect the regional structure of education administration in Northern Ireland rather than‘the functional areas of educational activity’.
Mr Hanley said the Department agreed to set up a top management support group, a separate policy planning group and to group finance and personnel functions into a single division following the probe.
Mr Robinson said: ‘I am not satisfied.
I will be tabling a further series of questions.
I think we can get more information on this.’
Men held
A NUMBER of men are being questioned about yesterday's Castlerock murders after security forces raided a number of homes in the north Co Londonderry area today, police have revealed.
Two countries united in grief
BRITAIN and Ireland today united to mourn the child victims of the Warrington IRA atrocity and voice outrage at a murderous week of Ulster violence.
Thousands were attending peace vigils in Belfast and Dublin as the parents of three-year-old Johnathan Ball buried their ‘beautiful angel’.
The full horror of an appalling upsurge in terrorism was illustrated in Belfast today at an anti-violence procession.
A placard carried through the city by Women for Peace was changed overnight, with the addition of two deaths to the total killed since 1969.
Hundreds, including schoolchildren, toddlers and Warrington woman Valerie Morgan, walked to the City Hall after a cross-community service at St Anne's Cathedral, held simultaneously with Johnathan's funeral in the bomb-hit Cheshire town.
The massive funeral was held as the family of UFF murder victim Peter Gallagher said its sad farewells in Toomebridge.
The hearts of millions of people across the United Kingdom and the Republic went out to Wilf Ball (58) and his wife, Marie (37), as they laid their son to rest in a quiet hill side cemetery overlooking Stockton Heath.
The shocked people of Warrington paid their respects, and stood, some weeping, in silent tribute as the cortege dove slowly around the town, a tiny coffin in front.
Johnathan's mother collapsed as her son's body was placed into a hearse after a Church service.
To express their grief over the Warrington atrocity, the people of Dublin sent thousands of floral tributes to Liverpool this morning with the Irish Air Corps.
A vigil was held at the General Post Office in O'Connell Street, Dublin, to coincide with the funeral, which follows the death yesterday of another victim of the Warrington blast, schoolboy Tim Parry (12).
Irish senator Gordon Wilson was among the mourners — his daughter, Marie, died in the IRA's Enniskillen Remembrance Day blast in 1987.
Before the funeral, Mr Wilson, who met Mr and Mrs Ball last night, repeated his call to the IRA to end its terror campaign.
Meanwhile, mourners at Mr Gallagher's Requiem Mass in the Church of the Sacred Heart, heard a priest describe the ‘shock and confusion’ felt in the community when the father of six was shot dead in Belfast on Wednesday.
Mr Gallagher, a Sinn Fein member, was the first of six men murdered by loyalist gunmen in the past two days.
He was described by Fr Patrick O'Neill as a good man who was ‘reared in a house in the grounds of this church and who lived a life committed to his faith, his parish, his family and who liked his weekend recreation.’
Fr O'Neill added: ‘Peter was well described in a TV interview on Wednesday night as a gentle giant.’
63 years of humour
THEIR columns have gone, but their names live on.
Veteran readers of Ireland's Saturday Night can still rhyme off the contributors who used to grace its pages.
Football columnist Ralph the Rover, for example, and his junior colleague Wanderer.
Franc's Diary, that entertaining miscellany which was written for years by a succession of different pens.
Another popular feature was ‘Barney's Blunders’, as was that celebration of Belfast dialect, the ‘Mrs McNeese’ column.
Then there was the rural charm of my old friend Gerry Rafferty's much loved weekly dander ‘Listen Here Awhile’, the inquisitive ramblings round the countryside by ‘Nomad’, and the contributions by that most famous of all Belfast local historians, Cathal O'Byrne.
Probably best remembered of all, though, were the Larry O'Hooligan cartoons, which ran in the ‘Pink’ for no less than 63 years (1898–1961).
Among the artists who provided readers with their Saturday chuckle, courtesy of Larry, were his creator J.H. Lunn, Matt Sandford and Billy Conn.
The O'Hooligan character, with his outsized nose, was so popular that iron casts used be made of him and would turn up occasionally as Belfast doorstops.
CLAIRE Curran, Ulster's top female tennis player, is poised to enter the history books.
The 15-year-old Boat Club player has been selected to represent Ireland in the prestigious Federation Cup tournament, the youngest ever player to attain such recognition.
Claire, currently based in Dublin, joins Gina Niland, Siobhan Nicholson and Karen Nugent in an Ireland team that embodies competitive spirit and generous skill.
The qualifying round of the tournament will be held in Nottingham in May and the competition proper will take place in Frankfurt in July.
Claire's elevation has been welcomed by Tennis Ireland Ulster Branch secretary Mavis Hogg.
‘For such a young player this is a tremendous achievement,’ says Mavis, ‘Claire has outstanding talent and she will now have a chance to compete against some of the best players in the world.’
Only last week Claire won the ladies singles title at the East Cork championships defeating experienced international player Lesley O'Halloran — ten years her senior, incidentally — in the final.
Crime alert
FAILURE to get to grips with the problem of young offenders will result in ‘a natural breeding ground for long-term criminality and even terrorism’, the RUC Police Federation has warned.
An editorial in the current edition of ‘Police Beat’, the Federation's official magazine, said: ‘The message must be hammered home that crime doesn't pay.
Europe boost for Belfast game
THE most important international badminton event to be staged in the province will be the Ulster Milk Games Europe-Asia match at Maysfield Leisure Centre on June 8.
And while the teams will not be selected until next month, the results in last weekend's All England championship finals provide a guide to the likely names who will feature in the minds of those selecting the teams.
The European Badminton Union have already named a strong management team in Steve Baddeley as team manager and Denmark's Poul Kold as team coach.
Kold will have taken great encouragement from last weekend's results at Wembley when his Danish players won two of the five titles, as there was undoubtedly some concern in European badminton after the Asians completely dominated the Barcelona finals.
The province can expect to see leading Danish players on the European team in Belfast, and the All England men's doubles victory by Thomas Lund and Jon Holst-Christensen was the first European win for 10 years in that event.
Holst-Christensen was a double winner joining fellow international Grete Morgensen to victory over Thomas Lund and Sweden's Christine Bengtsson in the mixed doubles.
All four semi-finalists in the mixed were European and there was some relief in European circles with the news that the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta will, unlike Barcelona, feature the mixed doubles game.
Audrey Kinkead, the secretary of the Badminton Union of Ireland and an IBF and EBU council member, is delighted with the decision as there was a danger that the sport would split with the men and women going their own way.
Entries in mixed doubles in international events had dropped dramatically prior to Barcelona and what is seen by many as the most interesting and entertaining discipline in the sport was in danger of extinction.
The Asians will not want to lose ground in the mixed doubles in the build-up to Atlanta and the Belfast match will provide them with an opportunity to test the best in Europe.
Distillery's late show
OMAGH Town's inability to get the ball into the net during half an hour of incessant first half pressure was cruelly punished by the deadly Billy Totten after 33 minutes at St. Julians Road this afternoon.
Totten pounced on Dermot McCaul's poor overhead clearance to crash the ball home off a post and lift the siege on his own goal which had led a charmed life.
On 16 minutes Eamonn Kavanagh's effort was deflected inches wide of an upright by Alan Hall and four minutes later Philip Mitchell sent John Crilly tumbling in the area as the Town captain chased McCaul's astute free kick but referee Freddie McKnight waved away the home side's penalty kick claims.
On the half hour John Drake's diving header took Coyle's crisp volley off the line with Collins beaten and Mark Donnelly had a shot scrambled to safety from the resultant corner.
In the closing minutes of the half Collins threw himself in the way of yet another Coyle attempt after dropping Marty McCaffrey's free kick to keep his goal intact at the interval.
Half time: Omagh Town 0 Distillery 1.
The Whites might have increased their lead on the restart from Totten's corner but a combination of Dunne and Kavanagh cleared Mitchell's header off the goal line.
But Collins was soon back in the thick of the action, fisting clear a McCaffrey free kick and throwing himself across his line to make a fine two handed stop from a Kavanagh volley.
The keeper was left exposed, however as Coyle climbed to meet Adrian Lecky's diagonal cross only to head wide.
The big striker made amends just short of the hour, blasting the ball all through the Coleraine defences for his 19th goal of the season, the culmination of good work down the right by Barry Patton.
The visitors bounced back with Mitchell heading wide at the far post and Cormac O'Donnell bursting into the box where Mark Donnelly's tackle ended the danger in circumstances that might have brought a spot kick.
At the other end Patton and Crilly were both just off target with headers.
Aidan McAleenan grabbed a fortunate winner for Billy Hamilton's side nine minutes from time as Joe McBrearty who had been a spectator for long periods allowed his harmless looking shot slip through his hands.
REFEREE: Freddie McKnight (Newtownards).
Homer chases the big one for Ulster
Committed Scott
HOMER Scott, an Ulsterman who trains in the Irish Republic, came home to Kildare from Cheltenham a fortnight ago with the air of a man returning from a job well done.
And why not.
For Homer with only two runners had landed a winner and a third.
Not bad for a man who 10 years ago was virtually unheard of.
Since those early days, Scott has turned out a lot of above average horses who have not only kept his smallish stable ticking over smoothly but have at times produced results which have had the bookmakers running for cover.
However, nowadays Homer's horses are consistent rather than spectacular, unlike the early 80's when he and owner Liam Marks were the undisputed kings of the bumper races.
In fact it got to the stage that if Scott had a horse in a bumper at all, it was backed favourite almost immediately.
Lorcan Wyer who has since gone on to become one of the most stylish jockeys in England was associated with most of the Scott winners in those days.
The same could be said for Adrian Maguire who got his big chance when Martin Pipe was looking for someone to ride the former Scott-trained Omerta in the Cheltenham Kim Muir in 1991 and Homer recommended Maguire who at that time was unknown outside the point-to-point field.
Maguire did the business as expected at Cheltenham and then travelled to Fairyhouse to ride Omerta in the Irish National and achieved the same result again.
From obscurity to fame in two rides.
That was the Adrian Maguire story and he had a lot to thank Scott for.
Afterwards as the plaudits for the winner died down, Homer confided in me: ‘You've just seen the best jockey since Jonjo O'Neill,’ and who would argue with that assertion nowadays?
Pat McWilliams who won the Ladbroke in 1991 on another former Scott horse, The Iliad, also used Homer's stables as a springboard to the sort of fame he achieved at Cheltenham later that year when he stormed home on Destriero to land legendary gambler Noel Furlong a ‘touch’ estimated at around £1m.
So Scott has never been far from the sharp end — where all the action is, as they say — and he fired his latest salvo when Rhythm Section landed the Festival Bumper at Cheltenham for his brother-in-law, Belfast solicitor Robert Sinclair.
But it is the horse who was third the day before who could give him his biggest win, matching Omerta's success in the National Hunt Chase at Cheltenham in 1986.
The horse is the rehabilitated The Committee who ran the proverbial ‘blinder’ in the Kim Muir and who is now quietly fancied to give Homer his first win in the National.
The Committee was one of the stalwarts of the Scott stable five years ago when he was landing hurdling prizes.
Then when he took to chasing he produced one of the best performance by an Irish horse at Cheltenham when going down narrowly to Garrison Savannah in the 1990 Sun Alliance Novices Chase — and Garrison Savannah the following won the Gold Cup and finished second in the National.
After that, it seemed as though The Committee would be a future Cheltenham winner.
But disaster is never far away in the sport of National Hunt racing.
Having run sixth to Desert Orchid in the Irish National the month following the Cheltenham race and then been beaten a short head by On The Other Hand at the big Punchestown festival in April that year, The Committee ran into a major training setback and never saw another racecourse for two and a half years.
He only returned in November last year when he ran sixth behind Gold Options, appropriately enough at Punchestown.
‘The Committee struck into himself when he was second to On The Other Hand,’ Homer told me.
‘I had to lay him off but I had every intention of bringing him back the following season.
However, I realised that his chances of racing that year were only 50–50 and I told the owners this.
‘I must pay tribute to them for both Dominic Quinn from Banbridge and John Bailie from Lurgan told me to take my time with the horse and bring him back only when I felt it was right to do so.
But for their patience and understanding, The Committee would not be in the position he is in today.’
Homer sees The Committee as having a tremendous chance in the National if he stays out of trouble.
‘He has the class to win the race,’ he said ‘and he should get round alright.
I am reasonably hopeful.’
Although he has yet to win since his comeback, The Committee's performances have been improving most of the time.
Following on this sixth behind Gold Options, he ran in the Troytown Chase at Navan but showed little as he finished down the field behind Roberts Rhapsody.
He then ended up on the floor twice at Fairyhouse and Punchestown before he ran against championship class when he filled fifth place behind General Idea in the Chase at Leopardstown over Christmas.
However, the best was yet to come for The Committee lost no fans when a decent third behind Zeta's Lad in the Thyestes Chase at Gowran Park in January before an equally encouraging third behind Wee Madge at Down Royal.
However, probably his best performance was in the Hennessy Cognac Irish Gold Cup at Leopardstown where he led for most of the trip before tiring and finishing fourth behind subsequent Cheltenham hero Jodami, Chatam and General Idea.
A man who has had a lot of success in a relatively short space of time — he has been training 15 years — Homer Scott has already had a Liverpool winner.
This was back in 1986 when Canute Express won the Janneau Mersey Novices Hurdle under Lorcan Wyer.
Pat tern of life for starlings in flight
DURING the late winter months starlings congregated in the late afternoon on the high tension wires near my home.
Small flocks coming in from all directions joined the first arrivals until many thousands were stretched out in long parallel black lines.
Profitable route for National Express
NATIONAL Express has enjoyed a one-way ticket to profitability, the coach operator revealed today in its first results since it floated on the stock market.
It roared back into the black last year to the tune of £6.8 million, compared with taxable losses in 1991 of £1.2 million.
Last year's results were flattered by inclusion of the Airport Coach Services operation, which was bought in 1991, and the reduction in interest charges following the sale of non-core businesses.
The core business, National Express, was badly affected by the recession as passenger journeys last year fell to 10.5 million from 11.8 million.
The fall was also due to abandoning unprofitable routes and aggressive competition from British Rail.
Despite the drop in numbers, pre-tax profits were virtually unchanged at £4.5 million.
Eurolines division had a particularly successful year, boosting profits 12pc to £1.1 million.
‘This result was achieved in spite of the worsening economic position in the UK and the beginnings of recession on the continent,’ the group said.
Strong growth was particulary evident on the daily Paris, Amsterdam and Brussels routes.
‘A very positive start has been made to unlock the enormous potential of new routes to central Europe.
The London-Prague service, which started in April, produced sales well ahead of forecast.’
Looking to the future, National Express, which floated in December, said passenger numbers would continue to be affected until there was an obvious improvement in the economy.
‘Because of the present state of the economy and also because of the seasonal nature of the main businesses, with the large majority of profits usually earned in the second half, it is too early to form a clear view of the outcome for the year,’ the group added.
Earnings per share amounted to 16.8p, compared with 10p previously.
HOCKEY
McKimm out, Kidd takes over
RBAI defender Conor McKimm has been forced to withdraw from the Ireland under-18 squad which began its Home Countries bid in Cork today.
McKimm has fought a losing battle to shrug off injury and is replaced by another Ulster player, Gareth Kidd (Annadale).
Holywood, Lisnagarvey and Instonians will be anxiously awaiting news of the draw for the Tennent's Irish Senior Cup semi-finals which will be made on the BBC Television programme ‘Sportscene’, which begins at 7.30pm tonight.
Meanwhile, life membership of the Irish Ladies Hockey Union has been conferred on two Ulster women, Professor Florence McKeown and Sheila Hennessy.
ILHU president, Joan McCloy, presented the pair with silver shamrocks at a function in the House of Sport last night.
Olympic bronze medallist, Jackie McWilliams, of Randalstown and Gt Britain, was awarded the Winifred Templeton trophy for her contribution to women's hockey in Ulster.
Leicester lay bogey
LEICESTER went into the match against Charlton hoping to equal the best winning run in the club's history…but they were up against their bogey club for the past two years.
It was Charlton who stopped a winning streak at the end of last season which cost Leicester automatic promotion.
Today it was playoff points at stake and Leicester's teenage sensation Julian Joachim put them in front with a powerful header within a minute.
The 18 year-old's second goal in two games since coming back from England youth World Cup duty in Australia last Sunday.
Gary Mills crossed from the left.
Steve Walsh glanced a header across to Joachim who planted the ball past Mike Salmon with such force he stood no chance.
Leicester needed the goalstart for it was the visitors who surged forward with the best of the goal chances.
Carl Leaburn was always a threat combining well up front with Alex Dyer.
On twenty minutes Dyer stormed down the left wing and sent in a perfect cross.
Leaburn rose above the blue shirts but his header was tipped over by Leicester keeper Carl Muggleton.
Leicester seemed out of it but remarkably seconds before the break Lee Philpott crossed from the left and found stand-in striker Steve Walsh who headed in his 7th goal in as many games since moving up front.
Half Time — Leicester 2 Charlton 0.
Ten minutes after the restart Philpott on the right this time, crossed from the byline and Walsh was lurking again on the edge of the six yard box to head in his second goal.
It put the game beyond battling Charlton.
But with 15 minutes left Dyer gave the visitors some hope when he chested down a cross and struck a strong shot past Muggleton from close range.
Leicester wobbled, but they hung on for the record equalling win.
Result — Leicester 3 Charlton 1.
THE security forces have smashed a daring IRA bomb distribution network after uncovering a huge amount of fertiliser — suitable for making explosives — near the scene of the latest UFF murder.
About five tonnes of fertiliser was found in an unoccupied shop unit close to the shooting in west Belfast last night, in which 17-year-old Damien Walsh from Poleglass died and another man was seriously hurt.
An RUC spokesman said Army experts carried out a controlled explosion on a suspect package found near the scene of the shooting.
‘As a result of this damage was caused to the door of an un-occupied shop unit.
In dealing with this damage, police found an estimated five metric tonnes of fertiliser of a type suitable for use as explosives,’ he added.
The bags of fertiliser are thought to be similar to those found at Fallswater Street in west Belfast last week.
Detectives believe the IRA was transporting deadly cargoes to various locations in the city — disguised as goods.
They think the terrorists put the explosive mixture, made up in polythene bags, inside larger bags.
Mr Walsh — the sixth Catholic killed in three days — died instantly in the gun attack at the Dairy Farm Centre on the Stewartstown Road.
The other victim remains seriously ill in hospital with leg injuries.
The killers drove a stolen car into the busy complex and shot Mr Walsh several times with a pistol.
A security man working at the centre said the injured man told him one of the gunmen put a sub-machine gun to his head, but that it had failed to go off.
The gunmen escaped in a red Astra car, hijacked in the Shankill and later found abandoned in Andersonstown.
Aidan Canavan, chairman of the Dairy Farm Project — set up with aid from the International Fund for Ireland — said: ‘The centre is one of the examples where success can be achieved by people getting together to work for their community in a non-sectarian way.
It is appalling it should be the scene for this attack,’ he said.
Mr Walsh's murder came just 11 hours after the UFF shot dead four Catholics and injured a fifth man as they arrived to carry out building work on houses in Castlerock.
Claiming responsibility, the loyalist paramilitary organisation warned it would continue to escalate its campaign of violence until political progress was made in Northern Ireland.
Secretary of State, Sir Patrick Mayhew, has issued a powerful appeal for the community to break its silence and give police vital information against terrorists.
Meanwhile, Dr Joe Hendron, MP for West Belfast, said he was horrified by the latest killing.
He has urged Unionist politicians to persuade their supporters to give the police any information they had about the terrorists.
Alliance Party chairman, Dr Philip McGarry, said it was essential that people stood together.
‘If we remain resolute and calm with our fellow citizens, Catholic and Protestant, we shall not be defeated,’ he said.
Sinn Fein said Mr Walsh's killing was sectarian and part of ‘a campaign of genocide’.
Managers rage after Cup exits
PAUL Malone today warned his League Cup flops: ‘Go through the motions against Linfield and you're out of my Irish Cup plans!’
The Ards manager is furious at his side's capitulation in Wednesday's League Cup semi-final with Coleraine and has told several players they're on trial against the Blues at Castlereagh Park tomorrow.
This championship game might have been a dress rehearsal for the League Cup final; instead it's a battle of the moody blues with both Ards and Linfield licking the wounds after being knocked out of the competition.
And Malone wants a drastic improvement in what is now a preparation game for next Friday's Irish Cup semi-final with Cliftonville.
‘Cup places are up for grabs and I'll be watching carefully tomorrow to see if any player is saving himself for the semi-final,’ said Malone.
‘I was very disappointed with our display against Coleraine.
The players seemed to think all they had to do was turn up and got what they deserved.
‘Coleraine showed that things can be achieved if you're prepared to battle and that's what I want to see us doing tomorrow.’
Ards will be without injured striker Harry McCourt tomorrow; defender Brian Campbell is also likely to be ruled out.
Their opponents have been through the mangle recently, going out of two cup competitions courtesy of Bangor and seeing their lead at the top of the table cut to a slender one point.
Linfield have five games left this season — all cup finals in a matter of speaking — and manager Trevor Anderson will certainly be treating them that way.
The good news is he will have striker Graham Harvey and defender John McConnell back in the side; Lee Doherty has also recovered.
Like Malone, Anderson has laid it on the line to his players.
‘They're playing for their futures at this club,’ he said.
‘If I'm here next season a few of them won't be.
Tuesday's performance was unacceptable.’
Second placed Portadown are back to full strength for their home game with Cliftonville; injury doubts Joey Cunningham and Peter Murray trained without problems.
Cliftonville are unlikely to risk Jim McFadden with the Irish Cup semi-final looming.
Crusaders, enjoying their low profile these days but still a major threat for the title, are at home to Newry and will have forward John Cleary available again.
And fourth-placed Bangor take on Glentoran at the Oval in a dress rehearsal for the Irish Cup game.
Celtic-bound Paul Bryne will miss the game through injury.
Donegall relief
DONEGALL eased their relegation worries when they had a fairly comfortable 11–9 win over North Dublin in Division One of the National Water Polo League at the Grove pool today.
They led 5–2 at half time and always had a safe cushion of at least two goals right through to the final whistle.
Tom Irvine and Robin Gordon both hit hat tricks with the other Donegall scores coming from Paddy Rice and Denver Kirk (2 each) and Nicky McDowell.
BADMINTON
Coleraine hopes
THE All Ireland schools' finals take place tomorrow at the Baldoyle Centre in Dublin, and Coleraine Inst, who represent Ulster in the senior boys event, have had outstanding success since the early 80s winning the Irish title no less than nine times since 1980.
Their last victory was in 1991 when they lost out last year to the Leinster champions Terenure who are the favourites to win tomorrow.
The Coleraine team will be led by Ulster under 18 player David Ilsley and he will be joined by Stephen Johnston, Peter Smyth and Ruari Hatrick.
Dalriada will represent Ulster in the senior girls event, Wallace High School will be the junior girls representatives with Bangor Grammar representing Ulster in the junior boys event.
NETBALL
Buoyed up
NORTHERN Ireland senior netball team buoyed up by their European League win over Scotland last week play League leaders, England, at Lisburn Leisure Centre tomorrow (2.15).
The new-look team again sees the inclusion of Anne Hemming who made her debut against Scotland and coach Anne Anderson who is keeping the formula the same tomorrow.
In the Progressive double-header Northern Ireland U18s play England at 12 noon.
The squads are: U18: D Gallagher, B Ward, C Roddy, Y Harkin, S Dunseath, captain, K Doherty, B Doherty, J Harrison, A Sloane, N Barbour, S McLaughlin, stand-by.
Getaway Britons perks up Cook
RECESSION-HIT Britons are more determined than ever to take their annual holiday, leading travel agent Thomas Cook said today.
‘Leisure travel used to be a privilege, now people regard it as a right,’ said chief executive Christopher Rodrigues, reporting on the group's second-best year in its 152-year history.
He said there had been a remarkable change in attitudes over the last few years in which those people still in work were determined not to give up their annual break, although they were being forced to cut down on other spending.
Thomas Cook's UK travel agency network had its best year ever last year and plans are under way to increase the current branch network of 340 by at least another 100 over the next two years.
Overall pre-tax profits for the group jumped 184pc to £25.3m last year from £8.9m in 1991, when the Gulf War had a severe impact on the travel industry.
The resilience of leisure travel last year helped to offset a reduction in business travel as companies sought to cut costs on sending executives around the world.
Mr Rodrigues described the figures as excellent results which demonstrated the group's strategy of continuing to expand internationally, while safeguarding the core UK business.
He said bookings for summer holidays this year were well ahead, with operators competing fiercely on price to capture their share of the market.
Thomas Cook's foreign exchange businesses also did well last year, with small businesses using the company to send money around the world as well as the traditional travel cash and travellers cheques operations.
In September the company was sold by Midland Bank to the German West Deutsche Landesbank and LTU group, Germany's leading charter airline and tour operator.
Earlier this month, the group bought an 8.3pc stake in UK tour operator Owners Abroad, helping to foil a hostile takeover bid from rival Airtours.
It has announced its intention to tender for a further 12.5pc stake.
‘AT THE tail-end of 14 years in power our rump of a Conservative Government can think of nothing but half-hearted socialist measures, as if through introducing socialism by the back door it will somehow ease its own exit by the front’— Commentator Auberon Waugh.
‘THIS drama about the decline of our coal mines has been running for at least 75 years.
Now, just before the final curtain falls, ministers are caught, red-handed on stage, with the corpse’— Tory peer Lord Deedes.
‘I NEVER could understand economics.
You can be caught out with your follow-up question if you don't know what you are talking about’— Sir Robin Day.
‘I HAVE been shot twice, once in the back, and left for dead, I've been stabbed.
I was once attacked by 18 blokes and put nine in hospital.
The other nine ran away’— former bare-knuckle champion Lennie McLean, on his violent past which is to be the subject of a film.
Woman missing
POLICE are concerned about the safety of a 20-year-old woman who has been missing for a week.
Joanne Fitzgerald, a market researcher from Brentford, Middx, was last seen talking to a man in Dunkin Doughnut in Piccadilly in London's West End on March 15.
Greg's got Annie's gun
A rifle owned by Wild West heroine Annie Oakley has fetched £84,000 more than five times its expected price at auction.
The 1888 Winchester was yesterday bought by private collector Greg Martin, from San Francisco, California.
He also bought a 1890 halfpenny coin shot through the centre by legendary female sharpshooter at the Christie's sale for £1,380, compared to its list price of £500.
Pig protest by Linda
LINDA McCartney, wife of former Beatle Paul McCartney, has written to Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating to express disgust at the premier's investment in a pig farm.
McCartney, on a concert tour with her husband in Australia, said in an interview that Keating could not be a good leader if he was involved in ‘murdering animals.’
She said on Tuesday she was going to send a vegetarian cookbook to the Keatings.
Life-saving success
JUST 24 hours after St John Ambulance launched its first-ever Breath of Life week, the charity has been deluged by people wanting the free two-hour resuscitation courses being offered throughout the country.
A spokesman for the service said last night: ‘If you are having problems getting on a course please bear with us.
We will deal with everyone in due course and are delighted to be deluged.
But please be patient.’
Blazing row
A Spanish driver let his fiery temper get the better of him when he was stopped by police.
As they wrote out a ticket 30-year-old Pere Costa smashed the car's windows, doused it in petrol and set it on fire before walking home yesterday and leaving the police to deal with the blaze.
Prisoner says thanks
HOME Secretary Kenneth Clarke might appreciate a letter sent to Horsham police by a convict just released from prison.
He wrote: ‘Thanks for your hospitality over the past few weeks and for helping me see where I have gone wrong.’
Avalanches kill 40
AVALANCHES roared down the mountains of northern Afghanistan, burying hundreds of people in buses and cars and killing at least 40, officials said yesterday.
Rescue operations were being hampered by severe winter weather and the death toll was expected to soar.
Birthday song
MRS Daisy Burt, who has just turned 104 at her home in Chichester, W Sussex, says singing keeps her young.
Mrs Burt's husband was killed on the Somme in 1916.
She then fell in love with an RAF pilot but he was killed in World War Two before they were married.
Collegians 2 Raphoe 3
RAPHOE striker Johnny Weir had the rare distinction of scoring at both ends of the pitch in today's Section Two encounter with a depleted Collegians side at Olympia.
The Donegal team started at a lightning pace and Billy Pearson scored the opener in the 10th minute after collecting a JP McGranaghan pass.
Three minutes from the interval Lindsay McCorkell added number two as Pearson turned provider during a sweeping five man move.
Twelve minutes from time Weir had the misfortune to turn a John Eggleston short corner drive into his own net after Raphoe keeper Davy Buchanan had been at full stretch.
But within a minute Weir found his bearings to make it 3–1 from a Pearson cross before Willie Gibson cut the deficit with a late set piece strike.
Antrim 2 East Antrim 0
THE Antrim and East Antrim encounter was a hard fought game with both teams going all out for vital points, particularly East Antrim, struggling at the bottom of the league.
East forced two short corners which proved fruitless and likewise Antrim had a similar fate.
The mid-fielders ruled the roost up to the interval, but after a scoreless first half the Antrim team showed great dominance.
They failed to break the deadlock from two well hit out short corners but East Antrim strikers Colin Black and Gary Hamilton explored every avenue in search of gold which never came.
Antrim got their welcome break in the 63rd minute from a hotly disputed penalty flick in which Leslie Allen's conversion landed in the back of the net to spell doom for East Antrim.
Two East Antrim players were sin-binned and not surprisingly Antrim got their second goal in the 69th minute through Allister Reilly to grab the vital points.
Down 0 Bangor 3
BANGOR moved two points closer to promotion to Senior I with a victory over Down in Downpatrick.
The scoreline perhaps did not reflect the effort which Down put in but Bangor were more clinical in finishing off their moves.
Bangor took an early lead when a hit-in from the left wing found McIvor in the circle and he simply helped the ball into the net.
In an explosive second half Bangor added a further two goals, the Down keeper saved a flick, Burgon hit the post and had two attempts taken off the line.
Bangor went two up from a short corner with J Clark firing in an unstoppable shot.
Then Down put some useful moves together and did look dangerous for a spell.
Burgon winded his way through the Bangor defence and passed the ball to Minnis whose shot was well saved by Brown.
Then came a penalty flick to Bangor with A Gibson saving well low to his left.
Bangor sealed the game following a break down the right wing when the ball was pushed under Gibson.
Ballynahinch 1 Portadown 2
BALLYNAHINCH completed their league programme when they entertained Portadown at Rangley Road.
The wet and windy conditions prevailing were not conducive to good hockey, with the visitors adapting better and taking both points in a creditable 2–1 win.
Portadown shaded the exchange in a poor first half with shots from Clarke, Burrows and Fleming bringing Maguire into action.
Steven Clarke shot Portadown into the lead in the 44th minute, scoring at the second attempt after Maguire had parried his first shot.
Maguire was much the busier keeper, with Portadown gaining a series of unproductive short corners from forceful play.
The ‘Hinch was stung into some retaliatory play, with a shot from Keri Kidd in the 55th minute only inches wide, but Kidd made amends in the following minute, beating Johnston from close in for the equaliser.
Clarke got his second goal in the 60th minute when he met a well directed right-wing cross from Wallace to first time the ball past Maguire to secure both points for the visitors.
Kilkeel 1 Civil Service 0
ON a cold miserable day Kilkeel entertained Civil Service and exacted revenge for an early season 1–0 defeat at Stormont.
In the early stage the sides were evenly matched effectively cancelling each other out.
In the second quarter the better team play of the home side asserted itself and with good use of their right flank Mark Kendall and Roy Gordon showed up to good effect.
Three minutes from half time Trevor Russell passed to Keith Haugh, his fine 40 yard run and pass saw Gordon Cracknell in turn pass to Alan McBride who cracked in a fine goal from mid circle.
On the resumption Kilkeel were awarded three consecutive penalty corners but they were unable to add to their slender advantage, and the direct long ball tactic from Service meant that Kilkeel always had to be alert to the breakaway.
As the match entered its final stages Civil Service thrust forward again using the long ball into the circle.
RUC 0 South Antrim 0
IN this crucial League game between two bottom of the table sides a draw was a fair result.
As there was so much at stake the standard of hockey was effective with both teams playing conservatively and not wanting to take too many risks.
RUC had slightly the edge in the first half but neither goalie had any shots to save during the period.
Both teams had a few short corners which came to nothing.
The trend continued after the restart with plenty of activity around the centre of the pitch.
Each team had a couple of scoring opportunities and a few short corners but the game dragged on to a scoreless draw.
South Antrim are still two points ahead of RUC but they meet again next Saturday, this time in Lisburn.
Hundreds join plea for peace
DUBLINERS turned out in strength last night to show their abhorrence of the IRA's violence and to demonstrate solidarity with the bombing victims of Warrington.
There was an overflow attendance of about 1,000 people at Trinity College in response to a plea from a Dublin housewife, Susan McHugh, for people to show their disgust at the murder of Warrington toddler, Johnathan Ball.
Hundreds of people were unable to gain admittance to the hall.
Gordon Wilson, whose daughter died in the Enniskillen bombing and who is a member of the Republic's Senate, was given a standing ovation by the emotional crowd.
Mrs McHugh, who was clearly delighted at the response to her appeal, said: ‘Let there be no mistake about this.
Tonight is a night to remember.
It's the night we, the silent majority, have said: ‘enough is enough’.’
To loud applause she declared: ‘The IRA did not kill Johnathan Ball in my name.
They did not kill him in your name.
I want to tell the world tonight that they did not kill him in the name of Ireland.
‘There's nothing wrong with being emotional about a little boy's death.
As a mother and, like you, I feel horror, revulsion and sadness.
But that's not all.
That's no longer enough.
‘Tonight I feel angry too.
I feel angry because I know even this war will eventually end.
I feel frustrated because the political will is not there to call a halt to the violence.’
Gordon Wilson said that after the Enniskillen bombing, there was also a watershed, a turning point.
But still there was no peace.
He added: ‘How much blood is to be spilt?
Do we go on killing each other until there is none left?
For God's sake, let us have peace.’
Many of those attending the demonstration earlier queued up to sign a book of condolence outside the General Post Office in O'Connell Street.
The book will be sent to the Mayor of Warrington.
The queue stretched the full length of the building — focal point of the 1916 Easter Rising — and included many young children.
One of those who signed was three-year-old Robert Lynch, of Darndale, who is two months younger than Johnathan Ball.
His mother, Catherine, said: ‘The bombing was outrageous and disgraceful.
When you have a child of the same age as Jonathan, it really hits home.’
Brendan Stack, a Kerryman working in London, said: ‘I'm lost for words to describe an act like the bombing of Warrington.’
He stated that he did not expect any hostility when he returned to London.
He added: ‘The English are very tolerant, but their tolerance will be stretched to the limit by this.’
The Republic's Senate last night stood in silence in sympathy with the relatives of those killed and injured in Warrington.
The Leader of the House, G V Wright, expressed revulsion at the shocking act of IRA terrorism.
He said he was sure all members of the Senate would join with him in expressing a feeling of outrage at ‘this appalling atrocity’ and in conveying deepest sympathy to the families affected and the other residents of Warrington.
Health experts to join top UK body
THREE Northern Ireland health experts have been appointed to the newly-constituted UK Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting.
They are Hilary Herron, nursing services head at South Tyrone Hospital, Professor Philip Reilly, head of department of general practice at Queen's University, and Professor David Sines, professor of community health care nursing at the University of Ulster.
Health Minister Baroness Cumberlege said that the new council marked a milestone for the professions.
‘We have, for the first time, made it directly accountable to practitioners, and we have strengthened its role in advancing and defending high standards of professional education and conduct in the interests of the public.’
Chain store employees in £10,000 theft ‘scam'
THREE former employees of the Top Man chain store in Coleraine have been sentenced for their part in a £10,000 theft of stock and cash from the branch.
They were among six people appearing in Coleraine Magistrates Court yesterday in connection with the theft.
The defendants were former employees, Michael Hugh Dempsey, Castleton Park, Portstewart; John Gregory Donaghy, Prospect Road, Portstewart and Christopher Ronald Mann, Elms Park, Coleraine.
Also appearing were Nicholas Frank McClelland, Daneshill Road, Coleraine; Gary William McCauley, Kinvara Park, Coleraine and Michael O'Donovan, Brook Street, Coleraine.
Dempsey admitted stealing an estimated 200 items of clothing, valued at £6,000 as well as £1,500 in cash.
Donaghy admitted taking five pairs of jeans, value £185 and £1,000 worth of other clothing as well as £540 in cash.
Mann pleaded guilty to taking jeans valued at £37 and £200 in cash while McClelland admitted handling and receiving stolen goods to the value of £92.
McCaulay admitted handling stolen goods and taking a pair of jeans valued £37 while O'Donovan pleaded guilty to stealing £300 worth of clothing and an unrelated charge of possessing a quantity of cannabis resin.
The pleas were entered at an earlier court which heard the charges arose out of the removal and subsequent sale of gents clothing from the store as well as what was described as the ‘creaming off’ of cash from sales at the counter.
It was also stated that a ‘scam’ had been running for quite some time prior to the defendants' involvement.
At today's court the RM, Arthur Jack, adopted recommendations contained in the probation reports, making probation orders in the case of five of the defendants and an order for community service in the other case.
McCaulay, Mann, O'Donovan and McClelland were each placed on probation for 12 months; Donaghy was given probation for two years and Dempsey was ordered to carry out 200 hours community service.
The Resident Magistrate said he had considered the matter of compensation but had decided not to award compensation.
Hi-tech firm's boost for jobs blackspot
THE unemployment blackspot of west Belfast is the location for a £1m hi-tech manufacturing company employing 20 people.
Silotank, based at the Twin Spires Centre in the lower Falls, produces storage tanks for use in industry and agriculture.
The glass-reinforced plastic containers are manufactured using a new centrifugal moulding system designed to meet stringent EC rules on pollution and food storage.
The tanks are lightweight, hardwearing, rust-proof and rot-proof.
‘The fusion of resin and glass fibre in the moulding process yields an end-product which is chemically resistant, but which can also be varied in terms of strength,’ said Silotank's managing director Robert Brennan.
The tanks can be used for storing chemicals, food, acids, oils, sewage and other bulk materials.
Funding Silotank has been operating since last year, but was officially opened yesterday at a reception attended by representatives of the organisations which have supplied funding for the venture.
They include LEDU, the Training and Employment Agency, West Belfast Enterprise Board and Making Belfast Work.
Sympathy for Warrington
LISBURN'S Mayor, Alderman Ivan Davis, and the chairman of Banbridge Council, Councillor Drew Nelson, have sent letters of sympathy to the Mayor of Warrington.
Mr Nelson said he felt Banbridge had something in common with Warrington.
The Ulster Unionist chairman said that just over 11 years ago an 11-year-old boy had been killed in a no-warning IRA bomb blast in the town.
Belfast couple create a piece of history
WHEN Ron Whiting and Julia Todd walked down the aisle at Christ Church, Durham Street, Belfast, they made a little bit of history.
Ron and Julia are the last couple to be married in the 160-year-old church, which will be closing its doors at the end of June.
The bride, of Whincroft Way, Belfast, is the daughter of the late Mr and Mrs Samuel Todd.
The bridegroom, of Gilnahirk, Belfast, is the son of the late Mr and Mrs C Whiting.
The bride wore a gown of ivory raw satin, with the bride and groom's initials embroidered on the train.
The full length veil was held in place with a band of pearls and crystals.
Miss Patricia Loughins and Miss Imelda Truesdale were bridesmaids.
Mr David Whiting was best man, and the Rev SNM Bayly, MA, officiated.
After a reception at The Old Inn, Crawfordsburn, the couple left on honeymoon to the Continent.
Man killed ‘escaping’ from lift
A STUDENT trying to escape from a stuck lift slipped and plunged 55ft to his death, a Belfast inquest heard.
Connor McCaffrey (18) was taking the lift to his room at Queen's University halls of residence when it became stuck between the third and fourth floors.
A jury found that Mr McCaffrey had forced open the doors of the lift and squeezed through a narrow 11in gap in a bid to jump down to the third floor landing.
Instead he plummeted to the bottom of the lift shaft.
Earlier in the evening the first year food technology student, who had heart surgery in 1987, had been at a disco in the Students Union.
He was ‘moderately intoxicated’ when the tragedy happened on February 25 last year.
But the inquest was told that lifts at Hamilton Hall had a history of breakdowns and students often attempted ‘self-rescues’.
Coroner Clifford Tughan said that he hoped Mr McCaffrey's tragic death would serve as a warning to others who might be tempted to climb out of lifts.
Another student Siobhan O'Reilly, who was also in the lift, said that they had pressed buttons for the fourth and tenth floors before it became stuck.
‘Connor said he would climb out and I told him not to be stupid,’ she said.
‘It happened so fast.
He climbed down and just disappeared.’
His father Phillip, of Erndhura, Farnascullogue, Lisnaskea, said he had been told by other students that lifts frequently broke down and students often clambered out of them.
Belfast City Council's environmental health officer Paul Scott showed the jury a film of the 26-year-old Otis lift.
He said that in his opinion the lift had stopped due to the lift buttons being pressed rapidly and randomly, or through a mechanical fault.
Otis engineer William Mulholland said that the lifts were checked regularly and claimed that vandalism or abuse was responsible for a large number of reported breakdowns.
He said that no mechanical or electrical defect had been found in the lift after the accident.
Ulster issue: TDs warned
THE Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, has threatened to take disciplinary action against Fianna Fail backbenchers who criticise his Northern Ireland policy.
A number of TDs, including former Defence Minister, Michael Noonan, have spoken out publicly against any move by the Government to water down the constitutional claim to Northern Ireland.
Some Fianna Fail TDs are concerned by recent statements by the Taoiseach and the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Affairs Minister, Dick Spring, that Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution are ‘not written in stone’.
They warned Mr Reynolds against ‘tampering’ with the Constitution in response to unionist demands for change as a pre-condition for talks on the future of Northern Ireland.
Mr Reynolds reacted to their criticisms at a meeting of the Fianna Fail parliamentary party.
He delivered a stern warning to those whom, he claimed, were ‘operating a different agenda’ that action would be taken against them if they persisted.
He said that Fianna Fail policy on Articles 2 and 3 had been clearly stated in their election manifesto in and in the joint policy for a partnership government with the Labour Party.
He added that splinter groups should not be pulling the carpet out from under the coalition.
He said it had been clearly stated that there would not be any unilateral change in Articles 2 and 3.
Later, Mr Noonan accused the Taoiseach of ‘double think’ in relation to Northern Ireland.
He said he would continue to express the views put to him by his constituents ‘without apology to anyone’.
Belfastmen in murder trial call no evidence
TWO Belfastmen accused of murdering a special constable during a routine road check and attempting to murder three other police officers yesterday called no defence evidence at their Old Bailey trial.
At the end of the prosecution case, counsel for Paul Magee (42) and Michael O'Brien (32) told Mr Justice Laws that they were not calling any evidence.
Prosecuting counsel John Nutting has alleged the two men, who were travelling in a red Sierra, were stopped in June last year on the A64 Leeds-York road, North Yorkshire, by Special Constable Glenn Goodman and Pc Alexander Kelly.
As Pc Kelly sat in the patrol car making radio checks, Magee got out of the passenger seat of the Sierra.
The officer thought he was about to urinate but then to his horror, it was claimed, he saw Magee turn and fire a pistol twice into Mr Goodman's chest causing fatal injuries.
He then fired at Pc Kelly through the police car windscreen, and as the officer lay injured across the front seat walked up to the car, put his hand on the roof to steady himself and emptied the gun into the officer's body.
Pc Kelly managed to shout the police emergency call sign into his radio.
Five miles down the road two other officers, Pc Mark Whitehouse and WPc Susan Larkin spotted the Sierra and gave chase.
Suddenly the car stopped, the passenger got out and fired a Kalashnikov rifle at the police car, hitting it at least nine times.
In a desperate effort to escape, Pc Whitehouse reversed the car until it crashed.
The gunman advanced towards the two officers but fled when another car appeared.
Magee and O'Brien were arrested in nearby Pontefract four days later.
In his final speech, Mr Nutting told the jury O'Brien had admitted being at the scene of both shootings, but the Crown had to prove he was a participant.
Pc Kelly's identification of him; a footprint at the murder scene matched a trainer Magee threw away in Pontefract, and clothing he dumped matched the description of what the gunman was wearing.
Another key piece of evidence was Magee's palm print on the roof of the police car, matching Pc Kelly's description of how he steadied himself before firing.
And Tony Dorigo and Brian Deane have lost their race for fitness for England's assignment.
Manager Graham Taylor flies out to Izmir tomorrow afternoon with a depleted squad of just 19 players after Paul Merson and David Bardsley also withdrew through injury.
His only reinforcement will arrive by private jet if Newcastle's John Beresford comes through tomorrow's Division One game against Birmingham unscathed.
Today's four withdrawals, coming on top of earlier drop-outs by Sheffield Wednesday's Paul Warhurst and Arsenal's Alan Smith, leave Taylor short of cover but will not have too drastic an effect on his team strategy for the Group Two game.
Ulster house prices offer the best deal
ULSTER may be in the grip of recession, but our house prices are still the most affordable in Britain, a survey revealed today.
Taking into consideration a number of factors — including earnings, mortgage costs and prices — Northern Ireland home buyers get the best deal.
According to the survey, carried out by MORI for the Woolwich Building Society, the average monthly mortgage repayment in the province is £130, compared to the UK average of £236.
In Greater London, it's a hefty £347.
Low house prices here mean that even though Northern Ireland is bottom of the UK salary league with an annual average of £15,012, people can still afford to get on to the housing ladder.
The situation has greatly improved from 1989 when affordability in the province was at its worst, with mortgage repayments eating up an average of 14.3pc of income.
Mortgage rates are now at their lowest for 25 years and UK incomes have risen by 50pc since 1987, although the rate of growth has been considerably slower in Northern Ireland.
The 18 to 25 year-old first-time buyers who took part in the Woolwich survey said the most important factor determining their decision to buy a house was job security (79pc), whilst only 46pc thought that prices were the most important.
44pc scored mortgage rates as their prime consideration.
Probe urged into mystery of Donegal swan deaths
A LEADING environmental scientist — who has contributed to several television documentaries on green issues — today called on the Department of Marine in Dublin to investigate the mysterious deaths of a number of swans at Mulroy Bay in Co Donegal.
Roderick O'Sullivan, who has carried out research for programmes such as Channel Four's Fragile Earth, said he was concerned that a mystery disease which wiped out half the swan population at the bay last winter had re-emerged.
And the London-based scientist said he believed it was more than a coincidence that the same colony seemed to have been affected by a second strain of the gizzard worm infection which killed 137 birds last year.
Post-mortems carried out on two of the dead swans have proved inconclusive, but Mr O'Sullivan said he suspected the birds had fallen prey to the same disease which hit the colony before.
Donegal County Council's executive chemist, Donal Casey, claimed he had received no recent reports of swan deaths at Mulroy Bay.
He also said the deaths of the swans could have been the result of bad weather conditions during the winter period.
But Mr O'Sullivan dismissed this theory, claiming that no other swan colonies in Donegal had suffered losses due to harsh weather.
‘What is happening at Mulroy Bay is very much a local problem,’ he said.
‘And the relevant authorities should be looking into this before there is a further outbreak.’
A spokeswoman for the Department of Marine said that tests carried out last year on the swans ruled out claims that the deaths had been caused by high levels of copper poisoning.
She also said that the Department would re-investigate the situation if evidence arose of a further outbreak of the gizzard worm infection.
Mr O'Sullivan said: ‘If this infection is occurring in the swans again, questions must be asked.
‘If it's affecting swans, could it affect other wildlife species and even human beings?’
IRA man defeated in American court extradition battle
A NEW YORK federal appeals court has overturned a key decision that would have allowed an former Belfast IRA man to remain in the United States.
In an unusual move, the full Court of Appeals in a 10–2 decision, threw out the ruling, by one of its own panels as well as a trial court, which held a provision of the British-US extradition treaty unconstitutional.
The provision, which went into effect in 1986, removed the right of British citizens to escape extradition if they were charged with political crimes.
The appeals court ruling greatly reduces the chances that Peter McMullen, who claims he will be killed by the IRA if he is deported to Britain, will be allowed to stay in the United States.
Although the court overturned a key part of the lower court decision, it ordered the trial court to consider other arguments in the case.
But lawyers familiar with the case do not believe this will stop McMullen's eventual extradition.
‘The fate of McMullen is all but certain.
He has two chances of avoiding extradition — slim and none,’ wrote Judge Frank Altimari, one of the two dissenters.
McMullen unlawfully entered the United States in 1978 on a false passport.
He claimed he fled to the United States to avoid being executed by the IRA.
He surrendered to US officials and requested asylum in exchange for information on IRA gun smuggling and fund-raising operations.
He also he confessed to participating in the bombing of army barracks in Belfast and England.
Britain then requested his extradition.
A US magistrate denied the request under the treaty existing at the time, which barred extradition if the defendant was charged with acts ‘political in nature’.
Sweeper to the rescue
A ROAD-SWEEPER and Londonderry police have come to the rescue of a young Japanese tourist.
Dublin-based student Tamako Handa (22), left her handbag, containing a camera, credit cards and money, on a bus during a sight-seeing trip to Derry at the weekend.
When she went back to look for it, the handbag was gone and she travelled back to Dublin without it.
However, a Derry road-sweeper found the handbag lying on Strand Road this week and handed it into Derry RUC.
After a wide-ranging inquiry, including checks with Magee College and other universities that drew a blank, Derry police contacted their counterparts over the border and tracked down Tamako.
The camera and credit cards were still there, but the money had disappeared.
Police believe the it was taken and the bag was dumped.
Thugs vent fury on zoo
A GANG of thugs went on the ramage and caused damage worth more than £4,000 in an attack on animals and staff at Belfast Zoo, it was revealed today.
Extra security staff are now being employed after the 20-strong gang smashed panes of bullet-proof glass in four animal pens.
The gang also threatened two security men who tried to stop them throwing stones and bottles at the animals.
Zoo staff said rare animals could have been killed in the attack and warned that the gang members would have been in danger if any of the animals had managed to escape.
Manager John Stronge condemned the gang, which is also believed to be responsible for a series of attacks of the Belfast Castle Estate in recent months, and promised tough action.
Disgrace ‘It is an absolute disgrace that these thugs terrorised defenceless animals for no reason at all and even threatened our staff who tried to intervene and we are not going to stand for that,’ he said.
‘The gang should also stop and think about the danger they could be in.
‘These panes of glass are bullet proof and will not shatter, but if they are badly weakened a large, frightened animal like a bear may be able to force its way through and the consequences would be very severe’.
The weekend attack was also condemned by local Alliance councillor Tom Campbell, who said the same group had been terrorising pensioners in the Cavehill area during the past few months.
He called on the RUC to ‘make an example’ of the gang by taking tough action to bring them before the courts.’
TODAY: Art exhibition at the Orchard Gallery by the American artist Ida Applebroog, 10am to 6pm, Tuesday to Saturday and Mondays by appointment.
As part of the Central America ‘93 week, an exhibition ‘View of a Better Future’ by Jenny Matthews is running in the Central Library, Foyle Street, Derry in conjunction with Oxfam.
Exhibition of poetry, stories and photographs to promote the ‘European Year of Older People’ in the Waterside Library, Spencer Road.
The Lifford Players present ‘The Passing Day’ by George Shiels in the Rialto Entertainment Centre at 8pm, tickets are £4 and £2.50 concessionary.
Bookings on (0504) 260516.
Tomorrow: Martin Lynch's ‘The Interrogation of Ambrose Fogarty’ in St Patrick's Hall, Strabane.
Bookings on Strabane 882483.
Exhibition ‘View of a Better Future’, Central Library, Foyle Street, Derry.
The Phoenix Players, Portadown present ‘Juno and the Paycock’ by Sean O'Casey in the Rialto Entertainment Centre at 8pm, tickets £4 and £2.50 concessionary.
Bookings on (0504) 260516 Dubblejoint Productions present ‘The White the Gold and the Gangrene’ by Terry Eagleton at the Foyle Arts Centre, Lawrence Hill, Derry.
Bookings: Rialto Box Office (0504) 260516.
Exhibition to promote ‘The European Year of Older People’ Waterside Library, Spencer Road, Derry Art exhibition at the Orchard Gallery by Ida Applebroog, 10am to 6pm.
Saturday: The Newpoint Players present ‘They Shoot Horses, Don't They?’ by Ray Herman at the Rialto Entertainment Centre at 8pm, tickets are £4 and £2.50 concessionary.
Bookings (0504) 260516 Theatre 3 from Newtownabbey present ‘Suddenly Last Summer’ at St Patrick's Hall, Strabane.
Art exhibition by Ida Applebroog in the Orchard Gallery, 10am to 6pm.
Dubblejoint Productions present ‘The White the Gold and the Gangrene’ at the Foyle Arts Centre.
Sunday: Theatre 3 from Newtownabbey present ‘Suddenly Last Summer’ by Tennessee Williams at the Rialto Entertainment Centre at 8pm, tickets cost £4 and £2.50 concessionary, for bookings contact Rialto box office (0504) 260516.
Items for the What's on column are inserted free and can be phoned through to Ken on (0504) 41131, faxed to 311273 or left at the offices of the Belfast Telegraph, 37 Glendermott Road.
Central America week
THIS is Central America Week in Londonderry.
Derry Development Education Centre has organised a week of action, exhibitions, workshops and educational events to raise awareness of Central America, its people and culture.
There is a photographic show at Magee College, entitled ‘View of a Better Future’, by Jenny Matthews.
Other events have included a Guatemalan refugee representative giving an educational workshop to sixth-form Spanish students in the Central Library, Foyle Street.
The final of a cross-community inter-school debate series took place in the library yesterday.
Taking part were Thornhill College, Derry, and Scoil Mhuire, Buncrana.
A short drama was performed before the debate by members of the 4D Theatre Company.
Car dealer's success drive
Excellence award: Charles Greenland (centre), director, service and parts with Peugeot Motor Company (UK), hands a certificate of excellence, presented annually to a limited number of Peugeot dealers in the United Kingdom, to Ronnie Ross, dealer principal and Brenda Turner, service manager, with Ross Motors, Peugeot dealers, Campsie.
Charity hits back at critics
AGE Concern in Londonderry today hit back at criticism of cutbacks in its services in the city.
The charity for the elderly has been forced to reduce some of its activities at Whyte House on the Waterside due to lack of funds.
Roger O'Doherty, secretary of Age Concern in Derry, said: ‘We wish it to be known that only evening activities are curtailed at present in the Whyte House.
This situation has been influenced by a number of factors.
‘The first is that, in keeping with all voluntary organisations, Age Concern is continually handicapped by a lack of sufficient funds.
‘Secondly, the post of organiser at the Whyte House, is ACE-funded and has been vacant since December 1992 and all attempts to fill it have proved unsuccessful.
‘The day-time activities and services continue as normal.
In spite of these restrictions, it is our intention to continue to provide a service for older people.
‘Indeed it will be our ambition that, when circumstances permit, to expand and enhance these services throughout the city.’
I didn't shoot girl in back seat: soldier
A SOLDIER has denied that he fired a bullet recovered from the body of a teenage west Belfast girl shot dead in a stolen car.
Pte Lee Clegg (22), who denies murdering 18-year-old Karen Reilly and her friend Martin Peake (17), maintained he never fired into the rear of the stolen Vauxhall Astra in which Miss Reilly was a back-seat passenger.
The court has heard Miss Reilly died from massive bleeding after being shot twice in the back.
The soldier told Belfast Crown Court he was aware that a forensic scientist had given evidence maintaining a bullet fired by him (Clegg) entered the rear of the vehicle and struck Miss Reilly.
However, asked by a defence lawyer whether he accepted that he could have fired the round, the soldier replied: ‘My Lord, definitely not.’
He said he did not ‘at any time’ fire into the rear of the vehicle.
Pte Clegg is one of six members of 3 Para on trial charged in connection with the deaths of the two teenagers, shot dead by soldiers who opened fire on the car as it sped along Upper Glen Road, Belfast, on September 30, 1990.
Giving evidence yesterday on his own behalf, he dismissed as ‘rubbish’ the evidence of the only police officer on patrol with him that the car posed no danger to the patrol.
And he also rejected claims by the policeman and a civilian that they witnessed a soldier being struck by other military personnel to make it appear he had been struck by the car.
Pte Clegg earlier told the trial he felt justified in firing four rounds into the front windscreen of the stolen Astra, as he felt the life of one of his co-accused, Pte Barry Aindow, was in danger.
Pte Clegg also denied lying to police during interviews about the car posing a threat to Pte Aindow.
The soldier told the hearing he felt justified in opening fire under Army rules written on the military ‘yellow card’.
One of these rules permits soldiers to fire on vehicles being driven directly at people.
In cross-examination by the Crown, Pte Clegg said he stood by every word of his interviews as being ‘truthful, accurate and complete’.
SIX members of the Parachute Regiment face charges in connection with the death of two teenagers who were killed when a stolen car was fired on, on Upper Glen Road, Belfast, on September 30, 1990.
The teenagers were Karen Reilly (18), of Jasmine Walk, Twinbrook, and her friend Martin Peake (17), of Cresslough Park, Lenadoon.
Lee Clegg (22) is charged with the murder of Karen Reilly.
He is also charged with two other soldiers, Stephen Boustead (28) and Barry Aindow (23), with the attempted murder of Martin Peake.
All three are accused along with Andrew Tracey (21), Robert Wood (29) and Andrew Oliver (24) of attempting to pervert the course of justice and obstructing police investigating the shooting incident.
Aindow is further charged with conspiracy with others to pervert the course of justice by allowing himself to be struck in the leg in order to support a false story that he had been hit by the joyriders' car.
Stressed teachers get lesson in coping
ULSTER teachers are taking new lessons after school hours — on stress.
A seminar tonight held by Belfast educational psychologists Mary Blease and Bridgeen O'Neill is the first in a series of measures by the Association of Teachers and Lecturers to help their members cope.
ATL press officer Rosemary Rainey said the uptake for such courses was ample evidence that teachers see the need for training to combat stress.
‘Many teachers are now suffering from or showing signs of stress-related illnesses so that they wish to take early retirement, some on the grounds of ill-health, or are eager to leave the profession altogether,’ the Belfast secondary teacher added.
Crusaders coast it
NEWRY TOWN reeled as Crusaders piled everything into their grim title challenge at grey, wet Seaview.
Only fleetingly did their reshuffled team — injured Paul Johnston, Peter Magee and John Campbell, replaced in the squad by Gary Hughes, Hubert McAlevey and Brendan Loughran — get a look-in during a one sided first half.
There didn't look a chance of another shock surprise win as there was at Carrick last week.
Michael Cash snapped Crusaders into the lead with a confidently struck close range drive high into the net in the 19th minute after Stephen Stewart had cruised through in a deadly wing raid.
Striker Jim Gardiner, who had been foiled of an opener in the 13th minute deflected for a corner by defender Ken Cairns, got well on target at his second clear attempt.
The 16 goal striker, who starts a two match ban on Monday, was bang on the spot to head Crusaders second from a beautifully served cross by Sid Burrows.
Crues' centre back Barry Hunter had snuffed out Newry's only worthwhile goal attempt early on when he blocked an effort by Gary Hughes who had been put through by the clever Ollie Ralph.
Half time: Crusaders 2 Newry Town 0.
Crusaders seemed to think a 2–0 lead was enough judging by their much more casual second half approach that allowed Newry scope for a marked improvement.
They were on top but strolling and even the return of Dublin striker Roddie Collins from suspension and the subs bench in the 62nd minute for Derek Carroll didn't produce the expected extra fireworks.
Crusaders showed most of their threat along the left for Sid Burrows was in his usual classy mood.
And Gardiner, who had done so much to crack Newry earlier, nearly had another goal.
His header was well held by promising keeper Craig Robson.
There was a discordant note 20 minutes from the end of a hard but fair game when Newtownards referee Frank Hiles booked Crusaders back David Mallon and Newry's Ollie Ralph after a skirmish.
Three minutes from the end the hard working Gardiner bowed out in style with a header that gave Crusaders their third goal of a confident display.
Pupils show style with shirt designs
It's bow-tiful: Primary 7 pupil Yolande Link of Crawfordfsburn Primary School, near Bangor, models the unusual tee-shirt which won her a prize in the school's design a tee-shirt competition.
Also in the picture are pupils from the other classes who won prizes, they are (from left), Emma Getty (P2), Carly Hodgkins (P4), Kerry Ferris (P5) and, Charlie Anderson (P1).
All the tee-shirts were modelled by the pupils during the school's fashion show organised by the Parent Teachers Association.
Special first night
It will be a special night for former conductor William Livingstone when Seven Towers Male Voice Choir stage their annual concert in Ballymena Town Hall on March 31.
The new conductor, Thelma Strange, picking up the baton for the first time, is his former pupil and so is new accompanist Kathryn Clarke.
Mrs Strange used to be at the piano when Seven Towers sang and now that she is stepping up to the rostrum, Kathryn, daughter of bass singer and choir secretary Jack Clarke, is replacing her.
Apart from watching two ex-music pupils shine Mr Livingstone will hear some of his special arrangements for the choir performed.
Guests at the concert will include bass Willie Loughlin and Flautilla.
THERE was a robbery at a tobacconist's shop in Great James Street on Tuesday afternoon.
At around 4.20pm, two men wearing woollen masks threatened a female assistant and took money from the till along with several packets of cigarettes.
They ran off in the direction of Northlands Road.
Both men were in their early 20's, one was 5ft 6ins tall with dark brown hair and wearing denim jeans and a denim jacket.
The other man was 5ft 8ins, with short dark hair.
He wore a brown sports jacket with a black roll neck sweater.
Anyone with information should contact detectives at Strand Road, phone 367337.
Criminals were active in the Waterside area on Tuesday afternoon.
A pensioner's home at Knockdara Park was broken into between 12 noon and 5pm.
The house was ransacked but nothing was taken.
During the same period, jewellery, a sum of money and a leather jacket were taken from a house at Bentley Terrace in the Clooney Triangle area after thieves forced their way into the house while the resident was out.
Anyone with information is asked to contact detectives at Waterside RUC, phone 367337.
Five chainsaws worth around £2,000 have been stolen from a repair shop at Main Street, Dungiven in the early hours of Sunday morning.
The saws had the names McCullough and Husqvarna, and anyone offered such equipment for sale in unusual circumstances is asked to contact police at Dungiven, phone 41222.
A bus parked overnight at Templemore School was broken into last Thursday and two fire extinguishers were taken.
At the Model school burglars ransacked the music centre after forcing open the main door.
A radio/cassette player was taken and found smashed in the playground.
Any information to detectives on Shantallow, phone 367337.
Found property: Police at Strand Road want to hear from owners of these items found recently in the city centre.
A purse containing a substantial sum of money found in the William Street area on 13 March, a purse containing a small sum in punts found in the Carlisle Road area on March 17.
A purse containing a small sum of money and a house key found at Guildhall Square on March 20, a large denomination bank note found in the Carlisle Road area on March 13.
Bombers attack 3 homes
BOMBERS attacked the homes of three nationalist councillors in Belfast and Banbridge early today.
A grenade was thrown through a bedroom window at a Sinn Fein member's house in Belfast and the homes of two SDLP councillors were firebombed in Banbridge.
Nobody was hurt in the attacks, the latest in a series mounted against representatives of both political parties.
A fourth house was also attacked early today.
It is owned by a Roman Catholic family in Belfast, but it too escaped unhurt.
Belfast Sinn Fein councillor Joe Austin was with his brother-in-law and four children when a grenade was thrown through the front bedroom window of his home in Falls Road.
The children were asleep in another room at the time, but the device hit a curtain and fell to the ground, where it exploded, blowing a hole in the floor.
Mr Austin said it was an attempt to murder his family.
Late on Tuesday night, Councillor Gerard McGuigan and his family escaped unhurt after the UFF threw a grenade through a bedroom window of his Ardoyne home.
Just hours later, father-of-six Peter Gallagher, a Sinn Fein member from Toomebridge, Co Antrim, was shot dead by the UFF in Belfast.
He will be buried tomorrow after 11am Mass at the Sacred Heart Church, Cargin.
Mr Austin said: ‘It is quite clear there is a co-ordinated campaign of murder against our members.
Having failed to break us politically or silence us through censorship, the role of the death squads is to kill us.’
Blast incendiaries were used to attack the SDLP homes in Banbridge.
A couple in one house at Primrose Gardens were treated for shock and smoke inhalation.
The other attack was at Chinauley Park in the town.
Meanwhile, in north Belfast, the Catholic owner of a house at Parkside Gardens found an incendiary on his windowsill shortly after 10 o'clock last night.
He managed to knock it away and it exploded without injuring him.
Scorch and smoke damage was caused to Ross's Auction Rooms, Montgomery Street, Belfast, when a bomb went off outside at 10.40pm.
There were no injuries.
A 26-year-old man was recovering in hospital today after being shot four times in an apparent punishment shooting in the New Lodge area of Belfast last night.
The man, found behind flats, was hit in both legs and both ankles.
Police said his condition was satisfactory.
THE BRIDE
CALLOUS INLA bomber Anna Moore was one of four — including family members — jailed for life for carrying out one of Ulster's worst terrorist atrocities.
The 47-year-old Londonderry grandmother admitted murdering 17 people — 11 soldiers and six civilians — in a bloody massacre at the Droppin' Well disco on December 6, 1982.
Sixty-six pre-Christmas revellers also suffered horrific injuries when a no-warning bomb exploded in the middle of the packed Ballykelly pub.
During the trial a witness described seeing bodies ‘stacked like dominoes’ amid the rubble but the cold-hearted killer from the Bogside defiantly displayed no remorse when arrested for mass murder in 1983.
Explaining that she was due to meet her INLA boss Dominic ‘Mad Dog’ McGlinchey in the Republic that November day, she told detectives: ‘You may find this hard to believe and think I'm hard and callous but if Dominic had asked me to do the same again, I would have done it.’
Sentencing Moore to 17 concurrent life terms, Mr Justice Carswell said it was: ‘a very appalling crime…one of utter horror and devastation’.
THE GROOM
Lisburn man Bobby Corry was jailed for life in 1986 for what a judge described as the ‘savage and reckless murder’ of a caretaker in Belfast 14 years earlier.
Innocent victim John Magee (54) was having a drink in the Capital Bar, Dublin Road, when a sectarian bomb planted by Corry and two UDA men ripped the pub apart.
At Belfast Crown Court, Corry admitted murdering Mr Magee as he sat with a pint, beside his pet dog, also killed, in the beer keg bomb blast.
Corry also pleaded guilty to robbery and having a gun.
A detective told the court the loyalist — 21 years old in 1972 and with his roots in Belfast's staunchly loyalist Sandy Row area — left the paramilitary organisation after the murder and had shown ‘genuine remorse’.
He was also no longer considered by police to be a threat to the community, Lord Justice Kelly was told.
Corry was affected by personal tragedy following the bombing.
One of his children suffering from Spina Bifida and another was killed in a train accident.
He had fled to England in the early 70s and worked as a miner but later returned to the province through ill health.
THE MAID OF HONOUR
Fatal Attraction killer Susan Chistie has seldom been far from the headlines since being jailed for the cut-throat killing of her lover's wife.
The brutality of her jealous crime — killing Penny McAllister (24) in a blood-thirsty bid to steal the victim's Army Captain husband — shocked an Ulster community already hardened by decades of violence.
The former UDR Greenfinch's sensational 11-day trial attracted intense media interest as it unveiled a tangled web of obsessive love, insatiable desire, cruel deceit and explosive violence.
Lord Justice Kelly faced a storm of controversy and provoked sustained public outcry last June when he sentenced the then 23-year-old Lisburn woman to just five years for manslaughter.
A Downpatrick jury acquitted the trainee officer of murder, believing she was out of her mind when she attacked love rival Penny with a razor-sharp blade at Drumkeeragh Forest, outside Ballynahinch in March 1991.
The disgraced soldier was then dragged back into the glare of publicity last November when the Attorney General successfully challenged her sentence as ‘unduly lenient’.
The Court of Appeal made it nine years.
After the appeal, Duncan McAllister resigned his Army commission while publicity surrounding Christie's friendship with Anna Moore helped keep her in the public eye.
THE BEST MAN
Understood to be a brother of Corry.
THE BRIDESMAID
Moore's daughter Jacqueline was jailed for ten years for her part in the Droppin' Well bloodbath.
At 22, she was described in court as a ‘weak minded, simple, giddy, superficial and artless girl’ only partly aware of the enormity of her crime.
She was acquitted on 17 counts of murder but admitted manslaughter during the trial which dramatically collapsed when the INLA bomb gang threw in the towel and changed their pleas.
Her boyfriend at the time of the outrage, Patrick Shotter (47), is also serving life for the Ballykelly murders.
FLOWERGIRL
Jacqueline Moore was pregnant when sentenced and her eight-year-daughter Nikki was the first child born in a Northern Ireland prison.
Redland £35m profit surge
REDLAND'S £624m takeover of Steetley last year laid the foundation stones for a dramatic surge in group profits, the building materials group revealed today.
Pre-tax profits jumped to £221.5m in 1992 from £186m the previous year with Steetley contributing about £50m to operating profit.
The group, which was dented by rationalisation costs of £14m, was also helped by stronger markets in several European countries.
In the UK, its roof tiles operation saw profits fall due to lower prices and further redundancy costs, while its roofing business was boosted to £161.1m from £128.9m.
In addition to the Steetley takeover, the group bought four roofing businesses for a total of £87m.
The total dividend is maintained at 25p per share.
Earnings per share dipped slightly to 23.7p from 30p.
‘She should have been hanged’
TEN years after prison bride Anna Moore brutally murdered his youngest daughter, Dick Dixon still believes the Ballykelly bomber should have been hanged.
The Limavady father of five outwardly appears to be coping with the savage death of 24-year-old Ruth, but the emotional scars remain painfully close to the surface.
Looking at a picture of his dead daughter on the living room wall, Mr Dixon said today's ceremony is an academic matter and views the professed Christianity of Moore and Corry sceptically.
‘I feel she and the others should have been hanged at the time and I feel the same now,’ he said.
The family man believes their new-found faith is ‘a ploy to get them out earlier’.
He also added that Moore had never asked them to forgive her for throwing their lives into grief and chaos.
Listening in their Castle Park home, his wife Virtue said Moore had altered her life for the worse.
‘Ruth was a pal of mine as well as a daughter,’ she said.
‘She changed that overnight and left me with a broken heart — I will never be the same again.
‘I'm a born-again Christian myself and if she is a born-again Christian I will be spending eternity with Anna Moore.
‘If I met her now I would talk to her — but not here.
I tried to be bitter but I couldn't.
‘I used to have to get out of bed to cry every night and was in an awful way when I passed the Droppin' Well.
Now I can pass it like any other house.
‘I even went in and had a meal on the spot where Ruth was killed.
‘It took me five years to realise that she was gone and I started living normally.’
Broken hearted: Mrs Virtue Dixon at home in Limavady with a picture of her daughter, Ruth, killed in the Droppin Well pub massacre.
Small is beautiful…
Top town: Lisburn Mayor Alderman Ivan Davis was given star attention from Kathy Reid and Jane Hodgers when he received awards for the 1992 Progressive ‘Ulster in Bloom’ competition.
Alderman Davis collected awards for Best Small Town, Moira, and Lisburn, placed third in the Large Town category, also the ‘Roses in Towns’ trophy.
Finlay to keep the drive on
ULSTER driver Stephen Finlay, who finished in a superb third place on the British Open (or international) championship Vauxhall Sport Rally in Wales last weekend, moves to Scotland this week to defend his lead in the British national series.
Finlay, from Ballygawley, won the opening round of the national series in the south of England a month ago and bids to consolidate his position on Saturday in the Aberdeen-based Granite City Rally.
He sees the national series as his priority and, in fact, only went to Wales last weekend as a warm-up for Saturday's event in the northern Scottish forests.
However, the Vauxhall Sport result, where he was only beaten by the official team Subarus of Richard Burns and Alister McRae and finished ahead of the new Ford Escort Cosworths of Gwyndaf Evans, has provided sufficient encouragement for him to tackle the next round of the Open series, the Pirelli International on April 17/18.
Finlay is one of the enigmatic characters of Ulster motor sport, a driver who flits in an out of rallying when the mood suits him.
But now he looks to have got the bit between his teeth and is buckling down to some series driving — and finally showing what enormous talent he has.
He takes his Malcolm Wilson prepared Ford Sapphire Cosworth 4x4 to Scotland where he faces tough opposition, notably from Murray Grierson in a Metro 6R4.
Also heading for Scotland is James Leckey whose Village Homes Cosworth 4x4 has been rushed back into shape after suffering damaged suspension on last weekend's Mayo Rally.
Meanwhile, several of the leading Northern Ireland championship contenders, including Stephen Emerson, will be in action on Saturday in the single-venue rally at Mallusk.
Emerson heads the entry list in his Opel Manta and others in the top 10 include George Elliott (Peugeot), Sean Haveron (Escort), Raymond Mason (Sunbeam), Phil Cherry (Sierra) and Paul McKinstry (Sunbeam).
The action starts at 12 noon.
Denny back in business
IT took Damien Denny only four and a half ruthlessly one sided minutes to strike a victory note at the Ulster Hall last night.
For him, the task was no more onerous than putting out the wheely bin on Monday.
If Coventry lad Jimmy McGee ever again thinks of stepping out of his class, the best advice anybody can give him is be sure to step down.
Even the bravest of lambs is no match for a lion!
It was mid-way through round two that a fired up Denny sprung the trap door here.
This was the Finaghy lads first fight at home in six years and you could almost feel seismic waves of anticipation as he came to the ringside.
The Prodigal had returned.
The beating McGee took was violent and quick.
Down three times in the first, his eyes fused and shiney, he was already showing signs of wear and tear.
When the round ended, the only question was when would the fight end, and one, maybe two more good punches from Denny were enough.
‘The right hook that finished him was the best body punch I've ever thrown’ said Damien with the air of a winner.
‘The guy just gasped for breath and crumbled, a sure sign he was hurt.
This was the fifth time I had him on the floor, so the referee was right to stop it’.
It was a demolition job from start to finish.
McGee knew of only one way to circle the ring — clockwise — and Denny put him off at will.
The big fellow was in a minefield without an exit sign.
He had courage, but nothing to back it up.
There was an easy fluency about Denny's work.
This was his chance to look good and he did.
The fans will want to see him again, not four months or a season from now, but soon.
Who would have guessed from his cold efficiency that this was only Damien's second contest in two years.
Clearly, he wasn't once a British title contender without being so again.
Hopefully, Denny's next fight will be for Terry Magee's Irish 11 stone title.
That's how newcomer Owen McMahon plans it anyway after a ‘first night’ here that deserved a bigger crowd.
The match making, to quote Freddie Gilroy, was quite superb for a small-budget bill.
Like Denny, Eamon McAuley came in from the cold last night for a good win (pts 6) over Manchester visitor Russell Davidson.
It wasn't the McAuley of old, probably because of ring rust and a badly bruised right hand, and the sooner he gets another contest the better he'll like it.
There were boos for Pat Loughran (Eamon's brother) in a points win over Londoner Felix Kelly, but cheers galore, Gilford style, for lightweight prospect Bernard McComiskey.
Young Bernard stopped Trevor Royal, from Bristol in the sixth and seems confident promoter McMahon might be persuaded to stage a show in Banbridge.
He could be right.
Sean Baker (Bristol) and Steve Levine (Birmingham) boxed a draw in a punishing six-rounder.
Security tight for odd couple's day
IT is probably the most publicised ‘quiet’ wedding in Ulster history.
An odd couple by any standards, Ballykelly bomber Anna Moore and loyalist killer Bobby Corry have chosen to seal their union in equally odd fashion at Magheraberry prison.
With a closely guarded guest list of just eight — four of whom remain unidentified despite intense investigations — the marriage was being staged under the attentive gaze of their jailers.
And while some of the traditional trimmings are allowed — including the specially made dresses and hired suits — their Big Day is restricted by the cold reality of prison life.
There will be no happy outdoor snaps for the album.
Just 24 pictures taken inside by a prison officer on film provided by the guests, will record the nuptials.
Tight security at the firmly sealed jail also rules out any video recording.
Strict rules on physical contact will be relaxed briefly to allow the pair to seal their union with a kiss and walk arm in arm down the aisle.
The former INLA woman and UDA man will only be able to cut the cake — a meagre one-tier affair supplied by the authorities — with a plastic knife.
The customary toasts will be cheered with soft drinks which will wash down a modest buffet of sausage rolls and sandwiches.
The chapel will be festooned with flowers, but each bloom will be meticulously examined before being allowed in.
The couple, both born-again Christians, chose the ceremony format, music and minister — understood to be Presbyterian.
Reception and speeches are scheduled for exactly one hour before the main participants are escorted back to their separate cells.
They will be unable to consummate their marriage until around the turn of the century, when they are expected to be released.
The husband and wife will have to be satisfied with ‘honeymoon’ visits by arrangement with the authorities at jail housing 56 women and 430 men.
A strange courtship which blossomed during visiting hours and after letters were exchanged looks set to continue in similar mode for the foreseeable future.
Family's grief: Peter Cooke at the grave of his sister, Patricia, killed in the Droppin' Well massacre.
Sweet victory for hungry Coleraine
Ards 1 Coleraine 2 (aet)
BILLY Sinclair and Coleraine have at last found the recipe for success.
Take one juicy Wilkinson Sword League Cup opponent, gradually introduce a false sense of security — then carve up.
Ballymoney, Portadown and Glentoran are ones Coleraine prepared earlier; Ards went under the knife last night.
Will next month's final with Bangor — Coleraine's first for six years — provide the icing on the cake?
Last night was meant to mark the end of Sinky's luck in this competition.
Having scraped through against Ballymoney in the first round, the Bannsiders proceeded to shock everyone by doing the same to the Ports and Glens.
Penalty shootouts were required in each instance but only the most optimistic fan — or a representative from the Guinness Book of Records — would have forecast it happening again.
No, the luck would run out against in-form Ards at Ballymena Showgrounds and Ian Bustard's tremendous opening goal for Paul Malone's side certainly added fuel to that theory.
But luck was replaced by pluck and you won't see a finer display of it than last night.
For well over an hour Coleraine laboured against confident opponents; Ards had got the breakthrough goal, looked more than capable of adding to it, and were cruising towards an all-North Down decider.
It was sweet dreams all round but they went to sleep far too early — and woke up to the reality of elimination.
Coleraine suddenly stepped up a gear in the last 20 minutes of normal time, a gear no-one, least of all Ards, believed they had.
And, to return to the culinary theme, it began with a Cook.
Derek Cook went close with a looping shot on 70 minutes, then blasted over from eight yards a minute later; those misses might have demoralised Coleraine but it had the opposite effect.
They drew level after 77 minutes, courtesy of a neat snap shot from Brian Donaghy and the floodgates opened.
Cook breezed through again but was upended by Ards keeper Stephen Vance — no penalty, but Vance soon had to save again from Cook and both Stuart McLean and Alan Ewing rattled the woodwork.
Where had Coleraine been before?
They survived anxious moments near the end of 90 minutes when Dave Connell and David Jeffrey went close for Ards but rallied again in extra time.
Cook emulated his fellow Scots by hitting the crossbar but McLean had the final say, so to speak.
The young defender made no mistake after Cook had cut the ball back to him after 108 minutes.
Ards have only themselves to blame; Bustard's 28th minute volley, which finished off Connell's deep cross put them in command but the same player failed with two later chances and Connell's rasping drive missed the target as well.
Perhaps they feared the dreaded shoot-out after Coleraine equalised but paid the penalty in any case.
The heat is on United
ALEX Ferguson is on a promise from Arsenal's George Graham, but the Manchester United manager remains defiant that his team can win the championship without any favours.
To retrieve their fate back into their own hands, they must exploit Aston Villa's defeat at Norwich and win when they go to Carrow Road for the second East Anglian title ‘decider’ on April 5.
If they lose, they will be five points adrift with six games to go and the nightmare of 1992 let loose again.
It does not bear thinking about at Old Trafford, but memories of how Leeds snitched the prize from under their noses last season have been reawakened by stonewalling Arsenal's 0–0 draw last night which left United four games without a win.
But Ferguson insisted: ‘Let me make one thing crystal clear — Manchester United won't bottle it on the last lap of the championship.
‘I most certainly take exception to one or two hints around at the moment that our biggest problem is keeping our cool.
‘It seems as if it has become fashionable to suggest that Manchester United might suddenly become nervous.
It's rubbish.’
Bryan Robson will be back in the starting line-up at Norwich, replacing the suspended Mark Hughes, and after a brief 14 minute cameo — his first in the Premier League for more than three months — his manager said: ‘His presence will be important.’
The former England captain could not break down a determined Arsenal side who were playing for their places in the forthcoming FA Cup semi final against Tottenham.
‘Arsenal played for their lives out there,’ said Fergie.
‘They must be on some bonus for the FA Cup semi final — none of them want to miss it!
‘But if they play with the same commitment and determination, against Villa at Highbury, I'll be satisfied.’
That game in the fascinating title run-in is on April 12, just six days before the Gunners' Coca-Cola Cup final against Sheffield Wednesday, but Graham pledged: ‘United will be expecting us to play just as hard and do them a favour — and we will do our best.’
Their best almost delighted Norwich, with Paul Merson cracking a 35 yard volley against the United bar and Peter Schmeichel having to make good saves from Ian Wright and Kevin Campbell to avoid a devastating defeat.
It came at the end of a month that would send most managers as mad as a March hare, with a defeat at Oldham and points dropped to Villa, Manchester City and Arsenal.
The only win came at Liverpool.
As for Arsenal, their injury problems mounted with Alan Smith, Nigel Winterburn and Paul Davis missing through injury, compounded when Tony Adams collected the groin strain which will possibly rule him out of the England squad.
Still, most of his Wembley contenders will be off with their respective countries next week.
Paul dishes out a winner
Paris bound: Paul Williamson, a chef at the Stormont Hotel, Belfast with his mouth-watering pork Craigantlet Creel dish which won him the Hastings Ulster Pork Challenge title at a competition held in the Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education.
Looking on is John Toner, manager at the Stormont Hotel.
The competition was organised by the Ulster Pork and Bacon Forum and Paul's prize is a trip to Paris for two.
Inquest call
INQUESTS should be replaced with a different procedure, Ulster Unionist MP David Trimble has urged.
The aim would be to put as much information as possible into the public domain as quickly as possible, he said.
Mr Trimble added: ‘It might be best to proceed, not in an adversarial courtroom manner, but in an inquisitorial procedure with the outcome being a report, part or all of which would be published.’
His comments follow several recent inquests involving controversial shootings.
Mr Trimble claimed they had proceeded as though the security forces were on trial and this was ‘an abuse of the inquest’.
Glenavon Reserves 4 Larne Olympic 1
GLENAVON Reserves did most of the attacking and Gary Clarke went close with two efforts.
However, the home team took the lead after 25 minutes when David Straney outpaced the Larne full back and his low cross was turned into the net by Clarke.
Larne had a chance to equalise but Geoff Crothers shot high over the bar.
Half-time: Glenavon Reserves 1, Larne Olympic 0.
Glenavon remained on top after the interval and scored two early goals through Trevor McMullan and Keith Percy.
David Straney increased Glenavon's lead when the Larne defence allowed him time and space to score.
Larne reduced the arrears when Harry Kernohan converted a penalty for a foul.
Rousing send-off for Celia
Retiring boss: Celia Coyle, from Ballyclare, gets a rousing send-off from her colleagues in Richard's Fashion Store, Belfast.
Mrs Coyle was retiring after 17 years as manageress.
Toasting her health are (from left) Linda Alcock, Pat Dunn, Donna Thomas, Alison Murphy and Jan Holmes.
Kidney drama man ‘doing well'
THE 24-year-old Donegal man who underwent a kidney transplant after being whisked off to Beaumont Hospital in Dublin minutes before he was due to go on stage at the City of Derry Drama Festival was today said to be ‘doing very well.’
A hospital spokeswoman said it was very pleased with the progress made by Philip O'Rourke, from Donegal Town, who was given a new kidney in an operation on Tuesday night.
She said that only time would tell, but the kidney appeared to be a good match.
‘He is doing very well and is very comfortable.
We are very pleased with his progress,’ she said.
The amateur actor was born with only a third of a kidney and has been on dialysis for the past four years.
Doherty in full swing
THE ‘house full’ signs were up last night as Dublin's Ken Doherty made his return to the Benson & Hedges Masters at the Goff's complex in Kill.
And Doherty, the best Irish player at present on the professional circuit, didn't let his fans down with a comfortable 5–2 win over an out of touch Neal Foulds of England.
Twenty three year old Doherty, runner up last year and winner of the Welsh Regal Classic this term, never looked like losing this one despite Foulds taking the opening frame.
Foulds could only muster single figure totals in the next two as Doherty opened up a 2–1 lead.
Foulds hit an early 60 break in the fourth but Doherty's reply was immediate when he knocked in a 55 clearance to move into a two frame lead at the interval.
After that there was no way back for Foulds as Doherty raced away for a 5–2 win, sealing it with a 60 break in what proved to be the final frame.
Doherty now looks forward to a quarter-final clash with Steve Davis.
In the other match played last night Nigel Bond beat Gary Wilkinson 5–3 to line up an exciting quarter-final tie against Stephen Hendry.
THERE were two century breaks in the fourth round of the Turtles of Rathkenny Ulstler Open Snooker Classic at Ballymena 147 Club last night.
Michael Duffy, the Province's No. 1 ranked amateur, sealed his place in the Last 16 with a sparkling 127 clearance in the fourth frame of his match against Colin Sewell.
And Julian Logue, who re-wrote the NI Snooker history books with the 147 maximum at the Bass Open in Coalisland last season, weighed in with 110 on his way to victory over Michael Sweet.
Defending champion Patrick Wallace came from behind to beat Mark Howe, but Kieran Erwin, twice holder of the title, went out in five frames to Harry Morgan.
Wedding is seen as final ‘betrayal'
A STARK, uncertain future awaits the convicted paramilitary enemies who became lovers by letter behind bars.
The families of republican murderer Anna Moore and loyalist killer Bobby Corry are believed to be bitterly divided over their controversial decision to wed.
The unlikely couple will probably have to leave Northern Ireland when freed — possibly in ten years — as it is doubtful former associates in the INLA and UDA will forgive, or forget, such an act of ‘betrayal’.
The first prison marriage of convicted murderers from across Ulster's bitter sectarian divide is seen by some as a positive sign of change.
Others view the relationship with cold cynicism.
Moore has already been snubbed by her parents while other members of her family are also thought to be furious at her marriage to a loyalist murderer from Belfast's Sandy Row.
At their Ardnamoyle home in Derry's republican Shantallow estate, the bride's parents distanced themselves from today's events.
John and Josephine McCool explained: ‘While we wish her well for the future, we cannot condone her behaviour over the last number of years when she has associated with loyalist prisoners.
‘We would like to make it clear that we will not talk to pro-British or British newspapers and we want reporters to stay away from our family home.’
Moore's sister Charlotte McDevitt, living nearby, responded with a swift ‘no comment’ when asked about the wedding.
It is not clear if another sister, Helena Semple, also serving life for the Ballykelly bombing along with her common-law husband Eammon Moore, another Droppin' Well lifer, will be at the wedding.
Minister retires
DR HOWARD Cromie is to retire from the active ministry in May after 31 years in Railway Street Presbyterian Church, Lisburn.
He is a former moderator of the General Assembly.
WEDNESDAY'S presentation at the City of Derry Drama Festival was The Heiress by Ruth and Augustus Goetz, brought to the festival by Ballymoney Literary and Debating Society under the direction of Roy Alcorn.
Commenting on the production, the adjudicator Michael Poynor mentioned particularly good grouping and movement and said the production had been ‘competently handled.’
He added that the scene changes had been ‘well controlled, well structured.’
The play is set in 1850 and the set reflected good attention to period with well chosen props.
It was a well dressed set and Mr Poynor remarked that costumes were ‘excellent throughout.’
Broadly speaking, sound was good but Mr Ponor felt the sound of the carriage at the beginning was a little distracting and went on for too long.
It was much better by Act II.
The opening of the play saw lovely mood setting with the lighting creating the effect of oil lamps.
Mr Poynor noted that a ‘naturalistic/realistic’ style of acting is required for this play and that it is interesting for actors to ‘play against character.’
There were some fine performances, most notably from Ruth Eillot (Catherine).
She was credible and creditable and played well the transformation from gauche, unworldly girl to dignified lady.
The performance of Lucy Alcorn (Mrs Montgomery) was also noted by Mr Poynor who described her as a ‘natural, easy actress.’
Desmond Cranston (Dr Austin Sloper) played the bitter father well.
The festival continues tonight with the Lifford Players' production of the George Shiels play The Passing Day.
Holywood 6 RUC 29
HOLYWOOD failed to take advantage of playing at home in the Halifax Properties Floodlit Trophy final when they were well policed by the RUC at Kerr Park last night.
They did, however, start off with a flourish with two penalties by out-half Ricky Adair.
RUC were taking some time to settle down but once Davy Barbour had landed his first penalty from about 50 metres the lights went out and the Holywood stars faded.
Mervyn Tweed, the RUC captain, was leading from the front, his try from a charged down kick on the Holywood line and the first of Walton's two tries after a typical dash from the ‘22’ gave the RUC a comfortable 13–6 half-time lead.
Barbour was twice on the mark after the restart with two penalties and Holywood retreated further against a now rampant RUC, whose flying wingmen Hamilton and Walton were having a field day.
The home side were at full stretch and with little possession were unable to threaten the RUC line.
Further tries from Walton and No 8 Gary McCullough completed the rout.
Referee Paul Hewitt had no trouble refereeing this one and the big smile on coach Robin Bethel's face said it all.
Dromore High 20 Limavady High 0
DROMORE High lifted their third successive High Schools' Cup when they defeated perennial opponents Limavady High in yesterday's final shoot-out at Ravenhill.
Dromore, playing with wind advantage were only able to manage a Mark Crothers penalty in the first period despite several promising attacks through Wilson and Tate.
Immediately after half-time they went further ahead when captain Nigel Johnston drove a short penalty for Jonathan Tate to take play to the front of the Limavady posts and from the resultant maul Johnston himself drove over to score with Crothers converting.
Johnston picked up his second try after great support for another fine Jonathan Wilson drive on the blind side.
The final and best try of the game came five minutes from time with forwards supplying the quick ball, the backs moved the ball across the line with full-back Keith Watson making the extra man and timing his pass well to release right-winger Ross Aiken to score.
Mother loses fight against school beatings
A MOTHER'S six-year campaign against corporal punishment in private schools ended in failure today, when the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg threw out claims that a beating on the bottom amounted to ‘degrading’ treatment contrary to the Human Rights Convention.
Corporal punishment is already illegal in state schools following a previous Human Rights Court case, but today's judgment leaves parents free to carry on choosing private sector schools where strict discipline is still the rule.
Wendy Costello-Roberts, who brought the case, and her family's adviser, said the court decision was carried by one vote.
Mrs Costello-Roberts said she was ‘disappointed to a certain degree by the decision’ but she added: ‘The fact that the vote of the judges was only very slightly against us does show that we were taken very seriously.’
Martin Rosenbaum, the family adviser, added: ‘This very narrow decision by the court shows that the Government can hang on to its defence of corporal punishment only by a hair's breadth.’
Jeremy Costello-Roberts was just seven years old and five weeks into his first term at Barnstaple boarding school, Devon, when he received ‘a slippering’ for notching up five ‘demerit’marks after talking in the school corridors and, on one occasion, being late for bed.
His mother, from Newquay, Cornwall, was incensed when she heard what had happened in a letter written home by her son.
She complained to the police and the NSPCC but was told they could not act as there was no visible bruising on the boy.
She withdrew Jeremy from the school in January 1986 and launched legal proceedings, claiming breaches of the Human Rights Convention which safeguards against ‘inhuman or degrading’ treatment and protects ‘the right to respect for private and family life’.
Wellcome profits boost
THE pound's devaluation proved a profits cure for drugs giant Wellcome with shareholders receiving a healthy dividend boost, figures today revealed.
Sales in the six months to the end of February grew 11pc to £1,025m with prescription medicines accounting for the vast majority.
Taxable profits in the half-year soared to £324.6m compared with £204.7m in the corresponding period in 1991.
The total dividend is increased to 4.8p per share from 4p previously.
Wellcome's leading drug Zovirax, used in the treatment of herpes, continued to perform well with sales ahead 17pc to £369m.
Aids treatment Retrovir was equally strong with sales growing 14pc to £131m.
The pound's devaluation after sterling withdrew from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in September proved an enormous boost to the group.
‘Sterling weakened considerably against a number of major currencies, notably the US dollar, yen and Deutsch mark,’ the company said.
‘We estimate that overall, exchange rage movements added 11pc to our sales and 19pc to our pre-tax profit.’
During the half-year, the company's cash pile grew £41m to £451m while capital expenditure climbed to £82m.
Profits rose spectacularly in the United States, jumping to £257.2m from £195.1m.
The UK also proved a success story where profits climbed to £149.4m from £114.9m.
The rest of Europe, Asia and Australasia were also ahead.
Earnings per share rose to 23.2p from 12.6p previously.
Drugs seized
A 24-YEAR-OLD woman was arrested and cannabis with a street value of around £2,000 seized following a search of a house at Palestine Street, Belfast, yesterday.
25-year ban for drink driving
A 26-YEAR-OLD Dungannon painter was banned from driving for 25 years and sentenced to six months imprisonment for a drink driving offence when he appeared at Newry Magistrate's Court yesterday.
Damien McGuigan, of Scotch Street, admitted driving while unfit and he was also sentenced to a further six months for driving while disqualified.
The sentences will run consecutively.
An RUC inspector said a test showed he had 141mg of alcohol to 100ml of blood.
Resident magistrate Mr Gerry Harty said McGuigan had a bad record.
He fixed bail for appeal but said McGuigan was not to be released pending appeal.
Johnny comes marching home
JOHNNY McNamee of Inchmarlo was crowned Vi-Sport Primary School Boys table tennis champion after an exciting three-set final against North West hope Ian Donaghey from Drumahoe Primary.
Sarah Jayne Miskelly, who joins McNamee in the Ulster squad for the Junior Interprovincial Championships in Dublin on Saturday, maintained a strong Darragh Cross presence in the Vi-Sport schools event by taking the girls title.
Sarah Jayne follows in the footsteps of her elder sister Leanne, who was 1992 champion, defeating Katie Morrison from Ballymena Academy Prep.
Meanwhile Ryan Glass of Inst has withdrawn from the Ulster Junior Boys side for the Inter-pros in Dublin, leaving the onus on Brian McRandal, Stephen Benson and Stephen McCormick to defend the title.
Another RBAI player Ross McMillan takes the fourth cadet boy place to join Dominic McGreevy, Robert Robinson and Robert Fisher, but Ulster hopes will rest on the three girls sides for Gold medals with Leinster and Munster favourite to win the boys categories.
AVOSTAR, trained by Billy Magill at Ballygowan can enhance his reputation by winning at the North Down Harriers point to point at Ballymoney Road, Craigantlet on Saturday.
Avostar, who was successful in the Open race at Athlone a fortnight ago is entered for the Hunt Race and also the Two Winner and should be followed wherever he runs.
Sabrita, who has had some useful outings this year is also entered in the Hunt Race but may go in the Open where she meets Fardross, a winner at Enniskillen.
Trained by Billy Patton, Fardross could go in again on Saturday.
Paul McMahon is in fine form and Another Machine, who won at Dromore is in the Two Winner race.
If Avostar gives this one a miss then Another Machine may be the right one.
More Britons spurn meat: survey
MORE than 2,000 Britons a week are turning their backs on meat and becoming vegetarians, a survey claimed today.
It said there were now 2.5 million vegetarians in the country, a record 4.3pc of the population.
The Gallup survey, carried out for Realeat, part of the Haldane Foods Group, found the total number of people who avoided red meat, including vegetarians, vegans and those who still ate chicken or fish, totalled six million or 11pc of the population.
The survey said that for the first time, there was a shift in reasons given for cutting back on red meat.
Those eating less for health reasons now represented 46pc of the total, whereas those stating financial reasons dropped to 18pc from 26p c in 1990.
Of those citing health reasons, the most important factor was concern about cholesterol content, but for the first time BSE — so-called mad cow disease — featured in the reasons given.
Just over 6pc were worried about BSE despite the absence, as yet, of any evidence of a link between the disease and sickness in humans.
Realeat marketing director Graham Keen predicted that at the current rate of growth there would be five million vegetarians by the turn of the century.
Going to work on a winning campaign
AWARD-winning Belfast agency, A.V. Browne turned in a significant increase in sales, despite curtailment of advertising budgets last year, and they made another milestone in another direction.
The agency say they broke new ground by bringing together a drinks company and an existing client, the DoE, to sponsor a major anti-drinking and driving campaign.
The campaign, sponsored by Gilbeys of Northern Ireland, included a sixty second television commercial which carried the message: ‘We want you to enjoy a drink but never when you're driving’.
The commercial collected one of nine awards for A.V. Browne from the Publicity Association of Northern Ireland.
The launch of First Trust Bank was a mammoth job left to September's McConnells advertising agency back in November, and indeed later this year the merger will be made complete with AIB.
The job, according to media director Billy Alexander, entailed the reprinting of masses of literature.
It was the only bank launched from scratch in the province for many years.
Coming up shortly is a launch for Vauxhall of the eagerly awaited Corsa.
Another advertising agency, Future Image, has broadened the base of its activities with an extension into design and print.
Dennis Cunningham, joint managing director in a company which also has an extensive PR side, saw the need for a fuller client service some time ago and now it's proving its worth to both the client and the company.
‘We've found, for instance, that we can keep the confidentiality of our client's affairs intact by providing them with a complete in-house service,’ Mr Cunningham said.
Future Image maintains that the extension to a wider base has won them at least half a dozen valuable new clients, and he thinks its the way forward for all agencies.
The world's the oyster for Anderson Advertising which is now placing media in five continents, and group deputy chairman Peter Spratt says their design company, Creative Pencil, is in the process of completing its first project in Europe.
This is a major re-working of packaging on behalf of one of Germany's largest wine exporters.
On the local front, Peter Spratt refers to the company's recent work on behalf of Mace, and he says that there is early evidence that the Mace ‘Gerry Anderson’ campaign is conveying something of the pleasure of grocery shopping, as well as making an important statement about branded merchandise and value for money.
Acquisitions
NORTH West Water Group has spent £4m acquiring two companies dedicated to the research and development of membrane technology — Ceramesh in Oxfordshire and ICI's Membrane Business in Cheshire.
Dividend up
INDUSTRIAL fasteners group TT is to pay a second interim dividend on March 31 for the year ended last December to ensure that shareholders do not lose out following the recent Budget changes.
Mortgage offers
ABBEY National is offering four new mortgage fixes: 6.25pc until October 31 1994 or 7.25pc until April 1996 for first time buyers; 6.85pc until October 1994 or 7.50pc until April 1996 for new applicants and existing borrowers.
Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society has a mortgage fixed at 7.95pc for five years.
Applicants must have a minimum deposit of 10pc.
Dublin agencies face a lean year
FOR advertising agencies in the Republic, 1993 will be the toughest year for years, with little if any growth and margins trimmed back to the bone.
‘They are far too tight’, believes John Fanning, managing director of McConnell's Advertising Services, Ireland's largest ad agency, and chairman of the Marketing Institute.
‘If agencies wind up in 1993 at the same level as in 1992, they'll be doing well,’ states Martin Larkin, managing director, Irish International Advertising.
‘Multinational advertisers will keep the market going.’
A series of financial blows has knocked consumer confidence.
The currency crisis, with higher mortgages and interest rates, means that consumers have far less disposable income.
One Dublin garage, in a recent trading month, sold just three new cars; the same month a year earlier, it sold 13.
With unemployment around 300,000, the highest rate in the EC, consumers are very nervous about the future, says Frank Young, managing director of Wilson Hartnell Advertising, a doyen of the industry, who retires at the end of this month.
‘I certainly wouldn't like to be a young person looking for a job in advertising this year,’ comments John Fanning.
Meanwhile, another financial blow has rocked the industry.
DMB and B Result, which had a link with a big international agency, went bust recently with a net deficit of over IR£0.5m.
Creditors are led by RTE, owed more than IR£200,000.
There's much talk of a bonding scheme after collapse, just the latest in a recent series, but whether anything is done remains to be seen.
The international agency, DMB and B, is continuing its links with Ireland by taking a 15pc stake in the well-established Dublin agency, QMP.
For ad agencies, spending on food advertising remains quite good.
‘There's no great evidence of a surge in own labels’, says Frank Young of Wilson Hartnell.
Own label groceries only sell half as much proportionately in Ireland as in the UK.
A few other sectors have some buoyancy.
Discount electrical retailers are expected to spend about IR£5m on advertising this year.
But a real sign of hard times in consumer sales and advertising comes from that old reliable, drink, where the indicators are well down.
All-Ireland marketing, a feature of TV but no other media, is showing some growth.
McConnells is handling the Northern Ireland Tourist Board for the South, where it has stepped up its marketing drive, and another Northern Ireland based account, Texas Homecare.
Brian Grant of Arks says that single island marketing will increase, following such examples as Colgate-Palmolive, Guinness and Weetabix.
But John Fanning offers a word of caution: ‘Brand shares are often quite different between North and South and lots of markets have grown up quite differently in both parts of Ireland.’
For most Southern advertisers and agencies, however, 1993 will be a year of hanging on at any cost.
Brian Grant believes that clients have become more sophisticated, so they will pressure agencies to improve the quality of their services, at a time when the advertising cupboard is pretty bare.
Banbridge 21 CIYMS 8
On a wind and rain lashed Rifle Park, Wray put the home side ahead with a well struck penalty into the wind.
The same player added another three points three minutes later to leave Banbridge leading 6–0.
On the half hour CI outhalf Irwin reduced his deficit with a penalty to leave the scoreline 6–3.
A determined back movement by CI saw Drummond cross for the visitors to leave the scoreline 6–8 at half time in the visitors favour.
Shortly into the second half Thompson scored for Banbridge again Wray added the points.
High flying Banbridge now playing with confidence took play deep into the CI half and a CI infringement allowed Wray to bring his tally to eleven points when he knocked over his fourth kick of the game.
Further mishandling by CI let Moorehead in for a try to put Banbridge out of sight.
CI's cup of woe continues.
Ards 3 Dungannon 32
In the 21st minute the Dungannon side at last found a way through the determined Ards defence.
Number eight Jeremy Hastings broke away to give right-wing Ronnie Carey a run to the line.
Ashley Blair converted for a 7–0 lead.
The same player added a penalty to make the score 10–0.
Just on half time number eight Hastings scored a push-over try which McGarry converted for a 17–0 lead.
Dungannon attacked at the start of the second half and within two minutes a McGarry penalty had taken their score to 20 points.
Ards were not overawed however and came with venom putting the visitors under severe pressure for some 15 minutes, but their only reward was a penalty from out-half Fry.
After their massive effort Ards were unfortunate to concede two more tries from centre Paul Archer.
One of these was converted by Blair to give Dungannon a rather flattering margin of victory.
North 0 Malone 18
SENIOR Cup holders Malone marched into the next round of this seasons competition with a comfortable victory over North and Ormeau this afternoon.
Richard Cullen kicked two early penalties and then after 26 minutes Malone scored a well executed try.
Colin Wilkinson took the ball on the burst and brought play to within ten metres of the home line where Colin Morrison fed the three quarters for Maurice Field to go in close to touch.
After the restart North started to play better rugby gaining more possession and putting Malone under pressure for the first fifteen minutes.
Out-half Wilson missed a few penalties but two much possession was wasted by continuous needless kicking.
Malone absorbed the pressure and against the run of play took up a position inside their opponents 22.
Wilson's relieving kick was charged down by Graeme Copeland who gathered and went over to touch down mid-way out for Cullen to add the points.
Portadown 20 Armagh 6
ARMAGH battled bravely before surrendering the initiative to Portadown during the closing ten minutes after a keenly fought first round encounter.
Portadown were relieved to hear the final whistle after a generally low key display.
A stubborn Armagh defence clearly frustrated Portadown's attacking edge for most of the time and the visitors took full advantage of their rare intrusions into Portadown territory.
On eight minutes Armagh outhalf Simon Willis struck the first blow with a simple penalty.
Although the Portadown backs threatened constantly, an Armagh boot was always on hand to relieve the pressure.
It was Willis again who raised Armagh's hopes with a second penalty as Portadown struggled to make headway in the back-line.
Home side outhalf Ian Brown, after an earlier miss-hit, eventually brought his side into contention with a penalty.
Portadown appeared to have gained a foot-hold shortly after the restart when Brown landed his second penalty leaving the sides all square but Armagh continued to defend vigorously.
In a moment of sheer pace Portadown winger Graeme McCluskey broke the deadlock when he raced clear from halfway to touch down following a speculative overhead pass from his fullback Billy Matchett.
Brown converted to settle Portadown's nervous state.
Minutes later McCluskey supplied the final pass to launch centre Alan Hunter in for a second Portadown try at the posts, leaving Brown to convert again to finally kill off Armagh's stubborn challenge.
BLACKMARK!
RANGERS STRIKER Mark Hateley will learn his European Cup fate today — and it could be much worse than he expected.
Hateley was sent off after an altercation with Brugge defender Rudi Cossey during last week's game at Ibrox Park.
He will definitely miss the showdown with Marseille in France on April 7.
But it was learned today that Polish referee Ryszard Wojoik reported Hateley for violent conduct — and not ‘rough play’ which Rangers believed was the case.
UEFA's disciplinary committee will discuss Hateley's dismissal in Geneva today and if the violent conduct charge is upheld he will be banned from Rangers' match with CSKA Moscow on April 21 — and perhaps the final itself should the Scottish champions get there.
Millions of television viewers saw Cossey over-react to a push on the shoulder from Hateley, who was promptly sent off with no action taken against the Belgian.
UEFA's observer at the game is said to favour leniency for Hateley but the disciplinary committee are not renowned for going against the word of a referee.
Rangers are likely to contest any punishment stronger than a one-match ban but it's not all bad news.
They have also learned that Marseille's superior goal difference in Group A of the Champions League will count for nothing should the two teams finish level on points at the end of the series.
If that happens, UEFA will determine the winners on the aggregate score of the two matches involving the rivals — so whoever wins on April 7 will almost certainly go on to contest the European Cup final.
Cloud looms on NIE share sale
BRITISH Telecom's plans to release a third block of shares this summer could force investors to ‘think twice’ about taking a stake in Northern Ireland Electricity, a leading stockbroker warned today.
The NIE flotation is likely to take place on Wednesday June 9, less than a month before the launch of ‘BT3’, one of the biggest-ever privatisation issues.
It's expected that the Government will off-load most of its 1.35 billion BT shares in late June or early July.
Gavin Graham, a director of Belfast stockbrokers BWD Rensburg, said he was surprised that NIE had decided to ‘squeeze in’ its long-awaited flotation so close to the BT issue.
‘I would have thought there was a danger of splitting investors between the two issues.
The people who bought BT shares in the two previous issues have done quite well.
‘Since they will be given preferential treatment this time around, it's likely many of them will want to put more into it.
‘However, I think the NIE flotation will be very popular with local investors, specially if the shares have an attractive yield, maybe something like 5.5pc.
‘With interest rates low at the moment, the issue will be even more attractive.’
Mr Graham said the NIE issue, confirmed yesterday by Economy Minister Robert Atkins, was unlikely to attract personal investors from Great Britain:
‘They won't go anywhere near it,’ he said.
When Scottish Power and Scottish Hydro were launched in 1991 there was a big response from Northern Ireland, but I'm sure it won't be reciprocated.
‘However, I think the large institutional investors, who make up the lion's share of the market, will be interested in NIE if they see there will be a good return.’
NIE will release details of the flotation and the share price next month.
The issue is being compared to the Scottish Power and Scottish Hydro launches, both of which were priced at 170p.
Scottish Power shares are now worth 239p.
Investors in NIE will be able to opt for discount vouchers to get money off their electricity bills, a particularly attractive prospect in the light of last week's Budget when the Chancellor announced a new VAT on domestic fuel and power from April 1994.
Economy Minister Robert Atkins welcomed the planned flotation and said it would give every electricity consumer in Northern Ireland the opportunity to have a stake in the future of the industry.
IT IS said that the marketing and advertising course is now the hardest to enter in the University of Ulster, requiring ‘A’ -level grades that would have sent my generation scurrying off with aspirations of entering Oxford or Cambridge and a career in the fast track of the Civil Service.
So what has made advertising so popular in the last number of years?
Why do so many people want to take a long journey into that rather strange place that is known as Adland.
Maybe it's the hope that whenever you get there it will be populated with totally happy families, a Dad that is always helping Mum, and the parents giving the 2.2 children their every hearts desire.
A place that people come up and give you double your washing powder, where, when you wear a certain pair of shoes, your sports performance will reach the dizzy heights of your professional heroes, where everyone has perfect teeth.
Or maybe it's just that there is a course that teaches advertising and marketing, which is relatively new in itself.
Most of the senior people in advertising today came through the media, through door banging at agencies to get a job in the traffic department, through the graphics department of the Belfast Art College, simply because there was no other education available.
And, of course, the 80s boom in advertising made the public aware for the first time that there was big business actually producing all the advertising that people see and hear every day.
The Saatchi Brothers became a symbol of success in the Thatcher years, originally on the back of a successful campaign for the Leaderene in 1979.
And that success led to television programmes about advertising, pages in the quality press about the media world, and, of course, the image that it is all Porsches, champagne and fun.
But what is the reality?
Competition.
Agencies fighting for business, adding value to their clients business by improving the accountability of the media spend, the research into the creative solution, future planning of how markets will react to new products, economic changes, demographic shifts.
All these are now part and parcel of the service provided by agencies, as the client no longer accepts that 50pc of advertising works, but which 50pc?
We have to know.
It's a business that is increasingly professional in its approach, because we are also in a business where we have to convince our clients that we know as much about what we do in our companies as they know about theirs.
No, its not all happy families and new cars, its hard, competitive, demanding.
But yes, it is still fun, thought provoking, stimulating, exciting and fast moving.
For those in it, Adland is the only place to live.
Polston is the Norwich hero
NORWICH hero John Polston woke up today with a king-sized headache and feeling exhausted after an epic 24 hours.
The headache came courtesy of a gash in the scalp suffered in the thrilling 1–0 win over Aston Villa and from the celebrations that followed Norwich going back on top of the Premier League.
The exhaustion came through a lack of sleep, not just from a night on the tiles but after being up until 2am yesterday morning to witness the birth of his first child, a son named Jordan.
He said: ‘What's happened in the last 24 hours has been unbelievable.
‘Witnessing the birth of the baby was the experience of a lifetime and then scoring the winner to beat Villa and put us on top of the Premier League just caps it all.
‘In fact it's been a great few weeks for me.
It was a great honour to be made captain of the side and now all this.’
But Norwich manager Mike Walker remained coy about the destination of the Championship saying: ‘It would be stupid to say we will win it but we have as good as chance now as the others.
‘It's a psychological boost to go back on top but we have been there before and we won't be getting too carried away.’
Walker is keen to continue the momentum which has thrown Norwich right back into the thick of the title race and he is reported to be keen to sign Bournemouth's highly rated striker Efan Ekoku.
Ekoku was reported to have been at Carrow Road last night for talks over a possible £700,000 transfer before the transfer deadline this afternoon.
Norwich's victory over Villa and Manchester United's goalless draw at home to Arsenal leaves Norwich a point clear of Ron Atkinson's men and two ahead of United, who they play next at Carrow Road.
Villa boss Ron Atkinson could hardly believe his side's fortune, saying: ‘It's hard to take.
We played magnificently and I thought we were the better side.’
Polston's goal grabbed the headlines but it could so easily have been Villa's Garry Parker who was the hero of the night.
Instead he was the villain.
He was put clean through by Ray Houghton in the 68th minute, rounded goalkeeper Bryan Gunn but although he steadied himself to convert from only six yards, he somehow failed to even hit the target.
And that proved a costly mistake as super dad Polston pounced to prise away the three points and send the Canaries of Norwich flying high after again ruffling the feathers of their championship detractors.
The real art of communication
THE CURRENT recession has certainly laid to rest forever the myth that public relations is a lightweight ‘luxury’ service used to indulge the chief executive.
That's the view of Sheila Davidson, chairman of the Institute of Public Relations.
‘Public relations at its best is much more than just media relations,’ she added.
‘Only with his tongue firmly in his cheek did Stephen Dorrell, Financial Secretary to the Treasury, say recently that one of the things PR people and politicians had in common is ‘having to explain the good news — and the news you wouldn't choose to explain’.’
PR, she said, is about the entire communication of your business internally to employees and externally to customers.
A public relations strategy should touch every moving cog in the workings of your business.
‘I won't name any examples of good practice but leave you to think of the company, charity or public body which you feel has had all round seal of approval,’ she commented.
‘Then think of any organisation whose reputation has bitten the proverbial dust over the last year and surprised you.’
Ms Davidson suggests that PR is now valued more than ever before and this is reflected in the number of highly qualified people coming into the industry.
‘The Institute of Public Relations in its turn is the guardian of ethics and professional standards and membership should be the benchmark for any organisation seeking to employ a public relations practitioner,’ she said.
Goodison to get a facelift
EVERTON are to carry out over £2.5 million worth of work on a Goodison Park facelift in an effort to bring the stadium up to standard for the 1996 European Championships.
A grant of £1.3 million has been handed to the club by the Football Trust and a new 6,000 tier will take the capacity to 40,500 by August, 1994.
Chief executive Jim Greenwood said: ‘The work cannot be done in a close season, so we are looking to start it next February and have the new stand ready for August, 1994.
‘We hope that will make us suitable for European Championship final matches, international games and semi-finals.’
UEFA bosses are expected to visit Britain at the end of this season to look at possible host stadiums.
Everton face opposition from city rivals Liverpool who are going to seat the Kop in an effort to win UEFA's vote.
Gala time at Garryduff
THE Irish Hockey Union's centenary celebrations start this weekend when the Under 16 and Under 18 Home International series is staged on the new artificial grass pitch at Garryduff, Cork.
The highlight of the celebrations is the Centenary Trophy in June when the World champions, Olympic champions and England join Ireland, but the youths set the ball rolling in a series switched to Ireland from its usual four-year cycle to suit the occasion.
Ulster will be well represented in Cork — ten players feature in the Under 16s and eight in the Under 18s.
Both teams will be coached by Ulstermen, and also there will be an Ulster umpire, Tom Morrison.
Under 18 coach George Blackwood will be looking to players like Ivan Steen (Newry), Mark Raphael (Lisnagarvey) and Mark Tumilty (Banbridge), who have all experienced senior hockey this season.
And under 16 coach Ronnie Smyth won't have to go far to order instructions for his team — his son David (Wellington College and Annadale) is the captain.
Meanwhile Leinster have named a strong panel in their bid for the senior inter-provincials being staged in Dublin next weekend.
Kingpins Avoca have five representatives, Three Rock Rovers three and Dublin YMCA three as they bid to break the Ulster stranglehold in the competition.
Shamrocks coach Peter Murphy has also named his panel for the series, and it includes eight Ulster players — three from Queen's, two each from Banbridge and Cookstown, and one from Lisnagarvey.
Reuters steal march on tax changes
REUTERS is to make early payment of its 1992 final dividend so shareholders will not lose out from the new tax arrangements introduced in the Budget.
The international news and financial information agency said it was bringing forward to April 5 the 15.9p per share payout.
Chancellor Norman Lamont announced in the Budget earlier this month that the tax credit on dividends is to be reduced from 25pc to 20pc from April 6.
PR depends on the truth
PR IS still about telling the truth, maintains Alan Burnside, of Alan Burnside Communications, Holywood, and he is adamant that without credibility as a truthful source of information, it is impossible for PR to operate successfully over time.
‘The public might be forgiven for asking if there are any ethics in PR,’ he said.
‘Public relations, ironically, has always had a poor image as being peopled by professional manipulators intent on pulling the wool over the eyes of a gullible public by misleading the media.’
He points to the fact that PR is about helping companies, organisations and even individual people achieve their objective using the media.
‘This requires a thorough understanding of what constitutes news.
But it should be news based on fact, not conjured up disinformation designed to damage estranged spouses or commercial competitors,’ he added.
However, he warns that competition, especially in a recession, can cloud a company judgement.
The over zealous activities of a few PR advisers who succumb to this should not be allowed to damn the profession as a whole, he said.
Brian Arlow along with Alan Burnside Communications, recently won the prestigious Northern Ireland IDB International News bureau account.
U-20 title goes west
FERMANAGH FE College defeated Castlereagh to retain their title in the final of the Further Education U20 League yesterday at Portadown FE College.
Castlereagh captain Lisa Bell led her team to a 3–2 lead after the first quarter but Fermanagh, coached by former Irish Olympic canoeist Ann Cairns, pulled level to 5-all at half time.
Fermanagh trailed by two goals at three quarter time but levelled the game again to 12–12 to take them into extra time, and stole the extra goal needed for victory on the whistle winning 16–15 to give them the trophy for the second year.
Tearjerker film role for melting Mel
IT'S spring and Mel Gibson — the embodiment of the thinking woman's romantic fantasy — finds his thoughts turning to young love.
Asked to name the most romantic thing he has ever done, the man who melts hearts warms to his theme — and tells of his own teenage moonlight serenade.
‘When I was 16, I sang outside the window of a girls' school.
I was half-smashed at the time.
I was down there serenading my heart out and they all started to pop their heads out of the window.
I thought ‘Wow!
It's working!’ and it was, but it all came to a crashing end because the matron on duty that night called the cops.
They didn't get me.
I was too quick for them!’
Hollywood's six-million-dollar man ditches his mad Martin Riggs persona as seen in the ‘Lethal Weapon’ series and cleans up his image in ‘Forever Young’, a film about taking risks, seizing the moment and getting one more chance, which opens in Belfast today.
Gibson plays a fearless test pilot in 1939 who, following a personal tragedy, volunteers for a top-secret experiment in which he is accidentally put into frozen slumber for more than 50 years.
He awakens in 1992 and, through a tender friendship with a fatherless young boy and his mother (Jamie Lee Curtis), he finally learns that, while time waits for no man, true love waits forever.
‘This is a story about love and the courage to express it when you feel it,’ says Gibson.
‘It's a very nostalgic story that pulls the heartstrings, but also has some humour and lightness about it as well.
It rekindles memories of those old-fashioned Hollywood romances of the Thirties and Forties that I had seen as a child.
‘Anybody with a bit of a ticker behind their rib cage can't help but respond to things like that.
For me, it was kind of an antidote to Nineties cynicism, which starts to get you down after a while.’
Gibson admits that there are one or two huge plausibility gaps in the film.
‘Where was that thing plugged in for 50 years?’ he asks of the oxygen chamber in which his character was frozen during the experiment.
‘But that's not important,’ he continues.
‘All the sci-fi elements are thrown out quite early on and what's left is just a romantic fairy tale.
Hopefully, people will realise that it is in the realm of fantasy.’
Once the test pilot comes out of the chamber, a nasty side effect is that the ageing process becomes speeded up.
Having to watch himself on screen as an old man, did it cast up worries about Gibson's own appearance?
‘Nobody wants to get old, but ageing is one of those things that's going to happen and I'm just going to let it.
A lot of people, particularly on the West Coast of America, get so many facelifts that the dimple on their chin is actually their navel.’
The personal tragedy that befalls Gibson's character in ‘Forever Young’ is that he loses his childhood sweetheart in an accident before he has plucked up the courage to propose marriage.
Did Gibson find a similar lump in his throat when the time came to tie the knot?
‘Yes, it's a hard thing to do.
It may not seem as hard nowadays, because people know that it's easy to get out of.
Forever can mean two or three years now.
Back in the 1940s, though, it was taken a lot more seriously, so that actually getting to the point where you popped the question was a big commitment.’
Emphasis on quality and service to customers
Surviving the revolution
THERE'S been a revolution in media over the last few years and it's going to continue at an ever-increasing pace for sometime to come.
This hectic rate of change and development is forcing all of us to take media more seriously than ever before.
We all now consume media — TV, newspapers, radio, magazine, outdoor etc — differently than previously in greater amounts also and in widely varying forms.
Basically, what has happened is that progress in technology, allied with rising affluence, has transformed availability of media and made personal choice both possible and affordable.
Our newspapers, for instance, have been transformed with colour and a return to writing and journalism not based solely on ‘hard news’.
This is a challenge of course for publishers to keep up with.
Witness the recent demise of Northern Ireland's first local Sunday paper — Sunday News.
Once selling over 100,000 copies each week and offering a real cutting edge in news content, the paper was a victim of under-investment for many years, and its decline was not inevitable.
This fact has been proved by Sunday Life, described accurately by McCann-Erickson as ‘the UK's most successful launch for a decade!’ and now on course for a six-figure circulation.
On the television front we are on the brink of seeing the franchise auction pigeons come home to roost.
Several ITV companies who may have overbid are showing signs of strain and indeed may not survive too long.
Ulster Television continues to thrive on an excellent programme performance and an immensely strong local identity.
Ulster's position is further enhanced by ballooning advertising revenue.
Overall, there are several major issues confronting us on the media front right now.
And we are not at all clear how they will turn out.
Let's summarise some of those issues now.
Firstly, it is time to accept that television viewers are now totally multi-channel orientated, no longer staying with one channel solely.
Today's teenagers have always had a choice of at least four channels and are now blessed with a multiplicity of choice thanks to satellite and VHS.
The next stage of satellite development will accelerate this trend rapidly.
In Europe the company operating the Astra satellite will use digital compression technology to offer a 180 channels per home option.
As a result viewers will become increasingly programme led, not channel led and also UTV's localness, referred to earlier, will become its greatest asset.
One further issue cannot go unmentioned namely, the future of the BBC.
The axing of Eldorado and claims that the BBC must pursue quality television raise dangers of the development of an ‘elitist’ emphasis.
This is to be avoided at all costs if the channel is to remain a mass audience broadcaster.
In a recent survey 60pc of those asked supported the view that the licence fee should be reduced, eliminated or frozen and advertising should be accepted.
It's certainly what advertisers need, especially locally.
In all this, one thing is certain.
The rate of change in media will continue at this pace for some years and we can take nothing for granted.
Media owners will need to constantly refocus and sharpen what they are providing — and of course advertisers too.
It really is time to take media seriously.
Trading slack as buyers sit tight
SELLERS once again dominated the scene as a tidal wave of company results failed to inspire the market.
With Wall Street weaker overnight and Tokyo much stronger, dealers were left in two minds about which way to go.
As it was, the market drifted from the outset, leaving the FTSE after the first hour of trading down 0.6 at 2860.0.
Impressive results from building materials group Redland coupled with an optimistic forecast about future trading proved something of a damp squib as the stock added just a penny to 490p.
Reckitt & Colman also revealed annual profits at the top end of market expectations, but the price slipped 3p to 603p.
It seemed there was little which could tempt dealers to buy.
Even Wellcome's healthy interim figures and an improved dividend payout left the stock 8p weaker at 883p.
Other pharmaceuticals were mixed on the news, with Glaxo up 2p to 599p and Smith Kline Beecham 2p off at 414p.
RTZ, the world's biggest mining group, was unchanged at 677p despite offering a 50pc higher share alternative to its final dividend payment.
Lasmo remained under pressure after cutting its dividend.
It fell 5p to 168p.
Slough Estates fell, not surprisingly, after announcing a cash call to raise £147m.
It lost 8p to 187p.
A firmer Hong Kong stock market pushed HSBC Holdings 2p ahead to 608p, with Mercury parent Cable & Wireless also benefiting by 5p to 733p.
A slump in taxable profits left food distributor Booker down 19p at 420p.
Construction and building group John Laing powered back into the black after hefty losses in the previous year.
Even this success was ignored by investors and the stock fell 2p to 236p.
Planning is the secret of success
IN all areas of the advertising media, planning should be uppermost in advertisers' minds.
By carefully planning, we are seeking to achieve better results than we have managed before and better results than those of competitors.
The science of planning rapidly developed throughout the 1970's and 1980's because the customers who the advertisers were targeting, changed.
Greater affluence and choice led to more fragmented markets and hence the growth of direct marketing.
The underlying principle or strategy of all direct mail/marketing campaigns is market segmentation.
For direct mail to be carried out cost effectively we must accurately find out who the customers are, what motivates them to buy, and how can we best reach them — in short, planning.
Many planning systems exist whereby consumers with similar characteristics of purchasing behaviour are grouped.
As a starting point for planning, the advertiser should profile it's own customer or target customer.
The systems can then identify the segments of the population who are most likely to buy the product/ services.
The UK direct marketing industry is estimated to account for over £7bn worth of trade employing tens of thousands of people in the industry.
It is the fastest growing sector of advertising and marketing, both in the complexity of planning and in the volume of direct mail, arriving through letter-boxes.
It is the proverbial mine field — though planned correctly the medium can be an extremely cost effective marketing tool.
Garvey ‘banned’ from title crunch
Lisnagarvey 0 Banbridge 2
ULSTER hockey's senior league title will be decided by the last game of the programme on Saturday…and it won't involve Lisnagarvey, the team which has had a four-year reign as champions.
Garvey conceded their crown last night at Blaris when they crashed 2–0 at home to Banbridge, and now it's a straight fight between current leaders Holywood and second placed Bann.
The title showdown guarantees a good crowd at Olympia on Saturday (2–45pm), with Bann needing to win to take the crown whereas a draw would be sufficient for Holywood to complete a Kirk Cup and league double.
Garvey needed to beat Bann and then hope Mark Sinnamon's men would turn the tables on Holywood, so that they could force a play-off, but that scenario never looked likely.
Instead Garvey looked a jaded team and although they pressed hard for long periods, they could well have suffered a heavy defeat after a host of elementary mistakes gave Bann opportunities which should have been punished.
The pace of Norman McGladdery, eligible to play having appealed a seven-game ban imposed on him by the Ulster Branch, Colin Allister and Lee Tumilty caused problems throughout whereas the skills of Jimmy Kirkwood and Daniel Clarke at the other end were stifled by a resolute defence.
Colin Allister set up both goals, the first in 14 minutes converted by McGladdery, and the second just 30 seconds from time by schoolboy Lee Tumilty.
Tumilty and Allister could each have had a hat-trick but nevertheless the team are within one game of league glory having started major rebuilding two seasons ago.
Coach Sinnamon must now ensure his team come out on Saturday equally motivated, for Holywood represent a big hurdle as they close in on a treble.
Norman Crawford's men have a point advantage, a defence superbly marshalled by Stephen Martin and which has conceded just six goals in 17 games, and an attack led by the prolific Kenny Morris.
But most of all, they have the determination to put their name on the trophy for the first time as a tribute to club president George Blower who tragically died at the end of a league game almost four weeks ago.
In Section Two, leaders Bangor have a tough trip to Down while at the bottom, RUC have a chance to close the gap on South Antrim when they meet the Lisburn team at Newforge.
‘General’ Leagues boost
YET another lucrative sponsorship deal has been signed by the GAA — and it will help to stimulate even more interest in the National Football and Hurling Leagues.
Church and General Insurance have stepped in to underwrite the league competitions for 1993/94.
The Leagues are currently sponsored by the Royal Liver Assurance and their involvement will terminate in May.
The new deal, which will bring £500,000 into the Association' ‘s coffers spanning the next three years, underlines the popularity of the competition, the second most important in the annual GAA calendar.
President Peter Quinn today welcomed the sponsorship package and expressed the hope that it will help to enhance the leagues.
Meanwhile, Tyrone will begin the defence of their All Ireland football title on Saturday when they meet Monaghan at Omagh on Saturday.
The two counties met in last year's Ulster final at Armagh and in one of the best games seen in the province all year Tyrone came from behind in the second half to pull off a memorable victory after having been reduced to fourteen players.
For Saturday's game Tyrone will parade several of last year' ‘s side while Monaghan have a handful of players who have already gained senior experience.
In other Under 21 championship matches on Saturday, Antrim will meet Derry in Belfast.
Antrim will be powered by Charlie McLernon and Jimmy Wilson at midfield while Eddie Quinn and John McManus will have key roles in attack.
Armagh oppose Cavan at the Athletic Grounds where the home side will include some of last year's successful Minor outfit.
Donegal have home advantage at Ballyshannon against neighbours Fermanagh.
Moyola Park 0 Dungannon Swifts 0
MOYOLA went closest to scoring in the opening half in a move involving Rafferty and Calderwood, but Black's kick went just over the crossbar.
Neither keeper was seriously tested, but McMinn proved dangerous at times for the Swifts with the home defence warding off a couple of good chances by the visitors.
Half-time: Scoreless.
McMinn had his best chance of the second half for Dungannon when a great shot from the right-hand corner of the box went narrowly wide.
Earlier, the Swifts' keeper Hutchinson brought off an excellent save from Black after being caught out of position.
He turned well, however, and dived to save at the expense of a corner.
Son-in-law's passion has widow in tizz
Q: I'm a 45-year-old widow with a big problem: my 35-year-old son-in-law.
Since my husband died two years ago, my daughter and her husband are always on hand to help and cheer me up.
The problem is I've found myself more and more attracted to my son-in-law and I know he feels the same way.
He's flirtatious and often comes round without my daughter.
Last week, he grabbed me and kissed me passionately.
I have to admit I did enjoy it.
He hasn't mentioned it since and neither have I, but I'm in a mess and feel so guilty.
What can I do?
A: You are both playing with fire and, although so far your clandestine relationship has been fairly innocent, if it develops any further, your daughter could stumble on the truth at any time.
It's normal for you to feel flattered by his attentions, as you must be feeling lonely after the loss of your husband, but your son-in-law should know better.
You must end his solo visits now and make an effort to get out and build your romantic life outside your family circle.
New book tells of Norma's traumas
NORMA Major fights a daily battle with intense personal pressures as wife to one of the world's best known and most high-powered statesmen.
That is the view of Northern Ireland Economy Minister Robert Atkins who has spoken out for the first time about Mrs Major, wife of his long time friend, the Prime Minister.
And he has compared her situation to that of Princess Diana in the months before the announcement of the Wales's separation.
Both women, he said, were perceived to be living fairy tale lives when privately, they were having to come to terms with intense personal pressures.
He added, ‘It is easy to make cheap cracks about Norma's hair and her clothes.
It takes a little more perception to appreciate what she is going through inside.’
Mr Atkins comments come in new book — Norma: A Biography — which will be serialised exclusively in the Belfast Telegraph tomorrow and Saturday.
The book by award winning journalist Tim Walker gives a rare insight into the strains on the Majors' marriage and describes Norma's battle to preserve a normal family life as her husband advanced through the ranks of the Tory Government.
He reveals how John Major first discussed being a possible contender for the premiership during a canal boat holiday with Atkins and his wife Dulcie in 1987.
During the holiday, Norma who was already suffering the stresses of life as the wife of a Government Minister awoke one night covered in sweat and clawing at a port hole, trying to get out.
Yet Major did not choose to discuss the momentous decision he was about to take with his wife.
While he talked with Atkins, writes Walker, ‘Norma and Dulcie were symbolically, sitting at the stern, neither of the men thinking to tell them of the course they were plotting.’
Obituary
Cancer doctor dies at 82
DR Denis Parsons Burkitt, a Fermanagh-born doctor who received world-wide acclaim for his research work on cancer, has died in hospital in Gloucester, aged 82.
He was born in Enniskillen and shortly after he joined Portora Royal School lost an eye in a snowball fight.
Despite his handicap, he continued his education at Dean Close School in Cheltenham and at Trinity College, Dublin, graduating in 1933.
He then spent five years studying surgery at Edinburgh, qualifying in 1938.
After service in the Royal Army Medical Corps, Dr Burkitt worked in Uganda and later joined the Medical Research Council and became involved in cancer research.
He first described the form of cancer common in children in Africa, now known as ‘Burkitt's Lymphoma’.
He also concentrated his work on nutrition and health and gained prominence by advocating that health could be improved if people increased the amount of fibre in their diet.
Dr Burkitt was a Fellow Royal College of Surgeons.
An active churchman, he was a former president of the Christian Medical Fellowship.
He is survived by his wife, Olive, in Bisley and three married daughters.
Is this boy too young?
I've fallen for a boy who goes to the same school as me, but is two years younger than I am.
My mates think he's too young for me and that I should find someone of my own age.
I've known him for about three years and we get on fine as friends.
Should I say anything to him about the way I feel, or are my friends right and should I try to forget about him?
You don't say whether the boy has shown any special interest in you, but as you don't mention it, I suspect he hasn't.
You're right to tread carefully, as if you do say anything to him you might well frighten him off!
Girls tend to develop emotionally before boys do, and you really need to bear this in mind when you consider the age gap between you.
Your friends have a point.
Stay friendly with the boy, though.
It would be a shame to lose a good friend.
As for finding someone of your own age, well, you don't need to spend your time looking round for someone to replace him with.
As young romances often come from the most unlikely places, just bide your time and wait and see what turns up!
Reckitt disappoints
RECKITT & Colman, the household goods, toiletries, food and pharmaceuticals group, was hit by difficult trading conditions in nearly all its major markets last year.
Taxable profits released today were £181.7m for the year to January 2 against £234m last time, with the group charging a £47.3m loss on its withdrawal from the North American spice and seasoning business.
There was also a charge of £9.59m for trading losses incurred in 1992 prior to the withdrawal and £9.64m for reorganisation of acquired businesses.
Shareholders get a final dividend of 10.25p against 9.55p last time, making a total of 16.20p (15.10p) a jump of 7.3pc.
Earnings per share were 25.16p against 37.90p.
The accounts were prepared in accordance with the new FRS3 reporting standard.
Profits before tax on the same basis of accounting as used previously came in at £248.25m against £252.3m.
Sterling
THE pound this morning was 1.4780 dollars and 2.4158 German marks compared with 1.4849 dollars and 2.4166 marks at the previous close.
The trade weighted index was 78.8 compared with 78.9 previously.
All set for finals show
THE Ulster Senior Basketball Cup finals take place tonight at Maysfield Leisure Centre.
In the women's final Sporting Belfast play Grosvenor with Sporting starting as favourites but Grosvenor have had some good results recently.
The men's final will be between Star of the Sea and Annadale/Queen's.
This should be an exciting match up, with both teams looking for a confidence boosting win.
The action starts with the women's game at 7.00pm and the men's follows at 8.30pm.
BOXING Lewis seeks Bruno bout
LENNOX Lewis is hoping for a September showdown with Frank Bruno.
‘Certain guys just don't know when to quit,’ he said.
‘He believes he can beat me so I'm going to give him the opportunity to try.’
Lewis is in training at Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, for his May WBC heavyweight title defence against Tony Tucker but that fight is already being overshadowed by talk of a clash with Bruno.
Frank Maloney, Lewis's manager and Bruno's promoter Mickey Duff have already spoken and are planning further talks at the weekend.
‘It will be the new national hero versus the old national hero in what could be the most popular sporting event ever held in England,’ said Maloney.
‘I think you're talking over 40,000 spectators and a gross of close to £10 million.
It could be the greatest English sporting event since we won the World Cup in 1966.’
Bruno is also in training for his fight with American Carl ‘The Truth’ Williams in Birmingham on April 24.
It promises to be his toughest task since his comeback two years ago.
Nigel's name game…
NORTHERN Ireland players Nigel Worthington and Stephen Morrow will go into the history books when Sheffield Wednesday take on Arsenal in next month's Coca-Cola final.
Players from both teams will be the first to have their names displayed on shirts for a major Wembley final.
The Football League believes the one-off experiment will be a help to fans — but it could cause problems.
‘It might be hard to fit ‘Worthington’ onto the back of a shirt — but Chris Bart-Williams has no chance!’said Nigel.
The final will take place on Sunday, April 18
Ulster MPs' ports plea
NORTHERN Ireland shipping services to Great Britain and jobs face a threat from new EC funds available to ports in the Republic, Unionist MPs warned today.
The MPs joined port chiefs from Larne to lobby Ministers and other parties at the Commons last night to press for better transport links.
Sir Patrick Mayhew was among 90 MPs and peers who heard the plea for upgrading the main road to Larne and rail and road routes in south-west Scotland and north-west England.
Cohesion funds from Brussels, provided to close the gap between the EC richer and poorer States, will give ferry services in the Republic access to grants up to 85pc.
Northern Ireland has been granted ‘Objective One’ status, which designates EC regions for special treatment, and Larne port's development has been helped partly by Regional Development Fund cash.
But the province — as part of the UK — is denied help from the cohesion fund.
Denis Galway, Larne port's general manager, told MPs that the result would be a ‘severe’ distortion in competition.
Larne and other Northern Ireland ports can seek only 50pc assistance for roll-on/roll-off facilities.
In a message to MPs, Mr Galway said that ‘job losses may ensue, not only in Northern Ireland, but also in the shipping services serving Scotland and north-west England, along with transport, haulage and industry in these regions.’
He said that the Republic had asked for EC aid for new lift-on/ lift-off and ro-ro ships.
‘Any such assistance would drastically distort competition and result in job losses on ships, most of which are British-crewed, on routes between the UK and Northern Ireland.’
East Antrim MP Roy Beggs said: ‘We remain concerned that the cohesion funding soon to be open to the Irish Republic could totally distort the balance between port facilities in the whole island.’
Cookstown Utd 2 Ballymoney Utd 3
IT was Ballymoney who started the game in livelier fashion and with only ten minutes played Willie McNeill almost headed them into the lead when he made perfect contact with McKendry's cross only to see his header strike the woodwork.
Cookstown sprung into life after this and although they played some flowing football they just could not penetrate a resolute Ballymoney defence until that is the 40th minute when a bad blunder from the Ballymoney goalkeeper Merchant presented Alan Shaw with a simple tap in from only five yards.
Half-time: Cookstown United 1, Ballymoney United 0.
Ballymoney got the game back on levels terms just two minutes into the second half when an accurate throughball from Michael Neill allowed Willie McNeill to race clear and neatly tuck the ball into the bottom corner of the Cookstown net.
In the 65th minute, Cookstown grabbed a second courtesy of Ricky Averill who weaved his way between two defenders before curling the ball into the top corner of the Ballymoney net.
Ballymoney equalised just two minutes later when Danny Graham slid the ball to the unmarked Michael Neill who then drilled his shot into the roof of the Cookstown net.
Ballymoney grabbed the winner five minutes from full time when a deep cross from Neill found substitute Millar who headed into an empty Cookstown net.
Queen's 50th treat
SEVERAL of Ulster's leading hurling players will participate in a novel tournament to mark the 50th anniversary of the Queen's University hurling club.
Four ‘Grads’ teams, spanning a twenty-year period, will take part in the event which is scheduled for the Queen's Playing Fields at Upper Malone on Saturday (12.00).
A team representing graduates from the 1970's era will meet teams drawn from players of 1980–85 vintage, the 1985–90 era and, of course, the present side.
Ciaran Barr, Ulster's first hurling Allstar and now playing for Dublin, will be among those in action.
He will be joined by a number of Down aces including Danny Hughes, Lorenzo McMullan and Paud mason.
Representing Derry will be Seamus and Henry Downey along with Collie McGurk.
David Maguire, Queen's PRO, says: ‘This is a unique tournament and the response from all the players has been excellent.
The current high profile of the sport in the province should ensure a big crowd and there should be some tremendous hurling.’
Facing terror
ANY attempt at a face-to-face meeting with the IRA is a dangerous operation, because it could either help or hinder the cause of peace.
Today's horrific attack in Castlerock underlines once again the scale of the task facing Gordon Wilson.
Just as the IRA is under enormous public pressure after the dreadful scenes at Warrington, loyalist gunmen have besmirched yet again the image of Northern Ireland.
One side feeds on the other's terror, dragging our community to new depths of despair.
Against this terrible backcloth, Mr Wilson faces a massive mountain.
His brave words echoed around the world after the IRA's bomb in Enniskillen robbed him of his beloved daughter.
Here was someone who had been through hell, but still could forgive the bombers, while pleading with them to realise the tragedy they were causing.
That spirit of compassion has brought its own rewards, in improved community relations from Enniskillen to Dungannon, and now it will meet its sternest test.
How will the hard men of the IRA react, when they hear at first hand what harm they are doing to everything they say they stand for?
Others have met the IRA before, without result, so it would be unrealistic to hope for too much.
The case against the IRA campaign is well known, so either its leaders are ready to capitulate or — far more likely — they think there is some advantage for them.
They have never been influenced by public opinion in the past but perhaps these are exceptional times.
They badly need to re-establish some credibility, after Warrington, and even they have found it hard to say ‘no’ to such a public appeal, from such an unique individual.
Not only has he been prepared to forgive, but he has taken the brave step, for a unionist, of accepting a seat in the Irish Senate, as token of his Irish identity.
He has more than earned the right to confront the IRA with the tragic error of their ways and to demand a cease-fire.
The world will be waiting for the IRA's answer, in hope and fear.
Whatever it is, there is always justification for meeting one's enemies, forcing them to give answers and chipping away at their base of unthinking support.
Killing freedom
IRRESPECTIVE of what political views they hold, those who stand for election in Northern Ireland require a lot of courage and conviction.
Politicians and party activists not only face the normal cut and thrust of political life but also a deadly threat to their lives.
All the major parties in the province can name members who have been murdered, attacked or intimidated.
Terrorism, from whatever source, is the enemy of democracy and its evil forces have been out in strength in recent days.
A Sinn Fein worker was murdered yesterday and loyalists tried to kill two of the party's Belfast councillors within the space of 24 hours.
Incendiary bombs were also planted at the homes of two SDLP members in Banbridge last night.
These attacks must be condemned without equivocation.
If the people of Ulster disagree with any party's views they have a simple remedy — vote against them.
The ballot box is the most potent — and only acceptable — weapon in a democracy.
Sinn Fein 's association with the IRA makes it unacceptable to many people here, but it is still a legal political party.
Attacks on its members are as contemptible as any other form of violence.
The grenades and firebombs used in the attacks in Belfast and Banbridge could have killed or maimed the politicians' wives and children as well.
No one can condemn the murder of a child in Warrington and be equivocal about a similar attempt on our own streets.
Charities to share £10,000
TWO charities are set to share £10,000 raised by Ulster motorists who each paid £3 to have their exhaust emissions checked.
Mr Brian Watson, chief executive of the Driver and Vehicle Agency, is to split the money between Action Cancer and the Northern Ireland Chest Heart and Stroke Association.
The money was raised by charging the drivers for the emission tests which become part of vehicle testing from April 1.
Fifteen DVTA centres took part in the charity day.
‘I was overwhelmed by the response to our invitation and must thank the DVTA staff as well as all those who came along’, Mr Watson said.
The oldest car tested was a 1953 Ford Prefect and the newest a Ford Mondeo.
Two Scottish breaks to be won!
WE'VE got together with ScotRail, Stena Sealink, Friendly Hotels and NIR to bring you two great prizes in an easy competition.
The first winner and companion will stay at The Station Hotel, Ayr.
The second winner and companion will stay at Central Hotel, Glasgow.
Station Hotel, Burns Statue Square, Ayr: At the very heart of Burns country, the Station Hotel is situated in the centre of the town, with ample free parking.
All bedrooms have a luxury you would expect — from colour television to sizeable private bathrooms.
The lounge and restaurant are truly fine rooms.
The Kintyre bar has a large selection of mouth-watering whiskies and the meals in the restaurant offer high quality cooking.
Or, if preferred, have a snack in the piano bar.
The hotel can now boast a brand new leisure centre offering comprehensive gymnasium, whirlpool spa bath, dry Finnish sauna, plus Turkish steam bath — all free to residents.
There's lots to do in Ayr — stroll round the town, visit the shops, have a game of golf on one of the challenging courses, visit ancient castles and magnificent stately homes, or spend time at the seaside.
Central Hotel, Gordon Street, Glasgow: The Central Hotel is located in the heart of the city, a few seconds walk from a main line station and within easy access of the M8.
All bedrooms are of a high standard offering private facilities, satellite colour television, in-house movies and hospitality tray.
The premier plus rooms have mini bars, hairdryers and trouser presses.
You will always find Scottish beef on the carvery in the Entresol restaurant, with a warm and friendly atmosphere in the rendezvous lounge bar.
Glasgow is an excellent town for shopping, or perhaps you would care to visit the museums, including the Burrell Collection.
There are regular concerts in the S.E.C. or you may prefer the Scottish Opera.
The Central Hotel has a full leisure centre, free to residents, with heated swimming pool, sauna, solarium, and fully equipped gymnasium.
The weekend breaks can be taken any weekend (subject to availability) until May 31 (except the Easter weekend April 9–12) and takes in Friday and Saturday nights, going home on Sunday, with dinners on the Friday and Saturday and breakfasts on Saturday and Sunday.
The hotel accommodation is provided by the Friendly Hotels Group.
ScotRail will provide our winners with free return rail travel to Glasgow and Ayr.
Stena Sealink are providing the return ferry journey from Larne to Stranraer and Northern Ireland Railways will provide free return travel from the winner's nearest station to Larne.
Shorts chase chess title
AS the Belfast and District Chess league draws to a close, the various promotion and relegation issues are beginning to fall more clearly into place.
Last week's game in Division One served to reinforce Shorts title challenge.
On Tuesday night they easily put paid to Newtownards' slight remaining hopes, by beating them 3.5–1.5.
On the following evening, their closest challengers Malone defeated CIYMS by a similar scoreline.
All of which means that Shorts require just three points from their final match of the season to clinch the championship.
On the same night, Carrick had a shock 3–2 victory over Fisherwick so that, while the unfortunate Bangor have definitely been relegated to Division 2, Carrick are still in with a chance of catching CIYMS and avoiding the drop.
Details:
The final games take place this week, with Shorts facing Carrick and Fisherwick meeting CIYMS.
Meanwhile Ruth Hollinger from Ballyclare High School has won the 1993 Ulster Schoolgirls Championship.
The event was held recently at Methody when six girls competed in an all-play-all.
The deciding game between Angela Corry and Ruth was won by the latter after a time scramble.
Pocket guide to unearth collectible items
THE ‘Antiques Roadshow’ may be over for another year but the affection for collectibles continues with bargains still being unearthed in the most unusual of places.
They are there to be found in everything from car boot sales to Victorian garden dumps.
For the traveller on the quest for something rare and rewarding there is no better companion than Phillips Antiques Pocket Price Guide, soon out from Guinness Publishing, priced £9.99.
This hardbacked little gem, beautifully illustrated and containing a mine of relevant information is a must for anyone doing the sales, auctions and fairs this summer and in the months beyond.
A unique reference tool it shows clearly the shapes and styles of all the items included and illustrates the terms used to describe them.
In it over 600 items have been priced and captioned by experts at Phillips, Britain's leading antiques auctioneers.
New colour sections on antique furniture — an important addition considering the buoyancy of such pieces at auction today — clocks, silver, glass, pottery and porcelain will prove their worth for a long time.
An extra colour section on English and European works of art pre-1900 will give valuable guidance to the amateur and the expert alike.
Available from April 5 at most bookshops the book can be ordered through all.
Capturing the horror of war
ONE of the most graphic accounts of the horrors and practicalities of war to be published in recent years is The Imperial War Museum Book of The First World War.
Now available in paperback (Sidgwick and Jackson, £14.99) it is a well-illustrated volume containing a lot of previously unpublished material, mostly extracts from diaries, letters and taped interviews.
The accounts reveal the effects the four long years had on people who lived, or failed to live, through the war that was to end all wars.
One assumption which the book challenges is that — apart from a few disenchanted poets and artists — most soldiers accepted uncomplainingly the necessity for huge losses and the privations of life at the front.
One has only to read the letter of Robert Scott Macfie, a middle-aged company chairman with degrees from Cambridge and Edinburgh Universities, who stayed in the ranks as a senior NCO, when he wrote of an action on the Somme in 1916: ‘The want of preparation, the vague orders, the ignorance of the objective and geography, the absurd haste and in general, the horrid bungling were scandalous.’
There are numerous accounts of life and death situations, including Rifleman Clegg's recollection of being gassed, in all its painful detail.
No less vivid are accounts from the women — nurses carrying on bravely under fire, the ‘Madonnas of Pervyse’ or Sister Brown in her hospital ship off Gallipoli.
The munitions workers are not forgotten, including Joan Williams who wrote of her new job: ‘It was nothing to leap out of bed at 5.15 on a frosty morning and I almost danced down Queen's Road under the stars, at the prospect of the day's work before me.’
The material, although expertly compiled by military author Malcolm Brown, is strangely lacking any reference to the 36th Ulster Division on the Somme.
It will be argued that every event of the war cannot be covered in one volume, but it seems strange that Brown saw fit to include a chapter on the making of the film of the Somme.
Alcohol alert is raised over vodka imports
AN ALCOHOL alert is sweeping parts of Donegal following a warning that bottles of contaminated vodka may be on sale in the county.
The drinks scare centres on Killybegs, Burtonport, Rathmullan and Buncrana where crew members from Eastern European ships have been distributing the vodka under well-known Russian brand labels — Stolichnaya and Moskovskaya.
Health inspectors from the North Western Health Board have visited hotels and pubs in the four ports to warn people against purchasing the vodka.
A local publican in Rathmullan said he had been told that the vodka had been contaminated by poisonous substances in the water from a plastics factory situated near the Russian manufacturing distillery.
A spokesman for the North Western Health Board said the warning only related to Russian vodka brands bought outside the normal distribution channels.
He also said that the Cork-based importers of the two brands only dealt with distilleries in Russia whose ‘quality control and facilities meet international standards’.
‘Exports of imitation Stolichnaya are from time to time made from other regions of the former USSR,’ he said.
‘The importers have given an assurance that all of the Stolichnaya stocks in Ireland and the rest of Europe are the genuine article from Russia.’
An intriguing tale of power
DUBLIN in the 1880s was a city where poverty and wealth existed sided by side.
Political intrigue abounded.
Parnell was in jail, and the British authorities are desperately holding on to power as support for the Land League accelerates.
It is in such a situation that Brian Gallagher's first novel of love, treachery and political intrigue, Invincible (Town House, £4.99), is set.
Based on historical fact, superbly blended with fiction, this account of the Invincible and the Phoenix Park murders, deals with a brutal incident in Irish history which, at the time, turned many people against the cause of land reform.
Gallagher is bound to recruit a lot of fans who, like me, await his next book with anticipation.
Cultra moves into horse plough mode
THE highlight of the second annual Country Championship Day at the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum tomorrow will be the horse ploughing match.
Event organiser Jonathan Bells said today: ‘Spring really arrives this weekend and there'll be lots of things to see and do.
We have a series of attractions, traditional Irish music, horse-shoe throwing as well as saddlery an open-hearth cooking demonstrations.’
Events start at 11am and run until 4pm.
Conference places
THE World's Poultry Science Association is offering 10 free places (accommodation and registration) at the 9th European Poultry Conference in Glasgow later this year.
Basil Bayne, WPSA Education and Careers committee, said: ‘The offer will be made on the basis of a 1,500 world essay on ‘Possible Developments in the production and marketing of poultry in Europe by the year 2000’ and the competition is open to anyone born after September 1, 1969.’
Essays must be submitted by August 1 — the conference runs from August 7 to 12 — and full details and a copy of the rules can be obtained from Basil at Greenmount College, Co Antrim, telephone 08494, 62114.
NIAPA urges action
NIAPA, the small farmers' organisation, has advised producers to pay careful attention to the new IACS forms which have to be filled in and returned before May 15.
Spokesman Jim Carmichael said: ‘This will be the most important form to be completed and returned annually in future.’
College warning
NORTHERN IRELAND potato growers have received a timely warning from the Harper Adams Agricultural College.
‘They should not cut applications of basal phosphorus as they prepare for planting,’ is the warning from college researcher Jim Lewis.
He has found in a three-year programme that tuber size and yield increased the most when both foliar phosphate and basal fertiliser phosphate were applied to the plants.
Payment delay queried
HUNDREDS of farmers throughout the province are still waiting for final payments under the Sheep Annual Payment.
Tyrone farmer Martin Brogan, from Gortin, said: ‘Our counterparts in the Republic have received their payments over two weeks ago and we are still waiting for ours.
‘We are entitled to £15.03p per ewe and I can assure you we need this money.
This is one of the leanest times of the year so we are exhorting the Department of Agriculture to speed things up.’
Northern Ireland is bucking the emigration trend
ACCORDING to the most recent figures available, the number of people coming to live in Northern Ireland is now greater than the number leaving these shores.
Provisional totals for 1991 record that while 15,900 people emigrated from Northern Ireland, 17,936 came to live here — a net inward migration of 2,036.
Throughout the Eighties the trend had been very much the reverse.
In 1988, for example, 21,600 people left Northern Ireland.
In the same period only 13,700 came here to live.
In other words, a net outward migration of almost 8,000 people.
So why the turnaround?
Experts say that the current recession is behind the trend.
That those coming to live here, are coming in search of work and a better standard of living.
And that those who may otherwise have left the province in search of employment on the mainland are being forced to think again.
Jobs, particularly in areas such as the construction industry, which has traditionally attracted Northern Irish workers, are no longer plentiful.
Most of those who leave here are young, between the ages of 16 and 30, and single.
The mainland of Britain is still their most likely destination.
Many, of course, go to universities and colleges.
But according to Mary White from the Emigrant Advice Unit in Hamill Street, Belfast a worrying percentage still leave here with no job, no contacts, no place to stay and absolutely no idea of just how hard life in the big city can be.
‘In London, many landlords now ask for a month's rent in advance.
Even a small bedsit can cost you around £100 a week, so you could be talking about £400 right away.
If you're DHSS it's almost impossible.
You'll have to pay your rent in advance and the landlord will reimburse you.’
She adds: ‘Most jobs require references.
Travel to and from work in the city costs on average £15 a week, then there's the council tax, which, depending on where you live, can cost from £10 to £20 a week.
‘Yet you still get young people from here arriving in London on a Friday evening thinking it's going to be easy to find a place to stay in right away.
‘It's very difficult to find accommodation on a Friday night in London.
Offices and job centres will also be closed for the weekend.’
Mary adds that even those who are successful in finding work and accommodation may suffer from loneliness and a sense of isolation in large cities like London.
She adds, ‘I used to live there myself.
I found the big difficulty in socialising was that my friends lived in another part of London.
The time spent travelling across the city meant that you often didn't bother to meet up.
It wasn't worth it.’
There are other problems too, she points out.
‘People think of London, it's only across the water.
It's only an hour away on the plane.
But the English do have a different culture.
We're much more easy going here.
We have a different sense of humour.’
She adds that in the wake of bombings such as the weekend attack in Warrington, anti Irish sentiment can run high.
‘Many young people from Northern Ireland find that particularly hard.’
She stresses that the overall picture is not so bleak.
Most people who leave here are successful in finding work and accommodation and do settle well.
The Emigrant Advice Unit tours school throughout Northern Ireland with a hard hitting message aimed at showing young people that a new life in another country may not be as glamorous as they had imagined.
‘If they're going to leave,’ says Mary, ‘They have to leave prepared.’
RUAS chief honoured
Royal tribute: Bill Yarr, chief executive of the Royal Ulster Agricultural Society, and his wife, Jo, at Buckingham Palace.
Mr Yarr was awarded the OBE for his services to agriculture.
Cash flow lags behind incomes
FARM incomes went up significantly last year.
At least that is what the official statisticians now provisionally estimate.
But the increase in incomes was not matched by a similar increase in the cash becoming available to farmers.
Cash available increased only marginally while incomes rose by £44m.
In conventional terms, the profit and loss account showed better profits while the analysis of the sources and uses of funds produced little or no improvement!
Provided the provisional calculations are reliable (which is a topic for another day), farmers can be forgiven for some confusion in any debate about whether they were really better off in 1992 than in 1991 and whether they ‘felt’ better off!
The income from farming in Northern Ireland in 1992 is estimated to have amounted to £224.2m.
There are just over 29,000 farm units, some of which are not full-time occupations for the owner.
Allowing for this element means that the average income from farming per full-time equivalent may be about £9,000 per annum.
As with all averages, particularly in farming, there is a wide dispersion of incomes on either side of the average.
The cash available to farmers and their spouses was put at £188m; nearer to £7,500 per farm, or about 17pc less.
The explanation of the difference is important for a number of reasons.
First, because the 20pc increase in incomes has been widely reported and may be used to give a misleading impression.
Second, because the elements of the calculation are an important part of the overall financial description of the current state of farming.
The contrast in 1992, when compared to 1991, is that a big increase in income, £44m, did not get converted into a significant amount of cash in farmers pockets.
The provisional estimates are that cash available to owners only increased by £8m.
The reasons become clearer from the table.
First, more of the income in 1992 was ‘notional’, to the extent that stocks increased and more time was spent using farm labour to create farm improvements.
These items accounted for only £17m in 1991: in 1992 they are put at £28m.
This explains £11m of the gap of £36m.
Spending on capital items and allowances for depreciation also affected the cash flow differently last year.
In 1992, capital investment was £3m higher, depreciation allowances were £2m lower, and capital grants to aid capital spending rose by £1m.
Overall this represents a reduction of cash flow by £4m.
An incidental feature of the capital transactions is the implication that the capital invested in local farming is being eroded.
On the existing assets, the statisticians suggest that the allowance for depreciation should be £134m.
However, new investment only amounted to £91m.
The replacement of capital has, in the past two years, been low, both, in cash terms and as a proportion of depreciation!
Stock increases, own labour improvements and capital payments, therefore, account for £15m of the £36m gap.
By far the largest part of the difference is explained by the relationship of farmers to their bankers.
Whilst farmers increased their borrowing in 1991, in 1992 it was reduced.
Total bank lending to farmers in the province amounts to about £295m.
This averages nearly £12,000 per equivalent full-time farm.
This figure excludes HP and some types of leasing finance.
However, in 1992, the amount owed to the banks fell by £6m, which contrasts with an increase of £12m in 1991.
This would explain a further £18m of the difference.
The fall in the amount owed to the banks is not easily explained.
It might be a sign that, with improved incomes farmers felt able to reduce their borrowing.
Alternatively, it might represent a pessimistic feeling about the ability to carry the existing borrowing.
This is a problem which needs more evidence.
The only other significant documented difference in the cash flow is a smaller than usual increase in the amount allowed for the imputed earnings of family labour, which rose by £1m to £56m.
All these factors leave only about £1m arising from other causes (including the margins of error in some of the estimates).
None of these comparisons makes any allowance for the effects of inflation.
If the mid-year inflation figures are used, then incomes from farming went up by about 16pc.
On the other hand, cash available probably decreased fractionally.
Looking at the overall position, farmers might be forgiven for seeing little to cheer in these figures.
The accountants may make better returns to the tax collector but, down on the farm, living standards did not reflect the improvement.
However, for some farms (but with significant exceptions) the early months of 1993 are more promising!
Moneyglass
‘AN excellent production’ was how adjudicator John Keys described the presentation of ‘Juno and the Paycock’by the Phoenix Players, Portadown at the Moneyglass Drama Festival.
He said Harry Foy's direction had style, attack and imagination.
He praised the set and was sure this was the kind of tenement O'Casey had in mind when writing the play.
Costumes were just right.
The adjudicator congratulated Brian Devlin, who as Captain Boyle had subtlety, poise and authority.
Congratulating the director on his meticulous work, Mr Keys said that the young characters, never O'Casey's strong point, were played with great conviction.
Angela McKeever as Juno Boyle, Paul Dougan as Johnny Boyle and Neil McGreevy as Gerry Devine, all added flesh to the O'Casey characters.
Also highly praised were Paul Magee as ‘Joxer’ Daly, Ann Conlon as Mary Boyle and Fiona Ennis as Masie Madigan.
Harry Foy as Needle Nugent looked the part and always stayed in character.
The Festival continues tomorrow night with the Moneyglass Dramatic Society's production of ‘The Freedom of the City’ by Brian Friel.
Lara Windies hero
CRACK batsman Brian Lara steered the West Indies to their second one-day win over Pakistan in three days in Port of Spain, Trinidad.
The rising star of Windies cricket hit an unbeaten 95 not out to spur his side to a five-wicket victory in the rain-affected match.
Lara, who hit a brilliant century in the four-wicket win over Pakistan in the first one-day game, slammed 10 fours in his innings of 106 balls.
West Indies, whose victory was their ninth in the past 10 limited overs matches against Pakistan, scored 196 for five in 41 overs after their opponents made 194 for seven in their 45 overs.
Trinidad-born Lara batted with a blend of aggression and sound defence while capitalising on two slices of luck.
He was dropped on four by Inzamam-ul-Haq at first slip off captain Wasim Akram's second ball of the innings and on 70 by wicketkeeper Rashid Latif off paceman Aamir Nazir.
House fire tragedy
AN elderly man has died in a fire at his east Belfast home.
Albert Wightman, who was in his early 70s, was found dead in his Knockwood Park flat where he lived alone after neighbours discovered the fire at around 6pm yesterday.
Police said a crime was not suspected.
Benn cancels visit
LABOUR left winger Tony Benn was today forced to cancel a visit to Northern Ireland.
The controversial Chesterfield MP had been due to give a lecture at Queen's University this evening on the future of British politics.
But he pulled out because of the expected Government statement on the pit closures programme this afternoon.
Joyrider's funeral
ONE of two teenagers killed in a stolen car when it crashed into a tree in west Belfast will be buried on Saturday.
Requiem Mass will be said for Michael Paul Largey (18), at St Teresa's Church Glen Road after his body is taken from Andersonstown Park West at 9am.
He will be buried at City Cemetery.
Funeral arrangements for Damien Fegan (17), of Vicinage Park, also killed in the Falls Road crash yesterday morning, have not yet been released.
Two other youths seriously injured in the accident were today described as ‘stable’ in hospital.
Industrial peace
PEACE has broken out in relations between workers and employers in Northern Ireland, figures revealed today.
Speaking at the opening of new offices for the Industrial Tribunals and Fair Employment Tribunals in Belfast, Economy Minister Robert Atkins said the province now enjoyed an excellent industrial relations record.
‘In 1992, only 15 days per 1,000 employees were lost through strikes, less than half of that in 1991, which itself was a very good year, and just a fraction of what it was in the late 1980s.
The figures speak for themselves,’ said the Minister.
Call of equality
THE Opportunity 2000 campaign, which aims to promote the cause of women in the workforce, was launched in Belfast today by Lady Elspeth Howe.
Lady Howe, chairman of the nationwide campaign and wife of the former foreign secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe, called on local employers to commit themselves to equal opportunities.
She was speaking at the launch of Opportunity 2000 at the Ulster Bank's offices in Donegall Place.
The bank's parent company, National Westminster, is a strong supporter of the scheme in Great Britain and the Ulster Bank is one of the first firms to sign up in the province.
The extension of Opportunity 2000 to Northern Ireland has been welcomed by the Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC).
Joan Smyth, chair of the Commission, said the scheme would act as a ‘spur to positive action’ by employers.
Tahitian just tonic
SPRING is in the air, and every bookmaker whose thoughts turn to Doncaster has a spring in his step.
Offering prices on the Lincoln Handicap is one of the more elaborate torture methods favoured by bookmakers to extract money from unwitting punters and this year there is an additional twist not one, but two Lincolns.
Saturday's big race has a safety limit, and not the one that should prevent punters getting anywhere near it.
Horses eliminated from the race at the bottom of the handicap will tomorrow find themselves at the top of the weights for the ‘consolation’ race the William Hill Spring Mile.
There may lurk some consolation for punters in this innovation, as those determined to have a bet in the Lincoln proper will learn much about the current trend of Town Moor's wayward draw advantage.
Moreover, the mile handicap on the first Friday of the Flat season presents punters with a formidable ally in the shape of Lynda Ramsden.
Last year she saddled King of Chance for a well backed success, while in 1990 her Daring Times landed one of the most colourful gambles of the whole season.
In between, Vague Dancer beat all bar one.
Tahitian, her candidate for tomorrow's race, looks just the sort to enjoy a profitable season as a four-year-old.
Last autumn he was making great progress, thriving on fast ground to score twice at Pontefract.
But he probably posted his best effort in defeat when just shaded by Cambrian in a 23-runner Newmarket handicap on his final start.
He finished in great style but was just nosed out in a three-way photo, and is improving sufficiently to shrug off an extra four pounds from the handicapper.
Stable-mate Sillars Stalker looks a great bet to complete a double for Mrs Ramsden in the Cystic Fibrosis Research Cup.
Sillars Stalker was a much improved hurdler over the winter, and returned to form with a blinding effort to chase home Olympian in the Coral Handicap Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival last week.
If his progress is transferred to the Flat, he will look embarrassingly well treated here.
Fears grow for lost fishermen
FEARS are growing for the two-man crew of a missing fishing boat, after wreckage from the vessel was found by coastguards.
Two RAF rescue helicopters, four Dutch warships and a lifeboat were searching the sea off the Yorkshire coast for the Whitby-registered Heritage.
The 32ft boat disappeared 15 miles east of Scarborough and the warships, on exercise in the area, joined the hunt after an oil slick was reported.
The Heritage was working out of Scarborough and her crew are believed to be from Bridlington.
The Department of Transport's marine accident investigation branch has started an inquiry.
The missing boat is what is known as a 10-metre rule-beater built to get round the Government's ruling that boats over 10 metres have to be licensed and adhere to controversial fishing quotas.
Lies told in Gay club fraud case: QC
THE ‘Gay’ club fraud trial in Belfast has been told he Crown case was ‘demonstrably wrong’in everything said to the jury during opening submissions.
Defence lawyer Tony Cinnamond, QC, told the Crown Court the prosecution had also put forward ‘a strange collection of witnesses’ some of whom, he alleged had told lies.
He said that one of their reasons for lying was probably that they did not want to be publicly associated with the Carpenter Club.
Unemployed accountant Richard Hodgson (44) of Tannaghmore Road, Markethill, is on trial on four counts of dishonestly obtaining cheques worth £147,000 from the Department of the Environment for a compensation claim on dates in 1988.
It is the Crown case the club was run as a business, yet for compensation purposes during a redevelopment scheme, was said to be a members club entitled to a higher rate of compensation.
He said the accused, Richard Hodgson could prove he did not get a halfpenny of profit out of the Carpenter Club.
Mr Cinnamond said all the money was ploughed back into the club, except for what it took to pay back those who had put up the finance to buy it in the first place.
Plans to turn it into a members' club had begun long before 1985 as the Crown alleged, said Mr Cinnamond.
Counsel contended the DoE was neither deceived nor misled about documentation it received in respect of the club.
Hodgson was in the witness box yesterday for the first time in the trial — now in its fifth week.
At hearing.
No drugs at hall — claim
THERE is no evidence that ex-paramilitaries are pushing drugs at raves at Belfast's Ulster Hall, councillor Jim Clarke said today.
The statement follows a claim by Sinn Fein councillor Fra McCann who said he had received complaints about dealers selling ecstasy at the council-owned concert hall.
And teenagers have claimed that men, recognised as former members of the now defunct IPLO, are involved.
Mr Clarke, who is chairman of the council's Leisure Services Committee, said that there was a misconception that rave dances were drug parties.
‘They are high energy dance parties,’ he argued.
‘We regularly get complaints about drugs but it is mostly due to publicity from drug raves in the rest of the UK,’ he said.
‘We rarely get any specific evidence of people actually passing drugs.
We have no evidence of any paramilitary influences at raves in the Ulster Hall.’
Mr Clarke said he would like to hear from anyone who had any such information.
He said the RUC drugs squad were notified of all raves in the hall.
‘We are obviously still concerned that there allegations of pushing drugs and we intend to monitor closely any future raves at the Ulster hall.’
NIE investors may cash in on BT sale
ULSTER investors who take a stake in this summer's flotation of Northern Ireland Electricity may be able to make a ‘quick buck’ and raise cash for the next issue of British Telecom shares.
The NIE privatisation, confirmed yesterday by Economy Minister Robert Atkins, is likely to take place on Wednesday June 9, less than a month before the planned issue of ‘BT3’.
It is thought the Government is planning to off-load most of its 1.35 billion BT shares in late June or early July.
The two previous BT issues have proved popular with Northern Ireland investors, many of whom will be interested in the latest flotation which will be the biggest-ever privatisation issue.
Belfast stockbroker Gavin Graham, of BWD Rensburg, said he was surpised that NIE had decided to ‘squeeze in’ its long-awaited flotation so close to the BT issue.
‘I would have thought there was a danger of splitting investors between the two issues.
The people who bought BT shares in the two previous issues have done quite well.
‘Since they will be given preferential treatment this time around it is likely many of them will want to put more money into it.’
Drew Porter, head of the Ulster Bank's Personal Investment Unit in Belfast, said although the two share issues were likely to be very close together, investors may be able to ‘make a killing’ on NIE and still be ready to snap up the BT3 opportunity.
‘Although the dates between the applications for NIE and BT3 will be fairly close, there should be no problem if investors want to use the proceeds of one to fund the other.
‘If the NIE shares offer a good premium, and I expect that they will, then people should be able to buy them, sell them quickly and make some money to buy into BT3 if they want.’
Both Mr Porter and Mr Graham expect the NIE issue to very popular, with many local investors keen to hold on to the shares so that they can qualify for the discount vouchers will entitle them to money off their electricity bills.
This is an attractive perk, particularly in the light of last week's Budget announcement of VAT on fuel and power from April 1994.
The flotation was supposed to have taken place last Autumn, but it was postponed until NIE secured funding from the EC for the under-sea power cable which will link Northern Ireland with the Scottish electricity grid.
The EC funding was confirmed last week.
Ballyclare
IN AN entry of over 1,000 cattle at McClelland's Mart, Ballyclare, animals continued to sell at exceptional rates although prices slightly eased on the previous week.
In the dairy ring an entry of 51 sold to a top of £1,430, £1,310 and £1,230 all paid to R & E Arthur, Knowehead, Templepatrick.
Calved cows sold to £1,220 paid twice to R Bingham, Crumlin and H S Rainey, Ahoghill.
In the suckler ring an entry of 49 sold to a top of £1,460 and £1,300 for two pedigree Charolais cows with bull calves at foot.
Commercial cows sold to £950 for Angus heifer with heifer calf with springing cows to £900 for an in-calf shorthorn.
In the fat cow ring another good entry of 52 continued to meet a sharp trade and sold to a top of £119.60 for a Friesian 470kg at £562 and to £118.90 for an Angus 450kg at £535.
In the store rings an entry of 400 bullocks continued to meet an excellent trade and sold to a top of £930 for Belgian Blue 464kg and to £920 for a Simmental 638kg.
Beef types sold to £154.60 for a Simmental 540kg at £835.
Conditioned bullocks sold to £157.90 for a Charolais 418kg at £660 with midweights to £175.20 for a Charolais 314kg at £550 and lightweights to £207.90 for a pair of Simmentals 178kg at £370.
A similar pattern continued in the heifer ring for another large entry of 263.
Stores sold to £154.50 for a Belgian Blue 290kg at £448 and to £153.90 for a pair of Blondes 195kg at £300.
Conditioned heifers sold to £139.40 for a Simmental 360kg at £502 with beef types to £126.50 for a Simmental 465kg at £588.
Inn the calf ring another good entry of 200 once again met a sharp trade although with shipping buyers absent Friesian bulls eased in price.
Continental bulls sold to £300, £295 and £275 all paid for Simmentals with continental heifers to £195 paid for a Belgian Blue.
The 51 dairy cows and heifers sold to a top price of £1,430, £1,310 and £1,230 all for calved Friesians.
The 49 sucklers sold to a top price of £1,460 and £1,300 for pedigree Charolais cows and bull calves at foot presented by P McAllister, Glenarm.
Commercial cows sold to £950 for an Aberdeen Angus X heifer with heifer calf at foot for S Pinkerton, Crumlin and springing cows sold to £900 for an in-calf shorthorn X presented by S Watt, Deerfin.
Another fine entry of just under 500 pigs at McClelland's in Ballyclare resulted in a great trade all round.
Prices: Over 30kg: T Farquhar, Kells, 12 pigs, 56kg at £53; W Hoy, Doagh, ten pigs 50kg at £48; Mrs T Gourley, Templepatrick, 11 pigs 45.5kg at £42.50; Cullybackey producer, 17 pigs 46kg at £42.50; G Montgomery, Broughshane, 16 pigs 43kg at £40.
Under 30kg: Ian Steele, Antrim, ten pigs, 27kg at £30.60; J Thompson, Glenavy, seven pigs 25.5kg at £29; H McGookin, Ballynure, 12 pigs 20kg at £25.80; J Thompson, Glenavy, eight pigs 20.5kg at £24.90; Jim Ross, Islandmagee, 12 pigs 17kg at £24; B Wharry, Glenarm, nine pigs 16kg at £22.60; T McGookin, Ballynure, 19 pigs 15.5kg at £22.60; J Thompson, Glenavy, eight pigs 17.5kg at £22.50; D Weatherup, Carrickfergus, eight pigs 17kg at £22.20; Ed Stirling, Kilwaughter, 25 pigs 15.5kg at £22.40.
Springers sold to a top of £200.
The 50 pork pigs sold to a top of 82.63p for 14 pigs for C Davidson, Ballinderry Upper; M Hill, Ballynure, five pigs £77.50; R Saunderson, Glenwherry, five pigs £82; Wm Gray, Doagh, four pigs £81; Mrs McClintock, Glenwherry, two pigs £82.
The 16 fat sows and boars sold to £130 for F Walker, Templepatrick; J McKnight, Templepatrick, sow £127; T McGookin, Larne, sow £115.
Allams
At Allams, another strong entry of 1,260 spring lambs, hoggets, breeding and cast ewes met an excellent trade with 1,126 hoggets sold to average £49.20 per head and spring lambs made to £57.60 each.
Ewes with lambs at foot met a sharp trade selling to £71 per head.
Cast ewes topped at £45 each.
Ballyclare
ANOTHER strong trade of 1,140 sheep at Ballyclare saw an easier trade for hoggets but still an excellent demand for well fleshed sorts which sold to a top of £49 per head for a pen of Suffolks from W Taggart, Doagh, and to £48.50 for four crossbreds 24kg presented by Mrs H Porter, Newtownabbey.
The 280 fat ewes continued to sell in a sharp trade with first quality Suffolk to £45, crossbreds to £42 and Cheviot ewes to £40.
In the breeding ring a large entry of 450 saw in-lamb hoggets sell to a top of £80 and £78 per head paid for Suffolk/Cheviot presented by D Foot.
Ewes with lambs at foot sold to a top of £86 for crossbred and two lambs offered by S H Moore, Larne.
Markethill
A MUCH larger entry of store pigs at Markethill sold in a strong trade particularly for heavy stores and middleweight stores which were in outstanding demand.
Heavy pigs sold up to £70.80 for 16 pigs from A Monaghan.
The same owner sold 16 pigs at £66.90; D Scott, Richhill sold 18 pigs at £59 and 27 pigs at £56.60; M Garvey NTH sold 11 pigs at £60.20; A Brown, Newry received £47.30 each for 23 pigs; P Hanna, Banbridge sold 11 pigs at £46; S Gordon, Kilkeel, sold 30 pigs at £45.20 and 32 pigs at £43.10 each.
Several more pens sold from £39 to £42.10 each.
Small suckers were in better supply with demand extremely good from £19.70 to £24.10 each.
Stronger lots sold up to £28.70 each.
Lightweight stores cleared readily from £30 to £34.50 each with several pens from £35 to a top of £37.80 paid to a regular Loughgall producer.
Springing sows sold up to £177 each.
Hilltown
ANOTHER good entry of over 400 cattle at Hilltown farmers sales met a brisk trade in all sections.
Almost 300 bullocks stores and beef sold to a top price of £945 and to £171.72 per 100kg for a 290kg Simmental selling at £498.
A 500kg Charolais sold at £820.
Good quality Friesians sold to £129.36 per 100kg for a 470kg selling at £608.
Heifers also were a brisk trade and topped at £192 over £1 per kilo for a 470kg Limousin selling at £662, £140.85 per 100kg.
Fat cows sold to £590 and to £102.56 per 100kg.
Others sold from £93 to £97 per 100kg.
Cows in calf sold to £840 for a first calved Limousin and a second calver Limousin sold to £780.
Cows and calves sold to £1,060 for a Simmental third calver with a Charolais calf at foot and to £925 for a second calver Simmental with a Limousin calf at foot.
Bulls sold to £890 for a 810kg Simmental.
Lighter sorts sold to £500 for a 360kg Belgian Blue.
The 74 heifers on offer returned great prices to top at £192 over for a 470kg Limousin selling at £662, £140.85 per 100kg.
Lightweights under 300kg sold to £395 and to £133.60 per 100kg for a 250kg Charolais selling at £334.
The 300–400kg sold to £512 and to £134.73 per 100kg for a 380kg Charolais selling at £512.
Heifers over 500kg sold to £656 and to £124.61 per 100kg for a 520kg Simmental selling at £648, £128 over £1 per kilo.
Other quality beef heifers sold from £80 to £120 over £1 per kilo.
Ruling heifer prices: 250k Charolais sold to £334, £133.60 per 100k; 270k Charolais, £360, £133; 290k Charolais, £360, £124.13; 300k Charolais, £395, £131.66; 340k Charolais, £440, £129.41; 370k Charolais, £462, £124.86; 380k Charolais, £512, £134.73; 400k Charolais, £512, £128; 430k Simmental, £602, £140; 450k Simmental, £582, £129.33; 460k Simmental, £600, £130.43; 470k Limousin, £662, £140.85; 490k Charolais, £614, £125.30; 520k Simmental, £648, £124.61; 530k Simmental, £650, £122.64; 550k Limousin, £652, £118.54; 570k Simmental, £656, £115.08.
A good entry of store and beef bullocks sold to a firm trade to top at £945 for a 650k Simmental £145.38 per 100k, £295 over £1 per kilo.
Lightweight bullocks under 400k sold to £592 and £171.72 per 100k for a 290k Simmental selling at £498.
The 400–500k bullocks sold to £820 and £167.44 per 100k for a 430k Charolais selling at £720.
Heavier beef bullocks over 500k sold to £161.54 per 100k for a 520k Charolais selling at £840.
Good quality Friesian bullocks over 500k sold to £125.48 per 100k for a 620k selling at £778.
Others sold from £75 to £130 over £1 per kilo.
Time to present a better image
THE majority of farmers have done so much to ensure quality food, a healthy environment, a beautiful countryside and the welfare of their animals, yet too often, they are still viewed as the people who make a handsome profit producing food mountains and destroying the environment.
Why has the image of farming gone from one where the farmer was respected as the provider of food for the nation to one where he gets enormous subsidies to produce food mountains and is a burden on the taxpayer?
First, because farmers have paid a lot of attention to improving the quality of their output and doing it as efficiently as possible, but have not taken time to tell the consumer and the general public about the efforts that have been made.
Second, they put themselves on the defensive by shying away from subjects like food scares and by protecting the rogues within their industry.
I can hear the screeches of protest as you read this but be honest.
you have all heard rumours about who is using clenbuteriol and when someone is caught farmers will say: ‘It's about time the Department caught up with him’.
Why was such a dangerous practice allowed to continue with the chance that the offender might never have been caught?
The people who heard the rumour and did not take any action are as guilty as the man who used the clenbuteriol.
A recent photograph in an Armagh newspaper showed a cow that had died during calving dumped at the side of the road with its leg tied to a gatepost (presumably to help pull it out of the trailer).
Neighbouring farmers must know who owns that animal.
But the culprit is protected and the public opinion of careless, cruel money-making farmers is reinforced.
The farming industry must tell the public at large and be seen to demonstrate that it cares about providing quality food which is produced with high animal welfare standards and protection of the environment.
The Green lobby, the animal welfare lobby, the organic lobby and the vegetarian lobby have all caught the attention of the media and consumer yet they are often minority sections of the community.
They have a co-ordinated public relations campaign which gets their message across.
The farming industry needs to inform the public about all aspects of their industry and open these up to public discussion.
Farmers must not be dismissive of their critics and they must be prepared to change their attitudes.
Feature writers and programme makers should look on farmers as a source of informed comment when they are writing articles and making programmes about food, the environment, rural life and the countryside.
Instead.
these people only refer to farmers when there is news like a food scare to react to.
This immediately puts the farmer on the defensive and reinforces the public's perception of them as a complaining, dissatisfied group.
The farming industry must be seen to make an example of the few who put the food industry at risk and they must put farming facts in perspective.
For example: the consumer who complains about farmers being subsidised is not aware that the subsidisation of UK farming is less than half that for British Coal.
The consumer who spreads alarmist stories about salmonella and listeria does not realise that the chance of death through salmonella is 0.01 for every million people and 0.001 for listeria.
This compares with 8 for air travel, 100 for child bearing and 0.6 for being struck by lightning.
So we are 60 times more likely to be struck by lightning than to die from salmonella!
Sacked surgeon wins adjournment
A SACKED Coleraine surgeon's High Court bid to get his job back was adjourned in Belfast today.
A lawyer for top consultant Brian Dane successfully applied for a postponement, in order for the physician to pursue the possibility of reaccreditation with Queen's University Medical Faculty.
Mr Dane (49) of Mountsandel Road is seeking an injunction allowing immediate reinstatement to his post and provision for him to care for his private patients.
The Board dismissed him for allegedly failing in his duties to teach junior doctors.
Judge John Pringle accepted the case be adjourned until the first day of term after Easter.
Tough times but weeklies roll on
NORTHERN Ireland's weekly newspapers seem to be holding their own in the recession but admit to having to work hard to earn every penny.
Advertising revenue is holding up well in the Down Recorder says managing director Colin Crichton.
‘But we have really had to earn it by improving the quality of our product.’
‘We have used our experience and our ability to sharpen up our image and our content and for six months now have been using full colour every week.’
‘The changes seem to be working, and this is reflected in a slight increase in circulation.
But business is far from easy despite all the efforts to talk up the economy,’ he added.
‘The emphasis for local papers is to produce the paper more cheaply than before and this is not easily done by firms that are self-financed in every respect,’ said Mr Crichton.
The outlook for Morton Newspapers, the province's biggest weekly newspaper chain seems to be looking up and they are optimistic about the future.
Still increasing their number of titles which now stands at 23, their newest, the Dromore Leader, purchased in October last year and the Castlereagh edition of the Ulster Star, are progressing well and fit in with Morton's corporate goals, said the group's senior executive John Morton.
Their other recent acquisition, the Manx Independent, is also performing well with massive increase in pagination and quality of content and reproduction.
‘Advertising revenue has held well over the last year and we now see some small signs of an upturn after three years of recession,’ he explained.
‘The weekly papers in the province seem to have come through the worst recession in living memory relatively unscathed.
Few titles have closed and some have even been launched,’ he added.
There are no major changes in circulations in the province which are traditionally very strong.
‘Our free newspapers continue to perform well with the North West Echo having got off to an excellent start.’
The Coleraine Times won the Newspaper Society award for the best free newspaper in Northern Ireland with the photographer and sports editor on that paper picking up national awards.
The Morton group are seriously looking at adding more units to their press in order to give more colour capacity but this would be reserved primarily for advertisers and not for further editorial colour.
‘It would also give us more capacity for spot colour which more advertisers seem to require,’ said Mr Morton.
‘There will no doubt be further changes in composing due to the rapid changes in computer technology.
‘The digital camera may also become affordable during the year.
Our production capacity has grown again with a weekly throughput now of over 800 tabloid pages.’
The group is hoping that 1993/94 should see some increase in advertising revenue.
The Northern Newspaper group has seven titles and a combined circulation of 80,000 covering County Antrim and most of Londonderry.
Advertising revenue for their titles which include the Ballymena Guardian and Coleraine Chronicle, two of the province's largest weeklies, are holding their own, said managing director Bertie Troy.
In fact, the revenue has been stable for the last three years.
They had witnessed a steady growth in circulation and were well satisfied with their achievements, even hopeful that things would improve.
Vauxhall profits up 69pc
VAUXHALL MOTORS today reported a 1992 pre-tax profit of £223.7m up 69pc on its 1991 figure.
But there was ‘little hope’ of results for 1993 being as good because of worsening market conditions in Europe, the Luton-based car company's chairman William Ebbert warned.
Nevertheless, Mr Ebbert said that 1992 had been ‘an exceptionally good year’ for Vauxhall with excellent Astra sales playing a prominent part in the good financial result.
Total Astra sales last year were 86,858 21.6pc up on 1991.
These helped give Vauxhall its best ever share of the UK market in 1992 16.7pc.
The company's total UK car sales in 1992 were 266,072 7pc up on the 1991 figure.
Mr Ebbert said: ‘While the UK market improved only slightly and there was some softening of continental markets, a combination of record UK market share and increased export business kept our production plants at full stretch.’
But Mr Ebbert added: ‘Market conditions in Europe are worsening overall and our expectation is that 1993 has little hope of being as productive and profitable for the company as last year.’
Turnover at £2,998.1m was the highest in the company's history.
Total domestic and export sales of all Vauxhall vehicles last year was 402,617 10.3pc up on 1991.
The 1992 profit was the third highest in Vauxhall's history and compared with a 1991 pre-tax figure of £132.6m.
Mr Ebbert warned that the company would have to continue operating at reduced output levels for the immediate future even though he saw a modest improvement in total UK new car sales this year perhaps up about 7pc to 1.7 million.
‘You have to deliver the right audience to advertisers'
Papers fight recession
WITH the recession few newspaper companies are seeing dramatic increases in their revenues, rather they're fighting hard to hold out until the economic situation improves.
The industry is working twice as hard to hold on to their share of advertising and is concentrating on giving readers even more for their money — quality editorial, more colour etc.
The investments and effort of the past few years have paid dividends for the Belfast Telegraph says managing director Bob Crane — resulting in higher circulation and major newspaper awards.
New audited circulation figures for the Telegraph show an increase of 3,118 copies daily, comparing 1992 to 1991 and won the Telegraph a major UK newspaper industry award.
That's a rise of 2.37pc at a time when many newspapers in Britain and Ireland are showing declining sales in the recession.
At the moment the Telegraph's readership stands at more than 460,000 readers daily with 55pc of copies (73,000) being home delivered.
The Sunday Life, barely four years old, has had its own share of successes, with a sales rise which outstripped every other national daily and weekly paper in the British Isles in 1992 and won it the Newspaper Society Sunday Award.
The new editor of the Belfast Telegraph Edmund Curran won the 1992 United Kingdom Regional Editor of the year while at the helm of the Sunday Life.
It was voted Regional Newspaper of the Year in 1991.
‘Things are looking pretty good and we have a bright future ahead,’ said Mr Crane.
‘I'm hoping that the second half of 1993 will be an improvement.’
Home delivered copies have ben boosted by special promotional offers.
The new Home Delivered Readers Club offers discount vouchers and a card which can result in big savings for the shopper.
The Telegraph embraces all socio economic groups — young and old and appeals to both sides of the religious divide.
‘You have to deliver the right audience to the advertisers,’ said Mr Crane.
Taken across the week the total readership soars to 719,000 or 61pc of the adult population.
1992 was a notable year for Century Newspapers Ltd, with the News Letter and its companion titles re-located in brand new premises in Boucher Crescent.
The move from Donegall Street coincided with the replacement of the company's presses, bringing web offset printing quality and colour.
With readership increased to 256,000 adults on Tuesdays and Fridays, the News Letter is far ahead of any other morning paper, said owner John Barrons, in terms of AB and ABC1 social class readers in Northern Ireland and has the largest overall readership of any morning paper in the Belfast urban area.
‘Editorial highlights of a busy year included the much praised Answers for Ulster series which provided three viewpoints on ways forward coinciding with the talks by Peter Brooke,’ said Mr Barrons.
The marketing manager of the Irish News Sam Simpson says his paper has undergone considerable change and some gratifying success despite the difficult economic conditions.
After a period of consultation with readers, advertising agencies and others in the newspaper business it was relaunched in February 1992 offering a fresh design, modern masthead and new sections aimed in particular at females and business readers.
‘After the introduction of the new paper our average daily circulation rose to its highest point for 12 years at 43,801 (ABC Jan-June ‘92),’ said Mr Simpson.
‘This made us the second most successful regional morning in the UK and one of only a handful of papers to increase annual sales.
The circulation success has been complimented by rising readership — 175,000 people now read the Irish News every day, an increase of 33pc since 1988 according to the NI Readership survey.
As part of a programme of continuous improvement, a new press with full-colour printing capability was installed in the autumn of 1992.
Deputy Chief executive Dominic Fitzpatrick confirms that the most difficult area they had to deal with over the last year has been the advertising element.
‘The recession has had a severe impact upon the advertising market but by sheer hard work, backed by increasing readership we have been able to increase revenues over our last financial year — we would like to have done better but we are pleased to have held our own in a difficult market.’
Looking to the future Mr Fitzpatrick sees the economy starting to pick up and the advertising market becoming much more buoyant in 1993.
Results at a glance
Reckitt & Colman pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £181.7m (£234m).
Total dividend 16.20p (15.10p).
EPS 25.16p (37.90p).
Wellcome pre-tax profit for six months to February 27 was £324.6m (£204.7m).
Interim dividend 4.8p (4p).
EPS 23.2p (12.6p).
Redland pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £221.5m (£186m).
Total dividend 25p (same).
EPS 23.7p (30p).
John Laing pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £11.6m (£65.3m loss).
Total dividend 9p (same).
EPS 9.44p (57.4p loss).
Henlys pre-tax loss for year to December 31 was £848,000 (£6.8m loss).
Total dividend 3p (same).
Loss per share 3.3p (16.7p loss).
Bemrose Corp pre-tax profit for 53 weeks to January 2 was £6.3m (£5.1m).
Total dividend 11.75p (same).
EPS 37.48p (30.63p).
Caird Group pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £4.0m (£6.9m).
Total dividend 1.33p (2.70p).
EPS 0.4p (4.76p).
W Canning pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £4.5m (£5.7m).
Total dividend 7.29p (same).
EPS 8.2p (12.2p).
Headline Book pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £2.1m (£1.2m).
Total dividend 4.5p (3p).
EPS 11.9p (8.1p).
Booker pre-tax profit for year to December 26 was £91m (£103.9m).
Total dividend 21.75p (same).
EPS 30.4p (36.3p).
Community Hospitals pre-tax profit for six months to December 31 was £1.9m (£2.7m).
Interim dividend 2.4p (same).
EPS 4.3p (6.2p).
William Morrison Supermarkets pre-tax profit for year to January 30 was £83.8m (£62.6m).
Total dividend 0.8p (0.67p).
EPS 7.71p (6.59p).
John Maunders pre-tax profit for six months to December 31 was £1.5m (£2.2m).
Interim dividend 2.3p (same).
EPS 3.98p (5.97p).
Oliver Group pre-tax loss for year to December 31 was £12.6m (£10.7m loss).
Loss per share 49.27p (39.43p loss).
Slough Estates pre-tax profit for year to December 31 was £50.3m (£31.6m).
Total dividend 8.1p (11.55p).
EPS 9.6p (8p).
BRYAN QUITS
BRYAN HAMILTON today resigned as manager of Wigan Athletic.
The former Northern Ireland international announced his decision after talks with Wigan chairman Stephen Gage and is expected to leave the English second division club immediately.
Wigan are in relegation trouble and Hamilton said: ‘There's no animosity.
‘As manager I accept responsibility for the team's position and both parties agreed it was time for a change.’
Hamilton, who played with distinction for Linfield, Ipswich and Everton, has been tipped as a possible successor to Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham.
It remains to be seen how his ‘failure’ at Wigan will affect that situation.
Tuesday night's 2–1 defeat by bottom club Chester was the last straw for the Wigan directors.
The chairman said: ‘The club's current position was discussed and an amicable agreement was reached.
‘A new direction was felt desirable for both parties.
‘The Board accept that injuries to key players for most of the season have paid a major part in the problem.’
Hamilton was in his second term at Wigan, having also managed them in 1985–86.
After a spell at Leicester City, he returned to Wigan in 1989 as chief executive and took over team affairs when Ray Matthias was sacked.
Ards' Cup protest fails
ARDS have failed in a bid to get the Bass Irish Cup semi-finals rescheduled.
The North Down side are due to play Cliftonville at the Oval on April 2 — the same night Northern Ireland's schoolboys face England in a schoolboy international at Castlereagh Park.
Ards wanted their match switched to Saturday, with the Bangor v Glentoran game brought forward to Friday evening but the Irish FA said no.
It means the international will go ahead with no Ards representatives present — not even the groundsman — and of course the attendance will also be severely affected.
An Ards spokesman said today; ‘Had the date been April 1 we would have understood the joke but it simply isn't funny.’
BANGOR star Paul Byrne will sign for Celtic at the end of the season.
Negotiations for the player's £60,000 transfer to Parkhead are ongoing with Bangor insisting that Byrne plays out the season here.
Bangor will play Coleraine in the Wilkinson Sword League Cup final on April 20; the venue will be arranged tomorrow.
They are also going strong in the running for a League and Irish Cup double.
LINFIELD are pondering a fresh move for Ballymena United striker Neil Candlish after having a £20,000 bid rejected by the Braid club last week.
The Blues want a partner for new signing Graham Harvey as the season reaches a crucial stage; they may also move for an cross-channel centre-half as doubts about John McConnell's fitness persist.
GLENAVON will play John McClelland's St Johnstone in friendly at Mourneview Park next Thursday evening.
Richards in fours win
ENGLAND international Wynne Richards scored a maximum eight on his way to a 27–16 win against Adrian Patrick's Darlington team in the opening round of the fours in the Manchester Unity English National Indoor Bowls Championships at Melton Mowbray today.
Richards trailed 13–5 after ends but wiped out the deficit on end 11.
He conceded a treble at the next end but then raced away to win by 11 clear shots.
Dark days are behind Zola
ZOLA Budd-Pieterse tomorrow sets out to exorcise once and for all the wretched memory of her darkest hours back in Britain five years ago.
As she prepares to go for gold at the World Cross Country Championships in the Spanish seaside town of Amorebieta, the South African could not help sadly recalling the drama surrounding the 1988 event which left her on the verge of a nervous breakdown.
‘Of all the low points I suffered, one of the worst was when I was deprived of the chance of winning a third world cross country title because I wasn't allowed to compete in 1988,’ explained the 26-year-old.
Facing a field which contains Britain's golden girl Liz McColgan, Ethiopia's Olympic 10,000m champion Derartu Tulu and her brilliant South African compatriot Elana Meyer, she talks of a top 10 finish, but adds with a smile: ‘There's always that possibility of winning.’
Girardelli does it again
SKI veteran Marc Girardelli landed the World Cup overall crown for a record fifth time today.
Girardelli settled the issue by finishing third in the season's closing giant slalom in Are, Sweden, behind fast-rising Norwegian Kjetil Andre Aamodt.
Alberto Tomba was second.
It was Aamodt's fourth successive race victory and gave him the title for the discipline, if not the major prize.
Girardelli's 60 points for third was enough to move him beyond the reach of Aamodt, no matter what happens in Sunday's season-ending slalom.
Fencing fans: Photographed at the Young Farmers' Clubs of Ulster fence erecting competition sponsored by Weston Engineering are members of Annaclone and Magherally Club.
Back, from left: Geroge Mitchell, William Mathers, Mark Forsythe, Glen Mayne and Robert Hill; front, from left: Stewart Mitchell, Robert Kettly, James Cromie and William Annett.
Actress ordered to pay £6m
A JURY has ordered actress Kim Basinger to pay £6.1m (8.9m dollars) to an independent movie studio for reneging on a deal to play the leading role in one of its films.
Basinger testified in the civil suit that no contract existed with Main Line Pictures Inc. and that she chose not to appear in the film, Boxing Helena, because she would have had to perform in graphic sex scenes.
But Main Line contended it had reached a binding verbal agreement with Basinger, who was to have been paid £2m (3m dollars) for six weeks' work, and that she backed out of it four weeks before shooting was to begin in 1991.
Main Line's lawyers said during a trial in state court that Basinger suffered from an ‘ego run amok’ and that her backing out led to a year-long delay and a loss of between £3.3m and £6.6m.
In the film, Helena is a woman who is rescued from a car accident by a doctor who then amputates her injured legs and unhurt arms and keeps her as a hostage in a box, hoping she will fall in love with him.
After a three-week trial and two days of deliberations, the jury yesterday found that Basinger had committed breach of contract and awarded Main Line 8.9m, which included general damages and compensation for the loss of her services.
IRA says it will meet Gordon Wilson
The IRA has agreed to hold face-to-face talks with world famous peace campaigner Gordon Wilson.
The revelation came just hours before Warrington bomb victim 12-year-old Tim Parry died in a Liverpool hospital.
In a statement issued in Dublin last night the IRA said it was prepared to meet Mr Wilson, whose daughter was killed in the 1987 Poppy Day bombing.
It said an IRA representative would be in touch with Mr Wilson in due course.
Responding to the news, Mr Wilson, who is today addressing the Dublin Senate, said he would be telling the IRA men to lay down their arms.
‘I will say to them: enough is enough, there has got be a better way for you, enough blood has been shed, enough people, far too many, are already grieving, hurt and anguished.
‘I am going to see them as Marie Wilson's dad.
I would hope to look them eye to eye and speak to them as one of humanity as I am, as people who have suffered as I have, and as have 3,000 people in Northern Ireland and as the Balls now have in Warrington.
‘I want to say to them ‘think again' and I want to say to them as man to man ‘think again, go and think about a better way,’ he said.
When SDLP leader John Hume met the IRA in 1985 he was taken to a house — widely believed to have been in the Republic — and after a wait of 28 hours was introduced to a man who said he was an IRA spokesman.
However the meeting broke up after a row over whether it should be video taped.
A meeting between church leaders and the IRA in Feakle, Co Clare, in 1974, resulted in a brief cease fire.
Sinn Fein party chairman Mitchel McLaughlin revealed today he had sent Mr Wilson a letter welcoming his decision to ‘break the ranks of consensus’ and talk to the IRA.
He also said that in the letter he told Mr Wilson that he was held in great esteem among Irish people, qualifying him to engage in political dialogue.
‘Dialogue is at the centre of Sinn Fein 's party policies and we would encourage similar approaches by other organisations, including the British and Irish governments,’ he said.
Mr Wilson, who is a member of the Irish Senate, also announced today that he would be attending the funeral of three-year-old Johnathan Ball, who died in the Warrington blast.
He said he was in contact with the Chief Constable of Warrington who told him that the Ball family would welcome him at the funeral, but only as a private individual.
The Republic's Foreign Affairs Minister Dick Spring said today the new generation of Irish people want to escape from the shackles of the past.
He said that would require change on all sides and their starting position must be the acknowledgement that all previous approaches had failed.
Meanwhile it also emerged today that a soldier has sent his medal for serving in Northern Ireland to the Ball family of in honour of their son.
Also the Lord Mayor of Dublin, Gay Mitchell, today offered to lead a peace march through the city in protest against the IRA bombing of Warrington.
He said he would be happy to lead the march planned for next Sunday ‘to show the city's revulsion for terrorism.’
In Belfast tonight two dozen young people will march through the city centre, each holding a candle representing one year of the ‘Troubles’.
The organisers say it is not just a reaction to the recent carnage in Warrington.
The young people, who will walk from the City Hall to arrive at Cornmarket at 7.30pm, have dedicated themselves to promoting a non-violent solution.
One of the injured was critically ill in Coleraine Hospital, while the condition of the other man was given as ‘stable’.
Two of the men died at the scene and their three colleagues were rushed to hospital, where one died a short time later.
The massacre happened shortly before 9am, when the workmen were getting out of their red van.
Cheques presented at parents' night
GLARRYFORD YFC had an entertaining parents and friends night in Killymurris Presbyterian Church Hall when members contributed to a comprehensive programme, including several choral and drama items.
Cheques were presented by Judy Stewart and Richard Calderwood to Wallace Gregg, who is travelling to New Zealand later this year on a YFC exchange programme, and to Kenneth Rock who is going to Sweden.
Evidence not ‘total fabrication’— soldier
A SOLDIER today denied that his evidence was a ‘total fabrication’ to justify firing at a stolen car in West Belfast.
Private Lee Clegg (22) told Belfast Crown Court how he fired three aimed shots at the front windscreen of the car which he believed had struck his colleague, Private Barry Aindow.
The soldier denies the murder of 18-year-old Karen Reilly who was in the car with her friend Martin Peake, who was also shot dead.
Earlier Clegg denied that he fired a bullet recovered from Miss Reilly's body.
Today under cross-examination he said: ‘I saw him (Aindow) knocked off balance.
I then looked through the sight (of his weapon) and fired three aimed shots.
‘The car was coming past me when I fired another shot into the wing,’ he continued.
‘When the car had gone past me I applied my safety-catch and I saw Private Aindow standing in a firing position’.
Asked by Crown counsel how Aindow had regained his balance, taken aim and fired in the short space of time available, the accused replied ‘I don't know’.
The lawyer said: ‘I suggest Superman couldn't do that.’
The soldier denied the barrister's suggestion that his evidence was ‘a nonsense and a total fabrication to justify firing at the car.’
Clegg also said he could not estimate whether the speed of the approaching stolen car was closer to 20 or 50mph.
Private Clegg is one of six members of three Para on trial charged in connection with the deaths of the two teenagers, shot dead by soldiers at the Upper Glen Road on September 30 1990.
‘Coke’ finalists
THE Coca-Cola Cup finals next Saturday will be the penultimate schools competition in a busier than usual netball season.
St Patrick's High School Ballymena defeated North-eastern rivals St MacNissi's to reach the Junior semi-finals for the first time.
Coached by former Glenravel footballer Alec Scullion, the team won the Coca-Cola Minor Plate last year and now face All-Ireland champions Loreto Grammar Omagh for a place in the finals.
Olympic hockey star Jacky McWilliams (Randalstown) fresh from her team's Senior League success will present the trophies.
Schools coaches are already preparing their U12 teams for the NI first year tournament at the end of May which will complete the competitive season and leave the way clear for targeted coaching courses.
Belfast is the only area who run a first year league which was formed several seasons ago and this year 15 teams have entered with the finals before Easter.
The NI Clubs league programme will be completed over the next month and the Shield finals culminate on April 24.
The Senior League looks certain to go again to Belfast Ladies who are four points clear of Pegasus.
The ‘Ladies’ captain Jenny Bradley will join the NI University team in Birmingham tomorrow as team manager.
The students compete in the British Universities championships from Monday to Wednesday then Jenny will don her coach's cap to take the British Select for a training session in preparation for the tour of Barbados.
Warrington: three men remanded
THREE men arrested after the IRA bombing of a Warrington gas works and shooting of a police officer were today further remanded in custody until April 22 at London's Arbour Square Magistrates Court.
Denis Kinsella (26) who lives in the Nottingham area and Pairic MacFhloinn (39) who is from Eire, are jointly charged with the attempted murder of 25-year-old Pc Mark Toker and with kidnapping.
A third defendant, John Kinsella (48) an uncle of Denis Kinsella, who also lives in the Nottingham area, is charged with the other two with conspiracy to cause explosions on or before February 26 in Warrington and elsewhere in the United Kingdom.
Denis Kinsella and John Kinsella appeared together, while MacFhloinn appeared on his own.
Miss Clare Reggiori, prosecuting, applied for a four-week remand in custody, saying forensic evidence needed to be examined.
She outlined the four areas of the investigation they were considering.
Mr Ron Birkett, representing the two Kinsellas, made no application for bail and did not object to the remand date.
On behalf of MacFhloinn, Mr Tim Green said he would be making no application.
McHale on the missing list
IT IS looking increasingly likely Austin McHale will miss the Circuit of Ireland.
The Galway International winner hasn't given up hope of bidding yet again for one of the few big Irish rallies to elude him but describes his chances of being on the start line on Good Friday as ‘remote’.
The problem, he says, is simply one of financial support — or more correctly, the lack of it.
‘I have the backing of two sponsors, Castrol and Sunday World, but that isn't enough to run a car like my Toyota Celica GT4 on the Circuit of Ireland,’ says the three-times Dunlop Tarmac champion.
‘This is a very expensive event — the equivalent of the Galway and Donegal Internationals rolled together.
It will take a great deal of money to do it properly and I'm only interested in doing it if I have the support to give me a chance of winning.
That means no skimping on preparation of the car, sufficient spares, full back-up and everything else that goes into being able to run competitively against the likes of Bertie Fisher and Kenny McKinstry.
‘At the moment I'm not in a position to do that and time is running out.’
The problem for McHale appears to be the lack of backing from Toyota Ireland, although he is reluctant to discuss it.
He will only say: ‘Toyota have not committed themselves to the Circuit of Ireland or any other rally this year.’
It is estimated to cost in excess of £20,000 to run a car like McHale's Celica GT4 or the Subarus of Fisher and McKinstry on a rally as long and demanding as this year's 1,200 mile Circuit — and that's before the cars are put back together again after a five-day pounding on some of the toughest roads in Ireland.
‘The car is going to have to be completely re-built afterwards and that has to be taken into account in the total cost,’ he says.
McHale will have to make his final decision in the next couple of days for, although he has reserved a place in the entry list with the Circuit organisers, two of his main mechanics are waiting for his verdict before deciding whether to join the World championship Toyota team on the Safari Rally in east Africa.
‘Team Toyota Europe want them to go to the Safari and they can't put off a decision much longer.
One way or another I'm going to have to decide over the weekend — and it's looking unlikely I'll be driving at Easter,’ he says.
The absence of McHale would be a major blow to the rally which is already short of ‘star’ quality.
Entries are up on last year but they come mainly from ‘middle of the road’ competitors whose goal will be finishing rather than winning this marathon.
The challenge for them is to get all the way round and being able to say ‘I completed the Circuit of Ireland’ will be reward enough.
That's why a high proportion of the entries come from English clubmen and why many Irish drivers with Metros, 4x4 Ford Cosworths and Mantas have stayed away.
On the two-day Galway International, for instance, no less than 21 front-running cars tackled the rally.
The Circuit will have half that number.
They are simply too expensive to run and maintain over such a long distance.
It is a problem recognised by the Circuit of Ireland organisers — and one they are already addressing with 1994 in mind.
Rea ready for Regal road racing season
THE Ulster road racing championship season starts officially next Saturday when the Mid Antrim club stage their meeting at Nutt's Corner.
With the first round of the Regal championship the likely highlight, the meeting shouldn't lack interest for this series has been a winner from the start.
Thankfully there weren't too many of these misnamed ‘closed to club’ affairs at the start of the year to put us off.
I always feel they are open meetings in everything but name.
The man to watch for in the Regal next week is Johnnie Rea, the current champion, but Alan Irwin — who wasn't at Aghadowey last Saturday for the RRC meeting — will be the No 1 threat.
Irwin had a marvellous year last time and will be keen to win the Regal as will Derek Young, another rider who could look back on 1992 with a great deal of satisfaction.
Joey Dunlop had an early season run-out at Aghadowey last week and should be back on the 125cc and 250cc Hondas, but Joey is not really a Nutt's Corner star and riders like Stephen Farmer, Paul Harbinson, Gary Dynes, Ian King and Phelim Owens will probably dominate the proceedings along with those mentioned earlier.
There will be two championship races in each class.
‘Masters’ on course again
GOLF'S IRISH Senior Masters' classic returns to Malone this season.
The tournament is again a Belfast Telegraph copyright, and one of 12 in a European Seniors' calendar now worth over £800,000 in prize-money.
This is an increase of £200,000 on last season when John Fourie not only celebrated his 53rd birthday here, but led South African golfers to a splendid 1-2-3 on the scoreboard.
Naturally, Fourie will be back to defend his title, a welcome injection for the championship as three more well-known names of yesterday look forward to joining the Tour — Malcolm Gregson and Spain's former World Cup partnership of Angel Gallardo and Tenerife-born Francisco Abreu.
‘As an Ulsterman, I'm delighted the Telegraph are with us again,’ says Tony Gray, the tour director.
‘There are more Senior tournaments in the pipeline, but what I want to see are more National Open championships.
Right now we have the British Seniors Open and Shell Scottish Open.
Soon, I hope, the Continentals will grasp the nettle.’
The Malone Masters will span four days, two of them Pro-Am days, and has been pencilled in from Thursday to Sunday, August 12–15.
Prize-money tops £55,000, and there'll be a celebrity player to add lustre to the line-up.
Last year it was Billy Casper, but who it might be this time is anybody's guess.
If the choice was mine, I'd be sounding out the likes of Larry Laoretti, shock winner of the U.S. Seniors Open six months ago.
A New Yorker of Italian extraction, his was a fairy tale victory as he chewed on cigars to settle frayed nerves, then beat Nicklaus and Player by five shots with final rounds of 67 and 68.
What a character — what a golfer!
Hi-tech hiccup turns back the clock
THE VALUE of micro-chip technology was never more clearly illustrated than in a new event at swimming's Ulster championships — the ladies' 100 metres medley.
Sharlene Brown set record figures of 66-plus in this four-stroke final to beat Regent House girl Gail Hamilton by a full body-length…but who was third?
When something in that costly box of tricks above the pool side malfunctioned on the first night at the Grove, they had no option but to call on a back-up team of stopwatch timekeepers.
Imagine the look of surprise on some faces, however, when the times for three bronze-medal candidates were returned as identical — 70.61 secs.
Naturally, the finish judges had to be consulted, and after what seemed a prolonged pow-wow, they came up with an answer.
Emma Robinson and Lisburn's Joanne Logan had dead-heated for third place, with another pretty young Lisburn swimmer, Ruth Hill, fifth, only one-hundredth of a second back.
From where I sat above the computer wizardry, it looked as though all three girls touched simultaneously.
Yet if Miss Hill was unlucky not to get a medal, her disappointment was nothing compared to that felt by the American Lance Larson on a steaming hot night in Rome over 30 years ago.
This was the Olympic final of the Blue Riband 100 metres freestyle and the race that produced the most controversial result in swimming history.
Although Larson was clocked at 55.1 secs, or better, by all three time-keepers on his lane, and the Australian John Devitt at 55.2 secs, the six place judges were split down the middle (3–3).
This left the chief judge with the kind of decision he didn't want, but he read it as he saw it and awarded Gold to Devitt.
It would be some years before electronics could become the final authority.
I was in a crowded Rome Press-box that night, and place judges, not watches, determined the order of finish in all Olympic races.
Protests or not, the result had to stand.
‘I thought I won,’ said Larson.
‘But then I can't be positive.’
Even Devitt wore a puzzled frown.
‘I was so sure I got silver that I congratulated Lance and climbed out of the pool,’ he commented as this one Gold medal verdict more than any helped speed acceptance of the touch-pad timing that has now become standard.
Devitt's 55.2 second dash was an Olympic best in Rome, but that was 1960.
Today, the Games' record in this event stands at a superb 48.63 secs, while Ireland's record-holder, Willie Johnston (52.25s), would have given Devitt a three-metre start and beaten him!
Workers set to lead city protest rally
THOUSANDS of banner-waving workers will protest at the ‘severe attack’ being sustained on the health service at a rally at Belfast City Hall on Monday.
Workers will march from the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast City Hospital, Shankill Womens' Centre and the Mater Hospital for the lunchtime Save Our NHS rally.
Employees from Shorts and Harland and Wolff shipyard will also show their overwhelming support by staging a demonstration at Dee Street roundabout.
And organiser Tom Gillen, of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, urges members of the public to turn out in force to show their concern.
‘What we are trying to highlight is the whole effect of Government policy on the health service,’ Mr Gillen said.
‘This includes cuts, under-funding, down-grading of Downpatrick hospital, the introductions of hospital trusts, and plans to close accident and emergency facilities at the Royal.
‘It is very difficult to get people to realise how serious the situation is,’ he added.
‘Everyone uses the health service at some time, workers and unemployed alike, and it effects every section of the community.
It is being severely attacked and there is a massive run-down underway.’
Meanwhile, Dr William McCord has pleaded for a rethink of plans to close the South Tyrone maternity unit, claiming it will lead to deaths.
And the Southern Health Board has received about 4,000 letters of protest at proposed ‘rationalisation’ plans.
Today nurses from the Moyle Hospital in Larne are being bussed to attend a Northern Health Board meeting in Ballymena.
A motion axing acute, accident and emergency facilities is expected to be passed.
Distillery II 2 Omagh Town Res 4
JOHN Gregg had an eventful game for Omagh Reserves when they beat Distillery II in the Irish League B Division at New Grosvenor.
He experienced the joy of scoring Omagh's first two goals in the opening period but had the opposite feelings of emotion when he was sent off in the last minute.
Distillery made a bright start and Micky Boyle put them ahead in the early stages but Gregg beat keeper Robinson in a race for the ball to level the scores and soon afterwards put Omagh ahead with a right foot shot.
Mark Blair headed Omagh's third goal before half-time and the visitors were well in control.
A good move down the right allowed Brian Pauley to head in Omagh's fourth after the break.
Paul McCartan pulled one back for Distillery three minutes from time and right on the final whistle Gregg was shown the red card.
Nothing for Irish eyes to about
DID you hear the one about 16 English men, eight Scots, four Welsh and two Irishmen going on a trip to New Zealand…?
No?
Well for a start it's not a joke, but it does bring a wry smile in the aftermath of Ireland's crunching victory over England last week.
That Lions tour party breakdown probably would have been the initial thoughts of the selectors in January.
But, like myself, there are many wondering whether there was any adjustment at all in the following two months.
As the championship progressed it was fairly obvious that England's magnificent Grand Slamming run was coming to an end, not because of the passion and pride displayed by Wales and Ireland, but the fact that some of the England veterans are undoubtedly past their shelf life.
The final choice for the arduous 13-match, three Test series in New Zealand, smacks of a big thank you job handed out by Lions manager Geoff Cooke to his England team.
Plus, the choice of Scottish utility prop Peter Wright also borders on the verge of parochialism.
It's seems incredible that after Saturday only two Irishman were eventually chosen.
I fail to understand the omission of Peter Clohessy.
He had his detractors, including myself, when he was first selected for Ireland.
But he has been a revelation.
As solid as a rock and a very tough competitor, Clohessy would have been a perfect choice, particularly after going through the pre-Tour fitness regime.
Then there is Terry Kingston.
Another to rise in stature when he was bestowed with the job as Irish pack leader.
He should be in alongside Kenny Milne instead of the burned-out Brian Moore.
And what about Eric Elwood.
Okay, the Irish selectors may be at fault for not ‘finding’ him earlier.
But he put all his cards on the table in his two appearances, and looks a very complete player.
Lions teams have always included a ‘risk’ or two, and Elwood should have been one of them in place of Stuart Barnes, who can be too unpredictable when the going gets tough.
As for Brian Robinson and Denis McBride, they were both genuinely unlucky.
Robinson may not have the stature, but he is a magnificent player with great footballing skills and enough versatility to be included.
McBride can put his luck down to criticism from scribes down south earlier in the season, rather than bad selection policy.
It's only when the rest of the Ireland pack were fit and aware enough to stay with the Ulster skipper, did those same critics realise what a good player he really is.
Ireland have been adopting a New Zealand type of pressure game, ushered in with the help of former All Black skipper Andy Lesie, and further enhanced by his close ally Willie Anderson.
But what Ireland did on Saturday, New Zealand will do quicker and harder as those England players will find out — hence the need for younger, fitter players to have been chosen.
Primary school plan runs into opposition
PLANS for Armagh's first integrated primary school scheduled to open in September may have run into opposition.
Residents of Killuney Park, a luxury cul-de-sac on whose doorstep the school would be built are to lodge a protest with the DoE's Planning Service.
Armagh Integrated School Group, which is behind the project, has submitted a planning application for the erection of a temporary building on a three-acre greenfield site just off the main Portadown Road on the edge of the city.
The land zoned in the Area Plan for housing is owned by local council chairman George Macartney.
He said yesterday he had not been approached about the acquisition.
One of the objectors emphasised the 13 residents were not against integrated education but considered the low lying site unsuitable for a school.
There were fears, said the resident, over the very serious increase in traffic which the school would generate.
Few children lived on the road and residents were mostly retired.
The park is part of a large complex which has just a single access onto the busy main road.
The resident added: ‘It is a very dangerous access at the moment and any increase in the volume of traffic would make it worse.’
The long term enrolment of the co-education establishment is anticipated to be between 150–250.
Already the names of 60 children have been registered.
Recently the group received a cash boost from Canada.
They are to share in a grant of around £12,500 donated by the Ireland Fund in Canada to help new integrated projects get off the ground.
ARIES (Mar 21/Apr 20)
The last thing you need Saturday is to be surrounded by a load of Job's Comforters telling you their troubles and explaining how hard and harsh life can be.
Seek out the company of cheery chums and forget your worries and woes for a wee while.
TAURUS (APr 21/May 21)
Saturday's sense of imminent gloom and doom fills you with a foreboding of problems to come and difficulties or dangers to be overcome.
The mood lightens Sunday, but I'm afraid there is an aura of troubled trepidation surrounding your financial affairs so be extra cautious.
GEMINI (May 22/June 21)
Keep your wits about you tomorrow or you'll forget something important and end up kicking yourself for being so stupid.
Come Sunday you'll enjoy a stroll down Memory Lane to re-live if not recapture some of the golden moments you've shared with the ones you love.
CANCER (June 22/July 23)
You want to have a good time and paint the town red this weekend, but somehow you feel restricted and constrained from enjoying life.
What you need most of all is peace, quiet and the undisturbed opportunity to be along with your thoughts.
LEO (July 24/Aug 23)
This weekend your ambitious drive may run out of steam, but friends and colleagues will be all the support you need to encourage you to keep on hammering away at achieving an important goal.
Their praises and flattery gives you new heart and helps you feel top of the world on Sunday.
VIRGO (Aug 24/Sept 23)
You could be on the floor this weekend for your world seems somewhat dull, listless and dreary without a flicker of excitement on the horizon to look forward to.
You're also prone to dredging up the wounding words and cutting critiques others have directed at you recently.
LIBRA (Sept 24/Oct 23)
Whatever dreams or desires are turning you on you'll want to pursue and promote them to the Nth degree this weekend.
Unfortunately you haven't the time, money or resources to do all the things you want to.
Try to keep logic on your side.
SCORPIO (Oct 24/Nov 22)
You start the weekend feeling bolshie and wanting to kick over the traces of convention and conformity.
You're out to shock and the more you astound and astonish people the happier you'll be.
Your virile, lustful lovemaking certainly surprises a partner.
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23/Dec 21)
You're packed with vim, vigour and vitality tomorrow and determined to get in shape to either win the love of your life or just enjoy feeling as fit as a fiddle.
Sensitive Sunday's a time when you must tune into the needs and longings of loved ones.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22/Jan 20)
You start the weekend like a whirling dervish as you get jobs done in double quick time and rush around seeing people, making decisions and generally working wonders.
Sunday's different, energy levels are low and you can't summon the strength or stamina to do anything.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21/Feb19)
Thinking about going on a fitness drive?
You'd probably benefit from losing a few pounds or taking more exercise.
Why not start Saturday and in next to no time you'll be looking and feeling like Adonis or Artemis.
Expect home truths from a youngster or relative on Sunday.
PISCES (Feb 20/Mar 20)
Fraught and frantic Saturday must be spent sorting out domestic dramas and cramming as much fun and laughter as you can into one short day.
You'll be whacked out on Sunday and in need of complete rest and masses of undisturbed peace and quiet so cancel plans.
G'DAY FOR JEREMY
JEREMY McWilliams faces the big one tomorrow when, as the first Ulster rider in the newly constituted 500cc World motor cycling championship, he lines up against the cream of the international circus at Eastern Creek, Sydney, for the Australian Grand Prix, the first round in the series.
All the testing at the Yamaha camp in Spain and in Australia, all the preparation, and all the homework are behind him now, and what he has left is the adrenalin pumping in his veins as he prepares for the biggest day of his sporting life.
It could be a major flop but I don't think so.
McWilliams, who last year made rapid strides in the international scene, is one of those competitors who appears never to over-react to anything.
Always articulate and knowledgeable about the pitfalls of this game, McWilliams has a lot going for him and if I had to decide who would be the best man to represent the province at this level, I would be hard pushed to go past him.
Short circuit racing has always been McWilliams' scene.
He has never been a road man and now all the dedication at tracks like Aghadowey and Nutt's Corner as well as Kirkistown has paid off.
He's in there with the Wayne Raineys and Mick Doohans of this world, not to say the highly talented Kevin Schwauntz.
So can McWilliams survive in this ocean of professionalism?
After all, he is the first rider from the province to take on opposition at this level, although Gary Cowan was heading that way before his accident at Daytona in 1990.
In the early testings with the Yamaha boys last weekend McWilliams was unflappable even though he had gearbox problems during the first session.
What pleased him, he told me, was that he had made a slow but gradual improvement in his times over the three-day session and Joe Millar, his backer, was also delighted at the methodical, no-nonsense way in which Jeremy was approaching any problem he encountered.
The handling of the bike, for example, was causing difficulties early on but with the help of his teammates, Jeremy was soon back on song.
As for tomorrow's race, Jeremy can't realistically expect to finish in the first ten first time out.
I would have thought around about 15th place would see him happy enough.
But you never know.
He's a highly talented rider with a hunger for success and if the Yamaha is up to it — and I've no doubt that it is — than we could be celebrating a single figure placing tomorrow, and that really would be something.
As for the other Britons, Niall MacKenzie — who has loads of experience in this sphere — would appear to be the best, but the North West 200 promoters will be looking for a good result from Kevin Mitchell who is one of their key men for the May meeting at Portstewart.
Mitchell is also an ‘old soldier’ at this game but I don't expect him to make any headlines.
However, John Reynolds, the latest addition to this high-speed travelling circus, could be one of the surprise packets.
British champion in the superbike class last year when with Kawasaki, Reynolds was virtually unbeatable and he will be keen to make the switch to grand prix racing as smooth and as successful as possible.
Mark absent
MARK Farmer is facing a delayed start to his season because the Kawasaki which he was to have ridden for a Malaysian team last Sunday is not yet ready.
Now Mark's first competitive outing will be in the world superbike round at Brand's Hatch on Good Friday, April 9.
This is the round which is being run under the banner of the Motor Cycle Union of Ireland.
Steve Hislop, who was also to have ridden a Kawasaki at the Brand's meeting, will not now be there for there is no bike for him in view of the fact that all efforts are being put behind Farmer.
‘It means that my season won't start until the first round of the British championship at Knockhill on April 17,’ Steve said.
‘And that seems a long way away.
Still, I will be riding the new RVH Honda, so that's something to look forward to.’
Congratulations to Ulster riders Ian Buchanan, Paul Maguire and Adrian Lappin on their performances in the second round of the British Enduro Championship.
Buchanan was 10th overall (second in over 250cc) Maguire 11th (8th in 250cc) and Lappin 13th (third in 125cc).
Champions in the Field
THE Field Marshal Montgomery quartet champions successfully defended their Ulster title at Ballynahinch High School.
Showing the reason why they are the best in the world, the four lads gave a polished performance in front of a hushed and packed house, to take the trophy and gold medals in Grade One with a score of 70 points.
Field Marshal had two quartets entered in the competition, and their ‘B’ set took second place on 64.
The RUC with new Pipe Major Mark Faloon must have been well encouraged when their ‘C’ set took third on 60.
There was jubilation from the Bessbrook camp when they regained the Ulster title they lost last year by coming first in Grade Two with a clear three points lead.
Killeen were runners-up, taking their first prize since their promotion to Grade 2, and last year's Ulster champions, The Tamlaght O'Crilly ‘A’ set were third.
It was a closely fought struggle in Grade Three between the two Ballynahinch teams, with just one point separating them for first and second places, with the ‘B’ set just edging into the lead for top honours.
Carrickfergus band Woodburne had a promising start to the season and took third.
It was double joy for Ian Bryson's Glassdrummond when their quartets came first and third respectively in Grade 4A, with Cottown ‘A’ holding onto their previous year's runner-up spot.
The wisdom of the Northern Ireland Branch of introducing a Grade 4B a few years ago, is paying off now, when this grade attracted an entry of 21 bands, some of which were playing for the first time.
One such band was St Patrick's Annsboro from outside Castlewellan, who had the joy of victory first time round when they collected the trophy and gold medals.
Just two points behind was Downpatrick Hospital's ‘C’ set, with Bangor Caledonia ‘A’third.
B'mena Utd Res 5 Coleraine Res 3
THIS B Division encounter produced eight goals, with the home side, Ballymena United Reserves, having the better of things to run out 5–3 winners.
It took them only 10 minutes to break the deadlock with Seamus Duffy curling home a direct free kick after a handball offence from 25 yards.
Eight minutes later it was 2–0 when Des Aitcheson, scoring from close range after Neil Fullerton's near post flick, had been brilliantly turned on to a post by the visiting goalkeeper.
Coleraine reduced the arrears when Cahal Deery shot home from an angle, but the home side's two-goal advantage was soon restored when Jason Gilmore turned inside the box to fire into the next.
Deery got to the bye-line with a fine run to set up Ian Adams for Coleraine's second, but again the home side regained their two goal cushion when Gilmore chipped into the net.
Five minutes later the midfielder completed his hat-trick when he fired home from the spot after substitute Eamon McLaughlin had been fouled.
Before Adams completed the scoring with a neat header from another Deery cross, Fullerton had a shot cleared off the line and Gilmore headed inches over.
Leukaemia ‘linked’ to nutrition
LEUKAEMIA may be more common in patients with eating disorders, says a study published today.
Researchers in Japan report three cases of leukaemia in women in their early 20s, two with bulimia and one with anorexia nervosa.
One woman died despite intensive treatment and none had been exposed to radiation or other factors known to cause the disease.
This type of cancer is rare, causing just over one in 100,000 deaths in Japanese women aged 20–24.
The authors suggest that extreme malnutrition may affect the immune system and make the disease more likely.
They call for more research on the physiological and immunological changes caused by eating disorders, especially bulimia.
In another study, researchers have said that premature babies are more likely to suffer from breathing difficulties in childhood than youngsters born after a full-term pregnancy.
The results follow a survey of primary schoolchildren in England and Scotland, which shows bigger babies grow into children with better lungs.
Five thousand children aged between five and 11 were investigated.
The researchers compared the children's health and lung function with their weight and how many weeks they were in the womb.
The authors, writing in the British Medical Journal, believe that what happens to babies before birth, including how long they stay in the womb, may determine how healthy their lungs are later in life.
Piquant poetry for ‘The Pink'
THEY didn't just call it ‘The Pink’ back in the old days.
They called it ‘The Piquant Pink’.
And it hit the streets in that colour from its launch in 1894 until changing over to white paper in January 1917.
Aesthetic considerations had nothing to do with it.
The conversion was for a technical reason — this was the third year of World War One and the dye for the paper was manufactured in Germany.
Belfast return for duo
GALLAGHER and Lyle, one of the biggest musical acts of the '70s, has been reunited after 12 years.
Benny Gallagher's and Graham Lyle's first concert together again will be in Belfast.
Just for old times' sake…
The duo, which had hits with ‘Heart on My Sleeve’ and ‘I Want To Stay With You’, will play the Ulster Hall on May 4.
For it was in Belfast in 1973 at the Grosvenor Hall that the singers' career first took off.
They returned in 1976 at the height of their fame to pack the King's Hall, Balmoral.
After they split, both turned to song-writing, and Gallagher wrote ‘What's Love Got To Do With It?’ for Tina Turner and tracks for Michael Jackson's album ‘Bad’.
Tickets go on sale at Virgin Records in Belfast on Saturday and at the usual Aiken Promotions agencies in the province.
Old should pay for long hospital stays: doctor
THE NHS should charge fees for old people who need nursing for more than 13 weeks in long-stay wards, a leading consultant said today.
The move is vital because the NHS is handing over responsibility for these patients to the voluntary and private sector because of cash shortages, said John Kellett, a consultant geriatrician at St George's Hospital in London.
‘No-one can pretend this is a comfortable option,’ said Mr Kellett.
‘It does make those who require nursing care shoulder the cost.
‘It does however remove the humbug which leaves the elderly to discover that our current free health service is a sham.’
Mr Kellett calls for a major shake-up in the system for looking after the elderly in an article in the British Medical Journal.
Social services departments take over responsibility for private care next week.
Local authorities will then have to support increased numbers of dependent people in private residential homes.
A study, also in the BNJ, says old people are less mobile, less able to wash, dress and feed themselves and more likely to be incontinent than they were in 1979.
‘Nothing happened in the Palace'
MICHAEL Fagan yesterday revealed the truth about what happened the morning he broke into the Queen's bedroom…‘nothing’.
There was no 10-minute conversation sitting on the Queen's bed.
‘A lot has been said about what went on.
Nothing.
She just said ‘get out’— that was it,’ he said on Radio 4's Famous for 15 Minutes programme yesterday.
Early on July 9, 1982, suffering from the strain of his marriage break-up, Mr Fagan climbed over the walls of Buckingham Palace and found himself — by chance — at the Queen's bedside, he said.
‘I thought I am going to get in there (the Palace) and I'm going to see the Queen,’ he said.
‘I don't know how the hell I found her room.
I really don't know.’
The Queen was lying in bed.
‘She looked too small to be the Queen,’ said Mr Fagan, so he drew back the curtains to get a better look.
‘Suddenly she sat up and said ‘what are you doing here’.
I was dumbstruck to be honest.
I was thinking what to say.’
He said the Queen then said ‘get out, get out’.
She then jumped out of bed and walked out of the room, he said.
A footman came in and said: ‘You look like you need a drink, mate.’
Then two policemen came.
Mr Fagan told them his name was Michael Hess, son of the Nazi leader Rudolf Hess who was in Spandau prison in Germany.
‘I think there was just something rebellious going on in my head,’ he said.
Mr Fagan, who was 30 at the time, was not prosecuted for the trespass after the Director of Public Prosecutions ruled there was no evidence that the trespass was a criminal offence.
But he appeared at the Old Bailey for an earlier trespass at Buckingham Palace, during which he had drunk some wine in the office of the Prince of Wales' private secretary, and was sent to a secure hospital in Liverpool.
He was freed in 1983 and now having custody of his children works as a full-time father.
New PR post for health board ‘voice'
GERRY Carson, for years the voice of the Eastern Health Board, has landed a major new public relations post at the Royal Group of Hospitals.
The Dunmurry man has been appointed director of public relations and internal communications at the group, the first health unit to be granted trust status.
Married with four children, Mr Carson is also well-known in athletics and has represented Northern Ireland in the Commonwealth Games.
He is a former chairman of the Belfast branch of the National Union of Journalists.
He was educated at St Malachy's College in Belfast and went to the former Polytechnic at Jordanstown.
Supersonic Barbara makes Concorde history
BRITISH Airways pilot Barbara Harmer flew into the record books yesterday when she became the first woman to operate a Concorde.
Barbara (39) from West Sussex flew BA's London-to-New York Concorde following six months intensive training on the supersonic aircraft.
‘I am both proud and privileged to be able to fly Concorde.
This represents the achievement of a long-held ambition,’ said a happy Barbara.
One of 40 women pilots with BA, Barbara went into aviation at the age of 21 when she became an air traffic control trainee.
After learning to fly she took a job as a pilot with a small commuter airline based in Humberside.
Barbara joined British Caledonian in 1984 and flew BAC 1–11s for three years before switching to longhaul DC10s.
When BA and BCal merged in 1987, she was determined to become a Concorde pilot and despite stiff opposition finally achieved her goal yesterday.
‘Concorde is the ultimate in aircraft in civil aviation,’ said Barbara.
Flexibility will mean easier planning
FASTER turnovers and more challenging campaigns is the trend for outdoor advertising in 1993.
Sites can now be bought for two week periods, allowing a greater flexibility in marketing planning.
In addition the potential for innovative poster design is beginning to be recognised.
Ailish Hamilton said: ‘The ‘twins’ campaigns are one of the newest advances.
They allow two different treatments of one product, to be seen side-by — side.’
The cost for 15 twin or double sites for 14 days is around £6,400, as compared to the average cost of one base unit in Belfast of £123 for two weeks.
Each site will have a different price according to traffic levels.
The most prestigious site in Belfast is thought to be prismatics site on Ann Street, which normally works out at £350 for two weeks.
Investing in the best sites for your campaign needs specialist knowledge as Karin Jeffrey points out: Many of the top companies would not have the in-depth knowledge of poster sites across Northern Ireland that we have.
‘There are over 1,000, 48-sheet poster sites alone.
If a major campaign is being planned, we can outline the best sites in towns and cities throughout the province.
‘We will then monitor the campaign to assess its effectiveness.’
ARIES (Mar 21/Apr 20)
The beauty of the world around you inspires you to find out more about an artistic or creative sphere of knowledge and experience.
Expose yourself to the fine arts.
Join a group or class of kindred spirits; why not touch up a canvas or try your hand at prose, poetry of pottery?
TAURUS (Apr 21/May 21)
A hectic social life could cost a packet so you might have to pull in your horns a wee bit.
Once your fiscal flow's back on course and you have set aside cash to meet household expenses you'll know exactly what you can afford to lash out on leisure and pleasure.
GEMINI (May 22/June 21)
It's the simple things of life that give you most joy and delight.
From watching and applauding a youngster's efforts and triumphs to giving yourself a pat on the back for working well and doing things properly you'll be chuffed and cheered by today's developments.
CANCER (June 22/July 23)
Once you get started there is no shutting you up and you are in one of garrulous, gregarious moods when you can spend hours happily swapping small talk and gossiping.
Steer clear of heavy sexual or emotive issues and stick to the frivolous froth of life.
LEO (July 24/Aug 23)
The thought of the wonderful things you can do and achieve makes you heart sing.
Unfortunately your head has a more down to earth message that stops you mid-melody.
Like a bucket of cold water the harsh realities of life drown your sunny optimism leaving you feeling despondent.
VIRGO (Aug 24/Sept 23)
It may be difficult finding the right moment to air an embarrassing subject, but that's not an excuse for shelving things indefinitely.
If the opportunity doesn't present itself naturally you have to engineer the situation so you can explain an important or emotional message.
LIBRA (Sept 24/Oct 23)
If you're a Libran who just has to say what's on your mind come hell or high water you could be heading for a stormy time.
Discretion's the better part of valour now and you would be wiser to keep your thoughts to yourself rather than risk a confrontation at work or home.
SCORPIO (Oct 24/Nov 22)
The drop of a hat, or anything else, is all it takes to turn you into a passion-packed romantic day.
From starting a new loving liaison to celebrating the joys of wedded bliss this is your chance to show your other half just how much you love and adore them.
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23/Dec 21)
There's a friendly, gentility about today that makes your home, workplace or neighbourhood a very nice place to be.
Everyone appears happy and smiling, folk seem anxious to help one another and take pleasure in each other 's company, so enjoy this brief glimpse of Utopia.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22/Jan 20)
It is harder than you think to actually stir yourself and make the effort to put a good idea into practice.
If you've been thinking of making domestic changes or improvements, but lacked the money or momentum to set the wheels of change in motion use today to make a start.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21/Feb 19)
A smashing day for sitting around with your favourite folk swapping stories and generally setting the world to rights.
On the other hand if you've important business or vital meetings to attend you will be in for a tough time.
What you must do now is enjoy gentle pleasure.
PISCES (Feb 20/Mar 20)
If you have sensed an undercurrent of discord and discontent running through your home you should take the initiative and drag things out into the open.
It may mean heated arguments, harsh words and hurt feelings, but once the air is cleared everyone will feel better.
North west to have its say
FOR the first time in many years, anglers in the north west of the province are to have a strong and united voice to convey their views to the authorities on a wide range of matters.
The announcement this week that a rod angling pressure group — the Foyle Association of Salmon and Trout Anglers (FASTA)— has been formed, follows last year's initiative by the Sion Mills Anglers in convening a series of meetings with other clubs and private fisheries throughout the Foyle system.
Those meetings highlighted the deep sense of frustration with the management of the Foyle system.
Later, the Department of Agriculture announced that, in conjunction with the Department of the Marine in Dublin, a management review of the Foyle Fisheries Commission was to be carried out.
The Foyle Fisheries Commission is a cross-border statutory body which was set up in 1952 under parallel legislation introduced in Northern Ireland and the Republic.
The Commission's main function is the conservation and protection of the salmon fisheries of the Foyle area.
The Foyle area comprises the catchments of all rivers and their tributaries which flow into Lough Foyle and the adjacent sea area between Malin Head in Co Donegal and Downhill in Co Derry.
The Commission has a permanent staff of 24 and, in addition, employs eight seasonal staff during the summer and autumn periods.
A statement from the new pressure group says clubs throughout the Foyle area feel that even with the continuing decline both in Irish stocks and water quality, the Commission has allowed over-fishing by netting to continue and is not adequately funded to deter or prevent poaching and the continued degradation of water quality throughout the system.
‘In addition, anglers believe that the added value which angling brings to the region has not been adequately addressed by the Commission in recent years,’ the statement adds.
The group has four main aims:(1) To represent the views and concerns of anglers;(2) To liaise with statutory and voluntary bodies in relation to angling and water environmental interests;(3) To encourage and promote measures designed to improve fish stocks and (4) to encourage the establishment of an effective water quality programme.
Angling reports from all over the country indicate that some rainfall would be welcome.
Rivers in Donegal badly need rain to bring fresh fish in.
However, Johnny Holmes of Letterkenny landed a fine specimen sea trout of 9 lbs from Glen Lake while spinning from the shore and there is a fair number of salmon showing on the lake.
The Drowes River is also suffering with the water level at summer height.
However, 14 spring fish were reported for the week with Paul McGivern of Belfast taking a fish of 10 lbs on a Gary Dog fly.
The two best fish of the week from the Drowes fell to Denis Brennan of Cookstown and Billy Ray of Belfast, both of whom caught salmon of 12 lbs on shrimp.
Billy Ray also had a fish of 8 lbs on shrimp.
The rivers and lakes of West Kerry, however, have enjoyed some rainfall, and as a consequence salmon catches on Loughs Leane and Currane were much improved.
The River Luane produced 25 salmon for a total of 222 lbs for the week with the best fish weighing 12 lbs.
Lough Currane produced 13 salmon for the week with the best fish weighing 11 lbs.
Lough Owel is also fishing reasonably well with a local angler taking a magnificent brown trout of 9 lbs on a Mepps.
This is one of the best fish from Owel in recent years.
The big western lakes, Conn, Corrib and Mask, are producing little at present and the Galway Weir produced only five salmon for the week in spite of excellent conditions for fly fishing.
Six salmon were reported from the River Moy for the week while both the Druncliffe River and the Ballisodare River each produced two salmon to rod and line.
The Straid Trout Fishery produced its best fish of the year so far, a cracker of 12 lbs 4 oz which took a dog nobbler fished by Lenny Magee of Lisburn.
Lough Cowey hosted a party of 12 Scottish anglers who had limited success on their first day, taking only 14 fish between them.
However, on their second and final day they had a change of fortune and headed for the ferry with an excellent catch of 109 trout averaging over 2 lbs each.
At Tildarg the best bag of the week involved three fish for 16 lbs 4 oz, caught by Tom McConaghy of Ballymena.
A party of Ulster anglers, led by Robert Donaldson of Enniskillen, went boat fishing in Kallala Bay and recorded excellent catches of cod, pollack, coalfish, ling, thornback, whiting, three varieties of gurnard, lesser spotted dogfish and spur dogfish.
Robert Donaldson took a fine specimen pollack of 12 lbs 5 oz.
Bateson is ‘dropped in it'
TORQUAY chairman Mike Bateson's plan to block relegation from the Football League has been scuppered by the Football Association.
Bateson announced that next month's extraordinary general meeting of the League, where he was hoping to persuade club chairmen to ‘drop the drop’, is to be called off.
Bateson explained: ‘The League have been in contact to say that when they informed the FA of the meeting, they were told that no matter what the egm approved the FA would not sanction any agreement which would produce more than 24 clubs in any one division.
‘Unless other clubs fell by the wayside for financial reasons, our plan to put a stop to relegation for another two years might produce 26 clubs in the third division by the end of the 1994–95 season.
‘That would mean three clubs having to be relegated then and that is not our intention.
‘The FA have indicated that they would not have any objection to there being no relegation this season.
But I couldn't honestly ask for that because it wasn't the purpose of our plan.
‘We were putting forward an overall package because of the financial problems facing so many small clubs not a quick-fix job.’
Clubs pay the penalty
OLYMPIAKOS Piraeus and Atletico Madrid of Spain have been fined a total of almost £100,000 for serious crowd and player trouble during their European Cup Winners' Cup clash on March 4.
Violence erupted on the pitch in the second-half of the quarter-final first leg and fans hurled missiles on to the pitch.
UEFA's control and disciplinary committee fined the Greek club £62,500 and the Spanish visitors nearly £35,000.
Atletico beat the Greeks 4–2 on aggregate after a 1–1 draw in Piraeus.
NS Wales in quick reply
NEW South Wales were 133 for two in reply to Queensland's first innings 311 at the close on the second day of the Sheffield Shield final in Sydney today.
Queensland captured the wickets of openers Michael Slater (69) and Steve Small (40) in the last hour after they had put on 119.
Stuart Low dominated the Queensland innings with 142 as they lost their last six wickets for only 52.
Paceman Glenn McGrath took four for 64 and off-spinner Greg Matthews three for 89.
British duo two off lead
BRITAIN'S Pamela Wright and Trish Johnson were just two shots off the lead at the halfway point of the Nabisco Dinah Shore tournament at Rancho Mirage, California.
In the first major on this year's US women's tour, with prize money of 700,000 (£500,000), Wright and Johnson both shot second round scores of 68, four under-par, for a 142 total.
Australia humiliate USA
DAVIS Cup champions the United States suffered a humiliating first round exit today in Melbourne when old rivals Australia won the doubles to take an unbeatable 3–0 lead.
The below-strength Americans became the first defending champions to bow out of the cup's first round in 10 years as Australia's singles hero Mark Woodforde took his brilliant form into the doubles against Jim Grabb and Richey Reneberg.
The left-handed Woodforde, 27, who beat David Wheaton in four sets on Friday, linked up with Todd Woodbridge to score a 7–6 6–2 3–6 6–7 6–4 victory in three hours 20 minutes.
Woodforde, who dropped his serve only once in the match, served for the tie, and wrapped it up when Reneberg hit a backhand drive well over the baseline.
Cooper's contract
FORMER Notts pace bowler Kevin Cooper is expected to sign a one year contract with Gloucestershire.
The 35-year-old will join his new county on tour in Sri Lanka next week, provided he receives a favourable medical report on the double stress fracture of his back he suffered two years ago.
County secretary Philip August said: ‘We don't anticipate any problems after watching Kevin bowl in the nets at Lilleshall for more than an hour.’
Malone's Cup dilemma
MALONE begin the defence of the Ulster Senior Cup title amid a host of problems when they undertake a repeat of last year's final against North at Ormeau.
Skipper Denis McBride is with the Irish Sevens squad in Hong Kong, Scott Kirkptrick is in the States, Stuart Duncan (knee injury) and Ken Tuta (suspended) are out until the end of the season.
They have a cluster of players standing by to fill the vacant back-row, while former Scottish B winger Stuart Porter, who has been playing flanker down the club this season, returns to the right wing in place of Graeme Copeland.
Copeland is moved into the centre for the injured Bill Harbinson, while scrum-half Stephen Cowan is also an absentee and Stephen Brown deputises.
North have also their problems in the back-row and are unlikely to have Ulster's Colin Darrah.
It promises to be a very close encounter, but North will not have a better chance to redress the balance against the runaway Ulster League winners.
The biggest and most competitive game of the day will be up at Eaton Park, where Ballymena take on Instonians, two teams who will be squaring up to each other in the AIL Division Two next season.
Ballymena, still without the injured Stevie Smith, have something to prove from what for them has been a poor season.
But Instonians, who continue with Jeremy Ogle at pivot, fancy their chances strongly.
Ballymena will rely heavily on Davy Tweed presenting enough line-out possession for Derek McAleese to keep Instonians on their back foot — and this could help Ballymena put THEIR best foot forward.
Planning winners
IN the Ulster Bank farm planning competition at Enniskillen Agricultural College the winning team comprised: Desmond McCarroll, Eskra, Frances Haire, Bellaghy and Charles Murray.
The second placed team was: Michael McAloon, Fintona, Noel Jackson, Drumskinney and Ian Gibson, Beragh.
Hungarian visitors
College study: Two Hungarians who visited Greenmount Agricultural College, Dr Janos Kormos and Dr Gabor Davidhazi, with college lecturer Basil Bayne.
Heading for glory
WHEN the final placing for the Head of the River Race last Saturday elevated Belfast Rowing Club's senior eight to 37th place out of over 400 crews, no further confirmation was required of the tremendous revival in their prospects.
In performing so well, BRC beat by 16 seconds Dublin University who have won at Erne and Galweay Heads and were the second Irish crew at Laganside Head.
At long last the men are starting to exhibit the same confidence and rowing ability which has taken BRC's women to eight Irish championships and countless Irish vests in the last six years.
The BRC squad includes Rodney Wilson and David Webb who both learnt their rowing at Methodist College and continued at Queen's before moving up to BRC.
Vastly experienced, Rodney — who was part of Ireland's Olympic rowing squad last year — has trained at altitude in Mexico City.
Similarly Dawson Wray, Johnny Bunn and cox Stephen Moore are also products of Queen's having started at RBAI.
Former junior internationals include Chris Allen and Rory McBride of Methody and Inst's Jonny Curran who also represented Ireland in the lightweight four at last year's Home Internationals.
Paul Savage, who has already won Irish championships at novice and intermediate level with Queen's University, is one of the best prospects in a long time to come ‘up the road’ to Hay Island.
Paul Carroll and captain Garth Young complete the squad and are home grown talent.
Garth, who also strokes the crew, is a former lightweight international and is returning to the form he showed before a back injury sidelined him last year.
The crew are coached by vice-captain David Storrs and Derek Gordon who between them have an immense depth of experience at the highest level.
Derek learnt his rowing at Belfast Inst before winning a coveted senior eights championship with Dublin University in 1981.
David took up rowing at Portora and has won the Irish novice sculling and intermediate fours championships with BRC.
The crew's immediate aims are Neptune and Queen's Regattas followed by Limerick as they quietly built towards bringing the Senior Pot back to Belfast after a 30 year wait.
Grass greener at Portrush
PORTRUSH have launched a bid to appoint a club coach in preparation for next season's Harp Senior League Section Two campaign.
Ulster Branch president Nigel McCullough handed over the Harp Intermediate League trophy to first XI captain Ronnie Smith amid jubilant scenes at the club's annual dinner in Portballintrae last night.
The Co Antrim team certainly had cause to celebrate after storming to the title after five years in the doldrums…and now they aim to go from strength to strength.
‘Playing membership has doubled in the past 18 months and we now have over 100 names on our books,’ committee chairman Gavin Eves pointed out.
‘We still believe there is a lot of untapped potential in the catchment area which stretches from Moyle to Ballymoney.
‘We have made inroads into schools like Coleraine Inst, Dalriada and Dominican College where boys hockey isn't on the curriculum, and we must be able to offer the youngsters proper facilities.’
Only two of Ulster's 32 clubs play their hockey on grass and Gavin realises that Portrush are caught in a time warp which could hinder the North West outfit's progress.
‘We would obviously like to have a synthetic surface of our own but we certainly wouldn't be able to provide such a facility without outside help.’
Automart
A GREATLY improved entry of store pigs met with mighty trade selling to £41.50 paid to a Dungannon farmer for his top quality pigs weighing 41k (101p per kilo) at Automart, Portadown.
Weaners remained in strong demand reaching 174p per kilo for a prime batch exhibited by an Aghalee farmer (10k £17.40).
Lightweight stores sold easily to a top of £27.60 for Duroc crosses exhibited by a Loughgall farmer (20k 138p per kilo).
Despite the larger entry home and export buyers could accommodate many more store pigs of all weights.
Pork pigs cleared without difficulty to a top of £83.50 paid to a Banbridge producer for his suitable 105k porkers returning a high rate of 79p per kilo.
Many local farmers received over 77p for their quality bacon pigs.
Fat sows enjoyed an increase in numbers, quality and price, selling to £58 per 100k paid to an Armagh producer for an 185k sow fetching £108.
A Craigavon farmer received £150 for his 280k boar returning a rate of £54 per 100k.
Another quality boar sold for £139 (265k £52 per 100k).
Springing sows reached £189 for a genuine sow sold by a Markethill farmer.
Sows and litters fetched £270.
Table topper
Going forward: Andrea Glover from Crossgar, winner of the Forward Trust Table Topper player of the month award, with her mother and coach Ann, who helped Ulster to retain the veteran inter-provincial title last weekend
It's make or break clash for Antrim
ANTRIM step into the lion's den — again — when they meet Limerick in a crucial Royal Liver National Hurling League play-off at Parnell Park, Dublin on Sunday (3.30).
But manager Jim Nelson is certainly not trembling at the knees.
‘We should have beaten them a couple of weeks ago when we finished all square and I have every faith in the boys,’ asserts Nelson, ‘Since then we went very close against Tipperary and given the self-belief the team now possesses I think we can give a very good account of ourselves on Sunday.’
Nelson's optimism is well founded.
His team now boasts a dynamic edge, an insatiable hunger for success.
And in Paul McKillen, a powerful midfielder; John Carson and Alistair Elliott, potent finishers: and Dominic McMullan, a granite-hard defensive stalwart, Antrim have the kind of players who can help swing the pendulum in their team's favour.
Paddy Walsh is introduced for Paul Jennings who departed for the United States this week but the Cushendall man will certainly not be out of his depth.
Gregory and Gary O'Kane have been looking sharp in the Saffron jersey recently while Jim Close and Sean Paul McKillop are match-winners in their own right.
Limerick are a strong, mobile side blessed with fluent skills and abundant flair.
Their penchant for turning defence into attack is well-known but Antrim could have their measure this time round although that might be considered too good to be true in some quarters.
In a Division 1B play-off Dublin will go to Thurles to meet Waterford while Monaghan travel to oppose Mayo at Longford in a Division 3B play-off.
Safety first must be watch words on the farm
FOR almost a quarter of a century we have been keeping records of farm fatalities.
And they make grim reading every time.
Over a 24-year period, up to and including 1991, a total of 307 people died in farm and forestry accidents in Northern Ireland.
Far too many by any stretch of the imagination; fatalities which could have been avoided had care and attention to personal safety been exercised.
In many instances death on the farm comes through carelessness on the part of those who work and walk the land.
Familiarity, they say, breeds contempt.
In the case of machinery it often makes operators indifferent to the dangers they are involved with every working day.
Ever since it first appeared, the tractor, like the motor car has been a potential source of danger and death.
This is borne out by the 1991 figures which tell us that out of eight fatalities, half involved the tractor.
One farmer was killed when his tractor overturned; another died when run over by the vehicle; a third was crushed when the uncabbed tractor he was driving overturned; and a fourth, a student home on holiday, died when thrown from the cab of his overturning vehicle.
There must be lessons to be learned in all of that.
Livestock too present many dangers with one farmer being killed when his Simmental bull attacked him.
Another was fatally injured by a stag when dispensing feed to his herd of deer.
Nature too has to be respected.
One part-time farmer was killed when struck by a falling tree during a storm while a forestry worker died after a section of a felled tree trunk apparently rolled over as he attempted to handle it.
All too often it is easy to be casual about every-day chores on the farm.
Everyone, of every age, must be vigilant.
And those who are too young to realise the dangers around must be well protected.
Women make mark with business ideas
‘AFTER running my own business and being my own boss I can definitely say I will never return to full-time employment again.’
This was the general consensus of 10 women from the North West who have just completed a ‘Women In Enterprise’ course at Magee University, organised by the Northern Ireland Small Business Institute.
The 10-week course, held in Londonderry for the first time, was aimed at women with a commercial idea which they wanted to turn into a business, or who wanted to develop a business already started.
Course co-ordinator Margaret Myers said more and more women were coming forward with good ideas and that many of those who had taken part in four previous courses at the University of Ulster in Jordanstown were now running very successful businesses.
She also said the course, funded by the European Social Fund, boosted self-confidence and helped the women plan their businesses for the future.
Grace Downey started her ironing service business ‘The Hot Press’ several months before participating in the course, and now enjoys a flourishing trade at her Waterside home workshop.
Grace was juggling a full-time job with looking after three children when she got the idea to set up her business.
‘I never seemed to have time to do the ironing,’ she said.
‘It was then I decided that there had to be a market out there for an ironing service for professional women — and this has very much proved to be the case.’
Grace has 35 to 40 regular customers per week and says she owes much of her success to the course, which has helped her become more confident as a businesswoman and as a boss.
She also maintains she would never consider going back to full-time employment and advised other women with good business ideas to ‘go for it’.
Grace's success in developing both her business and self-confidence was recognised when she was presented with an award last week by NISBI.
Pauline Ross's play resource centre, ‘Arts and Parts’ is different from the other businesses as it is a registered charity — so profits go towards the project.
Based at the Playhouse in Artillery Street, the already well-established business sells arts and crafts materials to schools, colleges and youth organisations, with the aim of encouraging young people to take a greater interest in the arts.
Before setting up the charity, Pauline worked as the arts education officer for Derry City Council and realised the North West needed a play resource centre to ‘turn waste things into creative things’.
Her slogan is: ‘we aim to create the arts as a service for the many as opposed to a luxury for the few’.
It seems to be the case as she currently has up to 200 various groups and organisations on her books.
Pauline said: ‘We can use the arts as a tool of communication for children and integrate the arts into their lives.’
The course has helped Pauline with such issues as marketing and cash flow and she already has drawn up a business plan for the next five years — confirming that she too has no plans to return to full-time employment.
‘The Write Image’ is a desktop publishing company owned by Fedelma Healey.
As part of her business Fedelma offers editorial services to other firms such as PR, producing in-house magazines, brochures and presentations.
Fedelma has only started up the business since beginning the course and has found it a ‘great practical help’.
With a background in both teaching and magazine work, Fedelma has had wide experience of full-time employment, but is happy that she ‘took the plunge’ and is confident her business will expand.
‘The course provided an arena for learning, for expressing doubts and exchanging experiences,’ she said.
‘What I considered to be quite an insignificant idea at first has now become a viable business for me.’
Margaret Myers said: ‘I am delighted that the Women in Enterprise Programme has been so successful in Londonderry, and as training providers we would hope to continue to provide award winning training from NISBI in Londonderry and throughout the province.’
Worry over ‘drop out’ school governors
SCHOOL governors in Northern Ireland are dropping out and being marked ‘absent’ from meetings.
Dozens of boards of governors sessions have been postponed because too few members have turned up.
Principals and officials are also facing increasing difficulty in finding volunteers to replace those who have quit.
The exodus comes as governors acquire legal responsibilities for the running of schools as a result of the Government's education reforms.
Many schools have had to double or triple the number of management meetings — yet members of the public who are governors receive no remuneration.
Michael Murphy, chief executive of the Western Education Board, the largest in the province, said today: ‘We are having to replace more and more governors, and my fear is the situation will get worse.
‘There is a lot of anxiety about their legal responsibilities and they are having to have more meetings than ever before.’
Resignations in controlled schools in the Western Area have doubled in the two years since 1990.
They are also believed to have soared significantly in the maintained schools sector.
The Board is also considering reducing the required numbers for a governors meeting.
In the Western area, half are needed for a quorum; in other areas it is a third.
The South Eastern Education Board, which was holding it's monthly meeting this afternoon, has also voiced concern about the governors issue.
A number of Education Board members, who can join up to five schools boards of governors, are having to stand down from some of them.
An official said: ‘There is an impression that governors are somewhat reluctant to take their duties up, or just don ‘t turn up for meetings when serious decisions have to be taken.’
Bid to recycle 25pc of waste
RECYCLING is to be given a boost in Northern Ireland, under new Government proposals.
It means that waste management controls will be brought into line with environmental protection laws already operating in Great Britain.
Environment Minister Robert Atkins issued a new strategy paper yesterday, saying it showed ‘the vital role’ of industry in the drive towards both economic growth and environmental protection.
Proposals place a greater emphasis on recycling.
Local authorities would have formal plans and recycling targets.
The Government's target is to recycle 25pc of household wastes by the year 2000, and a new duty would be imposed on councils to give priority to recycling waste, where desirable.
At the moment, less than 4pc of Northern Ireland's household waste is recycled.
Class act comes top in festival
On form: Ryan Annett has the privilege of holding the Vint cup after P2 and P3 pupils from Ballyclare Primary School had won their choral speaking class at the Ballyclare Musical Festival, which is being held in the Allen Hall of the Presbyterian Church.
Paul Foot to rebel over dropped Mirror column
AWARD-winning Daily Mirror journalist Paul Foot was today expected to distribute copies of his latest weekly column by hand after his newspaper decided not to publish it.
The Mirror had last night reportedly dropped Mr Foot's article because it was critical of the company's management, said a spokesman for the National Union of Journalists.
Mr Foot, voted Journalist of the Year in 1990, was expected to respond by handing out copies of the piece outside the Mirror's headquarters in Holborn, central London.
The column reportedly reveals that Mirror chief executive David Montgomery and other senior staff hold options to buy shares in the newspaper group which could make them hundreds of thousands of pounds' worth of profits.
It is also said to speak of low morale, falling sales and job cuts at the troubled newspaper.
‘The column is obviously critical of the Mirror management,’ said NUJ spokesman Tim Gopsill.
‘If the Mirror is a free and independent newspaper, why shouldn't it allow its space to be used to run copy critical of itself?’
He said the newspaper should have published the article in the same way as the BBC covered the controversy over the tax affairs of its director-general, John Birt.
Neither Mr Foot nor representatives of the Mirror's management were available for comment.
Three charged in booby trap case
RESIDENTS on a Londonderry housing estate tracked two men they had earlier seen allegedly acting suspiciously at a car used by a Ministry of Defence worker, a court heard yesterday.
And when security forces were called in they found a booby trap device containing one 1lb of Semtex explosives under the car.
Details about the alleged incident were given by a prosecuting lawyer at Belfast Crown Court in the trial of three Londonderry men.
Declan Moore (28), of Rathkeele Way, Richard Harkin (34), of Stephen's Court and William McGahey (35), of Rathlin Drive, have pleaded not guilty to three counts of attempted murder, planting a bomb and possession of explosives with intent on February 24, 1991.
The Crown lawyer said the court would hear that the probable target was a man who worked for the Environment Department and whose tasks also involved working at Ministry of Defence properties.
The car was owned by his father but he regularly used it.
Two accused, he alleged, were seen by witnesses planting the device at Primity Crescent, New Buildings.
When they were challenged from a window by the owner of the car they ran off down an alleyway.
Two witnesses left their home to see where they went and saw them getting into a Lada taxi.
Two others were also in the taxi and the registration number was taken.
He said the taxi was stopped on the underdeck of Craigavon Bridge and four men, including the three accused, were arrested.
Traces of explosives were found on the clothing of the three accused, two of whom were in the back seat of the vehicle and one in the front passenger seat.
All three, he said, remained silent during police questioning.
The lawyer said the defendants were all involved in a joint enterprise to plant a booby-trap device under the car.
There was, he added, powerful and overwhelming evidence to make the case that the three men stopped in the taxi were the same men at Primity Crescent and guilty of all the charges.
At hearing.
Benefits plea on fuel
THERE has been a call for pensions and benefits to be increased significantly to offset the effects of levying VAT on fuel.
In a joint statement, Councillor Gregory Campbell and Bill Irwin of the DUP said: ‘The Child Poverty Action Group in Londonderry recently completed a survey of a number of estates, on of which was the Caw area, where they found very high incidences of deprivation.
‘Over the next two years, these same people are to be faced with a rise of 25pc for domestic fuel — VAT at 17.5pc plus 3pc or 4pc price rises each year — then obviously there must be a significant increase in pensions and benefits in order for them to be able to pay.’
Rotary club honour
THE District Governor of Rotary in Ireland, Dubliner Maurice Kelly, will visit the Rotary Club of Londonderry next Monday.
He will join club members for their weekly lunch and will hear details of the community and international projects they are involved in.
The Londonderry club is 71 years old and is the third oldest Rotary Club in Ireland.
The president is Mr James Buchanan.
After lunch the District Governor and representatives of Londonderry Rotary Club will be received by the Mayor in the Guildhall.
Rise in male suicides in Republic
A TOTAL of 2,755 people in the Republic committed suicide in the 10-year period from 1982 to the end of 1991, according to figures given to the Dail.
More than three times as many men as women killed themselves during that time, the Minister for Health, Brendan Howlin, disclosed.
The number of male suicides over the ten years was 2,073 — almost three times the total of females (682).
In 1991, the latest year for which official statistics are available, almost four times as many men committed suicide as women — 252, compared with 66.
The most common method of suicide among men was hanging, strangulation and suffocation, while the most common method used by women was poison by solid or liquid substances.
In the case of both men and women, drowning was the second most common method used.
The number of men who hanged themselves between 1982 and 1991 was 624, while the number of women who hanged themselves was 73.
A total of 210 men used firearms or explosives to end their lives, whereas no women used this method.
The number of suicides increased steadily among men during the ten years.
The figure went up from 178 in 1982 to 252 in 1991.
The number of female suicides remained almost constant during the same period.
It peaked in 1990 when there were 83.
Welcome news for Baha'is
THE Baha'i community in Londonderry has welcomed news about United Nations interest in the plight of their fellow-believers in Iran.
The UN's Commission on Human Rights has passed a resolution expressing ‘grave concern’ over human rights violations in the Middle East country, making mention of the religious discrimination against Baha's.
A spokesman for the Derry Baha'is said: ‘The fact that these documents have been brought into the open is very important.
‘We hope that the British and Irish governments will take this opportunity to tell Iran that such behaviour is not acceptable.’
Making waves after a scare
A YEAR ago, Classic Tracks BCR had just over 30,000 listeners — the smallest audience of any station in the area.
It had also lost around £300,000 pounds and was staving off a visit from the official receiver.
‘Twelve months later the conclusion is that the race doesn't always go to the swift — even if it is the way the bookmaker bets,’ commented Mike Gaston, the station's managing director, who took over running the company just a year ago.
‘Last year,’ he added, ‘accountants advised us to let the station fold and buy the bits back from the receiver.
But you can't do that to people's dreams and jobs.
So we ignored the advice and got stuck in.’
In a valiant effort to keep the station on air, Gaston said they had to cut overheads, increase the audience, find £120,000 to pay off creditors and convince the bank that, as he put it, ‘the dead duck could fly’.
At the time the station was still losing almost £10,000 a month.
Nevertheless Mr Gaston said within a month they had cut costs to match the income…without losing a single job.
‘By the end of the third month we were making a slight profit.
‘Since then we have increased the listnership by more than 300pc giving 96.7 BCR over 100,000 adult listeners.
The latest audience research indicates that our audience is still growing and we intend to keep it that way.’
Mr Gaston maintains that BCR hasn't yet arrived…
‘It's still the best kept secret in Belfast, but the station will become a household name and it won't ever stand still,’ he promised.
Its appeal, he said, is the excitement it generates in the search for off the wall ideas…not to mention the opportunities it creates for involvement in radio.
Why BBC places its emphasis on quality
LATEST BBC Radio Ulster figures show a weekly reach of 31pc, and the BBC points out that for a distinctive, speech-based service, that's a remarkable catchment of almost one in three of the adult population.
It's also proof that quality attracts loyalty, said a spokesman.
‘Over the past four years, Radio Ulster and its sister station in the North-West, Radio Foyle, have won no fewer than nine Sony awards,’ he added.
‘This recognition from the British radio industry was for a phenomenal range of programming — sport, specialist speech, comedy, local radio personality, local radio station, current affairs and documentary.’
News and current affairs is at the core of Radio Ulster's 5,000 hours of output a year.
The BBC says the 8–8.30am segment of Good Morning Ulster is the most listened to half-hour of radio in Northern Ireland.
Specialist departments combine to provide the widest possible spectrum of coverage.
Sport has just extended its comprehensive weekend coverage with on-the-hour reports during the week.
If there's a traffic jam anywhere the new information unit will let you know about it on the hour as well.
The education unit broadcasts to the classroom on anything from geography to literature, not to mention the minefield of history.
Another big area is the reflection of the changing face of agriculture in the wider community of Europe.
‘Radio Ulster and Radio Foyle are here to serve the community,’ the spokesman emphasised.
‘They focus attention during special project weeks on subjects of public interest — from homelessness to child abuse.’
However, the spokesman pointed out that radio, of course, needs contact with its listeners in another way — through personalities.
They are, he said, the core of the daily schedule — Gerry Anderson, George Jones, John Kelly, Linda McAuley, Rose Neill, Sean Rafferty and David Dunseith.
‘Increasingly they are the voice of this community,’ he said.
New president for Chamber
In business: The newly-elected president of the Londonderry Chamber of Commerce, Michael Black (centre), pictured with senior vice-president John McGinnis, junior vice-president Ian Young, past-president Anthony Jackson and director Stan Donaghey.
It's not over ‘til fat man sings
WHEN it first played, Tom Murphy's ‘The Gigli Concert’ was almost unanimously decried as a piece of theatrical nonsense.
Before long, critics were hailing it as a masterpiece, and since then opinion has remained divided.
Now it's your turn to decide, as the Lyric Theatre courageously stages Roy Heyberd's production of ‘Gigli’.
Sean Caffrey is the Man who, with the ‘audacity of despair’ wanders into J P King's seedy offices seeking to realise his ambition: ‘I want to sing.’
Obsessed by recordings of Gigli's voice, his life has become a shadowy search for the answers he feels only Gigli can provide.
Robert O'Mahoney's King, a ‘dynamotologist’—‘self-realisation, you know?’— is the picture of a man floundering around in the deep end of life, who has forgotten not only how to swim, but even where he left his life jacket.
As the two men embark on a journey of self-discovery, the haunting music of Gigli punctuates their revelations.
This gripping drama owes much to the shades of menace hinted at in Caffrey's Man, and the semi-hysterical flutterings of O'Mahoney's King, who has long since toppled from his throne.
Whatever the outcome, this is one play where you can truly say it isn't over till the fat lady (or in this case, the fat man) sings.
Motor-cycling
Schwantz races to pole position
KEVIN Schwantz lived up to his billing as race favourite by taking pole position on the grid for Sunday's season-opening Australian 500cc Grand Priz at Sydney's Eastern Creek track.
The Suzuki rider showed a further improvement in final practice at with a best of one minute 31.188 seconds.
Schwantz, winner of 19 Grands Prix in a fruitless search for the world title, was joined on the front row by fellow American Wayne Rainey, bidding for a fourth successive crown, and Australian prospect Daryl Beattie.
Bruton fears Irish ‘Bosnia’ if Army goes
THE possibility of Northern Ireland turning into ‘another Bosnia’ in the event of a withdrawal by the Army has been raised by the Fine Gael leader, John Bruton.
He said there was a comfortable assumption that the present situation could not get much worse, but this, unfortunately, could be mistaken.
He added: ‘We should look at what has happened in Eastern Europe.
As long as an overwhelming military presence existed, a measure of peace — peace with resentment, but peace just the same — was maintained over a large area of Central and Eastern Europe.
‘As soon as this central military power was removed, ethnic violence erupted.
We now have violent civil wars in Bosnia, Azerbaijan and Georgia.’
Mr Bruton said those who believed that a British withdrawal, or a declaration in favour of a British withdrawal, would help solve the problem must answer these questions:
Could they guarantee that, in the absence of the overwhelming presence of the Army, there would not be a radical intensification of ethnic cleansing throughout the island of Ireland?
Would the Irish Army have sufficient military strength to impose order on the whole island?
Would it be able to protect the nationalists in Portadown and the Unionists of rural Fermanagh?
If not, who would be capable of protecting them?
Mr Bruton said some would suggest that a United Nations presence could solve that problem.
But people had seen how ineffective UN troops could be in the case of Bosnia.
He added that the electorates of UN member States might be unwilling to see their young men die in Ireland over a sustained period.
Garda in sex case wins legal battle
A DUBLIN-BASED policeman has won a legal battle to prevent the Garda Commissioner from dismissing him from the force for allegedly offering a prostitute IR£30 for sex.
Andrew O'Shea (31), who was stationed at Donnybrook, told the High Court in Dublin that in April, 1992, he was told by a detective inspector that a prostitute had made an allegation of robbery and assault against him.
He informed the inspector that he was not involved in any robbery or assault.
He said that when he was being interviewed by the inspector he was not asked about engaging in a sexual transaction with a prostitute.
He denied making a verbal admission concerning any transaction between himself and any women.
The inspector advised him that in his opinion he had a drink problem and should do something about it.
The next day he admitted himself to hospital.
On May 11, 1922, he was served with a document at the hospital showing that the Commissioner proposed, subject to Ministerial consent, to dismiss him from the force.
The document said the Commissioner was in no doubt he had breached Garda disciplinary regulations in that he associated with a prostitute at Wilton Place, Dublin, on April 16, 1992.
Overturning the Commissioner's decision, Miss Justice Carroll said the garda was not given a summary of the factual background to support the accusation against him.
He was just told the bare charge.
The garda was entitled to the evidence on which the allegation was made.
She added that since the essential requirement for natural justice was missing, the decision to dismiss him must be set aside.
Centre wages war on scrapping of councils
THE Women's Centre in Londonderry has attacked the proposed abolition of the Wages Councils in Northern Ireland.
A spokeswoman for the Women's Centre, a voluntary organisation fighting against the proposed abolition, said it would add further to the misery of women who are already exploited as cheap labour.
The spokeswoman said the centre had received a lot of complaints from women in the catering industry, concerning pay and conditions.
‘In many of the instances we find that employers are not honouring the basic minimum wage and ignoring overtime rates,’ she said.
‘We are able to tell the women what their legal entitlements are, and inform them of the protection offered by the Wages Councils’.
The centre has now gathered a number of signatures from other voluntary and community groups which are supporting its request to the Office of Wages Councils to reconsider the abolition of the Wages Council.
Ulster visit for vegetable expert
Roger Welberry, chairman of the National Vegetable committee of the National Farmers' Union in England and Wales will be in the province for a meeting organised by the Ulster Farmers' Union next week.
Mr Welberry, who grows around 1,000 acres of vegetables each year, has a vast knowledge of the many issues currently found in horticulture.
An expert in the field of marketing, he has been successful in selling his produce to large multiples and wholesalers.
Local marketing consultant Robin Anderson will also be attending the meeting which will take place in the Carn Grove Hotel, Portadown, on Monday at 8 pm.
The Vegetable Committee is inviting all growers to attend.
Grow yourself a miniature garden
SPRING is here!
The days are longer and the warmer temperature is encouraging new life to grow everywhere.
Look around in your own garden or school — plants and flowers are growing everywhere.
It is the perfect time to stand back and look at how the beauty of nature can enhance your surroundings.
Maybe if more people did this they would think twice before harming it.
So this week I thought we'd have a go at making a miniature garden, which you can grow in your bedroom.
Here's how to go about it.
Firstly we need some seeds to grow our garden plants from.
You do not need to go out and buy these.
Fruit pips are seeds, so try growing your miniature trees from these.
Try orange, lemon, grapefruit, melon, cherry, grape, apple.
Soak a few pips in water overnight.
Place a few stones at the bottom of small flowerpots (or yoghurt cartons with a hole punched in the bottom).
Fill the pot almost to the top with compost.
Press one or two pips into each pot.
Stand the pot in a saucer and keep the compost moist.
Keep away from direct sunlight until the seeds begin to sprout.
For the miniature garden you will need: A large baking tray or anything similar, such as a biscuit tin or plastic container, potting compost, pebbles, charcoal.
To make the garden place a layer of pebbles and some pieces of charcoal in the bottom of the tray.
This will act as a water reservoir to keep the soil from becoming too soggy.
Fill the rest of the tray almost to the top with potting compost.
As soon as the seedlings begin to grow, plant them in your garden.
Be careful not to harm the seedlings.
Slowly turn the pot upside down, holding the stem of the seedling gently.
Tap the bottom of the pot.
The plant will slide out in the compost.
Now plant the seedlings in the tray.
Leave room between each one for the roots to grow.
If you want flowers in the garden, look for miniature flower seeds in your nearest gardening shop.
You can grow seeds in the spaces between the plants.
Place the tray on a table near the window.
Water the garden just enough to keep the surface always moist.
Larger seedlings will block out the light from smaller ones, so try to keep them in a row at the back.
Information supplied by Derry Environmental Protection Organisation.
‘Chip’ can solve the Lincoln puzzle
GIVEN that the most decisive factor in the Lincoln Handicap has traditionally been the draw — made the previous day — it seems odd that trainers have a fetish for ‘laying a horse out’ for it months in advance.
High?
Low?
The Town Moor draw's favours are so unpredictable that you may as well stick to choosing a horse for its name alone.
You couldn't have missed last year's winner that way.
He was called High Low.
This year, punters can give themselves half a chance by watching today's ‘consolation’ race over the straight mile for horses eliminated from tomorrow's Lincoln.
There is little sign of any consolation for backers of the three horses whose trainers forgot to declare their (‘laid-out’) horses for tomorrow's race.
Connections of Laurel Queen, Walking The Plank and Buzzards Bellbuoy the trio to sneak in at the bottom of the race will have to send them a percentage if ending up in the money.
Buzzards Bellbuoy is certainly a possibility under last year's hero Jimmy Quinn, and comes from the same stable as Cuvee Charlie (won five years ago).
But it is Golden Chip, drawn 24 of 24, who is put forward as a very serious possibility should the lucky numbers be high.
Tough, consistent, and versatile, Golden Chip is effective on all types of ground, held up or blazing a trail.
He has forged a highly successful partnership with apprentice Steve Maloney, who led the turf jockeys' table for half an hour after winning the season's first race yesterday.
The partnership struck three times within a fortnight last July, winding up with a particularly game effort to deny in-form Pickles by a length in a competitive seven furlong handicap at Ayr.
The pair were in the front rank throughout, nothing else landing a blow, and Golden Chip had also dictated terms to his rivals over a mile on the same course four days earlier.
That day he had held on in a photo from Forever Diamonds, on similar ground to that he will encounter tomorrow.
Off just a four pounds higher mark, he looks a value bet in a race where the top three are strongly fancied but look likely to struggle giving away so much weight.
Young Buster's class should tell in the Hayselden Audi/ VW Doncaster Shield, but Taufan Blu could upset a few reputations in the Cammidge Trophy.
She, like her trainer, could be set for a good season.
Automart dairy sale attracts top breeders
PLANS for Automart's ‘new milk year’ dairy sale are well on course and have attracted entries from many of Ulster ‘s finest breeders.
Libby Clarke said: ‘The catalogue comprises some 50 top quality heifers, 10 young cows, three maidens and a team of six young bulls.
‘All cows and heifers are freshly calved for the sale with a number at note to leading AI sires.
‘Pedigrees include such sires as Hanoverhill Starbuck, Astro Jet, Linmack, Swd Valian, Elevation, Counsellor and many other top performance bulls.’
Free catalogues are available from Automart (telephone 0762 333012).
Co Armagh club celebrates centenary
Nostalgic times down in Lurgan
THE MAN who joined Lurgan Golf Club when the annual sub was five shillings (25p) will be 90 this summer.
He was captain there 40 years ago, and then president, and always looks comfortable in Donegal tweed under a striking head of silver grey.
George McCaw's name is on just about every major bridge trophy in Ireland, but it's in golf, Co Armagh golf, that he needs no prompting in times of nostalgia.
He was born in another age, the age when we played not for a million dollars in prize-money, or television sets, or holidays in the sun, but for the simple, exhilarating pleasure of golf itself.
The McCaw wit is as sharp as his memory and, to nobody's surprise, George was asked to say a few words at the first of many parties to mark Lurgan's Centenary.
It was in 1911 that he joined the club, a good year for everybody except possibly the first professional there, H.A.
Day, from Musselburgh.
His wages were 10 shillings (50p) a week, plus free accommodation, with a fixed fee for lessons set at 5p an hour, or 7p for 18 holes.
Lurgan would soon have two courses, one in the Lough Road area and the other at Demesne, and it was mid-way between the Wars before the clubs united.
It was about this time that Fred McKinley was invited to apply for membership.
Fred, who died before Christmas only a month shy of 93, had a rich fund of stories, most of them against himself.
Like when club secretary George Greer and a friend needed caddies.
The Major would call at Dollingston School and ask for the two biggest boys in class.
While both gentlemen shared the comfort of a horse and buggy to the course, however, the boys had to hot-foot it at a brisk jog behind the carriage —‘an exercise to be relished almost as much as the tuppence we got for caddying,’ Fred used to say.
Fred Daly took pride in his affinity with Lurgan.
He was professional AND green keeper there four years after beating over 50 other applicants for the job, and ranked among his star pupils Chris MacGeagh, daughter of a local linen baron.
Chris was Ireland's lady champion in 1939, the year Fred left Lurgan for City of Derry.
Fred always spoke highly of Lord Lurgan's golf.
As the Hon W G Brownlow, he played in the 1926 Walker Cup team that almost beat America at St. Andrews, and, like Fred, hit the ball a country mile.
His Lordship only resigned his membership of Lurgan about 20 years ago to make room, he said, for a younger golfer.
I wonder did Brownlow ever try driving the ball across Lurgan Lake as Daly would do…when the lake was ice-bound, of course!
History may be a confused heap of facts, or just plain ‘bunk’, as Henry Ford once said, but not when there's a good story to tell.
And author Larry Magee has handled this Centenary tale in masterly style.
Brian McKnight is Lurgan's captain in its milestone year, and travel boss Terence Murphy the club's president.
With help from Frank McKeown, it's sure to be a year all will enjoy and remember.
THERE was outstanding trade at the weekly sale in Saintfield Livestock mart where top price in the fat cow sale went to C Shaw for a Charolais, 770 kgs at £875.
Ruling prices: C Shaw, two Char, 770, £875; 30, £488; Messrs S & N Shaw, three Friesian, 590 kgs £625; 710 kgs, £750, 570 kgs, £565; W Caughedy, Fr. 645 kgs £676; l S Cromie, two Fr, 660 kgs £688 and 640 kgs £622.
At the sheep sales top price was paid to A Robinson who cashed five hoggets, 21 kgs at £50, 238.10p.
Fat ewes topped at £49 and ewes with lambs at foot £68.50.
Pork pigs made up to 80p paid to Mrs Breadon for six weights 101 kgs at £81.
Fat sows up to 59p — 130 kgs at £77 while sows off pigs cleared to £95 and stores to £44.
Davis and Doherty clash again in quarter-final
Masters reunion
IT MAY be the same place, the same time and the same round but Steve Davis will be praying for a different result when he meets Ken Doherty in the £180,000 Benson and Hedges Irish Masters today.
Exactly 12 months ago, local hero Doherty caused a major upset by edging the six-times world champion 5–4 to earn a semi-final place.
If the outcome was unexpected the deciding frame was astounding.
Davis forfeited it when he missed a red three times in succession attempting a thin, safety clip.
‘I don't think that will happen again for a long time,’ said Davis, who comes to Goffs for this year's event with confidence boosted by triumphs in the British and European Opens.
But Davis, now with 65 tournament wins worldwide to his credit, has enormous respect for Doherty, who also beat him in the quarter-finals of October's Rothmans Grand Prix.
‘Ken is a very talented and composed young player who is developing into one of the game's best,’ said Davis.
‘He's not quite there yet but if he keeps on improving as he's doing, it won't be long.’
Stephen Hendry opens his title defence tonight against Nigel Bond, desperate to win a tournament before the world championship begins in Sheffield next month.
Alan McManus, an outstanding candidate for the season's most consistent performer, caused the shock of the event so far with an impressive 5–2 victory over Jimmy White last night.
McManus fired in runs of 33, 42, 39, 94, 75 and 37 to win four frames after trailing 2–1 and in what will be his ninth major tournament semi-final appearance of the season he will tackle John Parrott.
Parrott revelled in his good fortune both on and off the table as he scored a 5–3 victory over Thai-phoon James Wattana.
An outrageous fluke in frame four proved to be a major turning point.
Then on leaving the table, horse-racing fan Parrott discovered that Amron, his nap of the day, had sprinted home at 10–1 at Doncaster.
‘I'm not feeling guilty about the fluke at all,’ joked the 28-year-old Liverpudlian.
‘To be honest it's about time that I had a bit of luck.
‘I've been trying hard lately but sometimes this game can kick you in the teeth.
You begin to feel like a boxer.
When you keep getting hit on the nose you don't feel like getting back into the ring.’
Wattana had beaten Parrott in four major events this season and he seemed a good bet to improve this record when he established a 2–0 lead.
Parrott won the third frame comfortably, though, and recovered to 2–2 when his attempted pot on a red in the fourth struck the jaws of a top pocket, rebounded into the pack and knocked a red into the opposite middle pocket.
Showing no remorse, Parrott compiled a 75-break; he took the lead for the first time with a more orthodox run of 83 in the next and then forged 4–2 ahead with a superb 70 clearance to black in frame six after trailing 58–0.
‘That's my best performance of the season attitude wise,’ said Parrott, who has gone off the boil since opening the current campaign with tournament wins in China and Dubai.
Bryan misses Wembley date
FORMER Northern Ireland star Bryan Hamilton was sacked with his team just 90 minutes away from Wembley!
Wigan Athletic are 2–1 up on Stockport County after the first leg of the AutoGlass Trophy Northern final.
But now Hamilton has his sights fixed elsewhere other than the famous twin towers.
Hamilton will coach in America this summer then study training methods with his old Ipswich Town boss and former England manager Bobby Robson in Lisbon and with another buddy at PSV Eindhoven.
About the long term Hamilton says: ‘I won't slam any doors.
I want to stay in football.
I have not lost confidence in my ability.
‘I have experience in management, coaching, administration and I have an eye for a good player.’
Hamilton will be at Lansdowne Road on Wednesday — as a Radio 5 analyst.
Clarke in training
NORTHERN Ireland striker Colin Clarke is back in training at Portsmouth — but won't play again this season.
A decision on his longer term future has been delayed until the end of the season.
Clarke had 14 stitches in a knee wound after colliding with a goal post in a reserve match before Christmas.
Byrne's bonus
BANGOR stand to make a lot more than the £60,000 down payment on midfield ace Paul Byrne.
Celtic have agreed to vital stipulations which will add considerably to the value of the Republic of Ireland under-21 international.
Cash bonuses come the way of the super seasiders whom Byrne plays 15 first team matches and wins his first full cap.
McKeown storm
AN APOLOGY could go some way towards reconciling warring factions Micky McKeown and crisis club Glenavon.
The Mourneview defender who stormed out and demanded a transfer after a bust-up over training says: ‘The club is in the wrong and must be prepared to admit the mistake and put it right.’
But McKeown warns: ‘There can be no compromise.
I certainly won't be stepping down.’
McLean to stay on
WILD horses would not drag Stuart McLean away from Coleraine right now.
The Scottish defender is still on a high after hitting the extra time winner which earned his side a Wilkinson Sword League Cup final spot against Bangor on April 20.
‘My contract is up in May but I'm happy at the club and would love to stay next season if I'm wanted that is,’ he said from his home in East Kilbride.
McLean joined the Showgrounds scene at the start of the season together with Derek Cook and Alan Ewing after spending three and a half years with Hamilton Accies.
‘I still train with Hamilton every day and also with an under 21 team,’ added the fitness fanatic whose progress with Coleraine has been carefully monitored by his former club.
‘Even if anyone came in for me I wouldn't want to go before the end of the season.
Reaching the cup final is the best thing ever to happen to me.
It has given us all a lift.’
Reid makes mark
FORMER Glentoran and RBAI schoolboy Stuart Reid is making his mark on the American college circuit.
Operating as a striker for Penn State, he scored a record 14 goal in the Big Ten League, was named Big Ten ‘Freshman of the Year’ and named in the Big Ten All Star XI by the ‘Soccer America’magazine.
Stuart's coach at Penn State is Barry Gorman well known to Irish League fans during his spell here with Linfield and other clubs.
Now Gorman is thinking of moving Reid into midfield where he starred for RBAI.
‘I'm going to see if I can adapt to that position,’ said Reid.
‘I still enjoy scoring and I'll try to do it as much as I can from the middle.
if it doesn't work out, I'll move back up.’
FIRST Division promotion chasers Leicester City are tracking Bangor's 29 goal striker David McCallan.
Scout David Nish watched the 21-year-old shooting star against Linfield in the Wilkinson Sword League Cup semi-final on Tuesday.
Call to canny kids to save rainforests
A FEW weeks ago TeleClub featured Kristian Schmid (Todd in ‘Neighbours’) and how he was looking for a boy or girl from Northern Ireland to join his Steel Can Recycling Board.
Boys and girls from all over the UK will join Kristian for a day in London, and will discuss how best to encourage people to re-cycle their steel cans.
Most of the cans on the grocery shelves of supermarkets are steel cans — the ones that contain soup, baked beans, rice, and vegetables.
You will always know a steel can by using a magnet — if it sticks, it's steel!
If it doesn't stick, then it's almost certainly an aluminium can.
Most of the soft drinks which children love are stored in aluminium cans, but like the steel ones, not nearly enough are re-cycled each year.
Now you have a chance to save your aluminium cans — and help buy a rainforest in Ecuador!
The Children's Tropical Forests Appeal has been set up to raise £10,000 to buy at least 285 acres of threatened tropical forest in the Jatun Sacha area of Ecuador.
Each aluminium can you collect will buy one square metre of tropical forest which will be preserved for future generations.
And it's easy — special collection boxes are in McDonald's restaurants, and supermarkets of the Stewarts and Crazy Prices chains.
Each can you save is worth nearly a penny to the Appeal.
As well as helping to save the rainforests, you'll also be helping the environment close to home.
Recycling aluminium cans not only reduces litter, but saves energy as well.
A staggering 95pc of the energy used to make aluminium from raw materials can be saved by recycling.
So, start collecting your cans today and help save a rainforest.
And don't forget to tell your friends as well.
Ards
TRADE continued buoyant for calves at Ards Livestock Mart where continental bulls sold to £265 for a 10-day-old Simmental exhibited by D F Crawford, Portaferry.
The same breed topped the heifer department when Francis Curragh, Donaghadee, sold an animal, ten days old for £162.
Friesian bulls continued to attract sound demand and John Stewart, Portaferry collected £178 and £176 for a couple of suitable bulls.
IRA haven't suffered half enough: MP
DUP deputy leader Peter Robinson has said he would be ‘very glad’ to see more Loughgall-style killings of IRA members.
And he added it was absurd that Army units which uncovered intelligence about intended attacks on UDR men, as at Drumnakilly outside Omagh, should end up in court.
Criticising new Dublin senator Gordon Wilson's comments that the IRA men he plans to meet were human beings and had suffered too, the East Belfast MP said: ‘They haven't suffered half enough.’
His comments came at the start of the monthly meeting of Castlereagh Council last night where members stood for a minute's silence in tribute to the four Catholic workmen killed in Castlerock and the two young victims of the IRA Warrington blast.
They were unaware of the shooting at the Dairy Farm complex in Twinbrook.
Mr Robinson said the minute's silence was becoming a ritual.
‘Every time we meet we are having to recognise that evil men are cutting down people from our community.’
He attacked Security Minister Michael Mates' warning that protection could not be guaranteed for everybody.
‘The fact is you don't sit back and wait for the UFF or IRA to hit their victims — you go after them.
‘I was saddened by the words Gordon Wilson said to an empty Dublin senate.
I noticed he said some may call him naive — that is the very best that anyone could call him.
‘I have no doubt Gordon Wilson is sincere but he is sincerely wrong.
He describes the IRA as fellow human beings who have also suffered.
They haven't suffered half enough.
I would be very glad if there were a few more Loughgalls.’
Ulster Unionist John Bell said there had to be a military victory over the terrorists before a political solution could be found.
Councillors Geraldine Rice and Tommy Jeffers joined in the criticism of Mr Mates.
Magical trips for winning film critics
I'VE just received details of the rewards awaiting the winners of our ‘Young Film Critic of the Year’ Competition.
Sponsored by the Belfast Telegraph, the competition invited young people to write a short review of one of the films shown at ‘Cinemagic’ before Christmas.
Cinemagic is the Northern Ireland International Film Festival for Young People and is a project of the Northern Ireland Film Council.
An overall winner and a runner-up were chosen from the many entries and their reviews were featured in TeleClub a few weeks ago.
Anne Corr from Dungannon won the top prize and towards the end of April, Anne and one of her parents will fly to London for a hectic couple of days.
They will view a special animation event on their first afternoon, then following a slap-up meal, will attend the opening night of ‘Un Coeur En Hiver’(A Heart in Winter), an award-winning love-story.
The Corrs will spend the next day at the Museum of Moving Image (MOMI).
The fabulous museum tells the story of moving images beginning in 2000 BC with shadow puppets through the silent era and the golden age of Hollywood, and on to recent developments in television.
A fascinating and entertaining trip is guaranteed!
Margaret Scally from Ballycastle won second prize in the ‘Young Film Critic of the Year’ Competition.
At the end of May Margaret and one of her parents will spend a day in Dublin as guests of Twentieth Century Fox.
They will attend the Irish premiere of the film ‘Used People’ starring Shirley MacLaine, Jessica Tandy and Kathy Bates, followed by a lavish meal at a special location.
Anne and Margaret will be using their talents as writers of reviews to tell us about what we hope will be memorable experiences.
Watch out for details about their trips in future editions of TeleClub.
Workmen tell of day-by-day murder fears
WORKMEN spoke today of the constant threat they live with day by day: that they will be mercilessly gunned down as they go about earning a living.
The men, all Protestants, said their boss was reviewing the policy of taking contracts in predominantly-nationalist areas.
Yesterday four Roman Catholic workmen were murdered by the UFF as they carried out renovation work on houses in Castlerock.
‘You work where you are sent, but you are nervous when you are in certain areas.
Local people don't talk to you and you sense an atmosphere.
‘But it is a fact of life in Northern Ireland and there is nothing you can do about it,’ said one man.
The men said they were shocked to hear of the cold-blooded murder of workmen in the quiet Co Derry village.
‘It is the last place you would expect this kind of thing to happen.
It just brings it home to you that it can happen anywhere,’ said a colleague.
The men said their employer was thinking twice about sending them to work in nationalist areas.
‘The Castlerock attack could easily have been us.
When people find out what area you are from, it is a good enough reason to shoot you.
But what can you do?
You have to earn a living,’ one of the men added.
Leckpatrick speculation mounts
SPECULATION over the future of Leckpatrick Holdings increased yesterday with the offer of £21.7m from Cork-based dairy concern Golden Vale and the entry into the arena of another would-be buyer, a Northern Ireland-based consortium.
At the same time it was announced Leckpatick chief executive Malcolm Woods had resigned to take up a new position as managing director of John Kelly, Belfast.
A source close to Leckpatrick said the parting had been ‘amicable.’
The new consortium which will be putting its offer to Leckpatrick next week has called on shareholders to take no action until they have heard further from the consortium.
Milk Board chiefs prepare for big changes
ROBIN Morrow and William Fullerton will lead the Milk Marketing Board through the coming changes in the dairy industry.
Board members have reiterated their confidence in the duo by re-electing them chairman and vice-chairman respectively.
Mr Morrow said: ‘I look forward to the challenge of leading the industry into a free market situation and to creating the right framework within which producers, processors and consumers can benefit from the increased competition which will inevitably affect all sectors of the industry.
‘The position of dairy farmers will best be safeguarded if they are united in the marketing of their produce and I have no doubt their new co-operative will become a reality in the near future.’
Mr Fullerton said: ‘The decisions taken in the year ahead will determine the structure of the industry for the remainder of this century and beyond.
‘The MMB has done an excellent job for milk producers in the past, providing a sure market and a guaranteed payment for their milk.’
Box-ing clever
BSkyB are set to screen three matches simultaneously, if Norwich, Aston Villa and Manchester United can all win the Premier League title on the final day of the season.
The three teams' fixtures would be rescheduled for Sunday, May 9, with the same kick-off time so there was no advantage to be gained.
BSkyB would use different channels for live coverage of Middlesbrough v Norwich, Wimbledon v Manchester United and Queens Park Rangers v Aston Villa.
Bookies back Oxford
BOAT Race whipping boys Cambridge go into tomorrow's 139th oar war with Oxford on an unexpected wave of optimism.
Beaten 16 times in the last 17 years over the 4 mile Putney to Mortlake course and virtually written off by the bookies, the Light Blues insist they can turn the tide.
‘We are confident we can beat anybody at the moment,’ said Cambridge coach John Wilson.
On paper Oxford look unstoppable two reigning Olympic champions, five former Boat Race winners and the most sought after coach in international rowing to make the cocktail gel in Mike Spracklen.
Dance sport
Irish hit ‘gold’ standard in Malahide
FLORA Millar's Dublin Gold Championships at Malahide's Grand Hotel once again was a sell out success.
Competitors from mainland UK failed to make an impact against the local talent in the Standard and Latin American sections.
The superb dancing of Dublin pair Michael O'Connor and Sharon McCann added yet another Standard section title to their Irish Open and All Ireland wins.
The win provided a fitting send off to Salt Lake City, Utah, where they are representing the Republic at the World's Standard Championships in the Mormon University.
Seems a funny place for a World championship?
Not so — students from the university have won major international titles for formation dancing for decades and can include the sport in their degree studies Interested?
Better be an early riser — their coaching and rehearsal sessions start at 6.30am — no smoking, no drinking, no bad language!
Maybe that's the road sport in general should be taking.
Belfast's Roy Blackstock and Lorraine Aiken took the Latin American title and on their displayed form have a freewheeling, downhill run home to yet another All-Ireland title.
Question is, what then?
They are young and talented and if they choose to turn professional they could do very well in pro events and become a major coaching influence in Ireland.
Continuing a well deserved winning streak, Bangor's John and Poppy Kerr won the Senior title, with defending champions Jim and Joan Murphy moving to the runners-up position.
The Juvenile Latin American title also came North with Paul Young and Nadene Martin, short in size but tall in talent, and a combination destined to enjoy further success.
Anyone passing Belfast's Europa Hotel on Monday could well have seen it moving to a funky beat — not because of high winds or earthquake, but the first heat of the Coca Cola ‘93 Disco Dancing Championships, which are co-sponsored by ‘Sunday Life’.
Altogether a ‘standing room only’ happening with Disco experts from six to 16 strutting their stuff.
The heat attracted 200 solo entries and 10 team entries, and if the standard shown is to be the norm then Scotland's representatives for the Grand Final will have to be very brave, never mind talented.
The day it all changed
THE people of Castlerock have often wondered when the horror of sectarian slaughter would come to their peaceful, seaside village.
For 24 years the barbarity of cold-blooded terrorism — so prevalent across the province — had seemed ‘a world away’.
But that all changed yesterday morning when the picturesque holiday resort on the edge of the Atlantic was awoken by the sound of gunfire from a UFF murder gang.
Two Catholic workmen lay dead, two more died in hospital a short time later, and another was seriously injured.
Castlerock's 1,500 residents, the majority of them Protestants, have never had time for sectarianism and division.
But they have dreaded the day terrorism would strike.
Presbyterian minister, the Rev Frank Russell, said: ‘We are part of Northern Ireland and this kind of thing was almost bound to happen here sooner or later.
‘Unless there is a change of heart and a positive determination to rid ourselves completely of this terrorism, then it is bound to happen in places such as Castlerock, as it has done in other areas.’
Mr Russell said all the churches in the village worked together in close harmony.
‘We are a lot further advanced than some in this respect.
We do various things in common with our Roman Catholic neighbours,’ he added.
Dr Bruce Styne — originally from California but who came to live in Castlerock six years ago after a spell working in London — said: ‘The people love this place.
There has never been any trouble.
‘It is a mixed community and everyone takes a great pride in the village.
I am Jewish and have always been made very welcome.’
Village priest Fr Kieran O'Doherty also praised Castlerock for its ‘excellent community relations’.
‘Everyone lives on a neighbourly basis with each other.
They would have read about these things happening, but now it has come to their own door it has been greeted with great sadness.’
Mrs Margaret Black, whose house was being renovated by the murdered men, echoed his sentiments.
‘We just can't take it in.
I have lived here for 40 years and no one ever bothered anyone.
‘The workmen were always very pleasant and chatted to us all the time.
It did not matter who they were or where they were from,’ she said.
The four who died were James Kelly (25), and James McKenna (52), from Maghera, Co Londonderry; Gerry Dalrymple (58), from Rasharkin and Noel O'Kane (20), from Upperlands.
A fifth man remains seriously ill in hospital.
TABLE TENNIS
Dublin challenge
DUBLIN is the destination for over 40 representative players from Ulster tomorrow.
The Forward Trust Belfast League Senior quartet of League champion Derek Weir, Wai Sun Chan, Willie Cherry and Liz Cheevers has a winning look about it as it faces the Dublin and District League while the Junior quartet of John Fall, Harry Finlay, Andrew Gibson and Sharon Ferguson, drawn from division two, hope to maintain their winning run against Dublin.
Six Ulster Junior teams at U-17, Cadet and U-12 levels compete in the Interprovincial championships at the IWA Hall.
The Junior boys and Cadet girls are defending champions but much is expected of the Junior girls side, with the U-12 girls having an outside chance of upsetting Leinster.
Ronnie's search
NAMES are being drawn up for the Co Antrim team to take part in May's Coca-Cola Under 18 Championship.
Clubs who feel they have boys worthy of inclusion should contact Ronnie McQuillan at Distillery FC.
‘We know about the players with senior clubs but there may be those in leagues like the Amateur League or in Boys' Clubs who would be worth looking at,’ says Ronnie.
‘We will probably hold some trial games before making our final selection.’
Players must be Under 18 on August 1 and be with clubs affiliated to the Co Antrim FA.
ALTHOUGH I promised you last week that I'd bring details of the all Ireland Schools teams competition this week, I'm afraid that I don't have full details to hand as yet, so I'll hold it over to next week.
My hand today comes from a duplicate pairs game played at the St Malachy's club earlier this week.
It features a well thought out line of play which reaped a just reward.
Sitting South, playing pairs at love all, you hold AQ7 K965 932 1096.
North deals and opens one club, East passes and you respond one heart.
West butts in with a bid of three spades — weak — and North bids four hearts.
East considers that briefly but passes, as do you and West.
The opening lead is the seven of diamonds, and the full hand is as follows, but try covering the East and West hands as you decide on your line of play.
Your initial appraisal indicates that whilst the contract isn't laydown, there are reasonable prospects for success.
The opening lead looks unlikely to be from a strong diamond holding and thus you decide to play small from dummy at trick one.
That manoeuvre might lead to a diamond ruff for West at trick two, but even that is unlikely to prove fatal.
Rather as you expected East wins the first trick with the ten of diamonds, and at trick two leads the four of spades.
You elect to win that with the ace, and lead a low club.
That fetched the two from West, the queen from dummy and the ace from East, who then leads a second spade — the nine.
You try the queen but West covers with the king and you ruff in dummy.
Time to tackle trumps now, so the ace is led from dummy to which all follow small, and you follow up with the jack intending to run it if East doesn't cover.
However, East plays the queen on the jack so you win with the king and to your delight East drops the ten.
Things are really looking up, so now you decide to broach clubs again.
When you lead the ten from hand West plays the jack and you win in dummy with the king.
Dummys last heart is led to your nine, which draws the outstanding trump.
After cashing the nine of clubs the ace of diamonds is an entry to dummy which allows you to cash the remaining two club tricks and discard your losing diamond and spade.
Eleven tricks made for a very good score, as several other declarers had actually contrived to go off in the same contract.
The crucial play of the hand involved the handling of the trumps suit.
The intention to run the jack of hearts on the second round was well thought out as it would have allowed declarer to retain control of the trump suit, even if the second trump trick had been lost.
Sitting South, playing pairs at game all, you hold J964 Q873 — 108654.
North deals and opens one diamond.
East passes as do you and West doubles.
North passes and so does East.
What would you bid now?
The situation is bleak.
From the bidding so far it seems that East is sitting over North with a strong and long diamond holding.
Hence one diamond doubled is definitely not going to be a good contract, and you must do something to improve the situation.
What you really want partner to do is bid one of the other three suites.
You don't really mind which one as you have support for them all.
This is a textbook position in which to use the SOS redouble.
If you think about it, as you weren't strong enough to respond on the first round, you can hardly want to redouble now to play.
By redoubling you are asking partner to bid something — anything — else, and even if it's a three card suit you'll be in a better contract than one diamond doubled.
In practice, opponents are less likely to double your rescue contract, and you may wriggle out of trouble.
Rupert the Bear stars in new musical
RUPERT the Bear will be in Belfast next week — in a musical play called ‘Rupert and the Green Dragon.’
The show is being staged at the Grand Opera House in Belfast, from Tuesday March 30 until Saturday April 3, with morning and afternoon shows only.
Tuesday has only one performance — at 2.00pm — but from Wednesday until Saturday there are two shows a day, at 10.30am and 2.00pm.
‘Rupert and the Green Dragon’ is produced by the same people who brought ‘Postman Pat and ‘Fireman Sam’to the Opera House so it will obviously appeal to children who love to see their favourite characters on stage.
For information on ticket prices and availability, you can telephone (0232) 249129.
80 exhibitors gather at career convention
NORTHERN Ireland's largest ever careers and higher education convention got under way today at Methodist College, Belfast.
Co-sponsored by the Belfast Telegraph more than 80 exhibitors from all areas of business and university life travelled to Belfast for the two-day convention.
Included among the wide variety of representatives were careers officers from major English and Scottish universities, including Oxford, Cambridge and Edinburgh.
Representatives from the world of high finance included chartered accountants and members of the major high street banks.
Chartered accountants BDO Binder Hamlyn are also sponsoring the event.
Eric Lindsay, head of economics at Methodist College, has been central in organising the fair.
He said schools from across the province had been invited to attend.
The ‘Options in the 90s’ careers and higher education convention ends at lunchtime tomorrow.
Belfast's title
THERE was great excitement at the Ulster Cup finals last night in Maysfield Leisure Centre.
Sporting Belfast won the womens' final beating Grosvenor 80–46.
Sporting had just too much fire-power for Grosvenor to contain.
Top scorers for Sporting — Thompson 20, O'Sullivan 12 and for Grosvenor, O'Neill 11, and Callaghan 10.
In the men's final Annadale/Queen's won a thriller against Star of the Sea 68–67.
This game was played at great pace with some spectacular dunks.
Star were up 36–34 at halftime, but a storming performance by Annadale saw them squeezed home to a deserved victory.
This weekend's play-off sees Star travel to Cork to play North Mon.
This will be a tough match-up but Star could do it.
Meanwhile, Annadale play Killester for eighth place and a Division One place next year.
Annadale are at a disadvantage having to travel to Dublin, but they are capable of winning.
Success sets Sharon on road to Rio
UNIVERSITY of Ulster girl Sharon Cunningham is on the road to Rio.
The 22-year-old fashion student has sewn up the opportunity of a lifetime by winning last night's Northern Ireland Smirnoff Fashion Designer of the Year Award.
She goes on to represent the province at the world final of the Smirnoff International Fashion Awards in Rio in October, with the chance to win 10,000 US dollars to help develop her career.
As broadcaster Selina Scott — on her first visit to Belfast — presented the trophy and £500 prize, the winner laughed: ‘I think I need a holiday!’
Sharon, from Dublin, combined faux fur, denim, silk tweed, suede and linen for her winning look of buckled Cossack coats, tweed jackets and denim leggings on ‘The Pure Thrill of Living’ theme.
‘I went for over-the-top, with strong colours yellow and navy.
When you dress up you want to have fun with clothes.’
Her long-term plan is to set up her own business.
International designer Paul Costelloe, for the judges, said the panel unanimously placed Sharon first.
He praised the professionalism and innovation shown by all 16 student finalists.
Runner-up, with a £300 prize, was Karven Wai Ching Lee of the University of Ulster with a cool linen range.
Third (£200) was Downpatrick girl Lesley Martin (18) of the Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education, with an avant garde linen range taking its theme from medieval times.
Hair, with elaborate wigs and hairpieces, was by Tom Mulrine of Gatsby International, Bangor.
Proceeds are in aid of Age Concern, Combat Cancer and Sparks in the Dark, a Newry-based theatre group for disabled people.
Elderly residents moved as Board closes down home
THE residents of an old people's home in Londonderry, some of whom are in their late 80's, are to be moved to new accommodation and the home closed, the Western Health and Social Services Board has announced.
There are 23 residents at the Shantallow Residential Home for the Elderly, and a number of these were moved last year when the Roe Valley home closed.
They will now be moved into one of the three remaining homes for the elderly on the city's west bank and it is understood that staff will also be deployed at these units.
The Board's General Manager Tom Frawley said today that the decision to close the Shantallow home had been a difficult one, but claimed it was the only possible course of action ‘in light of the increase over the last few years in the level of nursing home accommodation and the reduced demand for residential accommodation which has come about as a result of improvements in housing in general and the development of sheltered accommodation and other community alternatives.’
Mr Frawley said that staff would work closely with residents to ensure the minimum of upset.
The Board's decision has been criticised by SDLP leader and Foyle MP John Hume.
He said ‘We are approaching the situation where the ‘mixed-economy’ will mean public money funding private profit with little or no statutory provision to provide choice or help to set standards.’
Girl dies as fire sweeps house
A BRAVE neighbour today told of the desperate efforts to save a family from a Ballymena house fire in which a six-year-old girl died.
Sandy Lee Gilmore perished in the early morning blaze at her terraced home on the Drumtara estate.
Neighbours helped save the girl's mother, two younger sisters and an aunt.
But they were beaten back by thick smoke before they could reach young Sandy Lee.
Sandy Lee's mother, Siobhan Gilmore, her two youngest children, three-year-old Tamara and Deborah, who is a few months old, and Siobhan's sister, Tanya, were taken to the Waveney Hospital suffering from shock and smoke inhalation.
The rescuers included Mark McCullough, Roberta Anderson and Rodney Balmer.
Mark said: ‘I kicked the front door in and tried to get upstairs, but was beaten back by the smoke.
‘Then Rodney came over and the two of us went into the back yard and saw Siobhan screaming for help out of a bedroom widow.’
Roberta got a ladder, but it would not reach the window.
They called to Siobhan to drop tiny Deborah to them.
Mark caught the baby in his arms.
He said: ‘We then put the ladder up against the wall.
Rodney went up and Siobhan reached Tamara down to him and he passed her on to me.
‘We told Siobhan to come to the window-ledge and to hang down holding on by her fingertips.
She fell on top of me, but I was able to get a hold on her.’
Siobhan shouted that Sandy Lee was still in the front bedroom.
But Mark was beaten back by smoke half-way upstairs.
Two fire engines arrived shortly after 7am and quickly got the blaze under control.
Plymouth is blockaded in fish protest
FISHERMEN today mounted a blockade of Plymouth harbour in a protest over cheap imports of fish.
Around 50 vessels had gathered around the Devon naval port, witnesses said.
The action follows a blockade on Monday by more than 60 ships at Teesport, Britain's second largest commercial port.
Fishermen from Devon and Cornish ports arrived throughout the night at Plymouth and stopped the 8,500 ton French-owned ferry Quiberon on an overnight crossing from Roscoff from docking.
Men from Newlyn, Bideford, St Mawes, Salcombe, Mevagissey and Dartmouth as well as local boats were taking part in the protest.
Also forced to anchor was a Royal fleet auxiliary ship.
The Quiberon was due to head back to France at 9am with several huge lorries of fish for France and Spain on board.
David Pessell, chairman of the Plymouth Trawlermen's Association, said the protest would show the strength of opposition to the Sea Fish Act.
Charlie boy is the punters' darling
Graceful Swan
THE spontaneous and knowledgeable applause which greeted Charlie Swan when he rode into the winners enclosure at Navan in December 1992 said it all.
Charlie had just landed his 100th winner of the calendar year — the first jockey to do so — and the crowd were determined that he should be made aware quickly and with as much emphasis as possible, how they felt about him.
For Swan, the jockey with the choir boy looks, has become the punter's friend in Irish racing, the rider the small man loves to follow with a confidence which is rare in a sport known for its uncertainties.
To most of the regulars who troop from Down Royal in the north to Tipperary in the south, Charlie can do no wrong.
They feel he is on their side which is like a breath of fresh air in this game for most of us have known to our cost that there are many jockeys who don't always give their 100pc — especially when our money is down.
Or so it seems, anyway.
Now Charlie who has set a host of records in recent months is heading for another one — the highest number of winners in the newly formed Irish jump season.
But more than that he is anxious to win the one big race about which he has always dreamed — the National.
‘Ever since my father got as far as the fourth fence when leading the field on Zimulator in L'Escargot's year in 1975, I have wanted to do well in the race,’ he told me.
‘At first, I was keen just to get round but having done that for the last three years, I am now seriously looking at winning the race.’
Charlie of course is now the man every trainer wants to engage because of his marvellous performance at Cheltenham in booting home four winners and taking the Ritz Club Trophy for the top jockey at the festival.
It was certainly a Cheltenham to remember for Charlie and he recalled it with relish.
‘Fantastic,’ he said.
‘I thought the horses I was riding had each way chances but I never expected four winners.
Funnily enough, the one I gave the biggest chance to was Heist in the Festival Bumper but he finished second.
Three times in a row he has been champion jockey but his achievement in 1992, re-wrote the record books and won't be equalled by anyone else for a long time to come, if ever.
He beat Martin Molony's record of 92 wins in 1950, that red letter day arriving on a Sunday in November when he rode the Ulster-owned Atone to a victory at Fairyhouse.
This gave Charlie 93 and the magical 100 was within his grasp.
Relentlessly, he reeled off the winners until that memorable afternoon at Navan when by a remarkable coincidence, another Ulster horse, Novello Allegro gave him his place in history.
‘I knew I had landed my 100th winner,’ Charlie told me ‘but I never expected the sort of reaction I received from the crowd.
They were marvellous.
Usually horses are applauded into the winners enclosure.
Jockeys are known sometime to receive a different reception!’
Charlie went on to ride 109 winners in that calendar year but his total for the current season which ends in May, looks like being even bigger.
The son of a former officer in the Dragoon Guards, Captain Donald Swan, who still trains in Tipperary, Charlie obviously had racing in his blood and after leaving school at 15 he had made up his mind to be a jockey.
He began pony racing and as his father actively encouraged him, he naturally progressed to horses and by coincidence landed his first winner on his first ride — Final Assault on the Flat at Naas in March 1983.
Captain Swan was the trainer on that occasion and Charlie then moved on to the Kevin Prendergast yard where he had to give up Flat racing because of a sharp rise in his weight following an accident.
He broke his leg schooling and told Prendergast he wanted to go jumping.
Kevin rang Dessie Hughes and Swan went on from there.
Charlie is still with Hughes who along with Noel Meade, has first claim on him, although he rode Cahervillahow in the Gold Cup for Mouse Morris, his old partner.
It was Morris who gave Swan his first Cheltenham winner in 1990 when Trapper John took the Stayers Hurdle, still the biggest day in Charlie's life.
Morris also supplied Swan with two of his three National mounts — Last of the brownies, Mick's Star and Roc de Prince — but he didn't give him his first Liverpool winner.
This was Boreen Belle trained by Bill Harney in the White Satin Novices Hurdle in 1989.
Then last year Charlie made it two when the Arthur Moore trained Ninepins came home at 14–1 in the Oddbins Handicap Hurdle after a terrific ride from Swan.
For someone who is only 24 Charlie Swan has had a lot of falls and has broken both legs and arms as well as his nose.
He has also cracked his skull and still carries the scar.
For all this however, he has an iron nerve and told me, ‘I have never been scared but when I go out for the National I get a tingling sensation.
That's the excitement of the occasion.
It's certainly something special.’
Strangely for one who has been so successful, Charlie has never been inundated by offers from English trainers, although no doubt this is in the process of changing following those Cheltenham wins.
Before this year, Carlie had only received one chance of a retainer and that was from Nicky Henderson back in 1989.
Whelan in
RONNIE Whelan has been drafted into the Republic of Ireland squad for next Wednesday's World Cup qualifier against Northern Ireland at Lansdowne Road.
Manager Jack Charlton has called him up because of doubts about Middlesbrough's Alan Kernaghan and Chris Morris.
Whelan, out with a thigh injury since last September, has made an immediate impact on his return to the midfield for Liverpool, who are unbeaten in their last four games.
He won the last of his 44 caps in the 2–1 victory over Wales in Dublin last month.
Aintree saviour
THERE have been lucky winners of the Grand National but, of them all 100–1 chance Foinavon must rank supreme — and may also have been indirectly responsible for saving the race.
Sole contender to get over the 23rd fence at the first attempt in a huge pile-up in 1967, the moderate, blinkered Foinavon held on to his unexpected lead all the way to the winning post, seven lonely fences later, to beat Honey End with Red Alligator, who won it next year, third.
Yet, while Foinavon was indisputably lucky, bravery and skill also came into the reckoning.
That day 20 horses were put out of the race at the smallest fence on the course.
All of them had safely negotiated Becher's for the second time.
The commentator even remarked on the fact that the two loose horses leading the field had caused no hindrance.
They jumped straight and true, as if guided by jockeys.
But all that changed at the next, as the loose horses stopped and swerved broadside to the take-off side of the fence.
The havoc they wreaked was total.
Most of the horses were baulked and refused.
Some jockeys reached the landing side without their partners.
A few combinations scrambled over only to fall apart on landing.
Into this melee came the backmarkers, Foinavon among them.
Much credit is due to the quick thinking of his jockey John Buckingham riding in his first Grand National, in steering him over to the wide outside and popping him through a gap.
And an equal amount to the horse himself who had every excuse to stop on the take-off side along with most of his comrades.
From a virtual standstill he jumped over.
And entirely alone, he faced the remaining seven fences; a situation not for the faint of heart, for it is in company that horses race best, their adrenalin stimulated by the competition at their heels.
Buckingham did not realise at first that he had been the only one to get over the 23rd fence at the first attempt.
But by the Canal Turn he knew and by Valentines he realised he only had to stand up to win.
‘It is to Foinavon's eternal credit that he did not refuse either at the melee when he had every excuse to or when he was out on his own especially when he was tiring,’ Buckingham said.
‘When I saw Honey End and Greek Scholar coming at me I didn't think they could catch up but I gave Foinavon one more slap just in case as we jumped the last.
I must admit I was nearly unconscious at the end of it.’
Foinavon passed the post with his ears pricked and that night he ate up just as usual.
It was only the fourth time that one horse had completed a clear round.
The others were Glenside in 1911, Shaun Spadah in 1921 and Tipperary Tim in 1928.
Foinavon's win may have been due at least in part to the somewhat unorthodox individual training of his young handler, John Kempton.
Although his win brought amazed gasps at the time and returned odds of 444–1 on the tote, Foinavon in fact had been bought specifically with the Grand National in mind.
Kempton had a small yard in Compton in Berkshire and some loyal but unwealthy owners.
He had studied to be a vet but lack of finances had forced him to quit and he became a blacksmith.
He took out a permit; then, mustering a few owners, he was granted a licence to train at Compton.
First owned by Anne Duchess of Westminster, Foinavon — named after Scottish mountains in the manner of Ben Stack and Arkle — had won three chases for Tom Dreaper but had a tendency to fall and the Duchess decided to sell him.
One of his wins had qualified him for the National so when he came up for sale at Doncaster, Kempton secured him for 2,000 guineas on behalf of two of his owners who were keen to have a runner in the race.
John's prime aim was to improve the horse's jumping.
He took him hunting with the Old Berkshire where he jumped all sorts of obstacles and had to learn to look after himself in tricky situations and he found a new enthusiasm.
Foinavon was lunged over jumps and popping over little schooling fences became a daily routine.
Kempton would have liked to have ridden Foinavon in the National himself but displayed loyalty to his owners on two counts — his minimum riding weight of 10 stone 10 pounds would put him 10 pounds overweight; and he had another horse running at Worcester.
So on Grand National day, he went to Worcester instead of Aintree and he even rode a winner — Three Dons in a novice hurdle.
Nothing however could have prepared him for the drama to come.
An hour or so later he settled in the jockeys changing room to watch the National, his father having travelled to Liverpool to saddle Foinavon and Buckingham having been booked to ride.
‘As the pile-up happened and before the commentator spotted him, I saw Foinavon pop over the fence for he was wearing distinctive yellow blinkers which I had had especially widened for the race to prevent mud from getting into his eyes,’ Kempton said.
‘I couldn't believe what was happening, I had bought the horse for the National and here he was winning it.
I don't think the implication penetrated my mind all that quickly — that it was more than just an ordinary race.’
The hullabaloo the next day in the papers probably helped to save the race.
This was the time when the future of the course was under a cloud owing to Mrs Topham's negotiations to sell the site for building development.
But the sensational pile-up re-emphasised that any horse could win the National and revitalised public interest.
As Kempton said ‘It's possible there would be no National now but for Foinavon winning.
The whole place would be a sea of council houses.’
So that was Foinavon's year, a race which still seems incredible looking back 26 years.
And what must the owner Cyril Watkins have felt, for he was too excited to watch the finish on television.
The story goes that he was watching at home with his wife but after the pile-up occurred, he could stand it no more and went out into the garden for the rest of the race.
His wife had to call him in to tell him he had won!
Handguns used to kill four workmen
3 gunmen in slaughter at seaside
THREE gunmen — and not two as at first believed — took part in the Castlerock massacre of four workmen, police revealed today.
An RUC spokesman said ballistic tests had established that three handguns were used in the attack, which also left a fifth man seriously injured.
It is thought the only survivor of the five escaped certain death by jumping out of the back of their workers' van into a garden.
Doctors fought for more than six hours to save the life of Noel O'Kane (20), a single man from Keady Road, Swatragh, but he died in Coleraine Hospital yesterday afternoon.
The van driver, James McKenna (52), a father of four from Fivemile Straight, Maghera, and the front seat passenger James Gerard Kelly (25), single, from Tirkane Road, Maghera, died instantly in the UFF shooting.
Robert Gerard Dalrymple (58), a father of six, from Church Road, Rasharkin, died in hospital a short time after the incident.
The funerals of Mr McKenna and Mr Kelly will take place tomorrow after separate Requiem Masses at St Patrick's Church, Glen.
Mr Dalrymple will be also be buried tomorrow after 12.30 Mass in St Mary's Church, Rasharkin.
Police have set up a special incident room at Coleraine RUC station and have appealed to the public to help catch the murder gang responsible for the seaside slaughter.
Detectives want to hear from anyone who saw a light blue Ford Transit van, registration number GIB 915, in Castlerock yesterday morning or between the village and the secluded spot on Springburn Road, Milltown, where it was burnt out at 9.35am.
Police believe the gang may have transferred to a waiting car.
The RUC are anxious to speak to the driver of a maroon Maestro car which was close to the murder scene yesterday morning, in order that they can eliminate them from the murder investigation.
A police spokesman said: ‘Anyone who saw either the van or the car can contact the incident room at Coleraine on 44122 or use the confidential free-phone 0800 666999.’
Meanwhile, the use of selective internment on both sides of the border as a means of curbing the present spate of violence was rejected today by the Republic's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dick Spring, and by the SDLP leader, John Hume.
Interviewed on RTE Radio, Mr Spring said the killings underlined the need for inter-party political talks to resume, while Mr Hume said the use of internment had proved to be counter-productive in the past.
SOON, the limits on the amount of advertising RTE TV and radio can sell will be lifted, to the dismay of daily and weekly papers in the Irish Republic.
For over two years, RTE has been strictly rationed in the advertising it could sell, so TV costs went up by over 60pc.
Last year, RTE earned IR£64.7m from TV advertising, while all newspapers brought in IR£108m worth of ad revenue.
The recession in consumer spending will mean little if any real growth this year, believes John Fanning, managing director, McConnells Advertising Services, Dublin.
Some sources say that for newspapers, the real enemy is not RTE, but UK newspapers, which are far cheaper in the Republic.
VAT on newspapers in the South is now 12.5pc, the highest in the EC.
The cost of TV advertising could even fall, by up to 15pc, says Paul Mulligan, manager, marketing services at RTE.
Easing the restrictions could help restart TV commercials' production in Dublin, now almost at a standstill, adds Jim Nolan, director, IAPI (Institute of Advertising Practitioners in Ireland) which represents nearly all ad agencies.
The Advertisers' Association, representing major advertisers, reckons that about IR£5m a year in ad money has been going outside the State, mainly to UTV and Channel 4.
That cash is likely to return to RTE, says Fred Hayden, chief executive, Association of Advertisers in Ireland.
Smaller and medium sized Irish companies, forced off TV by the cost, could also return.
But the idea of a third TV channel in the Republic is now a dead duck, although the Government plans to have a modest Irish language TV channel on air in about a year.
RTE faces strong competition for viewers, especially from UTV.
Nearly all urban areas are cabled, so viewers can choose from up to 20 channels, although satellite stations have failed to make inroads.
They have about 4pc of the total TV audience.
BBC1 is very popular, while UTV goes into well over 50pc of homes in the Republic.
It is now in Cork's 35,000 multi-channel homes, a significant coup in the South's second city for UTV, says Brian Grant, chief executive, Arks Advertising, Dublin.
UTV and Channel 4 now have their own separate sales arrangements in Dublin, and UTV is pushing itself as an all-Ireland TV medium.
In the Republic, RTE's share of the multi-channel market is over 50pc, according to Paul Mulligan.
Nearly all the top rated shows are home-produced.
‘It would be easier and cheaper to buy them in from abroad,’ he says.
But Martin Larkin, managing director of the Irish International ad agency in Dublin says; ‘People prefer well-made Irish programming.’
The next big international test of RTE's production skills will be the Eurovision Song Contest, due to come from Millstreet, Co.
Cork, on May 15, costing RTE IR£2.2m.
While UTV is making inroads with its viewing figures in the South, the absence of cable TV in Northern Ireland, particularly in Belfast, is hampering RTE's expansion there.
RTE claims to reach about 30pc of all homes in the province, mainly in the south and west, giving it 8pc of the total TV audience.
Radio continues to be a big success, taking 15pc of the national advertising budget, compared to around 2pc in the UK.
Last year, RTE earned just over IR£13.5m from radio ads on its two main channels.
It gets some advertising on its only local station, Cork 89FM, whose transmission hours are likely to be extended soon.
RTE Radio 1 has over one million listeners daily, while 2FM has over 700,000.
‘We have a very significant audience in Northern Ireland, although no figures have been produced,’ says Brian Pierce, manager, RTE radio sales.
Atlantic 252, broadcasting from Co.
Meath on long wave is 20pc owned by RTE; it is now the most popular commercial radio station in Britain and has a big, youthful audience in Northern Ireland.
The 21 independent local radio stations all over the Republic claim they are getting audiences of up to three million listeners each week.
This year, these stations should get a total ad revenue of IR£10m, well up from last year's £IR£6.7m.
Apart from RTE's TV ad revenue, boosted by the huge cost increases, no other medium in the South is enjoying such buoyancy.
Centre bomb suspects claim innocence
FOUR of the five men arrested in the World Trade Centre bombing proclaimed their innocence and, a month after the blast, federal investigators believe there may be only one suspect still loose.
‘The circle is now very narrow,’ Jim Esposito, head of the FBI's New Jersey office, said after the fifth suspect was arrested yesterday.
Authorities also disclosed that an explosives timing device like those in other terrorist bombings was recovered at the New Jersey home of suspect Nidal Ayyad, a chemical engineer who investigators believe has bomb-making know-how.
But at his court appearance, Ayyad insisted: ‘I am not guilty.
I swear by all I hold dear the Koran, my wife, child and mother I had nothing to do with this.’
Bilal Alkaisi (27), arrested yesterday, entered no plea to charges of aiding and abetting the bombing when he appeared in court.
He was ordered held for a bail hearing on Tuesday.
Another suspect, Mohammed Salameh, shouted ‘I am not guilty!’ as he stood before federal Magistrate Judge Michael Dolinger.
Hours before Alkaisi's arrest, another suspect, Mahmud Abohalima, was flown in from Egypt.
He fled the United States within days of Salameh's arrest.
Abohalima, Salameh and Ayyad, like Alkaisi, are charged with aiding and abetting the bombing.
All were ordered to be held without bail.
The other suspect, Ibrahim Elgabrowny (42), an Egyptian living in Brooklyn, pleaded innocent to obstruction of justice and other charges.
I was hit by joyride car, says soldier
A SOLDIER has described the dramatic moment when he claimed a joyrider's car sped past and struck him.
Private Barry Aindow (23) said he fired at the car because he feared his colleagues' lives were in danger.
The soldier is one of six paras on trial for crimes linked to the deaths of two teenagers in west Belfast in September 1990.
Karen Reilly (18) and her friend Martin Peake (17) died when soldiers opened fire on the stolen car they were in at Upper Glen Road.
Giving evidence at Belfast Crown Court yesterday Aindow said: ‘I heard a car racing towards me.
It sounded like an engine that was screaming.
‘All I could see was the lights of the car coming straight for me.
They were on full beam.
‘The car was on the wrong side of the road travelling fast.
I thought it was going to hit me.
‘I cocked my weapon as an immediate reaction.
I made an attempt to move out of the way then it struck me.’
The soldier said he didn't remember firing but thought he must have fired as the car was going away from him.
‘I fired at the car because it was going into the rest of my team, endangering their lives.’
Aindow added: ‘I was shook up like I wasn't really aware of what was happening.’
He claimed that he was struck on the left leg and was knocked off-balance and said that afterwards he had difficulty moving.
‘He made his way along the road until a colleague told him to sit down on the pavement.
Eventually he was taken to hospital.
It has been claimed that Aindow allowed himself to be struck on the leg to support the false story that he had been hit by the car.
Earlier, Private Lee Clegg (22) told the court he had fired three times in the vicinity of the car driver's head.
He did so ‘to incapacitate him — to make him realise he had just injured one of my colleagues.’
The four other defendants are still to give evidence At hearing
‘Fiasco’ sinks Yard profits
THE ‘fiasco freighter’ Fort Victoria has torpedoed profits at Harland and Wolff, sinking the Belfast shipyard £9.5m into the red, it emerged today.
Without the enormous costs run up by the Royal Navy vessel, the Yard would have made profits of £6.5m.
Harland's chairman, Dr John Parker, wasn't sad to see the ship go this week when he handed it over to the Navy in a ceremony at Cammell Laird shipyard on Merseyside.
It has cost Harland's about £16m to complete the prototype vessel, which is three years late and £70m over budget, prompting Labour MPs to dub it a ‘fiasco’.
Hold-ups with sub-contractors and problems in developing the ship's highly-sophisticated computer nerve-centre have been blamed.
However, Yard bosses are happy with the performance of Harland's other divisions, particularly merchant shipping, which made a profit of £4.1m.
Dr Parker revealed today that the company was close to signing a seven-year charter for one of its Capsize bulk carriers.
The deal, with a European customer, is due to be signed within the next fortnight.
Last year, Harland and Wolff made a modest profit of £602,000.
This year, losses amounted to £9.45m and there will be no dividend for shareholders.
48 HOURS OF TERROR
Wednesday: 9am — Sinn Fein member Peter Gallagher shot dead by UFF in Belfast.
Thursday: 1.50am — UFF grenade attack Belfast home of Sinn Fein councillor Joe Austin.
9am — Four Roman Catholic workmen murdered by UFF in Castlerock, Co Londonderry.
A fifth man remains still seriously ill. 6.30pm — Shots fired at security sanger in Crossmaglen, Co Armagh.
8.15pm — Dee Walsh (17) shot dead and another man seriously injured in UFF gun attack at Dairy Farm Centre, west Belfast.
IRA bomb factory uncovered.
IRA to stop — Sinn Fein SINN Fein today dismissed a demand from two senior MPs for the party to call on the IRA to lay down its arms in the wake of the Warrington bomb outrage.
But a leading party member said it would be willing to meet former Northern Ireland minister Peter Bottomley and Labour MP Harry Barnes to discuss the violence here.
The MPs, leaders of Britain's cross-party peace group New Consensus, wrote to Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams challenging him to appeal to the IRA to halt its campaign of violence.
Mr Adams was not available to comment on the call, but party press officer Richard McAuley rejected it and accused the MPs of ‘playing politics with lives’.
He criticised the MPs for ‘their absolute lack of understanding of the conflict here’ but said he would be willing to meet them to discuss the letter and other issues.
‘The letter is personally addressed to Gerry Adams so it is up to him to reply to it, but the party's position is that it highlights the MPs' total lack of understanding about the situation here and our position in it,’ he said.
‘Sinn Fein is not the IRA and is not involved in any violence, a position which even the British Government now accepts, so we are not in a position to call on the IRA to end its campaign.
‘We have not received a request to meet the MPs to discuss the issue, but we have always said that we are prepared to meet anyone, anywhere and that position has not changed.
If they want to meet us I could see no objections’.
He also criticised the MPs for not calling on loyalists to call off their campaign, despite the fact that ‘they killed more people than the IRA last year’.
In their letter, the MPs said the deaths of Johnathan Ball and Tim Parry at Warrington had marked ‘a new low in the so-called republican campaign to free Ireland’.
They also said the party did not have ‘a mandate for national revolution’ because it represented ‘only a minority of a minority’.
‘Is there no point beyond which Provisional Sinn Fein and the Provisional IRA are prepared to go?’, they asked.
‘Is anyone of any age in these islands — English, Irish or whatever — now a so-called legitimate target?’
CBI survey boosts early market deals
ENCOURAGED by the promising CBI survey on prospects for growth in the UK economy and stronger performances on Wall Street and in Tokyo, shares bounded ahead in early dealing.
The moment for bargain hunters to enter the market was ideal as the FTSE had slipped sharply over the past few days.
The 100-index opened strongly and continued moving ahead steadily to be up 18.9 at 2871.7.
Buyers were also encouraged to make their presence felt by the easing of political tensions in Russia.
Drugs groups Glaxo and SmithKline Beecham were in demand after recent falls.
Glaxo, the UK's biggest pharmaceuticals group, added 7p to 607p, with SmithKline 9p better at 412p.
Wellcome again looked sorry for itself following yesterday's results with the stock losing a further 18p to 801p.
Investors are particularly concerned such a high percentage of profits came from foreign exchange movements.
Building materials group Redland was again subject to heavy selling following its results yesterday.
The market believes strong growth prospects are limited in the medium term and the stock fell 11p to 456p.
Another strong overnight surge on the Hong Kong stock market allowed Midland Bank parent HSBC Holdings to climb 13p to 621p, while Cable & Wireless, with its large interests in the colony, added 8p to 733p.
HTV, the broadcaster to Wales and the west of England, slumped 6p to 32p following its annual results showing it had dived into the red.
Carlton was undeterred by HTV's news as it jumped 6p to 754p.
Central, however, slipped 8p to £17.80.
National Express, which stormed back into the black in line with its own forecasts at the time of flotation in December, added a penny to 192p.
Fashion group Helene's agreed £5.5 million takeover offer for Gabbicci left Helene 1p weaker at 22p, while Gabbicci firmed a penny to 42p.
LEC Refrigeration's dive into the red with a slashed dividend payout left the shares 8p weaker at 268p.
Drainage pipes to boilers group Hepworth was similarly in the doldrums, 7p off at 315p after results showed a sharp drop in profits.
Hepworth profits tumble
INDUSTRIAL group Hepworth, whose products range from drainage systems to garage doors, suffered a profits slump last year, figures out today showed.
Pre-tax profits tumbled to £44.8m from £70m in 1991 as the group had to pay exceptional redundancy and related costs of £9.2m.
Earnings per share fell to 15.6p from 24.1p but the 1991 dividend total of 14.85p per share is to be maintained.
Professor Sir Roland Smith, chairman of the Sheffield-based company, said the UK had entered 1993 with lower interest rates and Government policy would appear to be placing greater emphasis on economic and business growth.
‘This is to be welcomed, since continental European markets may be subdued this year,’ he added.
‘For Hepworth, there are encouraging signs of recovery in some of our UK operations, although trading in our continental businesses is less buoyant.’
A plea for compromise
I AM sure I am not the only woman who wept in sympathy, shame and anger at the outrage done to the people of Warrington.
What cause can justify the murder and maiming of children?
Do the terrorists on both sides ever stop to think what kind of a country they are creating?
Surely we can be warned by the horrors being perpetrated in the former Yugoslavia about the results of political, religious and ethnic intransigence.
We are all to blame for voting for politicians who are unwilling to work for a solution that would acknowledge the rights and aspirations of both traditions in our community.
Without compromise there can be no peace in individual, family, industrial, national and international relationships.
Let us work together to produce a country we can be proud of, not ashamed of.
Power firm in £90m deal
LONDON Electricity has bought the power distribution networks of Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted airports from BAA, formerly British Airports Authority, for £90 million.
It is buying the external high and low voltage electricity distribution systems of the three airports which, together, supply a maximum demand similar to that of a city the size of Cambridge.
The agreement gives London Electricity responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the systems while BAA will pay it an annual fee, set at £13.5 million for the first year, linked to the retail price index.
BAA staff who currently run the networks have been invited to become employees of London Electricity.
IMRO moves
THE Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) has appointed Ann Scully, vice-chairman of the National Consumer Council, and Christine Downton, an economist, to its board with effect from April 1.
Mortgage fix
NORTHERN Rock building society has announced a two-year fixed rate mortgage of 6.25pc and a three-year fix of 6.75pc.
Minimum advance is £20,000 and the loan can be transferred to a new property without penalty.
Discount bank
GIROBANK is offering its Visa customers another book of vouchers offering discounts at restaurants, diy stores and other retail outlets.
Picture turns red at HTV
THE picture at HTV turned red last year as the broadcaster to Wales and the west of England dived into losses.
The pre-tax deficit amounted to £2.1 million, compared with a profit in 1991 of £441,000.
Advertising revenue fell to £93.3 million from £98.5 million.
But the company said the first three months of this year had started satisfactorily.
Shareholders, who received a total dividend payout for 1991 of 3.75p per share, will receive nothing for last year.
Losses per share at the group rose to 2.7p from 0.5p.
INDOOR BOWLS
Mossley again
MOSSLEY bowling club won this season's East Antrim Indoor League championship for the tenth time with a nineteen shot victory over Ballycarry OP in their final game.
Last year's winners, Kilroot finished runner up just ahead of Ballynure Presbyterian.
The first time Mossley won the league was in 1966 and four of that team turned out this year — Tommy Crawford, Jimmy McKeown, David McKinstry and Bill McGaffin.
Many strings to her bow
In tune: Naomi Hazlett (9) from Greenisland, has plenty of strings to her bow.
Apart from being an accomplished violinist, the pupil at Victoria College prep' department also plays the piano and recorder, sings in the local choir, is a ballet and an Irish dancer.
Naomi recently scooped top place in the under-13 class at the Belfast Festival, and in the coming months will be attending a violin festival in Korea.
Picture by Mervyn Dowling.
Joyride case soldier denies being kicked
A PARATROOPER who claimed he was hit by a stolen car in west Belfast has denied he was, in fact, kicked by another soldier.
Pte Barry Aindow (23) is one of six paras on trial at Belfast Crown Court in connection with the deaths of two teenagers in September, 1990.
Karen Reilly (18) and Martin Peake (17) died when soldiers opened fire on the stolen car they were in at Upper Glen Road.
During cross-examination yesterday — the 13th day of the trial — a prosecuting lawyer suggested that he was either kicked or stamped on the leg by another soldier, or struck by a rifle.
‘None of this is true,’ the soldier replied.
The lawyer said that the reason for this was to provide justification for opening fire on a car which was not endangering anyone's life.
The soldier again denied this.
Earlier, Aindow told the court that he was hit on the left thigh by the side of the car, which knocked him into the side of road and possibly on to the kerb.
He said he heard a car engine racing behind him and turned round to see headlights.
Aindow is accused of the attempted murder of Martin Peake and of attempting to pervert the course of justice and obstructing the investigating police.
He is further charged with conspiracy with others to pervert the course of justice by allowing himself to be struck in the leg in order to support a false story that he was hit by the stolen car.
The hearing was adjourned until Monday.
Ireland 7 Italy 5
A TWO point win with only two tries scored in their opening game against seeded Italy, left Ireland very much thankful for small mercies at the start of the 18th annual Cathay Pacific Hongkong Bank invitational here today.
Playing in the third game of the 24 match round Robin stage of the tournament, Ireland were actually left to contemplate the spectre of extra time as Italy came back with a try just before the finish.
The jubilant scorer was scrum-half Francesco Plettosanti.
The conversion was from the left and well to the left, but kicker Missimo Bonomi waited until the charging Irish seven were almost on top of him before sending a high, curling attempt just wide of the posts.
Enough was only just enough and Ireland took a perfect record on to their second pool engagement against home town favourites Hong Kong.
Ireland opened with a team that had Patrick Johns and Malone's Dennis McBride propping for Jonathan Garth while scrum-half Alain Rolland linked with Eric Elwood, Richard Wallace and Vincent Cunningham in the backs.
What followed was hardly pretty.
Indeed the Irish performance bore little resemblance to the confident efforts of acknowledged Sevens experts and defending champions Fiji, who ran all over and around Malaysia to win the opening game 49–0, or Australia, who started by scoring 47 points while conceding a lone try to Singapore.
Still a win is a win and a most popular one at that with the majority of a crowd that was building towards 25,000, mindful of the previous Saturday's events at Lansdowne Road where the eclipse of England remains the season's highlight.
A scoreless first half saw defences uppermost on both sides with Ireland defending with spirit.
Later Cunningham broke away and ran some 40 metres to score easily, and, as subsequent events were to prove, a decisive conversion by Elwood.
Italy left the counter to the very last seconds with their scrum-half touching down on his own kick through.
Happily, at least for Ireland, the additional points were missing and that was that — a winning start to the team's first appearance at this, the best known of all Sevens tournaments.
Clarification
THE family of Magheraberry life prisoner Bobby Corry have asked us to point out that they did not attend his wedding on Thursday to fellow prisoner Anna Moore and his brother did not act as best man as suggested in our report.
Mick knows score
MICK McCarthy's scoring exploits with Skibbereen have been one of the outstanding features of the All Ireland Club football championship campaign.
And tomorrow the O'Donovan Rossa club sharpshooter will again be hoping to ‘make his point’ when his side face Eire Og (Carlow) in the final replay at the Gaelic Grounds, Limerick.
McCarthy drilled a huge hole in Lavey's confidence with his accuracy in the ill-tempered semi-final meeting between the sides and tomorrow his penchant for picking off scores will be vital to the Cork side's hopes of success.
The drawn game was a thriller — reputedly the best match seen at any level for some time.
That's a sentiment with which referee Jim Curran agrees and the Tyrone whistler will again be the man in the middle tomorrow.
Upwards on 20,000 supporters are expected to flock to Limerick for a match that has evoked country-wide interest.
And if the fare served up is half as attractive as the St. Patrick's Day menu, then there will be no complaints.
Office rating
I READ with interest your recent coverage of local councils and their respective rate settings.
The performance of Castlereagh must attract the envy of many councils and ratepayers alike but I wonder how many of them realise its hidden costs?
No-one could look at our council offices on Cregagh Road with any sense of civic pride and indeed some would argue that having nondescript and dowdy council offices is quite the proper thing.
No airs or graces about us!
However, I have had occasion recently to visit the Church Road offices of the Environmental Health and Building Control sections of the Council and I have been appalled to see the conditions in which these people have to work.
Surely no-one in Castlereagh would begrudge a modest investment in proper safe, clean and comfortable working accommodation for their public servants?
Protest rally in bid to save birth unit
A BIG protest rally was being held in Dungannon today in a bid to save the town's maternity unit.
The demonstration was organised by the South Tyrone Action Committee, set up to oppose the Southern Health Board's review plans, which could threaten the unit.
Marchers were due to congregate at Market Square for an open-air meeting.
The action committee hopes to meet Health Minister Lord Arran and is seeking a meeting with Prime Minister John Major.
‘Troubles’ teach-in
A PART-time course on the Ulster ‘troubles’ is on offer at Queen's University next month.
The six weekly lectures will debate the origins of the conflict, how it has changed and why it continues.
‘Community Relations and Conflict in Northern Ireland’ will be conducted by Felim O Hadmaill.
Unionist resigns
A LONG-STANDING member of the Lagan Valley Ulster Unionist Association has resigned.
Norman Tulip, former secretary of the association, declined to say why he was quitting.
It is understood that his wife, a former assistant secretary of the association, is also resigning.
Stamp price-freeze
THE Post Office has licked the recession by announcing a price freeze on first- and second-class stamps.
Letter prices were last increased in September 1991 and the Post Office's latest pledge will remain at least until the end of August.
New phone-exchange
A NEW £125,000 telephone exchange opens on Monday in Drumquin, Tyrone.
British Telecom said the digital exchange would help nearly 500 phone-users make faster and better-quality calls.
Lisburn cash plea
MOIRA councillor Jim Dillon has called on the Government to back any proposals a Lisburn Area Plan may produce with ‘hard cash’.
Yesterday the Department of the Environment announced it was to begin consultation for the Lisburn Area Plan 1993 to 2008.
Lift-off for forum
BELFAST City Airport Forum, an advisory body set up to discuss environmental issues affecting the airport and the surrounding area, has held its first meeting.
Trocaire aid
THE Roman Catholic Aid Agency, Trocaire, has sent £20,000 to help the strife-torn people of Southern Sudan.
The agency has given a total of £1.5m towards emergency relief programmes in southern Sudan in the past six years.
Smith to have shoulder operation
ENGLAND batsman Robin Smith is to have a shoulder operation but hopes to be fit for the new domestic season.
The long-standing injury grew steadily worse in India and, by the time England reached Sri Lanka, he was unable to throw overarm.
There were fears that the problem might affect Smith's chances of being ready for the start of this summer's Ashes series but the 29-year-old player is aiming to be back in action when Hampshire launch their domestic programme next month.
SOCCER
Final goal
TOFIK Bakhramov, the Azeri linesman whose controversial ruling put England on course for their famous 4–2 victory in the 1966 World Cup final against Germany, has died aged 66.
Bakhramov's opinion that an extra-time shot by Geoff Hurst had hit the underside of the crossbar and bounced down over the goal-line prompted Swiss referee Gottfried Dienst to allow the goal which gave England a 3–2 lead.
SOCCER
End of the road?
THE end of Bruce Grobbelaar's reign as a Liverpool goalkeeper was virtually sealed when Mike Hooper signed a new three-year deal.
Anfield manager Graeme Souness pinned his faith in the 28-year old, instead of the veteran Zimbabwean, to rival current first choice David James.
Grobbelaar, 35, who has won more medals than any other goalkeeper, is currently on loan to Second division Stoke and a return to Merseyside now looks highly unlikely.
Souness said: ‘Mike Hooper has signed a new three year contract and that shows just how highly I rate him.’
GOLF
Price sets record
NICK Price set a new two-round record score of 132 to take a two-stroke lead in the US Players Championship in Ponte Vedra, Florida.
Price, of Zimbabwe, shot a cautious second round 68 and was surprised to hear he had broken the previous record set by Mark O'Meara and Steve Jones in 1987.
Among those also taking advantage of the excellent conditions were Americans Doug Tewell, Dave Rummells and former Masters champion Bernhard Langer, of Germany, all together on 134.
But Welshman Ian Woosnam only managed a second round 70 to leave him nine shots behind price on 141 after the two rounds.
TENNIS
Sabatini looking good
TOP seed Gabriela Sabatini moved comfortably into the semi-finals of the Virginia Slims of Houston tournament, dropping just three games against the unseeded Sandra Cecchini.
Later today the Argentinian will take on the third seed, Conchita Martinez of Spain, who beat Sabatini's compatriot Patricia Tarabini in the quarter-final.
The other semi-final sees fourth seed Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic face the unseeded German, Sabine Hack.
CRICKET
Masterful Crowe
NEW Zealand captain Martin Crowe played a masterful innings of 91 off just 100 balls to lead his side to a thrilling victory with two balls remaining in the one-day international against Australia in Hamilton today.
Set a daunting 248 to win by the tourists, New Zealand were struggling at 94 for four and needing to score at over seven runs an over, but Crowe and a timely 44 not out off 28 balls by teenager Jeff Wilson saw the Kiwis home at 250 for seven.
The result leaves the series at two-all with Sunday's Eden Park decider already a sell-out.
Makeshift Australian opener Mark Waugh, a scorer of two half centuries in the series, appeared to have set up a winning total when he hit 108.
But Crowe, carrying a leg injury, was the star-turn, although he was dropped on 12 before Mark Waugh ran him out.
HOCKEY
Dates swap
DATES for the two most prestigious events in the Irish womens' hockey calendar, the league winners play-off and the Irish Senior Cup final may be swapped to accommodate Leinster champions Muckross, it emerged today.
Renault Senior League winners Randalstown, were scheduled to meet the Dubliners along with the Munster and Connaught champions in Cork on May 22–23 but Muckross have applied for a re-scheduling to help their preparations for their European Club Championship campaign in Italy which begins a few days later.
However, due to the short notice, Randalstown would have been without four key players on May 15 which was pencilled in as the reserve date.
The Irish Ladies Hockey Union are now considering staging the Cup Final on May 22 and moving the play-offs back a fortnight.
Hateley out for two Euro matches
MARK Hateley has been given the all-clear to play for Rangers if the Scottish champions reach the European Cup final.
The 31-year-old striker learned that UEFA had doubled the one-match suspension he received automatically after being sent off against Bruges 10 days ago.
Although Hateley is now ruled out of the crunch game in Marseille on April 7 and the final mini-league match against CSKA Moscow two weeks later, he would be available for the final in Munich's Olympic Stadium.
The news is a huge relief to Rangers and the English international, who appeared the victim of a harsh refereeing decision by Polish official Ryszard Wojoik at Ibrox.
Hateley was shown the red card for pushing away defender Rudi Cossey, who indulged in some play-acting after tumbling to the ground.
However the dismissal was rated a ‘violent conduct’ offence by the referee, and UEFA's Control and Disciplinary Committee today decided to add one game to Hateley's punishment.
RACING
Dunwoody decides
RICHARD DUNWOODY has confirmed that he will ride Won't Be Gone Long in the Martell Grand National next Saturday.
Dunwoody had delayed the decision until after Won't Be Gone Long had schooled at Towcester earlier this week.
Won't Be Gone Long, who is trained at Lambourn by Nicky Henderson won the John Hughes Memorial Trophy over the Grand National fences with Dunwoody riding in 1990 and was also third in the Whitbread Gold Cup at Sandown Park.
Dunwoody is hopeful of returning to the racecourse next Tuesday following his lay-off because of a broken bone in his right hand.
Ireland's champion jockey Charlie Swan will ride Cahervillahow in the big race.
Trainer Mouse Morris confirmed today that the horse was a runner.
MOTOR CYCLING
McWilliams ‘23rd'
BELFAST'S Jeremy McWilliams will start in a disappointing 23rd place on the grid for tomorrow's Australian Grand Prix, first round of the World 500cc championship at Eastern Creek, Sydney.
McWilliams was still having problems with the suspension on his Yamaha during the final practice session and said afterwards: ‘I needed a higher starting position to have a chance tomorrow but I have learned a lot and I'm going to prepare for my first World championship by having a good nights sleep.’
The leading British rider on the grid is Scot Niall MacKenzie, who is 13th followed by John Reynolds on 14th and Kevin Mitchell on 20th.
Sean Emmett is 26th.
There will be 34 starters headed by Kevin Schwantz in poll position followed by last year's champion Wayne Rainey.
Why the days really are getting longer
AS THE clocks go back, astronomers are set to announce that the length of the day has been increasing over the centuries.
The change over the past 2,700 years means days have been getting longer at an average rate of 1.7 milliseconds per 100 years.
Dr Richard Stephenson, of Durham University, and Leslie Morrison, of the Royal Greenwich Observatory, made the discovery by studying data from the pre-telescope era and combining it with more recent facts.
Some details came from inscriptions of lunar and solar phases on clay tablets dating from between 700 and 50 BC.
A few accounts of total and partial eclipses of the sun also survive from Babylon and ancient China.
The findings of the two men will be presented at the Royal Astronomical Society meeting at Leicester University this week.
Even at the tiny rate of change discovered by the two men, an accurate clock started then would now be several hours out, compared to time judged by the positions of the sun or stars.
Des O'Connor fan hits wrong note with law
A STREET busker who warbled Des O'Connor songs on his home-made karaoke machine ended up in court.
Kenneth Jackson's crooning struck a wrong note with police who arrested him for allegedly disturbing the peace.
But Jackson, a 46-year-old Des O'Connor impersonator, really hit the roof when his karaoke machine was ordered to be confiscated while he was freed on bail, magistrates at Barnsley, south Yorkshire, heard yesterday.
In a bid to regain his machine the unemployed roofer climbed to the top of a building, ripped off tiles and threw them into the street, it was alleged.
Father-of-two Jackson, of Tune Street, Barnsley, was taken back to court on a charge of criminal damage.
Asking for reporting restrictions to be lifted in an effort to trace witnesses, his solicitor Ged Hale said: ‘He is a Pied Piper sort of figure who attracts lots of children.
He is a big Des O'Connor fan and emulates the singer.’
Magistrates remanded him in custody for a week.
Ulster people urged to watch their languages
ULSTER people have been urged to learn foreign languages, especially German, to gain as much benefit as possible from the single European Market.
Speaking at a student awards ceremony, Don Alexander, director at the Training and Employment Agency, said more people were now being given the chance to work in other countries.
‘With that freedom comes responsibility, for what use are all these opportunities without the skills we need to exploit them?.
‘If we want to match the achievements of the German economy, and have a part in its future, then we must learn to speak the German language — both literally and metaphorically,’ he added.
Prince meets troops in secret
PRINCE Charles spent today meeting security forces in Northern Ireland, his movements kept secret after a week's violence claimed six people's lives.
He arrived unannounced yesterday and stayed overnight.
It is understood he slept at Hillsborough Castle.
Wearing military camouflage uniform, he was taken to see various units engaged in counter-terrorism.
Officials refused to discuss his itinerary and, most unusually for such a senior member of the Royal Family, it was indicated that there was no plan for him to meet the public.
‘He is here for private engagements involving the security forces,’ said a Northern Ireland Office spokesman.
‘We don't discuss his movements.’
Earlier this week, Prince Charles met victims of the IRA's Warrington bombing, which killed two boys aged three and 12 years.
The Prince arrived in the town on Thursday, the day when 12-year-old Tim Parry died in an intensive-care unit.
He joined the people of Britain and Ireland in expressing his own sadness at the carnage.
Prince Charles is Colonel-in-Chief of the Parachute Regiment and last visited Northern Ireland in March, 1991.
Then, he mingled with people in Belfast's city centre during pouring rain and chatted with pupils of Deramore High School.
But today the tense security atmosphere was obvious.
There were no arrangements for the Press to accompany him on his tour, journalists were told.
In Northern Ireland this week, six people were killed in three separate attacks.
A Sinn Fein worker was killed at West Link in Belfast.
Then four Roman Catholic workmen were gunned down as they arrived for work at houses in Castlerock.
A 17-year-old Poleglass youth was shot by loyalist paramilitaries in west Belfast.
Prince Charles has not been a frequent visitor to the province.
His now-estranged wife, Princess Diana, came here each year between 1990 and last year.
The couple both visited Northern Ireland in 1987.
So far this year, the Princess Royal and Prince Edward have paid open visits to the province.
THIRTEEN teams have tried, 13 have been unlucky.
No visiting country has tasted victory in a competitive match in Dublin during Jack Charlton's remarkable tenure as Republic of Ireland manager.
They say you can twist statistics to back up any viewpoint, but you cannot argue with that record.
‘It's good that we've done well — I've really enjoyed it,’ says Charlton, seven years in charge now.
‘Generally speaking the results have been good although we've perhaps drawn too many games we should have won.’
Charlton's seven-year love affair with the Irish shows no signs of heading for the divorce courts.
‘People have said the fans hero worship me but I don't like that term,’ he says in his customary blunt tones.
‘The Irish are very relaxed.
I like that and get on well with them — on both sides of the border in fact — and that is all I require.
‘I said from day one that I would stay until I detected a change in attitude from the people in Ireland.
I would leave before any falling out.
‘If they want me to stay on after the World Cup I will consider that.
But if I felt it might be time for a change I would have to think about that as well.’
It's a job which suits Charlton.
His spells in club management with Middlesbrough, Sheffield Wednesday and Newcastle United were enjoyable but demanding.
‘International management gives me more time to myself but don't think I'm always away fishing.
People have that idea about me but it's not so.
There's a lot more to life than that.’
If Charlton does stay on after the World Cup, he'll find it hard to live up to the high standards he has set.
In all matches, competitive and friendly, Charlton has been in charge 65 times (33 away, 32 in Dublin) and has suffered defeat just nine times.
At home the impressive record is won 21, drawn nine and lost two (both to Wales in friendlies).
Competitively, the Irish haven't been beaten at home under the current manager.
Scotland, Belgium, Luxembourg, Bulgaria, Spain, Malta, Hungary, Northern Ireland, Turkey, England, Poland, Albania and Latvia have all tried in either European or World Cup qualifiers and all have failed.
Charlton's hasn't got the time or inclination to wonder what Billy Bingham is thinking about in the run-up to Wednesday's big game.
‘I've known Billy for many years.
I don't worry about what he is going to do.
I'm more concerned about my players being okay and available for the game.
‘I'm looking forward to all our matches coming up.
This year will be a difficult, but interesting, one.
If we can maintain our level of performance we will give the fans something to celebrate at the end of the year.’
Joyride boy mother's funeral plea
THE mother of one of two west Belfast teenagers killed when a stolen car crashed into a tree, today urged young people to turn their back on joyriding.
Speaking at the funeral of 17-year-old Damien Fegan, Fr Martin Kelly said the dead youth's mother had a message for young people involved in the craze.
‘If at least one young person decides to give up putting a foot into a stolen car ever again, then her son's death will not have been in vain; and another mother will not have to experience the heartbreak she is experiencing.
‘To those of you who have eyes to see and ears to hear the message from Damien in this coffin through his mother: never, never set foot in a stolen car again,’ Fr Kelly told mourners at St Patrick's Church, Donegall Street.
Damien, of Vicinage Park, and 18-year-old Michael Paul Largey, of Andersonstown Park West, were killed when a stolen Fiesta car struck a tree on the Falls Road in the early hours of Wednesday morning.
Two other youths were injured.
Fr Kelly urged joyriders to ‘let the ramifications sink in’.
‘You could be in this coffin, your mother could be heartbroken and devastated like Damien's mother at this time.
‘For your own sakes, for your families' sakes, for God's sake, don't let the selfish pursuit of thrills blind you to the implications of this body in the coffin and to the awfulness of the activity you are involved in,’ he said.
Damien was later buried at Carnmoney Cemetery.
Michael Largey was buried at the City Cemetery today after a funeral service at St Theresa's Church, Glen Road.
BILLY Bingham and Jack Charlton know each other inside out.
They don't always see eye to eye but they respect one another.
The odds are stacked against the shrewd Bingham but, stung by Charlton's dismissive analysis of Northern Ireland's chances, he is biting back.
And it's not the first time this has happened.
‘Jack is talking now about having nothing to worry about after watching us in Albania,’ says Bingham.
‘But you know he's getting a little scared when he starts making noises like that.
‘He knows our results recently haven't been bad.
If we win or draw on Wednesday it will make the Republic's position a bit unsteady.’
All this kidolgy comes second nature to two men immersed in football all their lives.
But now Bingham is nearing the end of his remarkably successful time as Northern Ireland's manager.
Just how near is the end?
Well that depends on the result of Wednesday's big game in Dublin.
‘I told the IFA that if we got to the World Cup finals and they wanted me to stay on I would and if we did not qualify I would stand down,’ says Bingham.
‘I wanted to prepare them for it, not leave it to the last two weeks with people asking what was happening.
‘I thought 14 years was a fair spell but I felt a bit sad and it will be hard to let go but I am preparing myself for that.
It was time for someone new to take over.
‘I'm now a director of Blackpool and a FIFA lecturer and instructor and am involved in the national sports centre project in Belfast.
There are many things I want to do.
‘I've thoroughly enjoyed my time as manager and put 100 per cent effort into the job.
The IFA were fortunate in that I was able to make it practically a full-time job because of my lifestyle.
They have had the benefit of that, but for my part I was able to do a job I really loved.’
Bingham enjoys the reputation of being able to get so much out of so little, making the most of limited resources.
‘If I have that reputation it's nice for people to say that.
I have my own way of doing things and have gathered lots of experience down the years in various jobs at various levels.
‘Your own personality has a lot to do with it, how you affect people.
I would have gone through fire for Peter Docherty.
If you affect people that way it's a great bonus.’
Bingham is content with the way the present Northern Ireland panel is shaping up, pointing to the youth of Fleming, Taggart, Magilton, O'Neill, Gray, Black, Morrow and Hughes.
‘How far they will go in the game I don't know but there is a great basis there,’ reflects Bingham.
‘After the demise of our great team in ‘86 we were building sand castles for a while — they were collapsing all the time.
But we held on and around 1990 I felt it was starting to develop.’
Ballyclare
JOANNE Jenkins from Raloo near Larne collected the top trophy at Ballyclare's Speech/Drama Festival when she was awarded the Audrey Robinson Rose Bowl after giving the most pleasing performance during the week-long event which ended yesterday afternoon.
Commenting on the festival the adjudicator, Miss Penelope Charteris from Brighton said: ‘It was lovely to be back in Northern Ireland to enjoy the hospitality and friendliness.
‘In recent years I have been impressed by the standard of speech training in various parts of the province and it was the same again in Ballyclare where a number of talented young people were on stage.’
UFF killers are ‘devil's disciples'
A PARISH Priest today described UFF gunmen who carried out the Castlerock massacre as the ‘devil's disciples’.
The Very Rev John Fitzpatrick was speaking during the funeral of Gerry Dalrymple, one of four Roman Catholic workmen murdered by the loyalist terror group on Thursday.
Father Fitzpatrick told mourners at St Mary's Church in Rasharkin: ‘You, who are of the parish, have often heard me say that the spirit of evil — the devil — is rampant in this world of ours.
‘If you needed any more proof, then it was present in Castlerock on Thursday morning.
Only the devil's disciples could have carried out such a wanton massacre, and where the devil is abroad the innocent suffer.
Gerry was innocent, innocent of any crime.
His murderers knew he was a Catholic.’
Two other victims, James McKenna (52) from Maghera and 25-year-old James Kelly who the IRA claimed was one of its members, were also being buried today.
The funeral for a fourth victim Noel O'Kane (20) from Upperlands, will take place tomorrow.
Also speaking at Mr Dalrymple's funeral, the Bishop of Down and Connor Patrick Walsh spoke of a ‘dark week’ of tragedy in Northern Ireland where so many families were ‘crushed with grief’.
Bishop Walsh said: ‘This has been a week of horror, a week of terror, a week in which we have seen a terrifying escalation of violence, a vicious onslaught of murders, attempted murders and attacks on homes.’
As the three funerals were taking place, four men from the Coleraine area were being questioned about the killings.
The funerals of James Kelly and James McKenna were being held in Maghera with Requiem Mass at St Patrick's Church, Glen.
Meanwhile, the father of James Kelly said his son had been forced to go to England to escape harassment from the security forces.
He also claimed that an attempt had been made to kill his son at the same site in Castlerock, where he was shot dead a week later.
New leash of life for heart-op Bimbo
BIMBO, a 10-year-old Springer Spaniel, went for a romp over his favourite Carnmoney Hill today — fully recovered from the rare operation that saved his life.
The dog with a serious heart complaint was doomed until veterinary surgeon Des Thompson fitted him with a pacemaker.
Now Bimbo, the pet of Vivian Fullerton and her husband, Ron, is restored to health and able to play and run after a ball again.
‘He was a cripple, the slightest activity made him keel over,’ said Mrs Fullerton of Fairhill Drive, Carnmoney.
‘Then he was diagnosed as having a heart block.’
Des Thompson, a specialist in animal heart disease, carried out the operation at his Earlswood surgery in Belmont Road, Belfast — only the third time he has fitted a pacemaker.
‘The dog's heartbeat was down to 25 to 30 when the average is 75 to 80 for the needs of the body,’ he said…
‘Now with the pacemaker in place Bimbo can lead an active life again.
I have provided him with an adjustable heartbeat of around 100.’
The pacemaker operation costs about £500.
‘But it's worth every penny to make a faithful friend well enough,’ said Ron Fullerton, manager of the country club at Dunadry Inn.
Gummer unveils £31m plan to protect wildlife
FARMERS in Northern Ireland will be paid to allow more public access to land designated as environmentally sensitive under proposals unveiled today by Agriculture Minister John Gummer.
There would also be direct payments for landowners who employ organic farming methods, and for those who create or improve wildlife habitats.
The proposals, which for the first time would offer direct payments for such schemes, form part of a package of six new measures to protect and care for the countryside launched for consultation.
Mr Gummer said the proposals resulted from the agri-environment regulation agreed in last year's Common Agricultural Policy reform package.
They would mean increased ministry spending on environmental schemes of £31m over three years.
The measures would also include:
The creation of six new environmentally sensitive areas (ESAs) in England, bringing the total to 22, two more in Wales to a total of seven, two more in Northern Ireland to a total of five, and five more in Scotland to a total of 10
The creation or improvement of a range of wildlife habitats over a 20-year period.
Mr Gummer said: ‘The proposals complement the range of environmental incentives already available to farmers and reflect the Government's continuing commitment to caring for the countryside and to integrating environmental objectives into agricultural policy.’
The Ramblers' Association said it welcomed any measures that allowed more people to walk in the countryside, and assistant director David Baskine said: ‘It is important that the proposals will not offer payment to farmers who own land where public access is already allowed.’
But Friends of the Earth said more money should have been set aside.
Agriculture campaigner Robin Maynard said: ‘£31 million over three years might build a few ornamental ponds in the countryside but it is hardly going to generate a major shift in agricultural policy from over-intensive agriculture to sustainable farming practice.’
The Council for the Protection of Rural England was also critical about the level of funding.
Land use officer Paul Wynne said: ‘With such limited funds available we must have schemes that produce positive environmental benefits.
‘Some of those the ministry is proposing are questionable, while schemes to help maintain the typical English farm and protect rare crop varieties such as traditional orchards have been ignored.’
The consultation period lasts until May 4 and individual schemes will be open for application towards the end of the year or early in 1994.
Casey son and mum's lover in unholy row
BISHOP Eamonn Casey's son and his mother's lover are to appear in court after a punch-up at their Connecticut home.
Peter Murphy, aged 19, and 59-year-old Scotsman Arthur Pennell, who is living with Annie Murphy, came to blows after an argument.
Neighbours heard screaming at the Murphy family's Ollcott Way home at midnight last Sunday.
Police from the Ridgefield precinct were called in to separate the men.
However, by then feelings were running so high Mr Pennell resisted arrest.
During the struggle police said Annie Murphy injured her foot, although she later refused medical treatment.
Eventually both men were bundled into a police car and driven away.
Peter Murphy was later released after signing a written promise to appear in Danbury Superior Court, Ridgefield, next Friday.
Mr Pennell has been charged with disorderly conduct and resisting arrest.
He was released on 100-dollar bail and will also be in court on Friday.
Police later described the incident as a domestic brawl.
Both men are facing a maximum penalty of a year in jail.
Sergeant Paul McAllister, one of the officers called to the house, said: ‘It was obvious there had been a physical dispute, although it was over when we arrived.’’.
He added Mr Pennell had resisted arrest.
A short preliminary hearing of the case was held last Monday.
Under state law if police uncover clear signs of a domestic quarrel, including injuries, they have to bring charges.
The case could interfere with Annie Murphy's plans to promote her book ‘Forbidden Fruit’, which gives intimate details about her affair with the bishop.
She is due to travel to Ireland and England next week to publicise the book, although as yet no firm date has been confirmed.
The book is due to go on sale next week.
Marlon is magic
BRILLIANT goalkeeping by Burnley's Marlon Beresford deprived Huddersfield of maximum points in their relegation battle.
Beresford came under almost non-stop pressure for the final hour of the match but was only beaten once for all Huddersfield's domination.
The goal came in the 65th minute after good work on the left by Gary Barnett and Simon Charlton.
Charlton's cross to the near post was met by a glancing header from Phil Starbuck which looped beyond Beresford into the net.
Burnley had taken the lead in the 13th minute when Adrian Heath capitalised on a dreadful clearance by Town keeper Tom Clarke, slipping the ball past Clarke before slotting into the empty net.
Result — Huddersfield 1 Burnley 1.
Ray Walker, Port Vale's longest serving player, scored the winner after 77 minutes, enabling his side to close the gap on neighbours Stoke at the top of division two.
Earlier Bernie Slaven had hit the post and seen a shot cleared off the line and a corner from Walker had struck the bar.
Hull had the better of the first half struggle with Russ Wilcox their outstanding player, unlucky when his powerful header was tipped over the top.
Connie didn't like her hits
But Potter's ‘Lipstick’ is top of her charts
FIFTIES star Connie Francis has confessed for the first time that she does not like her biggest hits.
‘None of my hits are my favourites,’ said Connie, whose Lipstick On Your Collar has been re-released after the success of Dennis Potter's Channel 4 drama, which ended last night.
‘All the hits were done because they were from a formula for making hits in those days.
Bobby Darin used to feel the same way.
He never liked his hits either,’ she said.
But she admitted she has been thrilled at the response the records bring and the millions of fan letters she has been sent over the years.
‘They represented an unforgettable era for people.
But I prefer the ones from albums that were artistically superior.’
She says she loves TV's Lipstick On Your Collar.
‘I know all about the TV show and it's a great idea, so I'm very, very happy about that.
‘I've had the same sort of experience in Germany where Everybody's Somebody's Fool was re-released and was a big hit all over again.’
She said: ‘I got started singing and playing the accordion when I was three every Italian girl with an Italian father in America played the accordion.
It was mandatory.
‘But I loved it and I loved singing and so I was performing by the age of four.
I never had a singing lesson in my life, it was just a natural thing for me.’
She is planning a comeback visit to Britain her first since shows in 1989 were scrapped because of ill health and expects to arrive in the summer.
FEARS OF TOXIC PIT
Shock plan to sell off Duncrue site
BELFAST could soon see annual profits of over £1m go up in smoke and become a dumping ground for waste from all over Europe, it was warned today.
A special meeting of the city council's technical services committee has been called for Monday to discuss a plan to sell off the clinical incinerator plant at Duncrue.
At present the city council is responsible for destroying clinical waste from hospitals, but under the new scheme the service would pass to the private sector.
The committee agreed to accept the proposal, recommended by external consultants, last year and a number of private companies, including some from England, have already put in bids for the service.
But a number of councillors are now having second thoughts.
They have warned that private developers could agree to destroy ‘dangerous waste’ from throughout Europe and claimed that the council could make more than £1m a year if it modernised the Duncrue plant.
Alderman Jim Kirkpatrick said a study by another group of consultants had shown that expenditure of around £4m would bring the plant up to European standards.
The Ulster Unionist claimed the cost of improving the incinerator would be recouped within four years.
He will propose a motion at Monday's special meeting calling on the committee to reverse its decision.
‘Belfast cannot allow this opportunity to make money for ratepayers to go to waste nor run the risk of making the city a dumping ground,’ he warned.
‘An operation like this should be the responsibility of the council because councillors have to answer to the voters and act in their interests.
‘A private company would be answerable only to its shareholders.’
Technical services committee chairman John Parkes agrees and will also be urging his colleagues to reverse their decision.
Legendary tales
RED RUM is certainly Aintree's best-known name, equine or human, and arguably the most popular horse of all time.
Between 1973–77 this wonderful steeplechaser won the National three times and finished second twice — an unparalleled record.
The horse is immortalised by a life size bronze statue at Aintree, presented by Seagram.
Despite his advancing years — at 27 he is old for a thoroughbred —‘Rummy’ will again lead the parade of runners on Martell Grand National day in 1993.
Bob Champion's success on Aldaniti in 1981 provided one of the most heroic chapters in racing history.
In the late 1979, Champion was told he had cancer and, realistically, only months to live.
Aldaniti had broken down with leg trouble, and his trainer Josh Gifford thought his career was over.
The 1960 Grand National was the first race to be shown live on British television.
Elizabeth Taylor starred in the film ‘National Velvet’ as the first female rider to win the race.
In real life, this has yet to happen.
Charlotte Brew was the first woman to ride in the National when partnering Barony Fort in 1977.
She failed to complete the course, and it was not until 1982 that Geraldine Rees, riding Cheers, became the first woman to finish the race.
Racing families don't come much more successful than the Beasleys.
Between 1877–1892 the four Beasley brothers — Tommy, Harry, Willy and Johnny — rode four winners, six seconds and two thirds from a combined total of 34 rides in the National.
The story extends to 1961 when Harry's grandson Bobby maintained the family tradition, winning on Nicolaus Silver.
The Martell Grand National is famed for shocks and surprises.
Four horses have won the race at odds of 100–1: Tipperary Tim (1928), Gregalach (1929), Caughoo (1947) and Foinavon (1967).
Rubio (1908) was the first American-bred horse to triumph at Aintree, and he was followed in 1909 by Lutteur III who gave the French their first success in the race.
In more recent times there have been numerous entries from Eastern Europe, including a pair of Russian runners in 1961 — Reljef and Grifel.
Charles Boyce rode Emigrant to victory in 1858 with one arm strapped to his side.
Seagram's victory in the 1991 Grand National was an extraordinary coincidence occurring as it did in the final year of the company's sponsorship of the race.
Falkands inquiry ‘must end'
A FORMER Government law officer has called on Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke to order the abandonment of the inquiry into alleged atrocities by British troops in the Falklands.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn, Tory MP for Perth and Kinross, said: ‘This is a grotesque waste of money and a totally fatuous exercise.’
Scotland Yard detectives have been visiting the Falklands digging up corpses of Argentine soldiers amid allegations that they were executed by British troops and that in some cases ears were cut off as war ‘trophies’ in the 1982 conflict.
This follows allegations in a book called Excursion to Hell by Vincent Bramley, who served in the conflict.
The inquiry is believed to have cost well over £1m already.
Sir Nicholas, a former Scottish solicitor general, said: ‘This is absolutely absurd.
To spend this kind of money…cannot be justified.
‘The allegations are ludicrous and in any event things happen in the heat of war.’
Sir Nicholas added: ‘These people should be brought home forthwith.’
He asked what would happen if an Argentine soldier was dug up with bullet holes.
How would it be proved that something against the rules of war had occurred?
And how would it be possible, in any event, to pin the blame on an individual?
Harry Greenway, Conservative MP for Ealing North, said the Home Secretary should set a limit on the expenditure of the inquiry and reassure people the money was being spent wisely.
Mr Greenway praised the ‘distinguished and courageous’ Falklands campaign and added: ‘We had better be careful before we defile the names of people who acted with such valour in the name of the United Kingdom.’
Repton big hit
STEPHEN Spence and welterweight Stephen McCloskey both put their best foot forward in defeat against a classy Repton (London) side on a splendid dinner-cabaret show at the Dockworkers club last night.
Repton is acknowledged as Britain's No 1 amateur club, and flew in some good talent for a match that roused a lively crowd.
They won it clearly after Spence and McCloskey were out-pointed on decisions that could easily have gone the other way.
Results in detail (Repton names first) Daniel Happe bt Ronald Bowe on points; Kelvin Wing bt Stephen Spence on points; Sean Turner bt Gary Patterson rsf1; Kieran Toal lost to Eamon Brannigan on points; Tony Cesay bt Stephen McCloskey on points; Des Beattie lost to Brendan Devine on points and Damien O'Donnell bt James Murphy rsf3.
Reynolds call for restraint after Castlerock
THE Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, has appealed for restraint in the wake of the Castlerock murders.
He said: ‘The killings at Castlerock are a further grim addition to the statistics of terrorism of the past few days.
‘It is as if the realisation of their utter irrelevance, and the futility of their actions, drives the terrorists on to ever more barbaric crimes.
They should know that it will change nothing.
Terrorism will not prevail.
Mr Reynolds appealed for restraint ‘at this difficult time so that yet further death can be avoided’.
He said: ‘I urge all those who are in a position to do so to use their influence on the men of violence from both sides of the community to end their murderous activities, and to create the only basis on which an enduring peace can be established.’
WHETHER you are a punter or just love horses you can't ignore point-to-point racing and down Ballymena way they turned out in force for last weekend's Mid-Antrim Hunt meeting at Galgorm.
And after two odds-against horses won the opening races, the crowd was treated to a magnificent display of jumping when George Martin guided home his own horse, even money favourite Limeridge, in the Open Race.
Limeridge has now won five point-to-points and one race over hurdles at Down Royal.
Fast moving ‘Juno’ praised
THE Phoenix Players stepped on to the Rialto stage last night with their presentation of O'Casey's ‘Juno and the Paycock’.
Mr Michael Poynor, the adjudicator, commended director Harry Foy for an energetic production which kept the action moving along at a fast pace.
The audience was never bored.
The adjudicator did point out that the set was perhaps too big to capture the claustrophobic atmosphere of a Dublin tenement room.
However there were touches of realism which worked well.
Lighting seemed to be at one basic level regardless of time of day or night though was subtly achieved in the final scene.
There were some problems with the age of actors to suit characters but this did not impede some splendid performances.
Jack Boyle (Brian Devlin) showed very good comic timing, helping to set up the comic aspect of the play.
Joxer Daly (Paul Magee) contributed an amusing foil to Boyle and both these actors were given well-deserved rounds of applause.
Juno Boyle (Angela McKeever) gave a portrayal which was generally well realised though it lacked a suggestion of ‘steel’ to be found in Juno.
Mrs Maisie Madigan (Ann Fleming) was a splendid warm-hearted tart which added warmth and colour to the production.
Johnny Boyle (Paul Dougan) provided the right sort of nervous intensity and Mary Boyle (Ann Conlon) was well played, lots of potential in this actress.
All the minor characters did all they were meant to do.
It was a good, humorous presentation of this classic Irish play.
The Festival continues tonight with Newpoint Players' production of ‘They Shoot Horses, Don't They?’ by Ray Herman.
Hot-tip Durkan steps forward for elections
SDLP chairman Mark Durkan, tipped to eventually succeed party leader John Hume as Foyle MP, is to take his first steps in elective politics, it was learned today.
The 32-year-old confirmed that he will be a candidate for the Northland ward in Londonderry in the local government elections in May.
Party insiders said the move was to help prepare the ground for him to eventually stand in place of John Hume.
As Westminster aide to the party leader, Mr Durkan has long been tipped for higher offices.
He was one of Ireland's top student activists in the early 1980s, and became deputy president of the Union of Students in Ireland.
The Derry man took the job as Mr Hume's top aide in 1984 and then spent two years in Washington, working for Senator Edward Kennedy on foreign affairs issues.
In 1990 he replaced Belfast councillor and barrister Alban Maginness as party chairman.
During his time with the party he has helped mastermind election campaigns for MPs Seamus Mallon and Eddie McGrady.
But he will not be able to start planning his own campaign yet, because he flies to South Africa next week to help the ANC prepare for elections there.
It will be his third visit to the country as part of an international group helping the ANC adapt to the democratic process.
Harry was more than the sum of his parts
THAT ingenious Ulsterman, the late Harry Ferguson, is recalled at a lecture in Carrickfergus tonight.
The Dromore born inventor (1884–1960) is, of course, best remembered for the design and manufacture of that revolutionary ‘farmer's friend’, the Ferguson tractor.
But it is sometimes forgotten that as far back as 1909 he built his own aeroplane in which he then made the first recorded flight over Ireland.
The many aspects of his life — all of them creative — will be examined during an illustrated talk by Billy Martin of Greenmount Agricultural College at Carrickfergus Library (8 pm).
Ferguson was a man whose eyes were constantly on the future, but he would probably have approved, nonetheless, of the historical purpose of the evening.
It is part of the campaign by the Carrickfergus Gasworks Preservation Society to raise funds for their restoration programme, stage one of which is now nearing completion.
Progress has been so good, they tell me, that there is now every chance the gasworks can be opened to the public on Sundays during June, July and August.
LIVELY WAYNE ALL GO
WAYNE McCullough turned up the heat again last night for his third victory in just over a month.
This time it was Caesar Zamora who felt the weight of Wayne's punches in a lively four round contest the aggressive young Ulsterman won clearly on points.
Zamora in Los Angeles is like Murphy in Ireland, ‘and most of them are just as tough’ said McCullough's manager, Matt Tinley after a bout that brought out the best in Wayne.
All three judges gave McCullough the nod.
As usual, he fought with whirlwind ferocity, rocking the rugged little Mexican with blows to the head and body in the second round before cutting loose again early in the fourth.
Zamora — he's probably related to the guy Wayne beat on his Los Angeles debut five weeks ago (who knows?)— hung in gallantly to weather the storm and was warmly embraced by McCullough at the finish.
‘He was a solid little hombre,’ grinned Wayne.
‘I thought I had him in the second round be he wriggled off the hook.’
McCullough is learning fast.
It's clear that ace coach Eddie Futch has taken a shine to him.
Futch, 82 next birthday and a father figure among America's great boxing trainers, is the man who calls the shots in heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe's gym, and it's now certain Wayne will box in a down-the-card role when Bowe defends his world title in either Washington or Atlantic City two months from now.
Meanwhile, Olympic champion Michael Carruth turned in a solid performance in Dublin last night with a 19–7 win over Ulster champion Eddie Fisher.
Fisher had little answer to the experience and ring craft of the 25 year old from Drimnagh.
Caruth, out of the rink since last August, was slow to warm up but once he shook off the cobwebs he looked the winner all the way.
Fisher had little answer to the good left jabs of the Olympic gold medallist as Fisher, a knockout specialist, tried hard to find the one big punch which never came.
Top award
EAMONN Loughran, the Commonwealth welterweight champion from Ballymena, has been voted best young boxer of the year by the Boxing Writers' Club.
Loughran, 22, headed the poll by a comfortable margin from Birmingham light-middleweight Robert McCracken, while third place was tied between British heavyweight champion Herbie Hide and Manchester featherweight Craig Dermody.
He is only the fourth Irishman to win the award since it was introduced in 1951, and the first since former world featherweight champion Barry McGuigan ten years ago.
The others were bantamweight champions John Kelly (1953) and Freddie Gilroy (1959).
Loughran achieved a major victory last November by stopping Canada's world-rated Commonwealth champion Donovan Boucher in three rounds.
Boucher had been making a habit of beating Britain's best 10stone 7lb men in Gary Jacobs, Mickey Hughes and Kirkland Laing, and Loughran's win must be one of the finer British achievements of the past 12 months.
Loughran, a distinguished amateur who landed a 1987 world junior championship silver medal, has won 21 of his 23 professional fights (one draw and one defeat by disqualification), and successfully defended his Commonwealth crown against Michael Benjamin last month.
The Barry Hearn-managed Loughran will receive the award at the Boxing Writers' Club annual dinner at the Savoy, London next Thursday,
YOU have more chance of seeing Haley's Comet than watching Bangor in the Irish Cup final.
A bit harsh maybe, but you know what I'm getting at.
The Seasiders have only appeared in one final in their success-starved history and that was 55 years ago.
Next Saturday they hope to reach their second when clashing with cup specialists Glentoran at Windsor Park.
It will be only their fourth semi-final in the cup but for once they won't be the underdogs.
Still in with a shout of the championship, Bangor are also in the final of the League Cup next month when they tackle Coleraine — but the Bass Irish Cup seems to be their number one target.
‘To be realistic we need other teams to slip up to sneak through in the league so the cup is really our priority,’ says 29-goal striker David McCallen who grabbed that sensational winner against his former club Linfield in the quarter-finals.
‘We had a feeling we would draw Glentoran after beating Linfield.
We're having to do it the hard way.’
McCallen's high-striking rate has been a big factor in Bangor's success this season.
So too has the rich talents of Celtic-bound Paul Byrne.
‘He's the type of player who blows hot and cold.
We don't know what he's going to do next — so what chance have the opposition?
‘Paul has played really well over the last few weeks and deserves his move.
He has what it takes.’
Bangor have proved they have what it takes to challenge for the major honours but they have never won the league or the cup.
The Glens have the cup pedigree and their cup run has kept a disappointing season alive.
But current form goes against them and, before today's meeting at the Oval, the Seasiders had two 2–1 victories over the Glens with McCallen getting three goals.
It's a tough one to call but Bangor look the stronger unit at present.
Not much to choose either between Ards and Cliftonville who meet at the Oval in the other semi-final on Friday night.
Frankie Parks is revelling in the manager's job after taking over from Billy Sinclair in November.
‘Marty Quinn and myself have been trying to rebuild the side and, considering the turnover in players, it's all the more pleasing to have got this far in the cup.
The team has bonded together well.
‘Any of the four teams left are capable of winning the cup.’
Ards enjoyed a record-breaking unbeaten run recently but were dumped out of the Wilkinson Sword League Cup semi-final by Coleraine during the week and they may find Frankie Parks' cup rollercoaster has gathered too much steam.
Tribute paid to UFF gun victim
NEIGHBOURS of the 17-year-old west Belfast youth shot dead by the UFF in a busy shopping centre have attended a short ceremony in his memory.
Damien Walsh, from Colinvale, Poleglass, was murdered on Thursday night as he closed up a fuel suppliers in the Dairy Farm Centre.
An older colleague injured in the leg in the shooting has since been discharged from hospital.
People from Poleglass and Twinbrook, who gathered at the scene of the murder last night, said they were deeply shocked.
Damien, known as ‘Dee’ to his friends, will be buried in Milltown Cemetery on Monday after 1pm funeral Mass at the Church of the Nativity, Poleglass.
His distraught mother, Marion, said her son, a YTP worker, was ‘totally innocent’ and had no paramilitary connections.
‘He was just a child.
I am extremely bitter about my son's death.
There was no reason for him to die.
There was no reason to do this.
Why do these people do this?’ she said.
Police — who can be contacted on Belfast 650222 — have appealed for anyone who was in the Dairy Farm complex on Thursday night at around 8pm to contact them.
They are also interested in the movements of a maroon-coloured Vauxhall Astra estate car, registration D978 XMO.
The vehicle was hijacked in the Shankill area a short time before the shooting and later abandoned at Slieveban Drive, Andersonstown.
Furniture tops the price lists
FOR the second week running high quality furniture topped the price lists and at Andersons a mahogany D-end economy table was sold at £2,250; another economy table from the Georgian era for £1,700 and a pair of shaped top, cabriole leg specimen cabinets at £1,250.
A Bergere settee and two matching chairs went at £1,100; a Victorian secretaire two door bookcase at £900 and 11 Victorian mahogany dining chairs at £875.
A Victorian four door carved back chiffonnier made £800; a reproduction inlaid cylinder top writing bureau £725 and a set of 14 Victorian dining room chairs, £700.
An Edwardian telescopic dining table, one extra leaf, made £575; a Victorian ebonised and marquetry three door display cabinet, £550 and a three-piece walnut framed two-seater suite, £510.
A set of 12 antique painted dining room chairs realised; a Georgian pine two drawer kitchen table £400; Vienna double weight wall clock, £330 and a Victorian sewing table, £340.
Among dozens of other lots were: oak ship's chest, £325; pair M C Wilks, watercolours, £300; Clarice Cliff Bizarre jug, £260; G W Morrison, watercolour, £260; Victorian striking bracket clock, £250; pair Victorian carved oak hall chairs, £230; 112 piece Booths Old Willow pattern tea, coffee and dinner service, £240; Queen Anne style dining table and six chairs, £220; National chromed cash register, £220; Victorian inlaid music cabinet, £220; miniature watercolour on porcelain, Lady Hamilton, £210; Tigerwood three bottle tantalus, £205; Victorian brass cased French mantle clock, £200; brass dial Vienna spring clock, £200; three band army musket and bayonet, £170; Bursley ware lamp base, Charolette Rhead, £150; Still life in oils, C Graham, £150; 34 piece Susie Cooper part dinner service, £140 Georgian toilet mirror, £130; 9 ct match holder, £120; two gilt cherub table lamps, £120.
Down Royal Auctions produced some commendable prices with a fine Italian marble top dining table making £2,400; a sapphire and diamond dress ring, £1,800 and a set of Chippendale style dining chairs, £1,500; mahogany-cased grandfather clock with brass dial, by Henderson, £1,200; an extending mahogany dining table with one extra leaf went at £1,200; a Victorian chiffonier at £850 and a Cecil Maguire oil, Plough Horses, at £750.
A rosewood revolving bookcase sold at £650; an S Stannard watercolour for £620 and a Ken Hamilton oil, £400.
Other lots included: Edwardian two seater settee, £360; pedestal table, £340; partners' desk, £340; Victorian sideboard, £340; pair of signed Snaffles prints, £320; Desmond Turner oil, Continental Scene £300; Edwardian occasional table, £280; Georgian pine bench, £240.
At T H O'Kane's auction rooms in Glenarm a Victorian oak extending table realised £1,425; an Edwardian mahogany three door wardrobe £550 and a seven-piece parlour suite £480.
A Victorian overstuffed settee went for £340; another overstuffed settee made £325 and a mahogany inlaid sideboard £270.
A mahogany breakfast table sold at £200; an astral glazed pine cupboard £200 and a marble top washstand £180.
Other lots included an oak dresser £170; pine chest of drawers £140; mahogany hallstand £130; lustre tea set £120.
Several silver Albert chains made from £100 to £130.
In Bloomfield Auctions a dining table and four chairs went for £300 while another set comprising a dining table and six chairs made £240.
An Edwardian dining table sold at £240; an oak single wardrobe made £80 and an oil lamp £75.
A marble mantle clock made £170; an Edwardian dressing table £240 and an inlaid writing desk £230.
Among other lots were; pine chest of drawers £100; flint lock pistol £105; Royal Doulton figure Queen Anne £140; ships's sextant £160.
Washstand basin £100; collection of tea pots totalled £170.
In Morgan's a small collection of silver items including teaspoons, salts and vesta case sold at £600 while a Grandmother clock in mahogany case made £450.
A Victorian stuff-over settee made £320; a mahogany hexagonal occasional table, £200 and a Sheffield plate tea urn, £170.
Several other lots found affection including: three piece carved oak bedroom suite, £170; walnut dressing table, £140; brass bound ammunition box, £130; carved oak farmed mirror, £120; four ladies gold wrist watches, £120; quantity of Irish linen, £100.
Next week, at O'Kane's Auction — April 1 at 7 pm — there will be a selection of garden furniture and ceramics.
James Adam of St Stephens Green, Dublin will hold an auction of period furniture, china, silver and Victoriana, March 31 at 11.30am at which a pair of Edwardian breakfront display cabinets are estimated to make around £5,000.
MB has a vision
I WOULD like to have a rattle at your partner in crime for the way that he reported the Bangor-Linfield game.
The report was very biased and one point in particular, the McCoosh goal that was disallowed.
I was standing 15–20 yards from the incident and I could not tell if it was a handball.
But Malcolm Brodie, who must have been 80 yards away and looking at the player's back, could say the goal was quite rightly disallowed.
You must have X-Ray eyes, Malcolm!
Putting paid to work
FOR years, unemployment has cast a long dark shadow over Northern Ireland.
The province has become sadly familiar with news of lay-offs and redundancies, factory closures and company collapses.
Although the recession may have hit other parts of the United Kingdom more severely, the search for a job in Northern Ireland today can still be a soul-destroying task, with vacancies often attracting hundreds of applications.
The economic downturn is hitting all sectors of society — from white collar personnel such as accountants and bank officials to skilled shopfloor workers.
The monthly publication of the unemployment figures provides a depressing barometer of the dole queue.
Unemployment in Northern Ireland currently stands at 107,187 people, or 14.7pc of the workforce.
Today's figures are, however, not as grim as in the dark days of 1986, when unemployment in the province peaked at 17.5pc (130,000 people).
But a new report predicts that the number out of work is set to continue to rise over the next four years, reaching a peak of 124,000 in 1996 and 1997.
According to the Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre, the situation will then start to improve, with a reduction in the number of jobless to 116,000 by the turn of the century.
Part of the problem is that the labour pool is steadily expanding, and the normal pattern of emigration has been reversed by the recession.
While Britain has borne the brunt of the economic crisis, Northern Ireland has been cushioned from the worst effects.
One element is the higher element of public sector employment — 38pc here, compared with 21pc in Britain.
Another factor is lower house prices — people in Northern Ireland tend not to have the massive mortgages which crippled so many householders in England.
While unemployment figures in Northern Ireland have been on the increase, they have not accelerated at anything like the rate in the usually prosperous south-east of England.
Between 1990 and 1992 our rate increased from 13.4 to 14.4pc.
In the south-east, it shot up over the same period from 4 to 9.7pc.
In Northern Ireland, last year saw some 5,000 redundancies, while the number claiming dole went up by 3,500.
The disparity arises because some of those who lost their jobs withdrew from the labour market, perhaps through early retirement.
A particular problem in Northern Ireland is the long-term unemployed — the 55,000 people who have been without work for at least a year.
Inevitably some become despondent, fearing they will never work again.
They claim that employers are unlikely to consider anyone who has been out of a job for so long.
Another issue which the Government is determined to tackle is the number of young people leaving school with no qualifications — 10pc at the last count.
One measure designed to counter this is the introduction this year of just one school-leaving date — the end of June.
This will give all pupils the benefit of five complete years of secondary education.
The jobs crisis means that the previously joyous prospect of a release from the rigours of the classroom is now tempered by the fear of unemployment.
According to the Training and Employment Agency, some 44pc of fifth-formers now choose to stay on at school.
Eightteen per cent continue their studies at a further education college, while 28pc enter a youth training programme.
Five per cent find jobs, and another 5pc wind up without work.
For those who are made redundant, the best advice is to try to get back into work as quickly as possible — the first three months is a vital period.
‘Those who lose their jobs are reckoned to stand a 50pc chance of securing new employment within three months,’ said Ronnie Scott of the Economic Research Centre.
‘The younger you are and the more skilled you are, the better chance you have of getting another job.
The figures also suggest that if you hold a qualification, you are half as likely to be unemployed as someone who has none.’
Even though things can look bleak for the unemployed, Mr Scott's advice is to take the long-term view — sooner or later an opportunity is bound to arise.
Of concern to the economists is the decline in the province's manufacturing sector.
It employs just over 100,000 today, compared with 177,000 in 1971.
Most of the recently created jobs have been in the service industry and the retail sector, many of them positions which attract part-time and female staff.
‘What's disturbing is that we still have quite a narrow industrial base,’ said Mr Scott.
‘When the recovery does come, we will not benefit as quickly as we should.
‘Our economic growth at present is only two to three per cent per annum, but we need 10pc growth if we are to start addressing the problem.
‘Overall there seems to be a lack of strategy on the part of the Government.
From the Minister down we are lacking the leadership which we need.’
What's disturbing is that we have a narrow industrial base.
When the recovery comes we will not benefit as quickly as we should.
NO GO NEIL
WHEN Newry's Errol Lutton makes his Ulster senior debut in the inter-provincials next weekend in Dublin he can thank his lucky stars that his club were the first to complete their Senior One fixtures this season…otherwise he would have missed his big chance.
Errol has been handed a three-game ban by the Ulster Branch's Disciplinary Committee, after receiving three yellow cards during the season — but because his club have finished their programme, the ban won't take effect until the start of next season.
That means the big defender, who has graduated successfully through the Ulster Under 16, Under 18 and Under 21 teams, was eligible for senior selection.
And he got the call last week to take his place in John Clarke's panel as they bid for a record-breaking six-in-a-row triumph.
It was a narrow squeak for Errol, for had Newry lost to Queen's a fortnight ago and ended up in a relegation decider against the students, the ban would have come into immediate effect.
No doubt the laying of the artificial grass pitch at Newry played a major part in getting their fixtures cleared up early.
It would only have needed one postponement at the school's shale pitch to have wrecked Errol's big opportunity!
But whereas Errol struck it lucky, spare a thought for Instonian Neil Cooke.
He received a lesser ban at about the same time for receiving three yellow cards too, and because his team have still at least one game to play, the Irish international must serve his ban immediately.
That game just happens to be the Tennent's Irish Senior Cup semi-final against Avoca.
But if that isn't bad enough, it isn't scheduled until April 24 — which means he has to sit out the inter-provincials.
It's certainly an anomaly that two players dealt with around the same time end up serving their bans well apart.
And that the one with the smaller ban ends up missing the senior inter-provincials as a result.
The Ulster Branch recognise the situation — it only happens like this once in a blue moon — but finding an answer isn't easy.
Guidelines have been laid, standards are set, and precedents have been established.
And when all has been said and done, the fact remains that a player must serve his ban while his club still has games to play, be it in the league or cup.
Playing for your province doesn't count, but it has been practice that if a player is banned at club level, he isn't considered for selection at that time.
If a club has finished its league and cup programme, then it has also been practice that any ban imposed won't take effect until the start of next season, so as not to prevent the player taking part in close-season and pre-season tournaments.
That's the way it is likely to remain.
Unless someone can come up with a better answer.
Don't blame fans for Oval woe
AS A regular reader of your ‘Have A Rattle’ column and as a long-standing Glentoran supporter, I feel I must take issue with your somewhat dismissive reply to ‘Jockus Concernus.’
To refer to one man expressing his legitimate grievance as ‘people like you’ again serves to perpetuate this myth of a small bank of ne-er do wells who exist solely to harass poor, inoffensive Mr Jackson.
Quite frankly John, this is not the case.
Jockus Concernus and ‘people like him’ have not put Tommy Jackson under pressure.
The supporters have not failed to build on the promise shown last season!
The supporters did not sign a bunch of overpaid, oversensitive underachievers (and this is not aimed at all our players — Devine, Lowry, Kelly, Neill, McKeever, Mathieson can excuse themselves!)
The supporters did not release some of the best young talent in Ulster (Strain, Millar, Keery, McCaffrey, etc!)
The supporters did not release Winkie Armstrong only to bring in Billy Whitehurst!
The supporters do not consistently play some of the Club's best players out of position to accommodate players so far past their sell-by date that if they were a tin of fish paste there's be an outbreak of salmonella the length and breadth of Mersey Street!
And finally the supporters have not wasted nearly £100,000 of the Club's money!
No we haven't, but we know the man who has!
Face facts, John, football supporters owe their manager, board or players NOTHING.
Quite the reverse — they owe US!
We pay every week to get into the game; this money goes to the manager and team, and in return they owe us a good afternoon's entertainment.
We are the paying customer, we are the boss and what we want we are entitled to get.
Jacko and Co were very keen to talk to television, radio supporters last year when the plaudits were flying about.
Where are they now when we want answers?
On one point you are spot-on.
There is an element at the Oval who would happily finish 15th if the Blues were 16th.
Most of these people have only seen a second half since the police closed the Oval club.
For the rest of us (‘people like us!’)— we want action — all of us!
More ‘people like us’!
Yes, sacking the manager would be ideal preparation for next week's Irish Cup semi-final, wouldn't it?
The ‘Strain, Millar, Keery’ argument does not hold water; they left the club years ago.
Verbals ‘unfair'
OPENING up your excellent Have a Rattle page, it continually sickens me to see so-called Glentoran supporters giving their manager the verbals in the press.
Are these not the same Glentoran fans whose continual barracking got our manager Ronnie McFall the sack and look what success Ronnie has had from he came to Shamrock Park.
Having spoken to various Glens fans the problem seems to be that the Board who made a fortune in the Marseilles game, aren't giving Tommy Jackson the money to spend on quality players, thus the lack of success on the playing field.
I have been following the Ports for 30 years now, home and away, continually watching them getting thrashed week in, week out.
Every season Glentoran and Linfield won everything, and I thought it was a fantastic result when we only lost narrowly at Windsor or the Oval.
It was just four of five years ago that your retired editor, Mr Malcolm Brodie, was saying it's between the Blues and the Glens again.
He couldn't see any other clubs challenging for the title.
That was until Ronnie McFall came to Shamrock Park and in a short space of time we have won the League two years on the trot, runner-up last season and challenging strongly again this season.
No club has a divine right to win the League year in, year out as the Glens and Blues have done down through the years.
We all go through the bad times so if these Glentoran supporters or any other supporters of other clubs would get behind their team, instead of giving continual stick, perhaps fortunes on the park might change.
I think you're missing the point here.
You're speaking as a supporter whose team has suddenly came good after years of mediocrity, not one whose team is struggling after years of success.
Once the standards have been set, dipping below them is often intolerable.
Selectors hand out harsh treatment
AFTER the euphoria of Ireland's amazing victory over England last Sunday had died away, rugby followers throughout the British Isles waited with keen anticipation for the announcement of the Lions party for New Zealand later this summer.
Like all good selectors, they had not been swayed or influenced by the most recent of events and clearly stuck to a game plan which may well have been devised before the 1992–93 season even commenced.
Were they right in their deliberations?
In terms of cold statistics for Ireland to win two out of the three matches against the other Home Countries and only have two players out of a party of 30 seems very harsh.
Brian Robinson, I believe, has every right to feel aggrieved when he looks at the other members of the back row.
In all likelihood Dean Richards will play on the blind side in the Test Team and hence it will be necessary to have additional cover at No 8.
Size undoubtedly told against Dennis McBride while Terry Kingston would have needed to have played in all four Internationals.
Similarly Eric Elwood, whose attitude was so positive and who played such an influential role in his two matches, was too much of an unknown quantity for the selectors to risk selection.
I believe that the out-half position will prove troublesome for the Lions in New Zealand as I would have serious reservations about Stuart Barnes being the right player under the type of physical pressure he is likely to be subjected to in the important matches.
Ireland's defeat of England may have come too late to influence the marginal selections but it certainly highlighted the shortcomings of some of the English players who were subsequently selected.
Teague, Winterbottom and Dooley all raised concern that this might be just one tour too far.
The selection of Dewi Morris ahead of Robert Jones is mystifying and exacerbates the potential problems to be experienced at half-back.
Carling's display confirmed that, while he is a world class centre, he is a very ordinary captain on the field of play.
Avoidance of injury will have an enormous influence on the success of the tour.
Ironically, injuries may provide Ireland with the opportunities to double their representation.
Glenavon fans ‘just as bad'
THIS letter is in response to Gerald Wilson's recent comments about Linfield fans at last season's Irish Cup final and the way BBC television supposedly ignored their ‘antics.’
This man is a Glenavon supporter who clearly fails to recognise or just simply ignores the trouble his own fans create.
I would suggest that there were no pictures of the cup final pitch invasion by Linfield fans because (1) they were celebrating a brilliant goal, but more importantly (2) the police put the Glenavon fans further back than the Linfield fans because they were provoking the Bluemen.
Mr Wilson commented on the BBC doing nothing which would do a disservice to Linfield Football Club, but I could say the same about Glenavon.
About four weeks ago I visited Mourneview Park to witness my team pull back a one goal deficit and win 2–1.
I and many other fans that day were simply disgusted with the way the Glenavon fans behaved.
It is true that during the match the Linfield fans created trouble, but it was among themselves by throwing bottles at each other.
I might add that the TV cameras moved in on this!
But in the second half when the Glenavon fans were creating trouble the cameras did not film them!
The Glenavon fans were obviously unhappy with the way their team has continued to play crap football.
Are these the same fans who at the start of the season boasted a five-man strike force which was going to win them the League?
But this was no excuse for the way in which they behaved.
They spat at the Linfield fans and at the Linfield assistant manager Lindsay McKeown.
If this was not disgraceful behaviour, they also threw coins and plastic etc. at the linesman, referee and Linfield players!
I am glad to see that the referee Leslie Irvine has filed an official complaint.
This behaviour should not be accepted, and if it was the Linfield fans almost certainly would not.
I'm glad to say that the Linfield fans behave in a more respectable manner.
Warren Martin ‘Linfield True Blue.’
I was at that game and the behaviour from some elements in the stands — on both sides — was disgraceful.
Labour attacks tax ‘punishment'
LABOUR MP Donald Dewar has launched a scathing attack on the Government's planned tax increases.
Mr Dewar, Labour spokesman on social security, said at the weekend that Chancellor Norman Lamont's Budget proposals to increase tax by £17 billion over the next three years would punish the nation — particularly the low paid.
He said the Conservatives had made no mention of tax increases in last year's election manifesto and accused Mr Lamont of having a ‘selective memory’.
‘There are two possibilities to explain the Chancellor volte-face,’ said Mr Dewar in a speech to a London conference on social justice.
‘He either knew what was happening to the economy at the last election and lied or he was living in a fool's paradise unaware of the damage he was doing.’
He added: ‘At the last election the Tories shouted from the rooftops that with them in power there would be no tax increase.
Their campaign was a huge piece of deception.’
United v Villa in top tribute
PREMIER League giants Manchester United and Aston Villa will meet at Windsor Park on Wednesday, May 11.
The game, which is sure to be a sell-out, has been organised as a memorial to Mervyn Brown, the former Irish League secretary who died last year after a long illness.
Rival managers Alex Ferguson and Ron Atkinson were good friends of Mervyn and had no hesitation in helping organise an event which should be a fitting tribute to one of Irish football's greatest administrators.
The last time Manchester United played in Belfast was in 1990 when they played an Irish League Select at Windsor as part of the local league's centenary celebrations.
Villa and United, of course, are currently involved in a three way battle with Norwich in an exciting climax to this season's Premier League Championship.
Wilson shares grief of Johnathan family
AN uncle of three-year-old Warrington bomb victim Johnathan Ball today spoke movingly of meeting Senator Gordon Wilson, whose daughter died in Enniskillen's Remembrance Day bombing by the IRA.
John Donlan said Mr Wilson met the family after attending Johnathan's funeral.
‘He came not as a senator,’ said Mr Donlan, on BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
‘He said he was representing nobody but Marie Wilson and he told us how he climbed out of the rubble in Enniskillen five years ago and somehow, through his daughter and his religious convictions, found the courage to say, ‘Enough is enough, there must be a better way’.
‘At the end of the day he said all the IRA had achieved in Enniskillen was to pull people closer together.’
The IRA has agreed to Mr Wilson's request to meet them.
Meanwhile, Progressive Democrat leader Des O'Malley today warned that extradition laws for terrorist suspects had to be tightened to endorse the Dublin government's condemnations of IRA attacks.
He said that until ‘scandalous’ loopholes in the extradition laws were blocked, condemnations of terrorism and expressions of condolence for victims of the violence fell short of being the optimum Irish response.
Mr O'Malley added: ‘The Warrington outrage besmirches the whole Irish people and leaves us all feeling ashamed and somewhat helpless.
‘It is time the slaughter of the innocents of Warrington really provoked the people of this Republic and particularly the Government into more than the by now ritual condemnation of such awful acts.’
Fairy tales target for political puritans
NOT even the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen are immune from political correctness.
After focusing on nursery rhymes and Enid Blyton, the political puritans now have the legacy of the celebrated 19th century Danish storyteller under their microscope.
‘We are experiencing the same sort of trend today as in Victorian times, when religious puritanism led to the editing out of potentially sexual and embarrassing aspects of Andersen's tales,’ said Professor Glyn Jones.
Professor Jones, a professor of Scandinavian Studies at East Anglia University, added: ‘Today's political, religious and racial correctness not only purges the idiosyncrasies and quirkiness from Andersen's language.
It's also daft.’
Professor Jones said new editions of Anderson's work expunged imagined racist overtones which were not there.
He illustrated his point in the latest Danish Literary Magazine, with examples of edited versions of his own translations for a new United States version of selected Andersen tales.
‘In my translation of the ‘Nightingale’ fairy tale, the word ‘Chinaman’has been deleted from my original text, which read: ‘I suppose you know that in China the emperor's a Chinaman…
‘,’ Professor Jones writes.
The new text talks instead of a ‘Chinese’ emperor.
‘Later on, the word ‘magic’ replaces the accurate translation ‘black magic’, presumably because it might offend racial sensibilities.
‘Black magic’ is apparently now considered racist in America so the term ‘Chinaman’must also be the same,’Professor Jones said.
The latest Americanised Andersen translations have caused an uproar in literary and academic circles in Denmark.
Timex plant set for new mass picket
MASS picketing at the Timex plant in Dundee will continue today as the bitter dispute enters its ninth week.
Supporters of sacked workers have rejected accusations of ‘rent-a-mob’ tactics and say they plan to turn up in force again.
However, Timex said it had won a court order restricting to six the number of pickets organised by local AEEU officials, and requiring that picketing be peaceful.
The order resulted from an appeal hearing at the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
Talks The Scottish TUC, after talks with Dundee police, has appealed for troublemakers to stay away, and for those attending to heed union guidelines and stay within the law.
But the STUC also voiced disquiet about the way last Monday's picketing was handled by police, and said it had secured a pledge that policing would now be ‘even-handed’.
Last Monday, in the worst picket line clashes seen in Britain since the 1980s, protesters fought with police as buses arrived with newly-recruited workers, hired to replace some of the 340 Timex workers sacked nine weeks ago.
Tommy Sheridan, convener of Scottish Militant Labour, said sacked workers had asked for outside support at the picket line.
Mr Sheridan was one of 16 people arrested on Monday.
In court he was ordered as a bail condition to stay away from the plant.
He says he plans to be in Dundee today but will not be at the picket — and rejected accusations by MPs and others of outsiders interfering in the dispute.
After talks with police in Dundee, STUC general secretary Campbell Christie appealed for pickets to obey union guidelines and not to break the law or block the road.
Timex said: ‘Provided there is compliance with this call…there ought to be no repetition of the violent and disorderly behaviour to which the company's employees have been subjected.’
Missing men cause poser
THE Belfast & District League are incensed with the non appearance of too many competitors in their individual championships this season.
This is a common occurrence in the annual league championships and it looks as though the Belfast & District have had enough.
There is a delegates meeting in the Constitutional Club tomorrow night (6–30) and if that particular item is not top of their agenda it should be.
I don't know of any league penalty regarding players not turning up and not letting their opponents know in good time that they will not be playing.
A player without a reasonable excuse should be barred from entering the competition the following year.
The A League singles championship begins on Monday night and the League officials are hoping that there will be a drastic reduction in the ‘absent’ players.
It is puzzling why this happens year after year and the only feasible reason I can come up with is — there seems to be far too many players competing in too many leagues in and around the Belfast area.
Some of them must be playing snooker three and four times a week in two or three different leagues.
If these players are so involved in league games why on earth are entering individual championships knowing rightly that they will run into the inevitable date clash?
Meanwhile, it looks like a toss up between Dunmurry A and B in their billiards cup semi-final.
Following the first leg little or nothing separates the two teams.
QE1, however, carry a lead of over 200 in their second led against Coach.
Andy Sharpe led the way with a well compiled 74 break in the first left game.
Homing in on top job
THE Northern Ireland Pool Association will be hosting this year's Home Internationals at O'Neill's Causeway Coast Hotel in Potrush, from October 28–31.
But first priority for the pool fraternity is to elect a new men's team manager to replace Trevor Harte who has stepped up to Association chairman.
A few names have been bandied about the circuit, but I'll predict that Ballymena's Russell Morrow, the assistant manager for the past few years, will get the vote.
There were plenty of thrills in the Stanley Belfast Cup semi-finals this week.
Liverpool SC and Renegades shared the first leg spoils at 6–6, and it was all square again in the second leg, which means it now goes to a three frame play-off at a date to be decided by the committee.
The Renegades were 6–5 ahead and looking good, but Robert Hunter was the Kop's saviour by taking the last game.
The other semi-final saw Newtownabbey side Palm Grove come from 5–3 down to snatch a first leg 7–5 win over Ballynahinch side Montalto Rangers.
Top players were Grove's Colin Adamson and Montalto's Chris Halloran.
The Coleraine Festival of Pool, held at the Lodge Hotel, proved a big success, and now plans for next year's event are under way…with the French national team among those likely to make an appearance.
Entries are still open for the UK Amateur tournament at the Rising Tide, Larne, in early April.
Also due soon are the men's doubles at 5th Avenue, Ballymena.
With one league game left in the Harp Esat Belfast League Division One, it's still the ‘Big Two’, champions King Richard and the challengers Oakley, neck and neck.
Budget clarification
THE Belfast Telegraph's contribution to the debate on smoking — in the form of two major articles prior to No Smoking Day — was very much appreciated by those of us working towards a healthier community.
It is important however to clarify some of the points made in relation to this often complex issue.
The £100m spent by the tobacco industry on advertising is not three times the budget of the Health Promotion Agency.
The £100m refers to spending on advertising throughout the United Kingdom.
In Northern Ireland, such spending is estimated to be in the region of £3m and it is this figure that is three times the Agency's £1m a year budget.
The tobacco industry therefore spends about £2 per head on advertising for each person in the province whereas the Agency has less than 70p per head to spend on promoting all aspects of health such as nutrition, alcohol and sexual health.
The second issue raised was the Government's stance on tobacco advertising.
It is not correct to say that the Government Select Committee on Health has recommended a continuation of the current system of voluntary agreements on tobacco advertising as opposed to an EC ban.
The Committee in fact supported a ban on advertising, going on to conclude that the Government cannot procrastinate any longer on the issue.
It is indeed deplorable that the Government sets targets for a reduction in smoking but continues to place the responsibility for achieving these on health, education and voluntary sector while avoiding taking the action we consider essential.
Hot under the collar
REGARDING your article on fuel wastage in Belfast, I have come across two instances of it lately.
I attend an adult evening class at Queen's and all winter the heat has been so intense that jumpers, cardigans and jackets have had to be discarded and all windows and doors opened.
The heat could not be turned off or regulated.
The same thing happened at the Dental Hospital at the RVH during the day.
I believe these two institutions are short of money.
Couple face bomb charges
A WEST Belfast husband and wife were remanded in court today on a terror charge.
Appearing at Belfast Magistrate's Court were David Casey (32) and Jacqueline Casey (30) of Fallswater Street.
They are jointly accused of conspiring with others to cause an explosion likely to endanger life.
The charge is understood to be connected to the discovery of ten bags of fertiliser at a house in the west of the city last weekend.
A detective told the court that after caution the pair replied: ‘Nothing to say to the charge.’
The officer said she believed she could link them to the offence.
Both were remanded in custody to appear at Chichester Street courthouse on April 21.
Cause for concern
MAY I refer to your front page article on March 20 concerning the three ‘meningitis’ cases in Bangor.
The Eastern Health Board spokesman, is, reportedly, telling the public not to be alarmed because ‘the three cases are in no way connected.’
Surely this gives cause for greater alarm, it would have been less alarming had the three cases been connected.
Hope in forgiveness
IN YOUR March 18 Viewpoint you cast doubt on the genuineness of the conversion of Anna Moore and Bobby Corry, who have received life sentences for their involvement in terrorist murders.
You also comment on the willingness of even those people who have suffered directly from terrorist violence to find forgiveness in their hearts.
This willingness to forgive past wrongs is one of the few signs of hope for this benighted province; but it is not enough to bring peace.
For this to happen we need those who are actively involved in terrorism to reject it.
That Anna Moore and Bobby Corry have severed their links with the paramilitaries and have decided to marry each other is a cause for rejoicing not condemnation.
There are enough hatemongers on the loose in this land, without the Belfast Telegraph joining their number.
Train robbers strike at Euston
ARMED robbers pistol-whipped two postal workers and threatened other staff with a gun as they stole mail bags from a train in Euston Station, London, police revealed today.
The workers later had to be treated in hospital for minor injuries and today the Royal Mail put up a £10,000 reward for the arrest and conviction of the attackers.
The raiders drove into the mainline station yesterday at about 7pm in a blue van after the train containing mailbags had pulled in.
A padlock on gates leading into the station from Eversholt Street had been cut in advance.
Police revealed that the robbery was carried out by at least two men, although as many as five could have been involved.
One was disguised as a post office worker.
They escaped in the van through the same gates they had entered and disappeared into heavy traffic.
Detective Inspector Raymond Ratty, of British Transport police, said: ‘A large quantity of mail bags and their contents were stolen.
The contents were not known.’
Riot police flood funeral town
SCORES of police officers in full riot gear flooded into Maghera today for the funeral of IRA man James Kelly, one of four Roman Catholics murdered by the UFF at Castlerock.
Amid some of the tightest security seen in the province in recent years, hundreds of mourners made their way from his Tirkane Road home to St Patrick's Church just over a mile away.
The funeral was delayed by 30 minutes after mourners, including senior Sinn Fein member Martin McGuinness, refused to move because of the heavy police presence.
A lone piper led the cortege past dozens of black flags en route to the church while more than 30 RUC Land Rovers blocked off roads and an Army helicopter hovered overhead.
The coffin of the 25-year-old whom the IRA has admitted was one of its ‘volunteers’ was draped in the Irish tricolour with beret and gloves on top.
Earlier in the same church hundreds of mourners attended the funeral of another victim, 52-year-old James McKenna.
A large crowd also attended the funeral of Gerry Dalrymple (58) in Rasharkin.
They heard parish priest Fr John Fitzpatrick describe UFF gunmen who carried out the Castlerock massacre as the ‘devil's disciples’.
Fr Fitzpatrick told the mourners at St Mary's Church that the devil ‘is rampant in this world of ours’.
‘If you needed any more proof, then it was present in Castlerock on Thursday morning,’ he added.
‘Only the devil's disciples could have carried out such a wanton massacre, and where the devil is abroad the innocent suffer.
Gerry was innocent, innocent of any crime.
His murderers knew he was a Catholic.’
Also speaking at the funeral, Bishop of Down and Connor Patrick Walsh spoke of a ‘dark week’ of tragedy in Northern Ireland where so many families were ‘crushed with grief’.
‘This has been a week of horror, a week of terror, a week in which we have seen a terrifying escalation of violence, a vicious onslaught of murders, attempted murders and attacks on homes,’ he added.
As the three funerals were taking place, four men from the Coleraine area were being questioned about the murders.
The funeral for the fourth victim, 20-year-old Noel O'Kane, from Upperlands, will take place tomorrow.
WHERE'S MAL GOING?
MANCHESTER United and Aston Villa are to play at Windsor Park on May 12 — a few days after the final fixtures in what has been a fiercely contested inaugural Premier League battle between them and Norwich City.
The game is a memorial one for Irish League secretary Mervyn Brown who died last year, with the receipts put into trust for the family — and to purchase the League headquarters in University Street to be named ‘The Mervyn Brown Memorial Building.’
Irish League president Morton McKnight said today that the respective managers Alex Ferguson (United) and Ron Atkinson (Villa), both close friends of Mervyn had responded immediately when the game was first mooted some months ago.
‘We decided Mervyn's tremendous contribution — one of imagination and professionalism — over the six years he was secretary had to be acknowledged in some way.
Again between such world renowned sides is therefore most appropriate,’ he added.
The match will be all-ticket with an anticipated 25,000 capacity crowd and distribution arrangements will be announced shortly.
League vice president Gifford McConkey said: ‘We are extremely fortunate to get these two teams to Belfast after such a hectic season.
It's a wonderful gesture by them.’
Linfield chairman, David Campbell said his club had unhesitatingly approved use of the stadium for this game to honour a man who had played such a vital part in the development of Northern Ireland domestic football.
Mervyn's widow Anne, his two daughters and sister-in-law Yvonne Lynn, who served on the League's administrative staff attended today's press conference when the match announcement was made.
ASTON Villa manager Ron Atkinson allowed Thursday's transfer deadline to pass without opening the famous chequebook.
‘What I want money can't buy,’ said Big Ron.
Oh, really?
What would that be?
‘A new set of knees for Paul McGrath.’
Such a request, unfortunately, is beyond medical science at present.
In the meantime, the big Irishman continues his weekly routine of sitting around doing nothing until match day — when he runs out to play stormers for Villa and the Republic of Ireland.
Dodgy knees and all, Atkinson rates McGrath as Europe's top defender — by a mile.
He's the rock Northern Ireland's strikers must get past if they want to succeed at Lansdowne Road next week.
But before he dons the green of the Republic, the 32-year old giant will rent out a dinner suit for tomorrow's Professional Football Association player of the year dinner in London's Park Lane.
McGrath has been advised to go…after all, he's a hot tip to win the thing.
The Black Pearl of Inchicore has Ryan Giggs, Paul Ince, Ian Wright, Alan Shearer and Villa team-mate Dean Saunders as competition but it won't bother him.
Nothing does.
By rights, he should not be playing next week.
Manchester United were convinced he was finished four years ago and were happy to let Villa take him — along with the personal problems which also contributed to his departure from Old Trafford.
‘It's incredible that Paul is still playing,’ said PFA chief executive Graham Taylor.
‘At one stage when he was at United I was asked to go and help him seek a settlement after a specialist's report said his knees wouldn't last another 12 months!’
But McGrath's knees, and Villa's title push, are lasting the pace.
The player wants the story to continue with the Republic and in the World Cup — and he will be back in his favourite position against Bingham's boys come next Wednesday.
For many years Jack Charlton used him in midfield but McGrath is now expected to play out his international career in the back four.
‘Paul is a diamond.
He can play anywhere,’ says Charlton.
‘He is one of the best players I have ever worked with and it's hard to recall him having a bad game.
‘He can't go on forever but there's still plenty of life in him yet.’
Paul, quiet, modest and unassuming says: ‘I don't mind where I play as long as I can help the team.
‘Every game is a bonus for me at this stage of my career and I'm enjoying my football.’
And what about next week's game?
‘I'm not one for making predictions but I'm sure it will be a hard fought, competitive 90 minutes.’
With McGrath on the pitch, it's hardly likely to be anything else.
NEXT Saturday (11–30am) sees the Northern Ireland Under 17 Hospice Charity tournament taking place in the Coach Club, Hillsborough.
The last 16 players will bid for the championship which was won last year by Mark Howe.
Grounds are bog standard
I SHOULD like to have your opinion regarding a touch and go subject: namely toilet facilities at football grounds.
Who are the guilty clubs and who are the guilty men in charge of such matters?
At our club Linfield, the North Stand toilets are abysmal.
When was the last time anybody saw hand towels or soap or a bog roll?
Maybe the powers that be have been only interested in cleaning up opponents.
How can we hope to attract women and kids to matches?
One Irish League Club — Ballymena Utd are about to stage a rock concert with 20,000 punters expected!
Great idea, wish them great success, but are they going to provide on site facilities on a stadia format.
Anyone in Ballymena listening?
I hope they can throw some light on a very delicate matter?
SKIING
Katja falls but stays on course
KATJA Seizinger lost her skis in a dramatic last-gate tumble but remained on course to carry off skiing's supreme prize.
Germany's Seizinger, narrow leader in the battle for the World Cup overall title, fell on the second leg of a giant slalom in Are, Sweden as she tried desperately to make up for lost time.
She careered across the finish line minus her skis but was still credited with fourth place behind winner Carole Merle of France.
Seizinger remained first overall but with her advantage over Austrian Anita Wachter trimmed to just four points with one race left.
Wachter had to settle for third place in the race after Italy's Deborah Compagnoni produced one of her best performances of the season.
to finish second behind Merle, who retained her World Cup giant slalom title.
TENNIS
India serve up surprise
INDIA took a shock 2–1 lead over last year's finalists Switzerland in their Davis Cup World group first round tie in Calcutta.
The Indian pair of Leander Paes and Ramesh Krishnan beat Jacob Hlasek and Marc Rosset, both ranked way above them, 6–7 (4–7) 7–6 (12–10) 7–5 2–6 6–3 in a rousing doubles match.
Paes, who beat Hlasek in the opening singles, faces Rosset tomorrow.
Krishnan will play Hlasek.
Barnes' ‘bullies’ disgust Wright!
IAN Wright has slammed the terrace bullies who are trying to hound John Barnes out of England's World Cup team.
The Arsenal striker was so horrified at the way Barnes was taunted against San Marino last month that he had to stop watching.
‘Everyone throughout the game was disgusted,’ said Wright, as England manager Graham Taylor faces one of the toughest decisions of his life over the Liverpool winger.
Taylor insists the Wembley taunting, since picked up by copy-cat morons around the Premier League, will not influence him.
But Barnes' disappointing form since the most humiliating night of his controversial career could well rule him out of next week's qualifier in Turkey.
That will give the boo-boys the illusion of victory, and will upset Barnes' colleagues.
Wright, who knows better than many what it is like to feel persecuted, watched the 6–0 win on television after his groin injury ruled him out and let Barnes back after 10 months' absence.
‘When the Barnes thing came around, I couldn't watch.
I knew the game was won.
What I heard every time Barnesy got the ball made me feel really bad for him.
I was gutted.
‘I just had to turn the telly over.
I've had stick like that at away games but never from so-called fans who are supposed to be on your side.
‘It's not going to bother Barnesy, everyone knows what he is like.
But when we all went back to training at our clubs, everyone was talking about the stick he got and all agreed it was disgraceful.’
Taylor feels the same but fears it may have become an unbeatable campaign against the enigmatic 29-year-old.
‘Sometimes it's taken out of everyone's hands John's, mine, yours,’ he said.
‘It's not a very nice feeling in the pit of our stomachs.
But there is a herd instinct.
Football crowds think that if you can treat an England player like that at Wembley, then they can all treat him like that on the league grounds.
‘We would all rather it didn't happen.
Unfortunately the more we talk about it encourages a certain kind of person to continue with it.’
Of more concern is the way Barnes has failed to silence his critics with his feet since his poor display and when asked if he will win his 69th cap next week, Taylor said simply: ‘I want to give it some thought.’
But while he hesitates over Barnes, he has already confirmed that 25-goal Wright will start and bid to score for the first time in eight caps.
It is not a record that worries a striker who has scored 51 times in 70 games for Arsenal and he said confidently: ‘It's in my nature to score, the way I play is just instinctive.
I feel even better playing for England, there are so many good players around you.
‘It gives you the chance to play on the ultimate stage, which is the World Cup.
I hardly dare think about that.
‘I would be more worried if I hadn't had chances in my previous games.
I'm never bothered about taking a chance, that's something I feel good about and it will eventually happen.’
His critics wonder if he won't talk or worse his way into trouble first.
But though the 29-year-old has had his share of bad headlines recently, he has vowed not to change his approach.
‘The difference between being a hero and villain is a thin line and I feel I'm always walking it.
Playing like that is quite exciting, to be honest.
‘I could score on Wednesday and become a national hero, but a week after I could get into a little incident and it would be all over the back pages again and I'm a villain.
‘Everyone's going on about my six bookings.
They all think I'm a nutcase.
But I just go out and play the game.
I never hold back and I'll always play like that.’
Reds fans ‘sorry’
WE, the 15 loyal supporters of Cliftonville FC from north and west Belfast, would like to apologise to the directors, staff and players over our recent remarks about the ‘Joe Kerr incident.’
We were wrong to accuse Cliftonville of not appealing on Joe's behalf when he got suspended until the end of the season.
We were acting as loyal supporters in defending the player and would do the same with any player at Cliftonville FC.
It appears from last week's letter that secretary Ernie McCormick and manager Frankie Parks did appeal on Joe Kerr's behalf and we appreciate their efforts.
In closing we would like to congratulate the manager and chairman Jim Boyce for bringing quality players such as Greenhalgh, Manley, Kerr, Gill, McAllister and Flynn to the club.
Cliftonville are now a team to be respected by other Irish League outfits and good luck to them in next week's Irish Cup semi-final.
We are very sorry we have caused any inconvenience to club and are hoping E McCormick accepts this letter of apology on our behalf club and puts it down to a mis-understanding by his supporters.
Linfield Swifts 1 B'clare Cdes Res 3
ON 31 minutes Ballyclare took the lead when James Beattie latched onto a headed pass and tucked the ball into the far corner.
The Swifts then came to life with Beattie's 25-yard free kick just over and Robinson's forward burst barely cut out on time.
Half-time: Linfield Swifts 0, Ballyclare Comrades Res 1.
After 48 minutes Wallace took a short corner to Stephen Beattie who floated a beautiful cross for Morrow to glance home into the far corner.
Ballyclare restored their lead in the 55th minute when promising Adrian Moore broke clear on the right and crossed for James Beattie to tap home the second goal.
Ballyclare scored a third in the 80th minute when Adrian Moore blasted home after persistent play by super James Beattie.
Ballyearl one win from double
THE Ballyearl Squash team is only one match from an Ulster league and club championship double.
In this afternoons semi final of the Ulster Club championship the Newtownabbey team defeated the Belfast Boat Club 5–0.
Duncan Cameron beat Brendan Mellor 9–3 9–4 9–6, Billy White had a walk-over Craig Mahoney, Robbie Robinson defeated Alan Poots 9–2 9–3 9–1, Trevor McKinlay overcame Danny McNally 9–3 9–4 9–5 and Ian Hackney defeated Andy Horne 7–9 9–4 9–0 9–2.
They now play Belfast Post and Telecom in tonight's final.
In the B section Seven Towers from Ballymena play Banbridge who had a 3–2 victory over Antrim.
Fullerton holds off Brennan
CYCLIST Barry Fullerton just managed to hold out and take the honours ahead of Harold Brennan (Kings Moss) in todays 50 mile handicap road race promoted by Newmills Cycling Club at Killyman, Co.
Tyrone.
The big field was split into three groups starting at Zero, four and seven minutes.
By half distance in the nine lap race, the handicap had unravelled and although Albert Shaw (Kings Moss) and West Down veteran Eddie Crory held a 40 seconds advantage, the rest of the field was back together and baring down on the leaders.
Their escape ended on the seventh circuit and during a hectic last couple of laps in which there were a number of attacks by Andrew Moss (Ballymena RC) Movilla's John West, Mark Smyth (Newry, O'Rourke's) and Jonathan Kenny (Movilla), it was left to the sprint with Fullerton just shading the decision ahead of Brennan.
Parrott leads at Masters
JOHN Parrott made a flying start to his Benson and Hedges Irish Masters semi-final at Goffs, County Kildare, this afternoon.
At the mid-session interval world number two Parrott led Scotland's Alan McManus 3–1 in their best-of-11 semi-final.
The 1991 world champion, impressive during the 5–3 quarter-final success over James Wattana on Thursday, picked up where he had left off in the opening frame.
McManus, who beat Jimmy White in the previous round, failed to bother the scorer as Parrott fired in runs of 48 and 31 for a 94–0 first frame win.
A missed black off its spot cost McManus dearly in the second before the Scot, appearing in the semi-final of a major tournament for the ninth time this season, appeared likely to take frame three.
But he missed a tricky black and Parrott stepped in with a 48 clearance to pink to lead 3–0.
Parrott looked likely to go further in front until he missed an easy yellow in frame four.
McManus cashed in to snatch the frame.
No worries!
WITH their very predictable choice of players, particularly the number of England players, the Lions are going to find it tough in New Zealand.
But while Ireland did show up a number of flaws in the English team's make-up, one game doesn't make a tournament.
The selection of so many England players was probably arrived at because of their high profile over the past couple of seasons.
But a lot of them only made it by the skin of his teeth and are in the party only because of their reputation.
However, in saying that there are a few Irish players who will be disappointed at not being selected.
I thought Brian Robinson was very unlucky and the same applies to Denis McBride.
The Lions are going to need pace in the back-row, and they haven't got that.
Either McBride or Neil Back, who are out-and-out flyers, would have provided that option.
I wouldn't have taken Mike Teague.
Instead I would have brought Peter Winterbottom as a blindside flanker.
The New Zealanders will have quick opensides, and therefore their continuity will be much better than the Lions — and that could be the key to winning the Test series.
I thought Eric Elwood might have squeezed in.
I would have Rob Andrew in my Test team.
If he receives decent ball, Stuart Barnes can be brilliant but a big question mark hangs over his performance when he's confronted with poor quality possession.
Elwood looked very good indeed and possesses a lot of talent, and from what I've seen of him, he would have done well in New Zealand.
Brain Moore is another fortunate to be selected.
He has been struggling to find form all season, and maybe Terry Kingston would have been a better bet.
I feel sorry for Robert Jones.
He should have been chosen alongside Gary Armstrong instead of Dewi Morris.
I also think Tony Clement is lucky to be in the party.
He has only been a reserve for Wales all season, although I believe he has been playing very well for his club.
And I've never heard of Peter Wright.
It appears that he's in because he can play both sides of the scrum.
But a rugged tight-head like Peter Clohessy might have been a better choice.
I don't think the New Zealanders will be too unduly worried about the Lions.
They will be more than equal in every department.
Glenavon achieve ‘goal’ in style
Larne 1 Glenavon 3
IN the sticky conditions Glenavon settled quickly with McBride bringing a good save from McConnell with a well struck ground shot after seven minutes.
Five minutes later the Larne keeper again did well to block a Ferguson shot on the line after the home defence had failed to clear a Williamson corner.
Larne should have taken the lead two minutes later when a right wing cross from Fay sailed over Beck but McCourt, running in at the back post, somehow managed to steer his header wide.
After 15 minutes Glenavon got their noses in front.
A back pass to McConnell saw the keeper mis-hit the clearance to Ferguson who provided the perfect lob into the net.
Davy Dennison, who was having a quiet first half, should have increased his side's lead four minutes before the break.
Turning well inside the box he side-stepped Birney to hammer in a shot which McConnell did well to push out for a corner.
A through ball from McBride after 50 minutes sent Byrne clear from what looked like an off side position.
The referee however waved play on as McConnell at the second attempt saved Byrne's poorly hit shot.
As the visitors pushed forward Ferguson was unlucky for the second time to have a effort cleared off the line, this time by Birney.
Glenavon's second came from the penalty spot after 70 minutes.
The cross from the left was handled by McKinstry and McBride calmly slotted the ball home.
Glenavon scored their third four minutes from time when Armstrong raced clear of the home defence to drive the ball into the corner.
With just seconds remaining Larne grabbed a consolation goal when McCourt converted from the penalty spot after Smyth had been fouled by Denison.
Rovers' make or break tie
DERRY City take a welcome break from the rigours of Premier Division football to entertain FAI Cup specialists, Shamrock Rovers, in a quarter-final tie tomorrow afternoon at the Brandywell (3.30pm).
And for the once mighty Dublin side, defeat would effectively signal the end of what has been a bitterly disappointing and frustrating season.
Rovers, under the guidance of former Republic of Ireland international, Ray Treacy, are uncharacteristically fighting for their very survival in the relegation zone of the Premier Division and their only hope of silverware rests in the FAI Cup.
‘When the draw for the quarter-final was made a few weeks ago, I was delighted at being paired with Derry City’ he declared.
‘But since then our League form has slumped and we appear to be suffering a confidence problem’.
Derry, on the other hand, will be at full strength with Paul Trainor returning to the first team panel after serving a one match suspension against Limerick last weekend.
Manager, Roy Coyle, is confident of reaching the semi-final stages but he had praise for Rovers after their two League performances against the Brandywell side during the season.
‘We got out of jail in Dublin and despite winning both games, they played us off the park’ he claimed.
Meanwhile if tomorrow's game ends in stalemate, Derry must travel to Cork on Thursday next for an outstanding Premier Division game with the Rovers replay at the RDS on Wednesday, April 7.
If the match produces a winner, Derry will meet Cork on April 7 instead.
Press get the blues
LOYAL Bluemen like you and Malcolm Brodie must have been crying in your beer when Bangor turned Linfield over yet again this week.
It's time to stop supporting Linfield, John, and give the other clubs the credit they deserve.
Bangor have been a revelation this season and are still pushing for success on three fronts, unlike the poor old Blues.
It really sickens me when the likes of you underestimate Bangor and other clubs when they play Linfield.
The Press Box must have been like a morgue when David McCallan scored that goal against them in the Irish Cup quarter final.
No doubt the heads were dropping all round — dear oh dear, what's happening to us?
We all turned up to see the mighty Linfield toss Bangor aside and we go and spoil the party.
Not only that, but we went and done it again in the League Cup!
At least Linfield are still above us in the championship race so you can keep on writing about them every day.
Linfield will get hundreds of column inches between now and the end of the season — if they win a match it's ‘clear the back page, boys' and if they lose, well…it's ‘clear the back page, boys!’
But I ask you, John — apart from the fact that we always beat them, there are lots of reasons why we should get just as much publicity as them.
When it comes to achievements this season, there is no comparison between Linfield and Bangor.
BOXING
Hodkinson into millionaire club
BARNEY Eastwood's world featherweight champion Paul Hodkinson has joined boxing's exclusive millionaires' club.
Hodkinson, arguably the best pound-for-pound fighter in Britain, has agreed a five-fight deal with ITV worth ‘in excess’ of seven figures, beginning with his £250,000 mandatory title defence against Mexico's dangerous Goya Vargas at Dublin's National Stadium on April 28.
And the television contract includes a possible all-British clash against Colin McMillan, provided the former WBO titleholder comes through a planned warm-up fight at the end of May following shoulder surgery.
Vargas, however, has a pedigree to pose a considerable threat to Hodkinson's prospective windfall but the all-action champion has no intention of ducking the top challenges.
His manager Barney Eastwood gave Hodkinson the option of taking his career in another direction, rather than fight the Mexican.
‘It's a dangerous fight my heart will be in my mouth,’ said Eastwood, who has guided Hodkinson's career for the last seven years.
‘But Paul wants it.
He doesn't want to give up his belt it's all down to pride.’
Hodkinson, who has successfully defended the crown three times since taking it from another Mexican, Marcos Villasana, in November 1991, added: ‘That belt means so much to me.
If I have to lose it, I'll only do it in the ring.
‘The fight I'd love would be against McMillan and it nearly happened before he lost his WBO title.
If we do get together, it's certainly won't be for a 50–50 purse.’
Hodkinson will make the first inroads into his fortune by taking a holiday with his wife to Las Vegas to watch the Lennox Lewis-Tony Tucker WBC heavyweight championship fight on May 8.
Cup ‘semis’ now pitched into quandary
THE Tennent's Irish Senior Cup semi-final draw has thrown up a repeat of last season's final between Holywood and Lisnagarvey, with Instonians getting Avoca…but hopes of staging a double-header at Olympia Leisure have been scuppered.
Both Holywood and Instonians use the Olympia synthetic pitch as home venues, which threw up the possibility of the games being played back-to-back on April 24 — but the Centre has been already booked for that date for a Celtic boys football tournament.
The pitch will be in use from 10am to 4pm, which could force one hockey semi-final to be staged as late as 4–30pm, or one or both to go elsewhere.
Holywood have already used the Valley synthetic pitch twice during their run to the semi-finals, and may consider going there again, or even to the new pitch at Jordanstown.
But there is little likelihood of them giving home advantage to Garvey who have gone 32 games without defeat in the competition and need to win it for a record sixth time on the trot to reach Europe next year.
Instonians will be delighted at coming out of the hat first against Leinster kingpins Avoca at home, but now will have to join Holywood in having talks with competition organiser Brian Hanna.
Strain eases
PORTADOWN centre-forward Stevie Cowan made history today at Shamrock Park as his club defeated Cliftonville to remain a point behind Linfield in this fascinating Irish League championship.
Cowan scored the equaliser a minute before half time to bring his total for the season to 44, beating the club record of 43 held by Martin Malone since 1973–74.
And then midway through the second-half he played a key role in Brian Strain's vital winner.
Martin Russell floated the ball into the goalmouth where Cowan intelligently stepped over it and there was Strain to finish it off.
Portadown manager Ronnie McFall said: ‘This will be as hard a game as we will get.
We struggled basically at the back.
Some players were nervous and edgy but over the 90 minutes we deserved to win.’
Cliftonville manager Frankie Parks put it like this: ‘There was a lot of frustration on the day but the better side won.
There is no disputing that.
They had a lot more possession, more control and we gave the ball away far too frequently.’
Missed chances?
Portadown piled them up in the first half.
It began with a Joey Cunningham shot blocked by Lee Greenhalgh, Strain's free header from Russell's free kick went inches past and then Russell with a saw his power-laden shot tipped over by Paul Rice.
Kieran Loughran was fortunate to clear the ball off the line as the Portadown forwards hovered hungrily around the goalmouth but then came a shock — a Cliftonville goal after 39 minutes.
Mark Gill picked up the ball in the middle of the Park and, with the Portadown defence spreadeagled and offering no challenge, he calmly lobbed it over their heads and also that of Magee who had come off his line.
But five minutes later Portadown equalised, the scorer?
Who else but the irrepressible Cowan who knocked the ball in at the far post after an excellent build-up involving Gregg Davidson, Peter Murray, Russell and Sandy Fraser who supplied the final pass.
Cliftonville had a wonderful opportunity to go into the lead just after the resumption when Tim McCann, lively and dangerous darted through, but as the keeper came out to narrow the angle, he whipped the ball past the far upright.
Then Strain went close with a header, Cunningham's long distance effort went over the bar.
Murray had a shot stopped on the line and substitute Gary Peebles, one of four Scots in Ronnie McFall's Tartan Army rattled the bar before Strain applied that 72nd minute coup de grace and Fraser had a goal disallowed for offside.
IT'S PARTY TIME AGAIN
PARTY Politics, the biggest horse in the race, could well emulate Red Rum and win the Martell Grand National two years in a row according to trainer Nick Gasele.
‘He appears to have come out of his last race at Haydock very well,’ Gaselee said, ‘and I am hopeful that he will run another big race next Saturday.
It's difficult to win the National two years running but it has been done.’
Party Politics, who stands at 18 hands, has had a history of wind problems and before and after last year's National he had two operations to improve his breathing.
The first was the traditional Hobday and then he had a tie-back.
But he appeared to be going nowhere during mid-season when he pulled up at Cheltenham in January with a broken blood vessel.
This race came only two months after he had run well for a long way when leading the Hennessy Gold Cup at Newbury and Gaselee told me, ‘He appeared to love the Newbury race and we were delighted with his performance at that time.’
However, Cheltenham told a different story and after Party Politics had recovered from his exertions he was given the most drastic wind operation of all, when a tube was inserted into his windpipe.
No one was certain whether or not this would have the desired effect but Party Politics produced a tremendous performance to win the Greenall Chase at Haydock, taking the lead a long way out and running on strongly.
This is a traditional Grand National trial and Party Politics was always going well to beat Fiddlers Pike.
After that he was backed for the National and although the urbane Gaselee is not prone to hyperbole he feels that, if he reproduces that Haydock run, Party Politics will take all the beating.
‘He likes the wide open spaces of Liverpool and Newbury,’ he told me, ‘and I am hopeful that he will run his best race yet.
He should be able to reproduce that Haydock form but you never know with horses, do you.
Anyway, he will certainly act on good ground.’
As for the opposition, Gaselee has his eyes on Royal Athlete who finished third in the Cheltenham Gold Cup, Zeta's Lad who has won five races this season, but is doubtful if the ground remains on the firm side and surprisingly Garrison Savannah who has been rather overlooked by the National pundits this year.
‘He made a mistake at the top of the hill in the Gold Cup,’ Gaselee said, ‘but you can take it from me, he didn't have a hard race.
‘I think he will take all the beating in the National for he ran well round Aintree two years ago when he was second.
He appears to be back to his best and I wouldn't rule him out.’
Carl LLewellyn, who rode Party Politics to glory last year, is back in the saddle on Saturday even though he has been out with an injury.
‘Carl expects to return to action at Ascot on Wednesday, so there is no panic,’ Gaselee added.
Gaselee, whose head lad Peter Heaney comes from Ulster —‘and I wouldn't be without him’— is one of the old school who takes life as it comes.
His win in last year's National broke a long lean spell but he was quite casual about it all in the post race interviews.
He may achieve a little more animation this time if Party Politics wins him his place in history.
If successful, Party Politics would be only the third horse to win in successive years, in the last 57 years, following on Reynoldstown (1935–36) and of course, Red Rum (1973–74).
But the big horse, ideally suited to Aintree, has some way to go before matching Red Rum's unmatched achievements.
Rummy who will again lead the parade on National Day, is immortalised by a life-size bronze statue after winning the race three times and finishing second twice between 1973 and ‘77.
Party Politics: Here he shows the style of jumping which saw the Nick Gaslee-trained horse win steeplechasing's most famous race last year.
The fences hold no fears for this big fellow and he has a marvellous chance according to his trainer of making it two in a row and thereby join a small but privileged group.
He carries only nine pounds more than in 1992 and despite being plagued by a wind problem since that success, has come back in great style after being ‘tubed.’
Donaghy plays a waiting game
MAL DONAGHY will win his 81st cap when Northern Ireland step out at Lansdowne Road next Wednesday…or will he?
For years those of us who have played a cat and mouse game with cagey manager Billy Bingham over team selections could always be sure that Donaghy's name would be the first one down on the sheet.
Now, for the first time in over a decade there is uncertainty over the Chelsea veteran's inclusion.
Recently the 35-year old Belfast man has been playing the ‘Irish sweeper’ role, in front of the back four.
It has worked effectively, especially against the more attacking sides.
But Bingham has hinted recently that he's pushing for a ‘younger, more mobile midfield’— and that will certainly be needed against the run-all-day Republic quartet of Townsend, Keane, Houghton and Staunton.
Bingham has, Colin Clarke apart, his strongest squad available for this crucial World Cup Group Three game.
With it, however, comes a series of dilemmas over team selection.
It would take a brave man to predict the eleven who will take to the field at lunchtime on Wednesday.
The availability of Nigel Worthington and Kevin Wilson provides the headache for Bingham.
Worthington, a priceless left back and Northern Ireland's international footballer of the year, is a certain starter.
Stephen Morrow played at left back against Albania and was singled out for praise by Bingham.
He's a regular in the Arsenal team now so presumably he'll play too — but where?
Morrow's ‘alternative’ position is anchor midfield, the position Donaghy currently occupies.
Mal could of course revert to right back, but that would mean dropping the speedy and much improved Gary Fleming!
The problems don't end there; Kingsley Black had one of his best games for Northern Ireland in Tirana, when he came in for the injured Michael Hughes.
Strasbourg's talented winger is fully fit again and desperate to play…but we all know that Hughes and Black just don't blend on the same team.
Add to that Kevin Wilson, one of Bingham's favourite players.
If he plays, who drops out of the midfield which did so well in Albania — or does Wilson move up front alongside the impressive Philip Gray — or Iain Dowie!
It would turn your head and I admit I'm scratching mine, but Bingham's is the only selection that counts.
I'm tempted to say that the only change from Albania will be Worthington's return in place of Donaghy, with the positions rejigged.
Bingham must get it right for a match I feel we can get a 0–0 draw or a 1–0 win out of— yes, I'm serious!
There will be a vociferous, partisan crowd in Dublin but the Republic of Ireland supporters get uneasy and impatient when their team is not on top — and Bingham is a master at tactics aimed at producing that effect.
And, unlike the last trip to Dublin when we lost 3–0 the magnificent Tommy Wright will be in goals.
It will take something special to get past him in current form and Newcastle team-mate David Kelly could be one of those trying.
Republic manager Jack Charlton is toying with the idea of using Kelly alongside Niall Quinn in attack.
That would be backed up by the aforementioned midfield quartet plus a back four of Irwin, McGrath, Moran and Phelan with Bonner in goal.
Big Jack has an alternative — to include Ronnie Whelan in a five man midfield with Quinn the lone striker and Houghton and Staunton pushing up in support.
Sounds like the perfect recipe for a dull, unexciting game to me!
A classic ‘confrontation’ is expected, but not a classic 90 minutes the purists would drool over.
Games between the two Irelands never have been and with so much at stake, both in terms of points and pride it would be a mite optimistic to forecast something like 3–2.
The last four cross-border meetings have yielded four goals with Gerry Armstrong getting ours at Windsor some 13 years ago.
A goal from one of the modern day Armstrongs could be enough to settle it in Dublin, or at least contribute to a ‘result.’
‘I believe we can win,’ said Bingham.
Yes, we can, but only if the team adopts a positive attitude like that refreshingly displayed against Germany in last year's friendly.
If they sit back against the jolly green juggernaut they'll get run over — make no mistake about it.
Overture to festival feast
LIGHT opera buffs in Londonderry are in for a musical feast with the return this year of the Derry Festival of Light Opera.
Following the success of last year's inaugural Derry Festival of Light Opera, the Festival will return to St Columb's Theatre, running from March 29 to April 3.
The musical extravaganza will open with the winners of last year's Festival — Belfast's Fortwilliam Musical Society who will provide audiences with a taste of the great American outdoors in Rogers and Hammerstein's popular musical ‘Oklahoma’.
The Festival will continue with the Western theme on Tuesday, March 30 in the guise of ‘Calamity Jane’.
This is followed on Thursday, April 1 by the highly successful production of ‘Grease’ by award-winning director and choreographer Peter Kennedy, which has recently finished a sell-out run in Belfast.
Tullamore Musical Society take to the stage on Friday April 2 with the stirring account of a Jewish family on ‘Fiddler on the Roof’ and the Festival comes to an end with the Carlow-based Dolmen Musical Theatre with Peter Kennedy's hit of last year's Festival ‘Clown’on Saturday night.
Taking on the difficult task of choosing a winner is London-based Olive Hurford-Porter, whose connection with the amateur operatic movement spans five decades as performer, choreographer and director.
COLLEGE IN CLOSE-UP
AN open day for prospective students and their parents at Limavady College of Further Education gave visitors the opportunity to view the work carried out in its various departments and to talk to staff and students.
Our cameraman was there to capture the events of the day.
Jordanstown hosts students
THIRTEEN hockey teams, representing the cream of British students, will converge on the University of Ulster next week for the British Universities Sports Federation's men's and women's tournaments.
The new synthetic pitch at the Jordanstown campus has attracted the prestigious tournament to Northern Ireland for the first time in over a decade, and the impressive facilities at the campus will be used together with the new pitch at Valley Leisure Centre.
The Northern Ireland men reached last season's final before losing to UAU 1–0, and coach Philip Anderson is hoping they can go one better with home advantage.
The women have a lot more catching up to do after last year's bottom place, but new coach Alan McMurray is quietly confident they can come closer to their 1991 success.
The women's tournament will be staged at the Valley, starting on Monday (1pm) and continues through Tuesday and Wednesday.
Taking part are Northern Ireland, England A, England B, Scotland, Wales and the Loxbridge team which comprises the pick of London, Oxford and Cambridge universities.
The men's series starts on Tuesday, and continues Wednesday and Thursday.
Their games will be at Jordanstown for the first two days, with games being shared between Jordanstown and Valley on the final day.
Competing are Northern Ireland, Oxford, Cambridge, Wales, London, Scotland, and UAU.
Speak makes ‘points'
Ballyclare Com.
2 Ballymena Utd 3
A last gasp goal from Jonathan Speak sent Ballymena United home with the three points following a hard fought game against neighbours Ballyclare Comrades at Dixon Park.
Comrades led 2–1 until the 79th minute, their two goals coming in the first half from David Eddis against one from a Dean Gordon own goal but United hit back late in the game.
Desi Loughery equalised after Neil Candlish's spot kick had been well saved by Paul Prentice before Speak grabbed the winner in the second minute of injury time.
The home side took a sensational lead after only four minutes.
Paul McGurnaghan's shot came back off the base of the post and David Eddis was on hand to hammer the ball into the net.
Ballymena soon settled after their indifferent start and they levelled matters on eight minutes with a goal which came right out of the blue.
Dessie Loughrey's long throw was flicked on by Robert Ritchie and the ball deflected off Comrades centre half Dean Gordon and went in off a post.
Eddis was shown the yellow card for a late tackle on Neil Candlish in the 12th minute and his team mate John Johnston followed him into the referee's note-book six minutes later after a foul on Jonathan Speak.
It was certainly an eventful day for Eddis as it was he who put Comrades further in front on 27 minutes, heading in from close range after Grant was unable to hold Philip Leckey's firmly struck angled shot.
Ballymena's Paul Hardy was replaced at the start of the second half by Jason Gilmore who scored a hat trick for United's Reserve team against Coleraine Res last night.
Ballymena eventually got the equaliser 11 minutes from the end after referee Tommy Deegan awarded them a penalty when Speak was impeded by McGurnaghan.
Candlish's spot kick was well saved by Prentice but Loughery followed up to blast the rebound into the net.
Speak made it 3–2 for Ballymena Utd in the second minute of injury time with a goal from close range.
Man of the match — David Eddis (Ballyclare Comrades).
Pupils rewarded for their business skills
PUPILS from seven Belfast schools have won awards for their business skills.
As part of the 1993 Business Challenge, organised by the Industrial Society, schools teamed up with companies to carry out a range of special projects.
The pupils, fifth- and sixth-formers, carried out the projects as part of their school curriculum.
At a ceremony at Belfast Castle yesterday, the following partnerships were commended: Belfast Royal Academy and Chem-Vite; Boys' Model and the European Commission; St Gemma's Secondary School and Boots; St Gabriel's Boys' Secondary and the Eastern Health Board; Little Flower Girls' School and Royal Mail; La Salle Boys' Secondary and European Components Corporation, and St Mary's Grammar
Great sporting moments have many facets but when it comes down to thrills and spill and leaving the pulses racing, the National is hard to beat.
Magic!
THERE are few sporting events which capture everyone's imagination.
Athletics has its Olympic Games, soccer offers the World Cup, and tennis highlights Wimbledon.
None of these move the British public quite like the Grand National.
Every year, a staggering £80m is wagered on this spectacular racing phenomenon.
Up to 17 million people in Britain watch the race on television as 40 horses attempt the 30 fearsome fences around the four and a half time course.
Worldwide, it is estimated that up to 500 million people see the race on television, either live or recorded, while millions more enjoy the live radio commentary.
On a normal day, racing will interest a mere fraction of the population — the Grand National, however, is something else.
In the beginning, the race took place over a course that included three brooks and a five foot stone wall amongst the 29 jumps.
It was, in fact, natural country with semi-artificial fences which were only slightly altered from their original shape.
It was essentially a race for horses bred for the hunting field.
The race became a handicap in 1843 and was finally named The Grand National Handicap Steeplechase in 1847.
Enthusiasm grew and by 1885, the course had been flanked by rails to control the crowds.
Even in 1839, an estimated 50,000 had watched what is believed to be the first running of the race Aintree.
The crowds had seen some legendary events.
In the 1839 race, Captain Becher riding Conrad had rushed into the lead but was unseated into the first brook — and so was born Becher's Brook, still one of the most spectacular and feared jumps in the world.
In 1863, the race was won by Emblem and in 1864 by Emblematic — full sisters and both ridden by George Stevens who took part in the race 15 times and won a record five times.
The 1871 National featured The Lamb who had already won three years earlier.
Owner Lord Poulett had a dream three months before the race — and saw The Lamb successful.
Lord Poulett recognised the dream jockey's face, and right away made contact with him.
Tommy Pickernell duly won on the horse with ease.
Between 1877 and 1892 was the era of the Beasley family — the brothers Tommy, Harry, Willie and Johnny.
Collectively they rode four winners, six seconds, and two thirds from a total of 34 rides.
In 1961, Harry's grandson Bobby continued the family tradition by winning on Nicolaus Silver.
It was a Royal year in 1900 when the then Prince of Wales (who would become King Edward VII) won with Ambush II.
He beat another Aintree legend — Manifesto, a magnificent horse that ran in eight Grand Nationals, winning two, finishing third three times, and fourth once.
The first victory for an American-bred horse was in 1908 when Rubio triumphed, followed the next year by the first French success with Lutteur III.
There was drama of a different kind in 1911 when Glenside came home alone — literally.
It was the only horse to complete the race without mishap — three others were remounted after falls to fill the minor places.
Reynoldstown, winner in 1935, produced the delightful headline in a newspaper ‘National Won by Three Furlongs’, the Furlongs in question being the owner, the trainer and the jockey.
Reynoldstown won again in 1936, but on this occasion was ridden by Fulke Walwyn.
And so on down the years the litany of excitement and drama has continued.
Part of the magic of the race is its unpredictability.
The shortest priced favourite can stumble and fall at the very first fence while the 100–1 outsider can achieve the ultimate glory.
Just such a remarkable feat happened two years running in 1928 and 1929, with Tipperary Tim and Gregalach respectively.
As a result, everyone believes that they have a chance of picking the winner.
The Grand National is not the preserve of multi-millionaire owners and breeders — the horses often come from devoted small owners and can be trained in the most humble of establishments.
After their racing days the horses are not destined for breeding; they often live as the mounts of amateur riders in local races or retire to become family friends.
Not surprisingly, ordinary people relate to such a race and particularly because the Grand National keeps on delivering the most remarkable moving stories.
Elizabeth Taylor's film role as the first female rider to win the race in Hollywood's ‘National Velvet’, was pure fiction.
The ‘real-life’ stories, however, are better…
In 1981, for example, a jockey who had fought back from the depths of cancer partnered a horse which had twice spent months with a hind leg in plaster.
Bob Champion and Aldanti won — and provided the story of the film ‘Champions’.
In 1956, The Queen Mother's horse, Devon Loch was clear and certain to win for jockey Dick Francis.
Less than 50 yards from the winning post, the horse unaccountably staggered, collapsed to the ground, and failed to finish.
Francis retired from racing but has built a new career as a best selling thriller writer.
Perhaps the greatest fairytale of all never took place.
In 1987, The Tsarevich, jointly owned by Edgar Bronfman, the Chairman of The Seagram Company and Ivan Straker, Chairman of Seagram Distillers ran into second place behind Maori Venture, owned by 92-year-old Jim Joel who thus becomes one of the select band who have owned both English Derby and Grand National winners.
For Edgar Bronfman and Ivan Straker, however, it would have been just reward for their assistance, to the race.
In 1983, Aintree racecourse — the home of the Grand National — seemed destined for development and a public appeal had failed to raise the money necessary to purchase it for the nation.
Seagram, one of the world's largest wines and spirits companies, stepped in and agreed to help save the National.
For the next seven years, the race became the Seagram Grand National, culminating in 1991 with a victory by a horse, born and bred in New Zealand, but trained in the UK.
Twice the trainer tried to sell the horse to the Seagram company and twice they refused.
And why not?
The horse, trained by David Barons, was called Seagram — and gave them the ultimate worldwide publicity without the cost of ownership!
And what about last year's winner Party Politics.
Surely no more appropriately-named horse could win with a General Election only five days away from the race itself.
Martell have substantially increased the prize money for the race to give a total prize fund of about £175,000, this being an increase f three per cent over the previous year.
This is made up of £130,000 in added money (mainly from the sponsor but also with a contribution from the racecourse and the Levy Board, with the remainder coming from the stake money paid by each owner to enter.
This year, the cost for an owner to enter was £710 split into £95 to enter in January and an additional £170 for each of the forfeits which were paid in February and March.
There was a further £275 to pay if the entry was confirmed.
The race is a handicap and only the 40 highest-rated horses who still wish to run on the day before the race, are permitted to post.
Any surplus runners are balloted out by the Jockey Club and their owners receive back their entry money.
The owners of the first six horse home receive prize money.
Rhyme ‘N’ Reason (pictured right) is seen here welcomed home by villagers at Whitsbury Manor Stables after his 1988 triumph.
His win had a special Ulster significance as the horse was bred by Downpatrick's Jeremy Maxwell.
The middle picture shows a disconsolate Dick Francis as The Queen Mother's Devon Loch is calmed after doing the splits 50 yards from the winning post in 1956.
Nigel Hawke celebrates his 1991 win on Seagram (bottom), the horse ironically, being named after the sponsors of the race.
Theft of traffic lights ‘sinister'
GARDAI are on the lookout for two dozen hazard warning lights and a set of traffic lights stolen in Donegal.
They have all been taken from roadworks in north Donegal since the beginning of the year.
So far 24 hazard warning lights and a set of traffic lights have disappeared in the Glentogher, Carndonagh and Quigley's Point areas, close to the border.
Hazard As well as the obvious hazard to motorists approaching roadworks without warning lights, there is concern the lights could be used by terrorists to set up roadblocks.
A senior Garda source in north Donegal said: ‘These traffic lights could be used for subversive or sinister purposes and we are anxious to trace their whereabouts as soon as possible.’
Lead cut to two points
ALAN McCann and Philip Murray won the Newry Club's Circuit of Down Rally last night to move within two points of the leaders in the WS Mercer Northern Ireland navigation championship.
Driving their Peugeot 205GTi, they dropped just 17 penalties on a difficult 80-mile route which started from Banbridge.
Championship leaders Ralph Ewing and Kevin McCracken finished fourth in their MG Midget on 45 penalties.
Second place went to the class two crew of Neil Fletcher and John Erwin in their Escort Mexico with Edward Murphy and Barry Taggart third in a Talbot Samba.
Murphy and Taggart led for much of the way but missed out a loop section of the route which cost them 30 marks and they dropped back.
Behind Fletcher and Erwin in class two, Robert Jameson and Ivor Copeland took second place as well as sixth overall in their Sierra.
Class three, over a shorter route, was won by Alan Magowan and Carson Harte driving a Porsche 911.
The local Rathfriland club took first place in the club team category.
The championship now takes a break until September with Ewing/McCracken on 31 points, McCann/Murray on 29 and Fletcher/Erwin on 28.
Newry
THE audience showed warm appreciation of Ballymoney's Literary and Debating Society's presentation of the ‘The Heiress’ at the 41st Newry Drama Festival.
Speaking at St Colman's Hall last night Dick Mills, chairman Northern Amateur Theatre Association, congratulated the committee on an entertaining programme for the week ahead.
Adjudicator Roma Tomelty-Carnegie said the play had some wonderful production values.
The sound and lighting effects were very good and the Victorian costumes were excellent.
It was a wonderful production, well crafted and well casted with no weak links, she said.
There was dramatic conflict, with some fine details and performances.
Ruth Elliott as Catherine, Dr Austin Sloper's daughter, was not easily fooled by suitor Morris Townsend, played by Gerard McMullan, whose presentation was virtually perfect.
Barbara Cooke as Mrs Lavinia Penniman, the doctor's sister, gave a super performance.
There was also a wonderful study of Desmond Cranston as Dr Austin Sloper.
The audience got his sense of concern that his heiress daughter would be happy.
The adjudicator also liked the performance of Catherine (Ruth Elliott).
She had passion, love and warmth of character, which she developed well towards the end.
Rosemary McDowell as Mrs Elizabeth, the doctor's sister, was a performance which she also praised.
Lucy Alcorn as Mrs Montgomery was beautifully played, with telling scenes.
Mary McMenamin as Maria, the maid was most convincing.
However, referring to characterisations she felt the full character of the play was not fully explored.
There was a weakness in the production.
The comedy ‘Blithe Spirit’ by Noel Coward will be presented by Coolmine Drama Circle, Dublin, this evening.
Parking price hike shock
ULSTER drivers already reeling from the jump in the cost of motoring imposed by the Budget are facing another rise in car park charges.
Belfast is already one of the most expensive cities in Britain for parking.
However the Department of the Environment has just announced a province-wide increase in its parking charges, due to come into effect on May 10.
Commuters and shoppers in Belfast will be hit the hardest, with rises of up to 50 pence in some city centre car parks.
The cost of short-stay parking — for up to two hours — will rise by five pence.
Increases for longer stay parking will range from ten pence to 30 pence outside Belfast.
The rates for on-street pay and display are being increased by ten pence an hour.
A DoE spokesman said: ‘These rises take into account the cost of providing and maintaining car parking facilities.
‘Our car parks still represent good value for money and they are cheaper than most car parking facilities in the private sector.’
Stars out of luck
NORTH Tyrone All Stars lost in both the mens and womens' Plate finals held in Maysfield Leisure Centre last night.
In the womens final Sporting Belfast defeated the All Stars 71–52.
Fifteen-year-old Catherine Devlin was the star for Sporting scoring 34 points including five three-pointers.
Top scorers for Tyrone were Nicola Arbuckle with 23 and Denise McCauley 17.
In the mens final Annadale/Queens proved too experienced for a young All Star team winning by 71–61.
Men used cap gun in robbery, court told
TWO men who used an imitation firearm to carry out a robbery were sent to a young offenders centre at Belfast Crown Court yesterday.
Joel McCausland (19) of Cheviot Street, and Alexander Kennedy (18) of Kenilworth Place, both Belfast, had pleaded guilty to a series of charges in connection with the robbery on October 6 last year.
The court heard that the two, armed and masked, had held up a courier as he was about to deposit a bag containing computer data sheets into a TSB night safe on the Belmont Road.
He was ordered to lie on the footpath, hand over his bag and also his car keys.
When a police patrol approached the men jumped into the courier's car and drove off.
They crashed at Tillysburn roundabout, causing damage in excess of £4,000 to the car.
A defence lawyer said both defendants had come from broken homes and had been brought up by their mothers.
Kennedy, he said, had no previous conviction but in this, his first crime, he had clearly gone straight in at the deep end.
The weapon used had been an imitation one.
There had been no paramilitary involvement and no one had been injured, he said.
Judge John Curran QC said the weapon used was some form of cap-firing pistol.
But the sight of masked men with a gun would put people in fear, he said.
He sentenced both to four years in a young offenders centre for hijacking and to six months for criminal damage.
McCausland was also sentenced to six months for reckless driving and for driving without insurance, the sentences to run concurrently.
Neill and White take honours
THE honours were shared at todays opening round of the Ulster Motocross championships at Desertmartin were Philip Neill and David White collected maximum points in the opening races.
In the 250 race Gary Jess set the pace for eight of the 12 laps, before front fork failure forced him to slow down.
This allowed Philip Neill through to win from Stephen McCreery and Jess.
David White and McCreery were neck and neck throughout the first 125 race, after early leader Philip Neill dropped the eighth place on the third lap.
However he came back to take fourth behind David Tougher.
In the Quad events there was a win a piece for Tommey Muldoon and John Walker.
Meanwhile in the first Clubman's Short Circuit meeting at Nutts corner, Ballymena rider Michael Turtle scored a double in the 250 races, beating Michael Arnott and Jeff Shaw in the first race, and Alan Fairley and David Richmond in the second.
Stewart Parkhill also scored a brace of wins in the 200 Irish Championship Races, beating Jerry O'Kane in the first and Peter Irwin in the second.
Board reviews school services
ULSTER school chiefs today revealed an action plan following the dismissal of a senior official over claims that £170,000 was paid out for goods never received.
The South Eastern Education Board said its internal audit staff will be increased — and detailed changes to procedures for ordering, delivery and payments have already been implemented.
John Doherty, the board's acting advisor for information technology, was sacked in January.
The board dismissed him for ‘gross misconduct and gross professional negligence’ and is still considering legal steps to recover the cash.
But the computer company which was to have supplied the computer software and hardware has still not been disclosed by the Dundonald-based board.
In a statement today, the board said the changes to the ordering and delivery cycle were designed to separate better the receipt of goods and authorising payment.
The ‘thorough review’ followed an investigation into malpractice and misconduct in the Information Technology Unit of the board's curriculum support service and accounts department.
Comprehensive and complex formal procedures were being simplified to concentrate on key issues of control, and a step-by-step guide is being produced for headquarters managers and principals and governors of schools and colleges.
The board also intends to carry out a survey into how the procedures are understood, and follow it up with a training and familiarisation programme.
The allegations first came to light last November, following an approach to the board from a financial institution.
Mr Doherty was suspended and court injunctions taken to freeze both his assets and those of the computer company.
Board members have agreed to the plan, which also involves a shake up in delegating authority to improve security and ensure equality of treatment for schools.
Mr Doherty could not be immediately contacted today.
Mark plays star role for Ireland
BANBRIDGE Academy pupil Mark Tumilty played a starring role in Cork yesterday as the Irish under-18 hockey team opened their Home Countries campaign with a 4–2 win over Wales.
Tumilty, who was anxiously awaiting news of today's Harp Senior League decider between Bann and Holywood, scored one of the goals and set up two others as George Blackwood's squad moved to the top of the table overnight.
Tumilty earned a penalty stroke in the 23rd minute when he was fouled in the circle and Newry High School defender Ivan Steen, who had an impressive debut, converted from the spot.
Rees Jones equalised seven minutes later but Ireland swept into a 4–1 lead with second half goals from Paul Lombard, skipper Francis De Rosa and Tumilty before Lee Richards scored a last minute consolation effort.
And there was double delight for the Irish contingent as Ronnie Smyth's under-16 squad had earlier set the ball rolling by overturning a 2–0 deficit to beat the Welsh 3–2, thanks to a Colin Hanna hat-trick of short corner conversions in the last 15 minutes.
The Home Countries series, which continues today, marks the start of the Irish Hockey Union's centenary celebrations.
The series was moved to Cork from its usual four-year cycle to suit the occasion.
Reynolds rules out internment
TAOISEACH Albert Reynolds today rejected any reintroduction of internment, in the wake of the latest terrorist murders this week.
Such a step, he said, would only make matters worse.
But Mr Reynolds said that renewed efforts were needed to find a political settlement in Northern Ireland.
All decent people have turned their backs on the men of violence, he said in a BBC interview, comment on feelings in Ireland following the IRA's Warrington bombing.
‘It has been a bad and black week.
One would hope we won't see a repeat of that ever again and we have said that before,’ he said.
‘But we have to keep trying.
We have to make people realise that violence begets more violence.’
Mr Reynolds believed it possible that inter-party talks on Northern Ireland could resume again, even before May's local government elections.
Last year's negotiations, he said, did achieve some progress.
Happy Hill in front row
Damon Hill produced the performance he had dreamed of to give himself a great chance of finishing on the victory podium at the Brazilian Grand Prix.
The 30-year-old Londoner, son of the late Graham Hill, steered his Canon Williams Renault on to the front row of the provisional grid alongside pole man and team-mate Alain Prost with a brilliantly controlled display of driving on the treacherous Interlagos track.
‘I am really pleased,’ he said.
‘I got much more out of the car than I did in Kyalami and I did not make any mistakes.
I feel good, I like the circuit and I am confident about everything now.
‘I wouldn't like to go so far as to predict anything for Sunday but you can be certain I am far more confident about the race now than I was.
‘It is difficult for me to find the limits of the car yet because I am given only a limited number of laps and I don't know the circuit.’
While Hill, who slid off at Kyalami during the season's opening grand prix, purred with satisfaction, his old friend and rival Johnny Herbert was left to reflect on a day of mixed fortunes.
He ended up eighth on the grid and said: ‘The car feels much better here than it did in South Africa.
We made some changes and they worked and then we made some changes that did not work.
‘A suspension controller malfunctioned and once that was fixed and I got out again the car caught fire when an oil cooler failed.
That was dramatic.
‘I looked for a marshall's post, but the guy's glove prevented him pulling out the safety pin in the extinguisher and I had to get out of the car and do it for him!’
Derek Warwick, returning to Interlagos after a long absence, found it tough going in his Footwork Mugen Honda and ended up 19th on the provisional grid.
The other Britons, Ligier team-mates Mark Blundell and Martin Brundle, also had a difficult day.
Both were frustrated after finishing 12th and 14th respectively and said a new front wing and problems with traffic had caused their problems.
Republic lending rates cut
THE Republic's Central Bank yesterday cut the cost of loans to commercial banks to the lowest level since July 1991.
The latest decrease in the bank's Short Term Facility — of 0.5pc to a new rate of 10.25pc — was the third in less than a month, and the second in a week.
It was expected to prompt banks and building societies to further reduce mortgage rates, currently averaging just under 12pc.
As recently as last month, home loan costs in the Republic stood at 14pc and looked like going higher.
But a 10pc devaluation of the punt within Europe's exchange rate mechanism heralded eventual cuts in interest rates.
Air wars as fares slashed
AIR wars have broken out on the vital transatlantic routes, with British Airways, Virgin Atlantic and two big American carriers all slashing their spring fares.
BA, American Airlines and United Airlines all cut UK-US return fares by up to £80.
Then, characteristically, Virgin chairman Richard Branson announced he was undercutting his rivals' new fares by £10.
The airlines made their moves yesterday to counter the traditional slack period on the normally busy American routes from after Easter until June.
All the new fare deals will come in on April 1 and last until June 15.
BA, American and United are introducing £259 return fares to New York, Newark, Philadelphia, Washington DC, Pittsburgh, Boston and Atlanta.
This represents a £70 saving, as do the new Miami and Orlando return fares of £309 and the £319 returns to Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, Detroit and Houston.
The new return fares to Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle will be £329 an £80 saving.
Virgin responded by offering return fares of £249 to New York and Boston, £299 to Miami and Orlando and £319 to Los Angeles.
In addition, Virgin is offering a special £199 return fare on its new service to Newark, which can be booked as a late saver and will be available until the end of April.
House for sale — with crumbling ceilings…
THE days of the so-called desirable property with a south facing garden in easy reach of shops but in need of attention to minor repairs are numbered.
For if the house has a north facing yard, is three miles from the nearest shops and its ceilings are crumbling, then to describe it any other way will soon be a criminal offence.
As of April 4 estate agents in the province will have to tell house hunters the facts about properties — or face punishments which include unlimited fines and being banned by the Director General of Fair Trading.
The new Property Misdescriptions Order covers 33 specific matters including any spoken statement, photograph, drawing, plan or particulars of sale relating to a property.
Disclaimer notices will offer no protection.
However, there is no general requirement to disclose information about a property, it only states what is said must be true.
Bob Johnston, chief inspector at the Department of Economic Development's Trading Standards branch, said he welcomed the new laws.
‘Their effect will be to require the same accuracy of description in relation to property sales as is already required of sellers of goods and other service providers.
‘To know the law now offers such protection should help some of the difficulties associated with house purchasing which, for many, can be an extremely harrowing experience.
‘Offences under the Act will attract a fine of up to the maximum £2,000 on conviction before a Magistrates Court and an unlimited fine on conviction before a Crown Court,’ he said.
Tom McClelland, partner in the Century 21 Tom McClelland Team, said the laws would not have the same impact in the province as in England.
‘Standards of agency in Northern Ireland are higher than in the south-east of England during the property boom of the 1980s.
Our prices did not go up at the same rate.
‘If the agent says something about a house it must be verified.
‘I think that what will happen is that subjective judgments will disappear, but I do not think that most companies will have any problems at all,’ he said.